 V "" : The ATLANTIC COMMAND Headquarters of the Commander in Chief Norfolk 11, Virginia . LETTER OF PROMULGATION .
 The objective of the subject record is to present a comprehensive account of the actions taken within the Atlantic Command to meet the requirements of the situation created by the introduction of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba .
 Further objectives are to note the achievements of and the cooperation accorded by . associated and subordinate commanders in the critical test of the Unified Command, Atlantic . Further objectives include to note .
 The commands making extracts shall be responsible for the security control thereof . Command commands will make extracts from the extracts .
 President John F Kennedy described an ominous build up of Russian missiles in Cuba . The President announced the establishment of a naval quarantine .
 President also made clear that he intended to assure the removal of Russian missiles from Cuba . The quarantine was to prevent the shipment of additional offensive armaments into Cuba*
 If necessary, the United States was prepared to take additional action, the president said . The U.S. is prepared to act if necessary .
 The President made clear that this was 'far more than a Cuban United States crisis' The crisis is widely described as the most serious since the end of World War II .
 It was* in fact, a direct confrontation between the security of the U.S. and the challenge posed by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was the focus of the Cold War, the author says .
 President said any missile fired from Cuba against a country of the Western Hemisphere would be considered a direct atteck by the Soviet Union . The President dramatised this fact by asserting that any missile from Cuba would be fired from the country .
 For the public, the President's address was the first alarm bell of danger . The public, for example, was at risk of a terrorist attack . For the President, the public was in danger .
 The Commander in Chief Atlantic had been preparing to counter this newest aspect of the Russian build up in Cuba .
 Under CINCLANT's command was a many-sided military organization involving over 400,000 personnel of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps . Eventually there emerged under Cinclant's command a complex military organization .
 IL-28s were being removed from Cuba from Cuba in December . IL-27s were ordered to be ready for increased readiness from 1 October .
 The integrated CLNCIAOT/CINCLANTFLT Staff necessarily placed greater emphasis in this docwsesrt on details of naval activities than on Army and Air Force Components .
 At the beginning of October the Atlantic Command was in its normal peacetime configuration . The Atlantic Command is in peacetime mode .
 Admiral RoDert L Dennison headed the U.S. Navy . Headquarters was in Norfolk, Virginia, Virginia .
 A JCS conducted world-wide CPX of the build up and initial phaaea of gaaeral war . Deen completed this month's CPX .
 Units of the Command soon to be involved in Cuban Contingency Operation* were carrying out or preparing for routinely scheduled exercises upkeep, overhar'i and deployments .
 Exercise ""BLUE WATER,"" a CFX of Commander Joint task force FOUR plans, was conducted from 2 to 5 October in Puerto Rico . Exercise was conducted by Commander Joint Task Force FOUR Plans .
 Of the seven CVAs In the Atlantic Fleet, three were in the Mediterranean on 1 October . Three of the seven of the CVAs in the Atlantic fleet were in October .
 ENTERPRISE was scheduled to return to Norfolk and arrived one day early on 11 October . ENTERPRise was scheduled for a flight from Norfolk to Norfolk .
 Of the six cruiser types, two were in overhaul and two in the Mediterranean throughout, leaving CANBERRA and NEWPORT NEWS available .
 In the Amphibious Force, the only AGC immediately available was MT MeKINLEY, participating in FHIBRIGLEX-62 . MT MeINLEY was the only available AGC available for the mission .
 POCONO sailed back from SIXTH Fleet arriving Norfolk, Norfolk, 12 November .
 iX Amphibious Brigade Landing Exercise was routinely scheduled for the period 15 October 3 November . All three LPHs were available to participate in the exercise .
 The mission was to train and exercise naval forces in the conduct of amphibious assault and associated naval operations . The mission is to train, exercise and train naval forces .
 In all, about 20,000 naval personnel and 4,000 marines were to participate in the event . The event took place in the United States in Washington, D.C.
 Seventy-four FMFLANT Troop Carrier Helicopters of the eighty-six available had been deployed to Mississippi .
 The 4th Marine Expeditionary Battalion Headquarters and Battalion Landing Teams 3/2 and 1/6 in PHIBRON TWELVE ships conmenced 15 October .
 Embarkation was completed on schedule on 17 October when the force sailed for the objective area . Embarkment was complete on schedule when the operation began .
 After skirting Hurricane ELLA, the forces sailed on 17 October from the Camp LejeuneMorehead City area and were due in the Exercise Objective area on 22 October . The forces were due to arrive in the exercise Objective area of the exercise objective area .
 It is of interest that as early as about 10 October the National Military Connand center began inquiring informally of CIKCLANT as to the nature of PHIBRIGLSX-62 .
 Without ever relating to the Cuban situation, there were indications of high-level interest in the exercise, there. There were indications that high. level of interest in it,’s been said .
 This support started with economic assistance and trade agreements, then expanded to include military equipment . Include military equipment of a defensive nature, such as small arms and machine guns .
 Eventually, armored hieies, tanks, and more complex weapons were introduced . Eventually, Soviet offensive weapons were included in the military buildup of the island .
 On achieving power in 1959, Castro openly collaborated with the Csaxrzziats and allowed them to operate as a political power* Relations of the Z£th cf July movement with the Communists were strained during the early Perlrd cf the regime .
 The USSR -watched and waited until February i960 before responding to Castro's growing need for its support . The USSR-watched the Castro-era Soviet response .
 This Bias assistance was indispensable to the survival of the Castro regime . Cuba' 6 alignment with the Bloc. was bad the effect of the Cuba-6 alignment .
 In the early part of 1962 the old line ^caacsists attempted to gain ascendancy over Castro . The old line tried to gain control of the Cuban government .
 Whether the move was directed by Massaw directed cr net is unproved . Little doubt that the Soviet's felt uneapy dealing with Castro .
 Pages a coMunist state In Cuba and his increased anti"" United States f pro-Communist actions also justified our increased surveillance and intelligence in the Cuban area . Pages a . coMUNist state in Cuba and . increased anti-U.S. actions justified increased surveillance
 June 1962 was marked by an increase in physical harassment of the Naval Base, Guantanamo . A 6 mile area around the base was declared a ""militarized"" zone . Families were removed, farms vacated and travel restrictions were imposed .
 On 2 July 1962, Raul Castro arrived in Moscow for two weeks of tali.s with Khrushchev and other high ranking Soviet officials . Castro was in Russia for the two weeks in July 1962 .
 This was correctly deduced as an attempt to secure additional military equipment . This was correct as a bid to secure more military equipment, it was deduced .
 This meeting resulted in an immediate and complex military buildup in Cuba that was not to end until the sighting of offensive missiles in Cuba in October . This meeting led to a complex military build-up that lasted until October .
 A large-scale increase in Soviet ship movements to Cuba became apparent in July 1962 . The increase in ship movements was seen in the months leading up to the Cuban Revolution .
 40 Soviet ships arrived in Cuba in October, despite the institution of the Naval Quarantine . 16 Soviet ships believed to be headed to Cuba turned back to Soviet ports .
 Approximately four flights a day were flown between Guantanamo Naval Base and Key West for shipping surveillance . Four flights were flown a day between the base's base and Florida's Key West .
 Strategic material was photographed inbound to Cuba but was not associated with the buildup of offensive weapons, until Ju6t prior to October . Intelligence confirmed that fact in October .
 Blue shipping, other than Soviet, remained at a fairly censtarit level in 3uba . Blue shipping remained at an average of about eight ships arriving per month .
 Scviet shipping activity was at its highest during the key months of August and September . Eight Bloc ships, othsr than Soviet, arrived in Cuba in the same period .
 There were Soviet Bloc military personnel in Cuba prior to August 1962 . Soviet military personnel were stationed in Cuba before August 1962.
 A large Influx occurred during August and September, when a total of 9 Bloc passenger ships arrived in . A total of nine Bloc passengers ships arrived during that period .
 By 13 November 1962, it was evident that Soviet military personnel were present In Cuba in much greater strength than previously estimated . By November 12, 1962, Soviet forces were in Cuba in greater strength .
 Subsequent intelligence showed that there were about 21,000 Soviet military personnel in the Soviet Union in the area .
 About 4,000 missile personnel and airmen departed from the base . The base has been closed since the removal of missiles and bombers .
 There is no indication that Soviet ground forces or naval personnel have departed or intend to depart . There are no indications that Soviet forces or personnel will depart .
 The construction of permanent barracks type buildings at Soviet camps 'indicates a prolonged stay' in the camps .
 The breakdown of the estimated 17,000 total personnel indicated 7,500 with the Ai2 Force* 7,000 with the ground forces, and approximately 2,000  with the Cuban navy .
 Bloc arms deliveries to Cuba commenced in 1960 and continued throughout 1961 . It was not until January 1962, during the New Year's Day Rarade, that the extent of these deliveries could be ascertained .
 During the period January through March 1952, the consolidation of the Cuban Ground Forces into three distinct elements was confirmed . 78,000 in the standing Army; 100,000 . in the ready reserve; and 100,00 comprising the Home Guard .
 Analysis of photograph* taken in August 1952 from Scviet merchant ships revealed an impressiva supply c-f advanced militarjwsapons . Analysis of photo* taken by August 1952 shows an impressive supply of weapons and ammunition .
 Pagis multiple-barrel, truck-mounted, barrage-type rocket launchers aew to Cuba . The introduction was confirmed cf Soriet and Czechoslovakia .
 Cuba's Havy consisted of obsolete U.S. supplied vessels, 3 FF boats, and 2 PCE boats . In September Soviet amphibious vehicles and armored per serine 1 carriers were added to the growing arsenal .
 A few had undergone overhaul and modernization in the U.S. in 1954 and 1955 . A few of the aircraft had been overhauled and modernized .
 During the first months of 1962, a buildup_of the Cuban Naval Forces beqan. The Cuban naval forces were preparing for the invasion of Cuba .
 From 15 January to 26 March, various Soviet merchant shipts delivered a total of 12 P-6 Class PT's and 6 KRONSTADT Class Patrol boats .
 These modern ships provided e significant increase in the Navy's coastal defense capability . The ships were built in the 1960s .
 The normal method of transfer was by means of a merchant ship carrying 4 Pi's on deck and a KRONSTADT in tow . The normal way of transferring was by . means of . using a . merchant ship with 4 Pi on deck . and a . KRON STAD
 Between 12 and 18 August, two Soviet merchant ships were photographed enroute to Cuba with strangely configured crates on deck . The crates were on deck at the time .
 Preliminary analysis showed that crates contained Soviet KOMAR Class Missile launching boats . Preliminary analyses showed that the crates contained missiles .
 The first KOMARS were photographed on 26 September operating in Cuban waters . This was later confirmed when the first was photographed operating in Cuba .
 Twelve of these missile-equipped boats were delivered to Cuba by September 1962 . Twelve of the missiles were delivered by September 1963 .
 On 18 October, 4 of the boats departed Mariel and operated from the port at Bancs, about 75 miles northwest of the Naval Base at Guantanamo . The boats operated from Mariel, located 75 miles from Guantanamo .
 They remained there during the quarantine, operating from the port, and only recently returned to Mariel . They remained in the port during that quarantine .
 It is not confirmed that Soviet personnel are sole operators of these boats . The boats are believed to be operated by Soviet personnel .
 Cuban personnel are being trained in their operation . They are still Soviet controlled and Cuban personnel have been trained in operation .
 The KOHaR class is basically a PT hull on which 2 missile tubes have been installed . It is estimated that the missile utilized in the KOHARs has a line of sight range of 10 to 12 nautical miles . The missile probably contains an automatic pilot, and carries
 By January 1962 the Cuban Revolutionary Air Force had abcut 60 KIG-type jet fighters . Cuba had abdicated 60 of the KIGs-type fighters .
 Intelligence substantiated the return to Cuba during the summer of 1961 of approximately 75 Cuban pilots who had received M1G jet training in Czechoslovakia .
 Under Soviet tutorage, a pilot training school was established near Havana at San Antonio de Los Banos Airfield . The school was opened by the Soviet Union .
 Castro's airfields had undergone major improvements in preparation for the MIG fighters . Castro's planes had already been equipped with MIGs .
 Runways were lengthened, new airfields were constructed, and refugios, or revetments, were built . Runways, or airfields, were constructed during World War II .
 By October 1962, Castro had 20 airfields able to support the operation of MIG fighters . Castro's airbase was able to provide support for MIGs .
 On 10 September 1962, it was confirmed that MIG-21 jet fighters were in Cuba . It was confirmed in September 1962 that the jet fighters had been in Cuba.
 This is a Mach 2 fighter, one of the Soviet Union's latest and most modern day fighters . This is one of Russia's most modern-day fighters .
 F*«m-2 IpTiotographs of Santa Clara Airfield taken in October, after the quarantine was established and later confirmed that a total of 42 <£*««9 the new generation fighter intercepter .
 From thiagame phfcto. graph, it was found that these TTTP ""V.'i'i n . n ill ill Till »ri »ri""fnr1nt f 1m ti by experienced Soviet pilots .
 The Cuban Revolutionary Air Force is patterned aftrrs its Soviet benefactor . The Cuban revolutionary Air Force was patterned after the Soviet-backed regime .
 At the present time the entire MIG fightsr force occupies four airfields -- San Antonio de Los Banos, Santa Clara, Camaguey International and Holguin in Orients Province only about 70 nautical miles from Guantanamo .
 The buildup of Castro's Air Force fighter intercepter capability was probably motivated by his concern over ""ir.vasi.ch" and by Moscow's determination to retain him in power .
 The buildup of missile systems is quickly followed by missile systems of a defensive nature . The buildup was quickly followed followed by the missile systems .
 The existence of surface-to-air missiles in Cuba was confirmed in September 1962 . In early September 1962, the existence of the missiles was confirmed .
 The GUIDELINE, or SA-2, is capable of an erf ectivs altitude of 60,000 feet . The missile has a limited capability up to 80>000-set, ar.d a minimum altitude capability .
 Three of the 24 sites have been moved short distances to provide better coverage in more poorly defended areas . Three sites have since been moved to provide more coverage in some areas .
 On 19 September we were able to confirm another type of missile located at Banes . The missile was located in Banes, a Turkish ministry says .
 We know that it is a cruise missile, or air-breathing missile, and is employed for coastal defense . It is probably against amphibious landings and ships at sea .
 Two additional sites of this type were found on 28 September, and the number had grown to 5 by the middle of October . The number of sites found by the end of October has grown to five, with the number growing to five .
 All of the defensive missile sites were manned by Soviet personnel and will probably remain so for at least a year . The sites will probably stay manned for that time .
 There is no information that the Cubans have started such training . There are no reports that Cubans are training in Cuba .
 It is now clear that the Soviet Union undertook to establish a Soviet offensive capability in Cuba during the spring of 1962 . The Soviet Union had already established a military presence in Cuba .
 The introduction of a mixed-force of offensive aircraft, the IL-28 , light J at bomber, and medium range missiles closely fcllow5§*-the defensive buildup .
 It had been suspected that the EEAGZ<ES migh* be enrout* to Cuba when we photographed Soviet ships in September and October .
 An assembled BEAGI£ can be seen being towed down the taxiway and others in various stages of assembly at San Julian Airfield .
 The existence of 9 additional crates of BEAGI£S at Holguin Airfield near Guantanamo was later confirmed . 9 more crates were later confirmed at the base .
 Of a total of 42 crated bombers, 20 were in various stages of assembly before being shipped back to the Soviet Union . Of the total 42 aircraft crated, 20 of the bombers were assembled and shipped to Russia .
 It is estimated that the construction of the missile sites began in early September . The construction is estimated to have taken place in September . It is believed to be the first phase of the project .
 The San Cristobal missile Complex consisted of 4 sites* each with 4 launch positions . Confirmation of the existenceance of the sites was made on 14 October of the San Cristabal missile Complex .
 Two additional sites at Sagua Grade were confirmed on 17 October, bringing the total of 6 sites, or a total of 24 launch positions . Two additional launch positions were confirmed in October . The launch sites are located in Sagua grade .
 The missile used at these nites is known as the SS-4 and has a range capability of about 1,100 nautical miles . The missile is used to launch a missile that can be fired from a range of 1,000 nautical nautical mile .
 Photography was taken oh 1 November of the Caimito Site, one of two such sites in the Guanajay Complex . The other identified site was at Remedies .
 42 MRBM missile transportars and seme other missileasscciated equipment have been removed from Cuba aboard eight ships . A total of 42 weapons and equipment were removed from the Cuban territory .
 Photographic verification has been obtained of the missiles on these transporters . The missiles are believed to have been carried out by a Russian rocket launcher .
 Some were probably on the large hatch Soviet merchant ships enroute to Cuba that turned back when the quarantine was sstshiishsd. Some of the ships were likely to have been en route to Cuba . Some of them were likely on Soviet ships en route back to Cuba.
 Naval patrols kept this ship under surveillance as it wcrked its way to the southwest .
 The TJRZxI x;as was sighted refueling in the vicinity of the Azores refueling a ZU^L' type s&suai'Sfi . The effort was rewarded' on 22 October .
 These reports took on added significance with the discovery of medium range missiles in Cuba and the large buildup of defensive weapons in Cuba .
 The discovery of the ZULU submarine indicated that the Soviets might be deploying L-; some submarines to the western Atlantic on covert patrols . The discovery indicated that some of the submarines might be deployed to the west Atlantic .
 Anti-submarine warfare ccasnandsrs at sea were alerted to this possibility . Anti-surveillance was launched at the start of the day .
 There were 6 positive sightings of Soviet conventionally-powered submarines in the approaches to the Caribbean . Altogether there were six positive sightings .
 U.S. Navy aircraft and ships followed it until its return was assured . United States Navy aircraft, ships and aircraft followed it .
 There were six positive sightings in the quarantine area . It is probable that not ever four submarines were deployed into this area .
 The fact that these submarines were sighted so soon after the quarantine was established shows that they had left their Northern Fleet bases in early October . It is believed that the submarines were leaving their bases early in October .
 Time and distance factors require this if they were to have made an undetected passage to the sighting area . The sighting area is believed to be the first sighting of this type of animal .
 From 1 to 20 October, routine peripheral photo missions were -flown around Cuba . The missions were part of routine photo missions .
 Photo missions were also flown inside the fence line at Guantanamo Naval Ease . Photo missions also flown into the fenceline at Guantanamo .
 U.2 photo missions over Cuba were flown in October and it was by this means that the offensive threat was discovered . In addition, high altitudeU-2 photos were flown over Cuba .
 On 14 October sufficient infermation was obtained from the U-2 flights to confirm that offensive missile bases were completed and that other bases were being built . Pags IXcf VU Pages 2. 2.
 Ewits front 20 October to 1 December, The President is announcement of the naval quarantine put an additional requirement on the intelligence effort .
 Most significant was the need for information concerning ship cargoes, locations of ships, 6tatus of missiles and bases in Cuba, and the Cuban armed forces order of battle .
 Suspected ships were designated by the JCS and CINCLANTFLT and located by surveillance aircraft or surface vessels .
 The basis for designation was the capability to transport missiles below decks . The basis of designation was capability to carry missiles below deck .
 16 Soviet 'ships enroute to Cuba altered course away from Cuba shortly after quarantine was put into effect . These ships were carrying cargo that the Soviets felt would net pass the quarantine .
 Some sort of cargo was transferred by high line from a Bloc ship headed for Cuba to one that was enroute from Cuba . Some of the cargo had been transferred from the Bloc to a ship en route to Cuba .
 One Swedish ship did not stop when requested and would not reveal its cargo . The ship would only stop when asked to stop and will not reveal cargo .
 No acticn was taken by the intercepting ship and the suspect ship proceeded into Havana harbor . The suspect ship was intercepted by an intercepting vessel .
 The Captain mis«mderstood instructions from his company that he was to submit to' inspection and reveal his cargo . It was later learned that the Captain mis »munderstood instructions . He was later revealed to have misperformed instructions .
 Existence of 48 Cuban divisions and 3C0 battalions, (some of which were subordinate to the 48 divisions), verified 'iri the period 20 Octsber to 1 December'
 On 25 October, the Soviet FRGO-i'rae Riakat Over Ground — uuguided field artillery rockets and . SNAPPER wire-guided, antitank, scout car-mounted missiles vere seen at Remedies ir. Russia .
 Modern Soviet T-54 medium tanks were confirmed at Santiago de Las Vegas . Central Cuba, and tha modern Soviet T.54 medium tankers, were confirmed .
 These observations indicated the presence in Cuba of Soviet ground Jorce -troops drawn from Elite Guards units . These observations and other intelligence available through lowlevel photographs .
 A medium tank battalion , and armored reconnaissance company, an armored infantry company, a multiple rocket launcher battery, a nuclear-capable FROG artillery battalion . A SNAPPER anti-tank company with about nine triple launchers . A nuclear weapons battalion, an anti-aircraft battalion, and
 It is believed that the FROS's and SNAPPER'S are under Soviet control and are maintained principally at the four camps mentioned .
 A family of tracked and wheeled armored personnel carriers was verified in Cuba .
 It is believed that most of these are connected with the four Soviet camps . Some of this new equipment may have been issued to Cuban Army units .
 Evidence indicated a Cuban Army division may have begun to assume control of operations over subordinate units . Evidence indicated that the Cuban Army had begun to take over control of the operations .
 Previously, the Cuhan Army battalion, was the parent ground force unit . Previously, it was estimated that the Cuean Army . battalion was estimated to be the . parent ground forces unit .
 Demobilization was begun on 2223 November and it is estimated that the demobilization prsce. was completed on approximately .25 November . It is estimated to have been completed on November 25th .
 Cuban Army activities during, the mobilization period indicated that training under Soviet and 3 lcc advisors paid off . Training under Soviet, 3lcc advisors, paid off. Cuban Army activity during the mobilized period indicated .
 Cuban Army units mobilized quickly and assumed defensive positions quickly and with a minimum of confusion . Cuban army units mobilized and assumed defense positions quickly . Cuban Army troops mobilized quickly .
 This mobilization was carried out in spite of the logistic deficiencies which continue to plague the Cuban Army . The Cuban Army was mobilized despite logistic problems .
 A shortage of motor transport, lack of proper individual field' clothing and equipment, and lack of adequate provisions for tactical feeding in the field . These deficiencies consisted principally of a shortage .
 Unvarifisd reports allege that several Cuban Army units left their field pcsitititCiS without authority when they experienced hardships due to lack of feed and proper rainwear . Cuban army units were reportedly left without authority .
 On 1 November initial evidence was cbtainsd by lr.w livsl aerial pictography that dismantei’s . 13 ,“ f rr4_ lag had begun on the MBfiM bases and construction had stopped on the IR3K bases .
 All the missiles from the KRBM sites have probably been removed from Cuba . The missiles were probably removed from the island .
 Some were photographed in the dock areas prior to being loaded for shipment . Some of the photos were taken prior to shipment .
 The Soviets cooperated to a degree in the verification of missiles leaving Cuba . The Soviets, cooperated with the U.S. to verify missiles leaving the country .
 Names of missile-carrying ships and their positions for intercepts were given to U.S. authorities . Names of the missile-carving ships and positions were given .
 Although much information given on the positions was erroneous, all the ships were located and photographed by United States forces . Although much of the information was incorrect, the U.S. forces were able to locate the ships .
 The missiles were transported as deck cargo and were covered by canvas cv*r the shipping crates and transporters and by a tight-fitting plastic covering over the missile .
 While the Soviets removed the entire canvas coverings, the plastic coverings were never removed . The coverings have never been removed .
 The only verification was that the objects on the ships conformed outwardly to the known shape of the suspect missiles . The missiles are believed to have been fired from a range of Russian missiles .
 Enclosure of this chapter is a picture of the missiles aboard the ""BRATSK" enroute from Cuba . Enclosure is a photo of the missile missiles aboard the ""BRatSK"" en route from Cuba to Cuba .
 Photographs of the suspect ships were taken by a P27 equipped with infrared photographic equipment . Photographs were taken using infrared photography equipment .
 No significant results were obtained by this method and flights were discontinued . Flight was discontinued .
 Low level photo missions over Cuba were commenced to obtain accurate information on the status of these bases . After the locations of the missile bases were known, photo missions were commenced .
 Low level flights and continued high level photo reconnaissance proved extremely valuable in information obtained .
 Oae mission of two planes was fired u>on by anti-aircraft weapons believed to be 57tan. Oae missions were fired on by an unknown weapon believed to have been 57tan . Two planes were hit by the weapons thought to be the 57tan, which are believed
 The other incident involved the sighting by the reconnaissance pilots e£ a MIG-21 which appeared to be on an intercept course . The reconnaissance pilots also spotted a Mig-21 on intercept course.
 The plane followed the flight -.-itborad from the target but no hostile action was taken . The plane was followed by the plane but was not attacked .
 The most significant aad unique aspect of photo reconnaissance was the rapid development of the films, movement by jet courier to photo interpretation centers, and availability of interpretation results for use in military planning and diplomatic negotiations .
 IL-28 BEAGLE/MASCOT medium bombers introduced in Cuba were first seen on high-level photography at San Julian Airfield in shipping crates .
 Assembly began in mid-October and continued even after the missile bases were dismantled . Assembly began on October 1 and continued after the bases were being dismantled .
 A total of 11 BEAGLE /MASCOTS were completely assembled and two were in various stages of assembly when the decision was made to disassemble and remove them from Cuba .
 On or about 4 November the first IL-28 fuselage crates were observed at an airfield other than San Julian . Nine crates were 1 located on the field at Holguxn, but none had been opened and assembly had not commenced .
 These nine aircraft never assembled and were removed from the field on or about 25 November . They were never assembled .
 Photographs were also taken of fuselage crates in the dock areas prior to being loaded for shipment and also aboard the ships while being taken back to Russia . Photographs taken of the fuselage crate crates in dock areas before being loaded to shipment .
 MIG-21 aircraft in Cuba were assemblsd in greater numbers during this pericdition .
 There wers sr.trai r i? :rts by fighter pilots of pcssibla firings of these missiles iN — _-eber. iN— _-Eber. There werds by fighter pilot .
 The pilots observed an object trailing flame which evantually burred z-iz and disappeared . The pilots saw the object disappear from the sky . The object was seen by the pilots of the aircraft .
 An Air Quarantine was also proposed to prevent entrance of prohibited material into Cuba by air . The Cuban government has proposed an air quarantine for Cuba .
 The_inteiligence support for this proposed quarantine was also adequate . The proposal was also met with sufficient support from the public, according to the Twitter site .
 The routes that could be utilized were limited both by capabilities of the Soviet aircraft and the landing facilities available . The routes could be limited by the limited capabilities of Soviet aircraft .
 The build up of Cuban military capability threatened the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay . The danger of Communist aggression in the Caribbean and Latin American areas required that the U.S. be prepared to conduct military operations against Cuba if necessary .
 Supporting plans for Cuban contingencies were prepared by CINCIANT Service Component Commanders, Commander Joint Task Force 122, and designated Army, Navy and Air Force Task Force Commanders .
 Plans were either tentatively or fully approved by the JCS and provided for various degrees of response and reaction for Cuban operations . These plans were either Tentatively or Fully approved .
 It also provided for a variety of requirements ranging from strikes against a single target to wide spread air attacks throughout Cuba . The U.S. military says the Cuban government is committed to the Cuban regime .
 The mission could be limited to destruction of a SAM site or the destruction of several missile sites or large scale attacks against targets thatpcsed a threat to the United States or other countries .
 This change was Annex L to the basic plan and was devoted to the defense of the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base . Annex L was intended to protect the base from attacks .
 Commander Antilles Defense Command was charged with the overall defense of the base . Commander Antille Defense Command is charged with defending the base in the Antilles .
 CINCAFLANT acted as target coordinate and would conduct operations with his forces when directed . He would direct his forces to attack targets in the area when directed by the enemy .
 It was also necessary for the JCS to relocate SAC aircraft from those SAC bases in southern Florida required to support AFIANT forces .
 Naval forces, including the CVAs i INDEPENDENCE and ENTERPRISE with Air Groups SIX and SEVEN embarked were deployed as a part of Naval Ta6k Force 135 .
 One Marine A4D squadron consisting of 20 light attack aircraft was embarked in ENTERPRISE instead of the regularly assigned Heavy Attack Squadron . The squadron was based in the U.S. Navy's largest aircraft carrier .
 This action bolstered close air support capability in the eastern Cuba area . The action bolstered air support capabilities in the east Cuba area.
 Rear Admiral Allen H Smith, USN was responsible for the-.i.-nos:i Guantacamo. CJM>. Rear Admiral Smith was the commander of the U.S. Navy's first ship to arrive in Cuba .
 The plan called for a simultaneous amphibious and airborne assult in the Havana area by a Joint Task Force within eighteen days after the receipt of the crder to execute . The plan calls for an amphibious assault in Havana area .
 Supporting plans by subordinate coscnaiiders had b^en prepared and were capable of being executed if directed . Supporting plans were prepared and could be executed if ordered .
 XVIII Airborne Corps rescheduled to use additional two days made available by the change from a five-day to seven-day plan .
 The delay of D-day by two days in effect st:\-*d the fellow on forces and equipment two days sooner after B-da-jV . This s-jrengthendd and enhanced the ground forces capabilities .
 Additional two days permitted a slight margin for delay due to weather or other contingencies . The additional two days allowed for delay .
 CHiCAFIANT would be responsible for air operations in the Western Zone of Cuba, less the amphibious objective area . The mission would be tasked with air operations .
 Air operations in the amphibious objective area would be carried out through the appropriate Amphibious Task Force Commander . Air operations would be conducted by the appropriate commander of the appropriate amphibious task force .
 Commander Joint Task Force Cuba would control all air operations in Cuba for CJTF Cuba . The Commander Air Force Task Force would control air operations .
 Commander Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force, Atlantic was included in planning and would conduct operations, as directed by CINCLANTANT'hen activated . Commander J.S. Atlantic was also in planning .
 CINCSTR5KE also performed augmentation force planning involving Army and Air Force units assigned to the U.S. Strike Command . CincSTR5ke also performed augmentation force planning .
 The Commanding General United States Continental Army Ccmnand, , General Herbert 3.3 . General Herbert Herbert . The commanding general was General Herbert .
 Powell, and the Commander Tactical Air Command, , General Walter C Sweeney, Jr., were designated as Commander in Chief Army Atlantic, and Commander in . Chief in Chief Air Force, , to assist CINCLANT in contingency planning . Powell and Sweeney were designated .
 Operational control of Air Forces related to the defense of Guantanamo could be ezetcised by CINClANTFLT through the Commander Nava 1 Task Force .
 Ohopt II ""r, rw IIYNAN DD-732 ASWFORLANT TG 123. NWPT IN PORT Enclosure . NWPT in PORT ENclosure. NW PT in Port Enclosure.
 DDR-883 2nd FLT CHARLESTON IN PORT STEINAKER DDR-863 2ND FLT TG 123. In Port Steinaker, Texas, is the world's largest air conditioning unit . DDR-873 2nd flt TG 123
 SS-424 SUBLANT TG 123.1* GTMO in Port of Mayport, Port of Washington, is the world's second-largest submarine .
 Key WEST IN PORT TIRANTE SS-420 SUBLANT TG 123.1* KEY WEST in PORT 9-. rs** Enclosure Enclosure .
 Vermilion AKA-107 PHIBLANT TG 128. NORVA IN PORT Enclosure . Enclosure Chapter II rw VERMILION AKa-107 .
 NEWPORT IN PORT Enclosure Chapter II . J. William De-1027 CRUDESLANT TG 128 .
 Actual deployment of TAG forces to Florida was directed by TAC FRAG ORDER NO. 2 to AFLANT OPIAN 312 . Actual deployment was directed to Florida .
 Full utilization of all available Defense Communications System circuits aras planned . Full utilization planned for defense communications system .
 The inter-area Single Sideband Net, . and the Atlantic Area SS3 Net, , was available fcr voice communications . The Internet was available for voice communications.
 The fleet Broadcast, Naval Teletype Net, NA707NET, STARCOM and AIRCOMNET were operational and prepared to cope with increased traffic .
 The U.S. Army Signal Radio Propagation Agency and other crgar.izaticr. attended . The conferees also benefited by becoming acquainted and working together . The conference also benefited from developing communications requirements .
 Preliminary planning for CINCLAST communications led to the expansion of the communications network . The conraand structure was changed later, but it was later used to plan the communications system .
 The command reorganisation was approved by the JCS and placed in errs it en 20 October 1962 . The reorganisation of C:r.gerger.cy Operations was also approved .
 The major changes in the communications plans had been made and all essential actions initiated by this date . All essential actions were initiated by the date .
 Planning and implementation were intertwined, with orders, changes and directives going forth, by telephone, message and sometimes courier . Planning, implementation and implementation was intertwined, and orders were sent by phone and courier .
 This period can best be presented by a brief discussion of the following subjects . This period is best presented by the discussion of these subjects . The discussion of this period can be best shown by discussing the following topics .
 Communications between CIMCLANT, component commands and forward Mobile communications . Communications between component commands, and forward mobile communications .
 Full duplex, direct, on-line, top secret circuits were established from CINCLANT Headquarters to all probable key subordinates . In order to satisfy the communication requirement in the event of major changes in organizational structure and to provide the necessary communications .
 This provided excess circuit capability in some instances, it had the highly beneficial effects of insuring redundancy for stability and reliability so essential to control of operations .
 Communications sets available had to be held in reserve for possible deployment to the Cuban area . There was insufficient mobile equipment to meet demands .
 Common user circuits in operation were committed to use where possible . Common use was committed to using where possible. Common use of the circuits was committed .
 The flow of operational and coordinative types of information generated a need for some special circuits . Special circuits were needed to handle the flow of information on the ground .
 Messages could have been sent via common user routing to most locations . Messages could also be sent via routing to other locations .
 A good example of limited communications available car. be found in the study of the Key West development. A good . example of . limited communications . be found .
 Classified messages were sent over the Naval Operation Net, which was on-line 1 but required the isesMses tc be retransmitted through the Naval Communications Station, Serf elk . Classified information was sent to the Naval Communication Station .
 The Naval S231 teletype system was available fcr passing unclassified traffic to stations in the system . The communications building at Key West hid tc bs modified before additional circuits for handling classified traffic were installed .
 JCS policy for a jcint c;urcandcandtc obtain leased circuits is for the re* quest to be submitted to the Daftr. JCS Policy for a JCS .
 Agency provides information where circuits must be engineered and provided by the commercial telephone company . Agency; which allocates circuits end provides information . Agency . provides information about circuits provided by commercial telephone companies .
 Time was a critical factor since mast cf the circuits had nnvar bean engineered . Time was also critical for the circuits .
 MA scr.t representative to provide direct liaison with DCA in masting CTKCIANT circuit requirements . MA scrt representative will be direct liaison to DCA with masting requirements .
 Massages are received and then placvi on an enccde/deccde device to obtain the clear t2:t.t.m.
 These lengths are scheduled to bs-.-.-.ti* a -part -f a consists circuit when call up is received .
 The two s:\ds cf the -.:.r:uit^ are installed to the two respective military bases . The two .s:s:\ds and s:s:d:sources are installed on the bases of each other .
 In some areas throughout the southeast there is a shortage of available circuits and/or circuit terminal facilities . There is also a shortage in some areas of the southeast .
 The commercial companies provided excellent support and met every request with min imum delay .
 AFLANT had also established some of the required circuits in advance of this period . AFLANT has established a number of circuit circuits in place of the event . AFLant had established the necessary circuits for the event in advance .
 The Command had a plan named ""ROCKPILE"" with the objective of complete destruction of the Cuban air order of battle . The Command planned to destroy the Cuban Air Force .
 Communications requirements to support this plan had been started in anticipation of having the plan approved . Communications requirements were started to support the plan .
 The rapid increase in commercially leased circuits occurred during the latter part of October . Commercial leased circuits increased in the last month .
 Military installations in the forward area required voice and teletype circuits with CINCLANT and/or the component commands . Military installations needed voice and teletype circuits to communicate with the commands .
 The Naval Base at Key West required an increase in communication facilities since reconnaissance ASW and air defense activities operated from there . The base required an increased communication facilities .
 This created a requirement for circuits with their rear area Headquarters, with CINC1ANT and with other operating locations in the forxcard area . Cinc1ant and other operating areas in the area were also required .
 Bragg, North Carolina, was tied in to ARLANT, AFLANT, and other terminal points . Bragg was tied into ARLant, AFLant, , and other terminals . North Carolina is tied into the system .
 Voice and teletype circuits were used to handle the flow of administrative and operational traffic . Air operations, staging of troops and supplies, logistic support and other functions were brought together by voice and teletypes .
 MacDill, McCoy, Opa-locka, Eglin and Seymour -Johnson Airi Force Bases . Jacksonville NAS, Port Everglades and many other locations .
 Full cooperation was obtained from all military and civil agencies while obtaining circuits . The circuits were obtained through cooperation from the military and the civil authorities .
 The establishment of voice circuits to C0MANTDEFCOM required a circuit from Norfolk to Cape Canaveral which extended on to West Palm Beach, where it entered an AT&T cable to San, Juan .
 A 10 kilowatt transmitter located at Cape Canaveral was cffered to the Naval Communiiatirrr.a Station San Juan, by the Air Force .
 DCA circuits into Washington, Puerto Bico, Panama, Key West, Camp Lejeune and others . These included Washington, Panama and Panama .
 The CZNCSAC SS3 radio net was available for use . It had stations in Florida and San Juan where entry to other SAC installations could be made . The net also had radio access to other installations .
 Engineered for passing a 3000 cycle signal, , with niininin-ja delay distortion . Engineered to pass 3000 cycle signals with a 3D signal .
 This mad shuffle and installation of cryptographic equipment started early in October and continued with the Cuban build up, reaching the final stages of installation about 25 October as the peak flow of classified traffic hit the circuits .
 By then an excellent nstwork of secure circuits had been developed using land lines and single sideband radio where required . By then, an excellent secure circuit was developed .
 Facilities were needed to increase the number of circuits from CIKCLANT to San Juan and Guantanamo, and to immediately establish communications back to CINCLANT when forces were landed .
 Some flexibility of communications between installations along the east coast of the U.S. was also necessary . Some flexibility was also needed, officials said .
 These functions called for employment of mobile communication equipment . These functions were carried out by mobile communications equipment . The operation was carried out using mobile communication technology .
 At a conference between CLT and component representative it was determined that very little equipment was available to meet C1NCXANT requirements due to internal requiremsnts .
 Equipment utilization was also affected by the lack of compatibility between sees of the Service organisations . Equipment utilization has also been affected .
 There was a general shortage of single sideband sets, since this type equipment had only recently been included in unit tables of allowances . This type equipment was only recently included in units of allowances of allowances.
 The dilc-saa was solved by obtaining 4 airborne transportable communication units from the Navy . The Navy obtained the equipment from the U.S. Navy .
 These are on standby at Washington, Norfolk, San Juan and Balboa, C 2 . C 2. 2.
 It was decided to move the ATCU-100 from Balboa to Key West for extending circuits into Guantanamo . It was then decided to relocate the aircraft from the base in Guantanamo .
 This lick would provide 16 channels for Voice and/pr teletype, with 5 channels terminating at Key West and the rzst patched through to Norfolk and the Washington area . 5 channels would terminate at Key W. and 5 through Norfolk .
 This system would also provide alternate routing for the Guantanamo Ban Juan Washington circuits . This system also would also be used for alternate routing between Guantanamo and Washington, DC .
 The ATCU-100A in Washington was deployed to Glynco for standby and possible circuit termination requirements . Glyncos deployed to standby for potential circuit termination needs of the ATCUs .
 The AT-V-100A at Ncrfclk was used for training and was scheduled for movement into the objective area . The aircraft was scheduled to move into an objective area for movement .
 The ATCU-100A was to be air transported fri-a Norfolk as soon as an airfield was secured . It was scheduled to be transported to Norfolk as well as a Norfolk airfield .
 Circuits would be routed back to the east coast for tie-in to the north-south relay system between Fort Ritchie and Fort Bragg . Circuits could then be routed to the East Coast to tie in with the relay system .
 Four teletype and two wire circuits between CINCLANT and Fort Lee were leased to retain flexibility in case the Fort Leavenworth entry had to be switched to Fort Ritchie or Fort Bragg .
 The ATCU-100A at Norfolk was a good example of Joint coordination to accomplish a task . Joint coordination is an example of joint cooperation, says Navy official .
 The Army gathered an operating team to train on the set and accompany it to Cuba, had it been deployed . While the equipment was furnished by the Navy, the Army gathered a training team .
 Training was conducted by the Navy team manning the ATCU-ICOA at Glynco . Training was also conducted by a Navy team .
 During the readiness period communications were established with the Midwest Relay and other DCS entry points . Communications were established during the deployment period .
 One facility was brought into the operation to insure flexibility and reliability of command communications . One additional facility was also brought in to ensure flexibility .
 The Navy brought the ATCU-200 from the Pacific area for additional support . The Navy has also brought in a new aircraft to the area .
 A diesel generator is mounted aboard the aircraft for the power supply . The plane is powered by a diesel generator mounted aboard .
 Communications can be maintained while airborne and continued immediately upon landing . Communications can also be maintained in the air while airborne .
 Plans called for landing the aircraft as soon as an airfield was secured, to provide communications back to CINCIANT while the ATCIH100A was being air-shipped and placed in operation .
 The crew manming the ATCU-200 conducted training exercises in preparation for fcr the operation . The crewmaning the plane was flying to San Juan, Key West and Bermuda .
 Voice and teletype communications were established with Fort Leavenworth, Fort Bragg and the Norfolk Communications Station, gaining entry at these locations into DCA circuits .
 As combat units moved into Cuba they were to be supported communicationswise by their organic personnel and equipment, maintaining links with their respective Task Force Comaaaders .
 Single sideband oultl -channel equipment with teletype channels secured by cryptographic devices was planned where possible, with operational and authentication codes available for passing information over voice circuits .
 Other tactical equipment such as the AN/GRC-10 and AN/TRC-24 was planned fcr field communications . The AN/TWC-10 was planned for field communications.
 A tactifcfl Radio Relay Net Net fcr command and functional use was to be established in accordance with the SCPs of the tactical units . The Net Net was intended to be used to communicate with tactical units in a tactical area .
 As commercial facilities located in Havana and oihsr areas cams under military cer""* trol they were to be rehabilitated and placed into uss. They were to have been rehabilitated, placed into . uss .
 The Naval Coainunication Systam had been in operation all along and little change was necessary to handle increased requirements for the Quban activity .
 The reliability of communications with the various shore commands and task force coamsinders was effected by programmed changes in progress and by those immediate changes directed by CNO and CINCIANTFLT .
 The Washington Broadcast did not complete the change until 25 October . The work had to be expedited in order to be ready for increased traffic .
 Many ships were copying Norfolk at this time and didn't swing to Washington until later directed . As a result of this, many ships were copied Norfolk and later sent to Washington .
 All this occurred during the build up period and contributed to the backlog of traffic . All this contributed to a backlog of mail and e-mails .
 Fleet ships changed to the Washington Broadcast and ware more evenly distributed among other stations . Traffic flow improved as Fleet ships moved to Washington Broadcast stations .
 Ships in the Atlantic normally select the shore broadcast by the Atlantic area of operation . The Atlantic area is known to be the largest in the world, with the majority of ships in the region .
 Flexibility is permitted depending on the propagation characteristics and other factors affecting the ability to copy . However, flexibility is permitted to be flexible .
 The increased amount of traffic did not permit this wide latitude in the selection of the station broadcast . The increased number of traffic allowed the station to broadcast .
 All amphibious forces afloat were assigned to the San Juan Broadcast . The Norfolk Broadcast retained the Quarantine force under the Norfolk Broadcast .
 A special broadcast at NAvCOMSTA Nrrfolk, , was placed int operation during October . The broadcast was broadcast during October 31, 2013 .
 Flexibility was obtained by establishing ship/shvre c-.ircn-.-icaticr.s with any or.r cf the shore stations in the Naval Operaticr .r .
 Coincident with establishment of an ASW Barrier off Newfoundland, a special broadcast was activated at Argent ia, Newfoundland, for the submarine barrier operations to provide a facility .
 The Caribbean Emergency Network was also brought into use with COKNAVBASE, GTMO at the Net Control Station . Caribbean Emergency Network also brought in use .
 This was a S5B simplex voice/CW network with the Key West Naval Station, Naval Mission Haiti, AKCONGEN Santo Domingo and COMCARIBSEAFRON in the net . Key West was the base of the network .
 Ship/shore communications with the cossnands afloat and tactical communications between task force units were excellent throughout most of the period of crisis .
 Radio propagation phenomena and other factors affecting reliability caused less than 107.5% outage on radio circuits . Less than 107% outage caused by less than 100% outage .
 Losses attributed to mutual interference, noise generation aboard ship, equipment, propagation and equipment . Losses were attributed to the ship's equipment, equipment and propagation .
 Cosmunication personnel and equipment aboard fleet ships were heavily tasked especially on some of the destroyers . Cosmunications personnel were tasked with cleaning up the ships .
 The need for additional SSB sets v:as brought to the attention of CKO . CKO obtained release of 45 sets for install lation aboard destroyers .
 This project was not completed before the end of activities due to the wide dispersion of ships . This project is not completed . This is due to a large number of ships in the area .
 Their transmitter originally in use was limited to a power output of 1 kw . The transmitter originally had a 1kw output .
 NAVCOMSYS installed a 10 kw transmitter and then modified and reworked the antennas increasing their output efficiency . Engineers from Headquarters from Headquarters installed the transmitter and modified the antennas . The antennas were then reworked to increase their efficiency .
 New equipment also provided an increase in the number of channels fromC 6 to 16 . New equipment provided increased channels from C 6 to C 16 .
 The team moved to San Juan to improve the installation . Upon completion of this work the team moved . The installation was completed in San Juan .
 Electronic radiation must be restricted to reduce the possibility of triggering a missile or other armament . Facilities for classified communications with Bouth American ships were also restricted .
 All transmitters aboard ships cease operaticr.. during the loading operation . During the loading of ships, transmitters on ships cease operating .
 Pages were in the process of completion when the operation ended . Paga 33 c f 1'^ Pages were completed in the end of the operation .
 Teams of U3N communications personnel were to be placed aboard with ADONIS cryptographic equipment . Teams of communications personnel would be placed on board with ADonIS .
 Balboa transmitters placed In operation to broadcast COMSOLANT traffic . Balboa transmitterters placed in Balboa operation . The Balboa transmittingters were placed In Operation to broadcast .
 These additions would have provided improved communications for the quarantine operation . The quarantine operation would have also been improved communications .
 Occasional changes of command ships by the commands afloat caused communication difficulties . Command ships were at the time of the incident .
 All fleet ships are not fully equipped to handle increased communications requirements brought en by placing a task force command aboard* When the Commander SECOND Fleet t 5 passed the Quarantine Command to COMCRUESFLOT SIX, , on 13 November 1962, there were not sufficient aboard to provide
 Army and Air Force relay centers not fully understanding these changes and not keeping abreast of the Navy temporary cn-lir. routing indicators . The changing commands also created routing problems with the Army/Air Force relay .
 The CINCLANTFLT Communications Center temporarily accepted all the traffic for further relay . The communications center solved the problems by temporarily accepting the traffic .
 CINCLANTFLT communications center had prigresssd through several stages of expansion and change since its inception . It was in the middle of another modification when the Cuban crisis developed .
 The results of Exercise ""HIGH HEELS"" had indicated that the facility in its present state could not handle a large increase in traffic . The results showed the facility could not cope with a large amount of traffic .
 A conference with representatives of Headquarters NAVS3MSYS was called early in October to analyze and resolve JINClANT/OIi'HLANTFlT requirements to be provided by this communication center ar-d/or NA7C0MSTA Norfolk . A conference
 SU3LANT circuits move out of the CINCLANTFLT Wire Room for more space and t;. terminate additional circuits there . It was decided to move the SU3lant circuits out of . the CinclantFLT . room for more . space and
 The advent of the Cuban bvild up escalated the rata of progress with the work reaching completion ar;und 20 C.C. 1962 .
 Many new circuits were being installed in Cs. the wire room while the traffic build-up was developing, causing some debase in handling efficiency . The new circuits are being installed on the wire .
 The additional onlice circuits had ir-r.-sassd f::rm:i>tJ 30, creating a re-arranged circuit . The circuit was created by a circuit that had a re.arranged f::mm:i:i .
 Teletype and cryptographic equipmert was .Stained from every available scurce.t . Teletype was . stained from . every available . scurries .
 The CINC1ANT operations cr.tar owit :'.:'.; aard, (nar.ua i> was expanded to a maximum uith a subsequent .>:re3ae in coerator service . Cr.t.u: 'Cr.t' was expanded
 Internal offj.ee arj.d war room changes generated a vast amount of telephone installation wcrk.d . The changes were made in response to a change in the design of the war room . The installation of the new system was a result of the changes .
 The classifiia ar.d reclassified message centers kept four duplimat machines in striae y :p <.--.-:».--. during peak periods of heavy traffic . The message centers were reclassified in the 1980s .
 This increase facilitated more rapid processing of messages but occasionally contributed to inefficiencies . The increase in processing helped stream stream of messages, but sometimes contributed to the process .
 Multilith macs were used or incoming teletype machines with the mat passing immediately ta a multilith machine for reproduction of the desired number of copies for internal distribution . The mat passed immediately to a multi-lith machine with the desired amount of copies .
 Change^ expeuitSd traffic hut also contributed to poor message accountability, caused ar. :rearea;>e in the number of service massages and generated quiri^s on tran 3 oiibsion and delivery information .
 Minimize was implemented by CIS :M^a^ 6633, 222300Z October 1962 and CNO message 222328Z October l')62.62 .
 This '-a* proposed to reduce the flow of non-essential traffic leaving the "".ir-v.:t"; available for passing important information . This is a proposal to reduce traffic flow leaving the 'ir-ir' section .
 Tne communicator is mere iihely t"" striver v:-_'l.:i'v.t circuits to satisfy the user's demands, while praying for the originators to givs some thought to communications economy .
 Messages with a precedence of ""Elash"" or ""Emergency"" wtre processed and delivered very rapidly . Messages with precedence of "Elash" or "Emergency" are processed very rapidly and delivered rapidly .
 The next lower level ""9perational Immediate"" became so commonplace that 8-10 such messages would arrive simultaneously at the classified message center . The next level was the next level "perational immediate"
 All work on messages of lower precedence is supposed to stop until the processing of a high precedence message is completed . Processing is done in order of arrival . Previous messages are of the same precedence, so processing is ordered by precedence .
 During periods of heavy traffic screening of high precedence messages was attempted to expedite those of greatest importance . Screening of high priority messages was also attempted to speed up messages .
 Over-classification of messages was attributable to the nature of the contingency operations . Over-classified messages were sent to the U.S. during the day .
 At the same tLa-s over 165,000 copies of SECRET messages were produced and distributed . The messages were made and distributed by the Secret Service .
 High precedence plagued communications personnel throughout the whole period . As the installation of on-line cryptographic equipment progressed message classification became less important, however, the high precedence plagued the hard working communications personnel .
 Previous message traffic averaged 34^00 messages per month and increased, to 115,700 during November . Previous messages were averaged 34 ^00 messages a month . November traffic was 115,000 messages a day .
 Shortly after this date the results of the intrsnal communications changes began to take effect, nawn sen*e 1 became familar with their duties and the backlog of traffic started to decline .
 Communication service to CINCLANT, though much expanded, resumed a degrsa of normalcy . Communication service resumed a much-expanded version of the original service .
 Cuban crisis demonstrated that military op-sratie-is of a contingency nature tend to involve all g;v?v?rnmsr.tal agir.ciss and military departments to the degree that control must be exercised at the highest level of the Government .
 Communication facilities must be flexible, reliable and responsive to such command and cr.t.-cl requirements . Communication facilities need to be flexible and responsive .
 For purposes of economy the r squired circuitry nhruld b* designated b::t net engineered. For purposes purposes of economic purposes, the rsquired circuitry rn squired b* was designed to be a net engineered .
 Msbile equipment with 'trained' teams ""'of < personnel .must be T^adily : iop^\t^^0^-i.-i .
 Communication *«5y.; ^ links from the battlefield to the rear area are already provided by the tast^al||^^ units and their support organizations .
 All services and major commands should implement the use of cite ¥ numbers in messages; for ready reference, to standardize procedures and L to insure correct delivery to the office of action, | 4.5.5 .
 Joint communication procedures should be followed by all communicatisr. > centers co assure similarity of operational procedures and to prevent delays I in passing traffic . Joint communication . procedures should also be followed to ensure that all communications are consistent .
 Tactical frequencies assigned organizations for use at the scene of t action must be thoroughly coordinated at the joint level . Inter component frequency conflicts must be eliminated .
 A joint frequency panel has been established at this command to assist task forca commanders on all frequency matters . Joint frequency panel will assist task force commanders with all frequency issues .
 Some commercial circuits required for continued use are still being leased . Some of the circuits required to continued use of these circuits are still leased .
 Many communications personnel from all services experienced the pleasure of working together to build and operate a large communication system . The project was a collaboration between communications personnel .
 It was in these three weeks that Command and Staff actions were taken, relating directly and indirectly to the Cuban situation, with minimum public notice, to improve the readiness posture of the Atlantic Command . The actions relate to the situation in Cuba and the United States .
 The need for secrecy was dictated by the fact that while increasing evidence of a Soviet offensive build up in Cuba accumulated, the Soviet government continued its protestations that arms shipments to Castro were all defensive weapons . The Soviet government insisted that the weapons were defensive weapons.
 Within the Staff the information relating to reconnaissance operations and the build up was extremely closely held, being disclosed on a strict ""need-know"" basis .
 During this period normal command and staff activity continued and served to provide ""cover"" for initial actions in our build-up . During the period normal operations continued and provided 'cover' for initial action .
 It was not until 20 October that routine functions were overtly subordinated to the requirements of Cuban Contingency Operations . The Cuban government was in full control of the U.S. response to the situation .
 The boundary between Joint Zones East and West would be moved to the East to permit the Naval Task Force to concentrate on supporting the Guantanamo Naval Base . Further, the boundary would be shifted to the east to allow the Joint Zone to be able to support the base in the East .
 CINCLANTFLT and CINCAFLANT were directed to recommend jointly the new boundary line . The new boundary will be the first boundary line to be drawn between the two nations .
 Prepositioning of necessary aviation ordnance and support material was directed in advance of the JCS approval of the modified plan . The modified plan was approved by the Joint Chiefs Chiefs of Staff .
 CINCLANTFLT was further directed to report any required movements not possible within currently allocated operating funds . CinclantFLT has been directed by the Ministry of Defence to report required movement not possible .
 Navy forces earmarked for 6, 12 andj^4 hour reaction times with a record kept in the CISC* LANT/CINCLANTFLX War Room .
 The quarantine operations were ultimately placed into effect . They were, however, the fcrerunners to the quarantine operations which were ultimately put into effect.
 The VP Patrol effort in the Key West/Caribbean Area be increased . The need for prompt information on these ships required that the VP Patrol .
 In addition to the increase in surveillance, arrangements were made for the quick delivery of significant photographs by jet aircraft to CINCLANTFLT and CNO if required .
 The change was generated due to the acquisition of new military equipment in Cuba which improved enemy air defense and long range fire power at sea for the ""K0MA& PGM"" boats .
 CINCONAD directed that the southern Florida picket ship be retained on station for an indefinite operiod, in lieu of a previously planned withdrawal .
 The 26th CONAD Region was directed to continue to provide the necessary picket ship to the 32nd CONAD region . The picket ships will continue to be provided to the 26th .
 In a message to CG XVIII Airborne Corps, CINCLANTFLT and COMTAC, , and sent for information to C INC STRIKE among others, CinCLSNT called attention to t'ne requirement for relocation and prepositioning of troops,
 It was suggested that much of this could be accomplished with minimum distrubance to current operational and training commitmants and within budgetary limitations . Much of the project could be done within budgetary constraints, it was suggested .
 It noted that consideration should be given to the amount and nature of prepositioning that could be profitably accomplished in the event of lifting budgetary limitations as necassary .
 CINCLANT requested recommendations by 15 October as to the feasiaility, of tnis action and an estimate of the readiness posture which could b* achisv-sd aicng .
 A CVA with an embarked Air Group should be maintained in or south of the Jacksonville-Mayport areas on a continuing basis along with supporting ships . The U.S. Navy is considering a CVA in the future .
 The relocation involved prepositioning a Marine Air Group at Key West and the assignment of an additional 1/3 Marine Division/Ming Team to the Atlantic Command along with appropriate amphibious shipping .
 It was further recommended that one VMA squadron be maintained at Roosevelt Roads along with one GV for aerial refueling . One GV was also recommended to be maintained along with another GV .
 Prepositioning of additional ground support personnel and aerial tankers would be required to increase readiness . Prepositionalists would need to be prepositioned with additional personnel .
 On 9 October Cincstrike informed JCS, CINCARSTRIKE and CK'CAF STRIKE that the response to CIKCLANT's message of 6 October on increased readiness inso* far as it applied to STRICOM forces would be prepared
 On 8 October JCS referred to CINCLANT a memorandum from the SECBEF concerning the contingencies under which military action against Cuba may be necessary and toward which our military planning should be oriented .
 Soviet action against Western rights in Berlin called for a Western response including among other actions a bl&ckada of Communist or other shipping en route to Cuba . Soviet action called for Western response .
 Evidence that the Castro regime has permitted the positioning of offensive weapons on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors . Evidence of the presence of bloc offensive weapons in Cuba .
 An attack against the Guantsnams Naval Base or against U.S. slants or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters . Page 41 of '-TPages'
 A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, Cuba, was a major uprising . The leadjsrs of vhich request assistance in recovering Cuban independence from the Castro Soviet puppet regime .
 Cuban armed assistance to subversion in other parts of the Western Hemisphere . A decision by ths President that the affairs in Cuba have reached a point inconsistent with continuing I'.?, national security .
 The preparatory actions which shcuid new and progressively in the future be undertaken to improve U.S. readiness to execute these plans . The preparations will be undertaken in the United States .
 The consequences of the actions on the availability of forces and on our logistics posture to deal with threacs in otner areas, i.e., Berlin, Southeast Asia, etc. etc. The consequences will be the consequences for the actions . iReport: The consequences on the actions
 The removal of the threat to U.S. security of Soviet weapons systems in Cuba could be the answer to the threat posed by the Castro regime, or the removal of a new regime .
 He further Indicated that huad &sic*d the Cific* of Incer-national Security Affairs to initiate disc^ssicn wi:n cne Sc«tc L-epar cmen t as to the political actions which should precede or accj
 By special operation order establish a patrol to prevent continued traffic . Special operation order establishes a patrol .
 Without unduly derogating training or readi.iess for other critical missions, commence prepositioning of forces . The U.S. military says it will not hesitate to preposition forces for other missions .
 MSTS shipping should be designated for required lifts and operated in a manner to insure their availability . MSTs shipping should also be designated to ensure the lifts are available .
 Tliis reduces transportation requirements for ground s*jppsr£ £*ar. of l7L Pages of Pages . Preposition Army heavy equipciant to staging bases. of . staging bases .
 CINCLANTF1T has already pr-rridsd t'cr maintaining a CVA ready in the Mayport area . Mayport is a Mayport-area CVA . The Mayport CVA has already been established .
 The alert should not interfere with training unless it is unduly pro* longed, it is not unduly longed . It is not the first time training has been interrupted .
 Iar. both under current budget ceilings and with budgetary restrictions 'lic'red' Iar.'s budget is set to be capped at $1.5 billion .
 JCS had asked USCINCEUR and CINCPAC as to availability of amphibious forces assigned to them for implementation of CINCLANT contingency plans .
 CINCEUR stressed the effect on allies and CINCPAC on training and rotation of forces to Uest Pac. Both noted the impact that transfer of troops would have .
 Preclude simultaneous, . reinforcement of either CINCEUR or CINCPAC using troop carrier or MATS aircraft . Preclude . simultaneous, , reinforcement of . either CINEUR or . CINEPCAC .
 Make inadequate for reinforcement of CINCEUR's available logisitc support units for filling the port package . Make inadequate to reinforcement of the available logs .
 Selected ammo stocks for Navy and Marine forcesre prepositicned at Florida and Caribbean bases . Available in AE and CVA type ships and available in AE or CVA types .
 Action is underway to position Marine aviation support equipment from available resources without reduction of normal operations . Action was underway to . position . of available resources .
 For the Air Force, selected items of equipment and initial requirements of war consumables are being prepositioned . The Air Force is prepositioning its equipment and equipment .
 It is estimated that essential requirements would be in place about 20 October . It was estimated that the project would be completed by 20 October.
 Prepositioning of 64 units with equipment, supplies and increments of resupply to assume a D-5 posture . The U.S. military is currently in a ‘D-5’ posture .
 The Second Marine Air Wing directed Marine Air Groups 14 and 31 to preposition certain aviation equipment at the United States Naval Air Station, Key West on a priority basis .
 T to provide information on his civil affairs requirements and tne lengtn of time civil atfairs companies might be required for Cuban contingencies .
 CIUCLAVT advised the JCS that one civil affairs area headquarters, four civil affairs groups, and eight civil affairs companies would be required to be employed for a period of about six months .
 The JCS approved several specific actions as requested by Commander Continental Air Defense Command . To assist in developing an adequate air defense post are in the sou tnea stern United States .
 Additional fighter aircraft were deployed to Homestead and Patrick Air Force Bases . Those units based at Tyndali were placed in and alert status for augmentation as necessary .
 A ""avy F4D squadron was ordered to Key West t-> augment Air Defense fortes in tne arsa. A ""Aavy F.4D Squadron" has been ordered to augment air defense fortes .
 CINCCXAD ccjrdinated air defense requirements for soucnern Florida .with CE'C'lAJir -to ensure maximum effectiveness and utilization of forces .
 Javy 3 Air Force and Marine units using Key -vest facilities were required . Use of the Key-vest facilities was required .
 The shortage of equipment at Key West made it necessary tor units to provide some of their own ground handling equipment, bedding, see. ferieir forces .
 Coordination of all air reconnaissance operations in the Cuban peripheral area . Air reconnaissance operations to be conducted in Cuban periphery area .
 Assistance in identification of air reconnaissance flights penetrating the ADIZ and provided clearance for such flights through the Key 'Jest warning areas .
 Cincouad provided representation in the Center to facilitate the interchange of intercept information . CINCOUAD provided representation In the Center .
 Heavy base loading and saturation of facilities was not limited to Key West . Key West was not the only place in the United States to base base .
 The conclusions indicated that every available military air installation in Florida would be required to carry out the Army Concept of Airborne Assault . The conclusions reached indicated that . every available . military air . air installation would be needed to carry on the concept .
 The naval Air Station at Sanford, Florida was approved for use as an additional staging base and direct liaison between COMTAC and CO, NAS, Sanford . Sanford was authorized for planning purposes .
 The CG XVIII Airborne Corps stressed the need for Opa-locka Airfield near Miami to support Army Forces .
 CINCLANT negotiated for the use of the field which permitted its ultimate use for prepositioning of materials . The field was used to preposition materials .
 The use of Strategic Air Command bases at Homestgad, MacDill and McCoy -wasrequired by CINCLANT forces .
 Action was initiated to relocate SAC aircraft from these bases . AFLA.NT units at these fields were relocated to accommodate the AFLA .
 Air Command and SAC aircraft evacuated to ether airfields . Subsequent arrangements were made between the Strategic Air . Command and Tac. Air Command aircraft evacuated .
 SAC, CINCLANT, TAC and Department of the Air Force preposition his forces and materials at these vital installations for the possible execution of Cuban Contingency Plana. CIKCAFLANT prepositioned his forces, materials and materials .
 CLANT and the evacuation of SAC ~ aircraft reduced the risk to some extent . The evacuation of the aircraft was also reduced .
 It was considered that the action would provide the United States with an unparalleled . opportunity to incraase knowledge of Soviet SAM capabilities end, thus to assist the over all general wa# capability .
 The scheme for the operation as proposed by CETCLANT would be intone of two options . CETCLant would have to choose between two options for the scheme .
 Option one consisted of not launching air strikes against a selected SA-2 site . Under Option two, two SA-1 sites would be selected .
 Precise attacks would be launched to destroy only the fire control system on one site and only the launchers and missiles on the other sites . Precise eir attacks would target only the sites' fire control systems .
 The scheme was forwarded to CINCAFLANT and CINCARLANT for coordinated comments on the feasibility of the concept . The scheme has been forwarded to both the provinces .
 CINCAFLANT and CINCARLANT stated that option one might be feasible with seaborne forces but would fae extresaly hazardous if attempted by airborne forces . Option one may be feasible but would be difficult to carry out .
 As far as option two was concerned, these commanders agreed that, this option was theoretically feasible, but impracticable . As far from option two, they agreed that this option is theoretically feasible .
 Fine target selection required in this type of maneuver was considered impossible due to the Inter-related proximity of components . The fine target selection needed in this kind of maneuver is considered impossible by the team .
 Enemy capability could include launching a missile from one site using fire control radar from another site .
 CINCAFLANT/CINCARLANT recommended that all SAM sites be destroyed as forcefully and rapidly in the initial assault . SAM sites should be destroyed in the first phase of the assault .
 It was pointed out that ifc might be possible to locate remaining unassembled components in Cuba for post hostility study . It was also suggested that it might be able to locate unassembled parts in Cuba .
 This placed a heavy additional requirement on the CINCLANT Headquarters. This placed an additional burden on the headquarters of the National Security Council .
 It was readily apparent that augmentation of the CINCLANT Staff would be required . It was immediately apparent that augmentation of the staff was needed .
 Truman to report to CINCLANT as Deputy Chief of Staff for Cuban Planning and Operations . Truman will report to report as Deputy Secretary of State . Truman to be Deputy Chief Chief of State for Cuban planning and Operations. Truman will be in charge of Cuban military operations .
 Truman would become the CINCLANT Chief of Staff for Cuban Contingency Operations, and that a separate CINELANT Contingencies Staff would be organized . Truman would be the CinCLANT chief of Staff .
 Officers not assigned to the Contingency Battle Staff were assi.'vned supervisory, administrative, intelligence, planning or communications duties .
 All other CINCLANT responsibilities were retained by the integrated crTCLA'TT/ClNCLANTFLT Staff . All other responsibilities remained with the integrated staff .
 Through a process of adjustment, evolution and arbitrary decisions, the two staffs arrived at satisfactory working arrangements . The two have been working together for more than a decade .
 The danger of escalation, particularly in the initial stages, made it imperative that full CINCLANT capabilities for general war be maintained . The requirement to operate the Contingency'ar Room had taken the services of four of the 12 officers assigned to the CEXLAIlT/
 The contingency staff gradually merged with the Cr:ClAUT/CElCLA^TFLT Staff with cooperation and coordination so outstanding that it was difficult to distinguish between them .
 Contingency Battle Staff went to a four section vatch on 1 November and was gradually reduced in size from then until its disestablishment on 3 December . In recognition of this, the Contingencies Battle Staff was reduced to four sections .
 During the build-up of forces and the preposition ing of materials for the execution of Cuban Contingency plans, it became apparent that a shortage of amphibious shipping existed .
 The existing military airfields in southern Florida were saturated. Also the existing airfields were saturated .
 This saturation resulted in a heavy r;-k in the event of a successful air attack or missile bombardment of tl ese fields . The saturation of the fields would have a large effect on a successful strike .
 Initially four LST's were allocated to ARLAT'T to deliver Task Force CHARLIE to the objective area . Task Force Charlie was assigned to Task Force Armir's Task Force . Task force CHARlie will be deployed to the area in support of the mission
 Task Force CEARLIE conducted training operations in the Georgia-Florida area during build-up of forces . Task force CEARlie is based in Florida and Georgia .
 Additional LSTs would be required to transport the armored units to the objective area if they were to arrive when needed . During these exercises it was evident that additional LST's would be needed .
 Since there was no additional LST shipping available in the Atlantic Fleet, it wa6 necessary to charter four commercial LSTs for a period of 60 to 90 days . The charter is for a 60-90 days .
 The four chartered LSTs were still insufficient to meet the requirements . It was determined thfit the original four LSTS allocated . The original four lSTs allocated were still enough to meet requirements .
 The Commanderin-Chief of the United States Atlantic Fleet recommended that the Chief of Naval Operations activate eleven LSTs from the Atlantic Reserve Fleet . The Chief of Navy Operations said that the need for the ISTs is to alleviate the shortage .
 These eleven LSTs would require rehabilitation and, when activated, they were to be manned by a minimum crew ready for immediate use . When activated they would be manned, they would have to be able to be ready for use .
 A determination was made also that more emphasis should be placed on 1ST types rather than rollon roll-off types .
 Twenty commercial cargo ships were chartered and prepositioned at ports for outloading to reduce reaction times . The ships would be prepositioning at ports to reduce react times .
 Action was taken upon CIKCLANT's recommendation to do this on .26 October . The action was taken on October 26, 2014 .
 Military Sea Transportation Troop Transports were removed from schedule trips and held in east coast ports ready for outloading . At this time Military Sea . Transportation . Troop . Transport Transports are removed from . schedule trips . and held .
 The question of operational control of MSTS commercial shipping was not ..resolved in aarly planning . The question was not ...resolved .
 MSTS commander would sail ships upon request to a designated control point . This problem was eventually resolved and it was apreed that it was resolved .
 In the area of Air Defense, the rules of engagement for operations in the Key West-Cuban area ware confusing and unclear . Rules of engagement in the area are unclear .
 Key West lies within a few minutes of Cuba by jet aircraft . The rules of engagement needed clarification . Key West is within the Cuban border .
 JINCLANT issued a directive which set forth protective measures to be taken in the event of attack . The directive defined hostile acts committed by eiusmy forces .
 This directive was approved by the JCS and promulgated for compliance by all concerned . It was promulgated by all parties involved in the directive .
 Initial plans for defense of the Key West area did not earmark a specific ""HAWK* 1 unit for deployment . Initial plans were not earmarked a specific unit for deploying .
 The assignment of a ""HAWK"" unit in plans would have been appropriate . The problem was solved with the deployment of an Army Hawk unit to Key West .
 Air Defenss radar facilities at Kay West Ground Control intercept site wsra inadequate in terms of overall space and . numoisrcf radar scopes . Air Force radar facilities in Kay West are located in the area .
 The increase in tactical commitments including peripnerel reconnaissance flignts precluded the reieaae of all the GC.T radar equipment for Air Force .
 Equipment was net adequate ts mast mast all operational requirements . Equipment provided adequate equipment to meet all requirements .
 Tne addition of an Air Force mobile radar and GCI site provided a msan3 fur tactical control over Air Force aircraft in .
 Funding was approved for a new Ground Control Intercept facility at NAS Key West . Weatarn Cuba and thus enacifcd tne normal Key West radar to. conduc r operations; -in regular spaces allocated, . funding was allocated for the project .
 In the area of force levels for the CINCLANT 312/316 OPLANS it became apparent that the tactical fighter and troop carrier aircraft listed were not adequate for the tasks assigned .
 Because of the build-up of Cuban military potential an increase in Air Fcrce forces was required . The increase in Cuban military forces was needed because of the building up of its potential .
 Military Emergency Zone was created because of the large amount of air operations which would occur in the southern Florida area upon the execution of the 312/134/316 OPLATIS . It was necessary to provide a method end means for the control of  essential air traffic .
 Nonessential air traffic included local civilian and nontactive military air operations . This nonessential traffic included nonessential military air traffic .
 The emergency security control of air traffic program would be implemented within the Military Emergency Zone immediately upon establishment of the ':hi zone'
 All civilian and noneau-.ical military traffic scheduled to terminate, depart or overfly the MEZ would be diverted, cancelled or terminated .
 A detailed military government directive ('developed at D/A in soirdiviarion with OINCLANI and sent by DOD to Sta.*:a Department for Coordination In"" arien) ere prepared . Plans, proclamations, ordinances, ordinances and a command
 The need for best estimates of casualties that might occur was required. However, the need for the best estimates was required . The U.S. military says it has no idea how many casualties might occur .
 It './as further pointed out that estimace of casualties based on the assumption that the enemy may employ tactical nuclear weapons was not meaningful because operations could cause severe losses .
 On the other hand, a hit on minor troop concentrations mieht not be sienificant .
 Commanding General, USCONARC and CINCSTRIKE reached an agreement on a major change in the task organization for STRAC OPLAN 316 . In the meantime, U.S. and Cincstrike agreed to change the organization .
 2nd Armored Division was deleted from Task Force Charlie and a comparable force from the 1st Armored Division designated as its substitute . Effective 19 October Combat Command .
 The Commanding General, XVIII Airborne Corps was directed to inform Headquarters, USCONARC concerning the detailed composition of the substitute 1st Armored Division force as soon as possible .
 It was also agreed that no major unit changes would be made in the task organization for the present .
 During the month of October 1962 the responsibilities of the Commanding General, USCONARC, both in that capacity and in the capacity of CINCARSTRIKE led to the assignment of CONARC troops to operational missions and training exercises .
 The two major troop dislocation affected the USCONARC 's capability for reaction were the use of CONARC troops in Operation ""RAPID ROAD" at Oxford, Mississippi and the major CINCSTRIKE training exercise ""THREE PAIRS"" held at Fort Reed
 General Howse was relieved of the command responsibility at Oxford on October 1962 . Howse had been in charge of the Royal Air Force at Oxford for three years .
 Units involved included five Battle Groups from the and Airborne Division, as well as some Military Police Battalions . Units involved in the operation included five battle groups from the .
 By October, the major units had been deployed to their home stations . The major units were deployed to home stations in October .
 The exercise was planned to involve both the 1st and Armored Divisions in a series of three PTX phases of three days duration each . As it eventually evolved, this exercise involved both the 2nd and 3rd Divisions .
 PTX phases were to be followed by two live-fire phases of hour-long duration each . The PTX phase was followed by the two live fire phases of an hour-to-means phase .
 During each of the PTX phases a Brigade of the 1st Armored Division was to maneuver against a Combat Command of the 2nd Armored Division . A Brigade of 1st . Armored Division is to maneuver with a Combat . Command of 2nd. Armored Division in the battle zone .
 Two Brigades and two Combat Commands were scheduled to take part in the live-fire phases . The live fire phase is expected to take place during the live fire phases .
 K-'/\\ Some of these were included on the troop lists as supporting units . Some of the troops were included in the troops lists as support units .
 From embarkation to completion amphibious operations, amphibian operations are carried out . The U.S. Navy's amphibious force is based in the United States. It is the first amphibious amphibious operation in the U.N.
 Armored Divisio--, as wail ad roi:r Trai-ooV-atiox Coroe iiMi izrzsk ciapaciae and Ma 317M Military Poii :* ;;ar.talioi.
 Units should be mobilized on SnDay to meet three separate requirements: forces required by the troop list to OPLAN 316 . Forces for the defense of the Florida Keys, defense, prevention of sabotage and subversion and for rendering assistance to civil authorities .
 Army reserve units include two Civil Affairs Headquarters and two Psychological Warfare Companies . The first category included Army reserve forces .
 The third category was drawn mainly from the Florida Army National Guard . It includes elements of two divisions, the 51st Infantry Division and 46th Armored Division .
 CINCSTRIKE passed this information to CINCARLANT . CINCLANT formally directed CINCRLANT to assume temporary operational control of the designated CincstRIKE forces . CincSTRIke passed this info to CinCLANT .
 Commanding General, USCONARC as CINCARSTRIKE placed his entire command on DEFCON 3 status effective hours, 12 October . Despite the fact that Cincstrike had already been relieved of operational control over forces participating in the contingency plans, he the Command
 Exercise ""THREE PAIRS"" and Exercise ""SHORT LINE"" will continue until 27 October at a level of activity which could be achieved with the forces remaining available to him . CINCSTRIKE decided to continue both Exercise "THREE PIRS" and Exercise "
 This action was taken with the permission of the Joint Chiefs of Staff subject to his own discretion . The Joint Chiefs' permission is subject to the author's own discretion.
 CINCSTRIKE felt that such continuance would provide proper cover for the contingency plans . Cincstrike felt . CINCstriKE felt . that such . continuance . would provide . proper cover . for the contingencies plans .
 Preparations for the first major troop movements were made on 22 October . Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the loading for movement of Task Force CHARLIE, 1st Armored Division . Task Force Charlie was the first division of the 1st American Expeditionary Force .
 The movement was to be made by rail to Fort Stewart, or to a port of embarkation . The movement would be made either by rail, or by sea or by land .
 This determination of an interim destination was to be made at a later time . The decision was made on the interim destination of the ship .
 CINCARLANT was informed that group support equipment, maintenance spares and personnel such as cooks and bakers would have to be provided to support Army elements . Due to limited billeting facilities, the Army would also have to provide tents and bedding for some of its units
 The 3rd Missile Command Provisional was directed to move as soon as practicable after 1300Z hours to Homestead Air Force Base, Florida to provide logistical and administrative support for CINCARLANT forward Headquarters .
 Action was next taken directing Third Army to assemble and prepare for movement to selected staging airfields- and Army Staging Area Command Headquarters for each responsive staging base .
 Third Army was also directed to complete activation of teh Third Army's Headquarters, Army Staging Area Command and to move in to its designated destination as soon as possible . Third Army has been ordered to activate its Headquarters and Army Staged Area Command .
 Third Army was next directed to issue the necessary instructions and orders to expedite the movement to their destinations of all units assigned on the ASA troop list . Third Army issued orders to issue necessary instructions .
 Commanding General, 2nd Logistical Command was directed to prepare a detachment of thirty-five officers and ninetyfive men for movement to Opa-looka Air Base to establish a proposed field headquarters . The commanding general ordered a detachment to prepare for movement .
 The Transportation Group, , was alerted for movement to the Florida area where headquarters would operate under the direct control of the proposed Peninsula Base Command .
 The group's major mission teams are at all staging bases in Florida and at all surface ports of embarcation being used in OPLAN 316 . The group is based in Florida . The mission teams will be at all Florida staging bases .
 Action was taken on October to move the first of the Combat units requiring relocation for implementation of OPLAN 316 . In addition to the support units, support units have been relocated .
 The 2nd Battalion, 69th Armor, 2nd Infantry Division, was to be held for eventual movement through the port of Savannah, Georgia . The first unit move so directed was that of the 2nd battalion, . 69th Infantry Division from Fort Banning to Fort Stewart, Georgia
 Fourth Army was directed to move the first, second, fifth, and sixth increments of Task Force CHARLIE to Fort Stewart, Georgia . At the same time, 4th Army was ordered to move first, 2nd, 5th, and 6th increments . Task force CHARL
 The prepositioned units of Task Force CHARLIE were scheduled for eventual movement through the port of Fort Lauderdale, Florida . Task Force Charlie was scheduled to move through Fort Lauderdale . Task force CHARlie is scheduled to arrive at the port .
 Page, and three tugs., ^ -, A nuaber' of ""problems arose to -plague ""uSCCNARC/SINCARLANT in the early phases of ©repositioning troops' to attain a readiness posture j ...-_•>
 Carolin would be used to outload xhe 1st Armored Division from its pre-^r s -> positioned location at Fort Stewart, Georgia . Carolin was used to load the 1st . Armored Division .
 The office of the Chief of Transportation directed US30NARC to request the required rail equipment from the Defense Transportation Management Service for immediate positioning at designated home stations . The office *fj^-r**f*\^ of the chief of Transportation .
 Oin.fcr is*, respokee to a qtiery from STN2LASI, CrNGARLASX; .v'.5>s Slr.d Airborae^ Division . Oin .fcr respokesokese is*,
 Commanding General, USCONARC felt that some attempt should be made to retrieve at least a portion of these Spanish speaking personnel for use in the Cuban operations . The commanding general, U.S.CONARC said some attempt to retrieve some of the Spanish speaking .
 A recommendation was made to CINCLANT that he, in turn, query CINCARIE as to the availability of four Special Forces Operational Detachments, Type A, all Spanish language qualified, support OPLAN 316 . The recommendation was consequently made .
 The teams, if made available, would be attached to the Special Forces at Fort Bragg, North Carolina .
 1st Infantry Division Battle Group Task Force Task Force 1st . Infantry Division Co. Co. Air Echelon 8th Airborne Division 101st Airborne . Brigade of the 1st. Infantry Division Brigade . Co. 8th . Air Echlon of the 101st .
 Florida with the*--; ; •; exception of two batteries of the 8th Missile Battalion . The 8th missile battalion is based in Florida .
 The car* aaalgned to the STRAC pool at Fort i 1 Lewis . Exception, however, was made for the car* .
 Stewart con; aisted of four reinforced battalions wfcth atcapproxiaate strength of 3,5**0*^, i ; i;, officers and men . Stewart: "Stewart is a strong force in the world, not only but a strong
 It was planned to unload all wheeled vehicles upon^ .;::-$*•; arrival at Fort Stewart for eventual: overland convoy movement to the .outicad; »_; lag port; . It was . planned to . unload vehicles upon . arrival at
 CINCLANT also pointed out that the Naval Air Station at Key West — which had been suggested bv^ClNCARLANT as an. alternate'-«,»rSxi^'.. facility -- was fully committed to . the support of high performance aircraft .
 The Task Force would be constituted in one location and could move as an integral force to the same part for outloading . Thus the entire Task Force could move together in the same place .
 Steps taken to provide aviation support for the forward echelon of CINCARLANT headquarters . Steps were taken on 27 October to provide support for CINCLANT .
 The 100th Aviation Company, , was organized on that date . It was organized with an authorized strength of 18 Officers, 13 warrant officers, and 91 enlisted men . The company was organized in 1903 .
 A problem had arisen by this time in connection with the use of the Roll-on, Roll-off vessel, the USNS TAURUS, as a carrier vessel for the initial assault phase .
 This type of vessel contained no provisions for off-shore or stream discharge of cargo from the rain and mezzanine decks when participating in an amphibious operation . The vessel was not equipped to deal with the rain or streams of water .
 The Commanding General, XVIII Airborne Corps, recommended the provision of a properly positioned and secured 40-ton crawler crane on board the vessel .
 This type of crane could be made available from one of the Transportation Corps STRAC terminal service companies located at Fort Story, Virginia . The Transportation Corps is located in Virginia .
 These requirements were to be completed prior to moving to Port Everglades, Florida, for the initial loading of the ship .
 CINCARLANT was able to report by 18 October that both the First Increment of Task Force CHARLIE and the Headquarters of the 1st Armored Division — was ready to move on a hour notice .
 The Fourth Increment — consisting of the 3rd Battalion, 6th Artillery — was located on flat cars at Fort Chaffee, Arkansas, and was prepared for immediate movement . The 4th Increment was located .
 Task Force CHARLIE planned to move on 28 October . The Floating Reserve was alerted so as as to arrive at Fort Stewart, Georgia, after Task Force . Task Force CharLIE was due to move to Fort Stewart in Georgia on 28 Oct.
 The On-Call Force was alerted for loading, which was to commence approximately November . The loading will begin approximately November 30 .
 XVIII Airborne Corps stipulated that they be positioned at the southern most point in Florida at which they could be properly supported . Transportation specifically requested positioning at Fort Lauderdale, Florida . XVIII . Airborne . Corps merely stipulated they be . positioned .
 This prepositioning action would insure that the landing craft and auxiliary craft were available for rendezvous with the Navy Task Force at both the time and date required in OPLAN 316 .
 The Transportation Center. -planned to Initiate the movement on 30 October if approval was forthcoming, with the complete positioning. of. the craft in the desired location by 2.30 October .
 A lack of proper rtorage space for loaded equipment cars at Fort Stewart, Georgia, created a major problem for the 1st Armored Division arriving at that station . The problem was caused by a lack of adequate space at the station .
 Certain cars were to be kept with loads intact in order to facilitate movement of Task Force CHARLIE to the port area . Certain cars, particularly those with tracked vehicles, were to have loads intact to keep them intact .
 CINCARLANT initiated action to procure additional rail siding capacity In the vicinity of Fort Stewart and particularly requested appropriate rail storage at neighboring Hunter Air Force *asease .
 This latter request was apparently denied by the Commanding General, Eighth Air Force . This was apparently the request for the commanding general to be in charge .
 CINCARLANT requested the Department of the Army to secure the proper approval for use of Hunter Air Force Base facilities at the Department level .
 Strategic Air Command Instructed Commanding General, Eighth; Air -Force; to give maximum support 'to. the Commanding . General, Fort Stewart, Georgia, by providing on-base rail sidings at Hunter Air Force Base . Late that same after• noon the Strategic Air .
 The Strategic Air Command, however, desired to be kept informed as to whether the meeting of this requirement caused a serious interruption of the SAC mission . SAC wanted to know if the meeting was to be met with serious interruption .
 CTNCARLANT. was then in the process of transferring this responsibility to the proposed Peninsula Base Command which was to be established in Florida for just such purposes . CTNCarlant. was in the . process of . transferring this . responsibility to a new base command .
 Such designated units were to be placed under the operational control of the Commanding General, Peninsula Base Command . The operation was to be under operational control .
 Third Army was also directed to furnish the new command with copies of all support plans which had previously been developed for this mission . Third Army also was directed to provide copies of the plans which were previously developed for the mission .
 Third Army was to continue to be responsible for the operation of a personnel replacement center and for administrative and logistical support of the Peninsula Base Command and all of its assigned and attached Army units .
 The directive did not affect Third Army's assigned mission under .35PFLAK nor any other assigned missions lh support of OPLAN 316 . The new directive, moreover, did not in any way affect .
 These directives, -owever, were to be effective as orders only upon receipt Of -nstruscoi.* fr.ra higher headquarters to implement OPLAN 316 .
 A total of 31 Landing Craft Utility, 'LCU> were In storage at the Charleston Transportation Depot . These units, moreover, would require replacements for currently authorised craft .
 Tne remaining 27 craft would have to be processed by contract In commercial facilities, a process which would require a minimum of five to six weeks for completion .
 At the same time, CINCARLANT was able to announce -^at the Chief of Staff, United States Army, had approved the preloading of . two Roll-on, Roll-off ships and the four available LST's .
 Two Roll-on, Roll-off ships had previously been scheduled to out load tcv* Fo-t Lauderdale, Florida . CINCARLANT was now preparing plans to load f-ea cut of Savannah, Georgia, in view of the fact that the troops wars are located
 CINCARLANT intended to proceed wit.f-a loading of the vessels and, if time permitted, to rehearse tas unloading as well . If time is permitted, the vessels will be reheared .
 Neither of the two Roil-on, Roll-off vessels were or tie combat category . CTNCARLANT was of the opinion extraordinary measures would be reauired in order to . Insure propej unloading of prioritj aupp*.^* ard equipment at the
 Area Commands at the intermediate staging airfields gave Heaocuarters a chance to evaluate their support capabilities . The development of problems could provide valuable information for future operations .
 The 6th Battalion, 65th Artillery, , was located in the general Key West area, with A Battery at the western tip of Key' West, B Battery on the beach nearest to Cuba in Key West .
 The 6th Battalion, 15th Artillery, was located in the vicinity of Homestead Air Force 2ase, Florida, with A and C Batteries located at that airfield itself .
 All four batteries of the 2nd Missile Battalion, 52nd Artillery, were located in the vicinity of Homestead Air Force Base .
 Information had already reached CINCARLANT concami^z ""-- number of operational HONEST JOHN and LONG JOHN units but no ' information had been developed concerning the DA7Y CROCKETT Wespore Teams .
 CINCARLANT therefore requested information from Third, Fourth and Fifth Armies as to the number of DAVY CROCKETT Weapons Teams — both:XM2S and XM29 — which were to remain at their home stations with crews and equipment .
 Key West Ir.tsrnatior.al Airport is considered imperative that immediate authority be granted for Army use of the Key West airport .
 Key West International Airport or equivalent space at tie Key Wes; Air Station was essential to the success of Army Air Operations in tha objective area . CINCARLANT emphasized to tl-.a Department of the Army that either Key West . International . Airport or . equivalent space was essential
 Ths Advance Ta;tisal Air Command, , command post, which controlled troop carrier •' d flight aircraft, was physically located in the same building .
 A :vnplete staff with all liaison and computer service was also available there . Staff also available for liaisons and computer services .
 CINCARLANT had directed the establishment of the Peninsula aa»s""3ommand comprising the State of Florida, the headquarters of which wtre so be located at Opa-locka Air Sate . The.nd -logistical Command was selected as its command
 Liaison detachments from the Army Material Command, port, medical control, ar.d from pertinent Department of Defense agencies were either already located at Opa-locka Air Ease or moving into position .
 This entire organization, immediatedly responsive to the Commanding General, US.:3NaR-, as CINCARLANT, afforded maximum flexibility, control, ar.d .^ordination . The entire organization was made to be responsive to U.S. President Barack Obama
 The command was also intended to supervise and coordinate the movement of replacements and medical evacuees . The command is also meant to coordinate the movements of replacement and medical personnel .
 Peninsula Base Command was restricted to the geographical limits of the State of Florida . The forces and activities of the command were limited to the state of Florida.
 Commanding General, USCONARC, transmitted to the Department of the Army the feelings of CINCLANT, with regard to the operational control of the Antilles Command, United States Army .
 This wo-ld allow for time to clear up command arrangements, bring the AntiLls* Command up to date on the situation, and enable that command to prepare plans for the staging of Latin American units .
 These two decks, therefore, had to be used for one-quarter ton Jeeps or for soae o ther such cargo which could utilize this low headroom . The two decks were used for Jeeps, soae or soae .
 Both the COMET and the PAGE, however, had a normal speed of approximately eight knots, thus requiring about three and one half days for the journey from Savannah, Georgia to Fort Lauderdale, Florida .
 It was considered that if these two vessels were to carry the First Increment of Task Force CHARLIE, they would have to move forward or they would never arrive in the objective area as scheduled . The decision was made by the U.S. President Barack Obama, President Obama and
 The TAURUS had no ramps between decks and so had to discharge directly from each deck . The TAurUS was a faster ship - approximately 14 knots - than the faster ship .
 A permanent ramp had been constructed at her normal berth in Hew York City but such facilities would not be available in the objective area . Such facilities had been built at her usual berth in the city but would be needed to reach the objective .
 This meant that the Relics, Roll-off capabilities of the vessel could not be used to their fullest intent and capacity . The Relics were not able to use their fullest potential and capacity in the vessel .
 CINCARLANT decided that the BARC, , units of the Transportation Corps would fill the gap resulting from this lack of available landing craft . The BARC units were used to fill that gap .
 BARC a would be available for immediate use upon arrival in the objective area . The BARC is available to be used in the mission's first phase .
 Morevoer possessed both an amphibious and land capability which made them adaptable for the movement of emergency requirements from shipboard to inland distribution points . They, morevoer, possessed both amphibious .
 XVIII Alrborr.e Corps to place the 554th Transportation Platoon, BARC Operation and Maintenance, in the surface echelon of OPLAN 316 .
 Planning details provided that the BARC's be deck loaded on cargo vessels and that they be made ready for drop discharge at the destination . Planning details were provided for that they could be decked loaded and ready to drop discharge .
 Second Army directed to alert the 554th Transportation Platoon, (EARC Operation and Maintenance), at Fort Story, Virginia;, with three BARC's for actual movement .
 Sixth Army directed to maintain the 14th Transportation Platcor., , with three BARC's in a 3tate cf readiness for future movement if directed . Sixth Army was directed to . maintain the . 14th transportation Platcor. with three . BARCs .
 The Rodl-or-or. y Roll-off vessels were now scheduled for preloading at Savannah .
 Four LSTs earmarked for Task Fcrss OHARLIE remained as previously scheduled for out loading through Fort Lauderdale, Florida . Georgia, but the four LST's earmarked . remained as . previously scheduled .
 The first increment of Task Force CEAXLIE will be moved to Fort Lauderdale . The move will excute invasion rehearsals and the preloading of the four LST's .
 Action to Initiate the move, however, was held in abeyance by the Deputy Chief of Staff fo„* Logistics" pending a final coordination on the location of the LST's. Action to Move to be initiated is still in place .
 New lagistical problems have been encountered at this time in* connect ion with the four LST's which vere earmarked to transport the various increments of Task Force CHAr.LIE to the objective area .
 Four LSTs were considered sufficient, since the total wetznt requirements for the First Increment of Task . Therefore, four LST's were considered considered sufficient . The mission was described as a 'first task'
 The four LST's which were allocated to CIN> ARLANT for transporting Task Force CHARLIE were of the ->ld type which had a maximum capability of 1,000 weight-tons, but only 5G0 weighttons capacity for a normal over-the-be
 World War II experience proved that chose vessels could be loaded up to €00 weight'J.-.-.-* tor over-the-beach operations without encountering too much difficulty .
 Task Force CHARLIE has a carrying capacity of approximately 3,000 weight-tons for an anticipated over-the-ieach landing . The LST has a capacity of about 3,500 weight-tones .
 Task Force CHARLIE' a would have to be reduced if that force intended to land over-tne-hserh. This msant that even with the fifth vessel, Task Force .
 A3 far as CINCARLANT was, concerned, it was ccoc a matter pf apace; btt ratner cr.e of weight and t-e manner in which the tonnage wa»tc r« landed .
 This problem led directly to providing wa^erproofing kits for the vehicles to be landed form amphibious vessels . This problem consequently led to the introduction of the amphibious vehicles .
 Chief of Staff for Logistics, CG USCCNARC, announced on 31 Orr.ober 156.har. only one such kit was available to the Cxtamand. Only one of the kits was available .
 The CAL-AGRO was berthed at Ocean City Terminal, Savannah* Georgia . The vessel was under civilian ownership .
 A preliminary inspection of the vessel by CINCARLANT indicated that it was in good shape and that approximately three day3 would be required to bring it close to its original configuration . The vessel is expected to undergo three days of work .
 On 31 October CINCARLANT requested the Commander in Chief, United States Atlantic Fleet, to make the necessary official inspection of the vessel and to determine the practicability of chartering and operating it in view of the deficiency in this type vessel .
 Further actions were taken on 31 October to move units into a positioned location at Fort Stewart, Georgia .
 Those units which moved on this date consisted mainly of the Signal and Medical units which were required to accompany Task Force CHARLIE into the objective area .
 These included a Field and an Evacuation Hospital, a Medical Group Headquarters, two specialized Medical Detachments, and a Signal Group Headquarters .
 The Medical Group and the two hospitals were directed to move their currently assigned personnel and with full ICE equipment . The medical group and two hospitals will move their current assigned personnel to move .
 Additional professional personnel were to be provided by USARLANT when required . Additional professional staff were also available to assist .
 Because of the scarcity of the type of professional personnel required for the two specialized detachments, they were directed to move without them . The scarcity of professionals required for each of the detachments .
 USARLANT would also furnish these professional personnel if and when they were required . USARlant would also provide them with USARARLENT personnel .
 The Department of the Army said the move appeared to be compatible with the current operational requirements of both CINCLWT and CINCARI3 and that it also was in agreement with the planning up to this point .
 CIN.1LANT, after appropriate coordination wi:'r> CINCARI3, submit such a reto-nmenda-ior. dir*2t'_y to tr.e s"":ir.t Z^itfi . If CINCL
 Task Force CHARLIE completed its reic^a-.lo-. . id Fort Sn^wart, Caorgia, by 1 November 1962 . Task Force . completed its . reic*a-lo-.
 Its of ..r.i.s comprising Paga 76 of l^i Paej. t v e Task Force remained loaded on rail flat cars which were stored in holding areas near Fort Stewart .
 All wheeled vehicles had been offloaded for future convoy movements . The vehicles were retained in a combat loaded condition .
 1 conducted firing pra::e of £rewserved weapons and conducted service practice with artillery pieces on loan from the National Guard . November Task Force person? November Task force person?
 The entire Task Force was placed on a tnree hour alert status for movement to the ports of embarkation . The Task Force has been placed on tree hour-alert status .
 The Division Floating Reserve was scheduled to commence a training porgram on 5 November which was designated to increase the individual combat proficiency of all personnel . The training is designed to increase combat proficiency .
 Full-tracked vehicles of the Floating Reserve — like thoae ef Task Force CHARLIE — were to remain loaded on rail flat cars . The Floating Reserve was to remain on a rail flat car .
 These cars, however, were to be stoced at holding areas in the vicinity of the port of Savannah, Georgia .
 Wheeled vehiciles were to be offloaded but to remain under combat load . Wheeled vehicles were to stay under load, but not offload but remain under load .
 Floating Reserve was to be held on a six hour alert for eventual movement to the ports of embarkation . The Floating Reserve has been held on an alert for six hours .
 As of 1 November the JSS On-Call Forr.e was still located at Fort Hood, Texas, but was shceduled to begin its move to Fort Stewart, Georgia, about 4 November . The JSS will be stationed in Georgia .
 At Fork Stewart this force would accomplish the same training program as the Division Floating Reserve . The force would train at Fork Stewart .
 CINCARLANT considered a ten day 'alert status adequate' of this latter force . CINCELENT considered a 10-day alert status adequate .
 An additional specialized -jr«it wa3 organized on 1 November 1962 to meet these specific needs within sr.a obje ::'.ve area .
 The 1st Press Camp, , was organized at Fort fc-icis, Virginia, with an authorized strength of thirteen officers t one warrant officer, and eighty-one enlisted personnel and assigned tie miaeioi .
 The division planned to send four M+tf tanks, four Mil tcrks. and one M5S to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, where driver training would' be conducted .
 A t-tal of cO personnel were involved in the first of suet training courses fsr Task Forjs JHARLIE . Task Force Forjs . JHarlie . CINCARLANT proposed the practice loading of the various increments of Task Force CHAR
 A oort call for the first increment of the Task Force vas issued by the United States Arm/ Trar.so^rtation Terminal Command, Atlantic, on 3 November, with the personnel and equipment scheduled to arrive at Port Everglades, Florida, on the following day .
 XVIII Airborne Corps recommended that the entire first increment be loaded on four allocated LST's as provided in the orginal planning . At the same time XVIII . Airborne . Corps recommended the entire . first . increment be . loaded on . four allocated . LSTs as
 Four LSTs would carry a complete causeway pier of fcur sections . One of tht four LST's would carry an additional section of the causeway .
 Ihia would enable the LST's to carry the maximum planned weights since they would not be required to beach . LSTs would not need to beach, since they are not required to do so . The LSTS would be able to carry a maximum planned weight .
 XVIIE Airborne Corps recommended that these procedures be carried out in a practice landing as a prel?mir?mir.arr to actual operations in the Assault Phase of OPLAN 316 .
 Division Floating Reserve was scheduled to arrive in the objective area on cargo 6 ships on D+10 and could unload at any of four possible locations . It was printsd out that the division Floating Reserve is scheduled for arrival on cargo .
 The availability of the Floating Reserve closed ashore waa estimated at D*12. The availability was estimated to be D*11 .
 Planning factor estimates for the number of tanks in the objective area on D-i-12 were approximately 300 . Planning factors estimated for the . number of . tanks in . the . objective area of the objective . area were estimated to be around 300 .
 Not all of these tanks would be in the immediate area of operations and many already would have suffered combat losses . Many of the tanks would have been in the area of operation and would be suffering combat losses.
 USC3NARC/USARLANT planners concluded that operations at that point would favor an infantry-heavy rather than a tankheavy force .
 2nd Battalion, 8lst Armor, form the On-Cali Force to form the Division Floating Reserve, displacing the 2nd battalion, 52nd Infantry . They therefore pointed out that a substitution for tactical reasons could be accomplished by swithhing the 2.2nd Battalion
 XVIII Airborne Corps was given until the isllnwing day to make a firm recommendation in this regard . The XVIII airborne Corps were given until this week to make the decision .
 Beat and floating craft units of the Transportation Corps had bear, moved forward to prepare for actual assault phase movements . St. St. Mary's was the first assault phase of the U.S. invasion .
 An additional boat company and a ICu-con crane from the United States Army Transportation Terminal ^emmand, G-if, were also added to the amphibious element of the surface ecr.elon .
 The 123th Transportati is on Sattalioa for operational control for the duration of the Cuban emergency . St. Petersburg, Florida, will be in control of the aircraft .
 Upon termination of the operation, thai ifcit and the ecuipmi&t world revert to the control of the Co-nnnnwtnding General, , Fourth Army .
 Istaraiitionel Airport as a staging field for Army aircraft earoute to the objective area vas obtained on 3 November . Feriiasior. for tha.Arrtf to be used as a . staging field . for troops in the area .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the Chief of Staff, United States Army to initiate action with local authorities for use of the airpert . On that date, the Joint chiefs of Staff ordered action with . local authorities .
 All equipment was combat loaded and tracked vehicles remained loaded on flat cars in holding areas in the vicinity of Fore Stewart . Trackers remained loaded in the vehicles in the area of the operation .
 Personnel of the entire Ta*k Force were psychologically ready for immediate combat . Personnel were on a thrae-hsur alsrt for movement to a designated port of embarkation .
 Ail Task Force personnel, moreover, were restricted to the Fs-rt Stewart reservation a-d had with them only thac clothing prescribed by OPLaN 3 It .
 Personnel of the livisicn Floating Reserve were acheduled to close at Fort atswart an the following day . All equipment had already arrived .
 All wheeled vehicles wire already offloaded and the tracked vehicles were scheduled for offloading commencing on 11 November . The personnel of the division Floating Reserve were in alert status and were rsstriitsed .
 This grouo, noweser, did have military winter clothing in addition to that prescribed i3P1AN 3Hi . This grouoser, nowser, does have military clothing .
 All v«iiciiciici.s* or this fir.:?, including tranced vehicles w-sre to be unleaded vehicles . All vehicles will be delivered with unleaded gasoline .
 The 108th Transportation Battalion in St. Petersburg, Florida, will take operational control for the duration of the Cuban emergency . The battalion is based in Tampa, Florida . It will take over control of the situation in Cuba .
 The unit and equipment would revert to the control of the Commanding General, Fourth Army . Upon termination of the operation, the unit and the equipment would be returned to the command .
 Permission for the Army to use Key West International Airport as a staging field for Army aircraft enroute to the objective area was obtained on 3 November . Permission was granted for the airport to be used by the Army in November .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the Chief of Staff, United States Army to initiate action with local authorities for use of the airport . On that date, the Joint chiefs of Staff said they would initiate action .
 Once the pertinent negotiations were completed, CINCLANT, was authorized to begin, at his discretion, to preposition supplies, equipment, and personnel . Once the relevant negotiations are completed, the president could begin to begin preposition .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff limited the immediate use of the airfield to the prepositioning of only logistical support and required operational facilities . The Joint chiefs of Staff said the use was limited to logistical support .
 On 4 November, the 1st Armored Division was queried by higher headquarters as to its capability to maintain its current operational readiness posture and its current deployment configuration without significant reduction of combat readiness . The division is currently deployed in Afghanistan .
 Task Force CHARLIE was at full TOE strength in both personnel and equipment and was in the highest possible state of readiness . The 1st Armored Division pointed out that Task Force CharLIE is at full ToE strength .
 All equipment was combat loaded and tracked vehicles remained loaded on flat cars in holding areas in the vicinity of Fort Stewart . Trackers remained loaded in the vehicles in the Fort Stewart area .
 Personnel of the entire Task Force were psychologically ready for immediate combat . Personnel were on a three-hour alert for movement to a designated port of embarkation. Personnel were also on a psychological alert .
 All Task Force personnel were restricted to the Fort Stewart reservation . They had with them only that clothing prescribed by OPLAN 316 .
 The 1st Armored Division estimated that this alert posture could be maintained for an additional two weeks . It could last until about 28 November without significantly affecting the Task Force's combat readiness .
 Personnel of the Division Floating Reserve were scheduled to close at Fort Stewart on the following day, but all equipment had already arrived . All equipment arrived at the base .
 All wheeled vehicles are already offloaded and the tracked vehicles are scheduled for off-loading commencing on 11 November . The tracked vehicles were scheduled to be off-loaded at the end of November .
 The Division Floating Reserve personnel were in alert status and restricted to the Fort Stewart reservation . Like Task Force CHARLIE, the personnel of the Division floating Reserve were on alert status .
 This group, however, did have military winter clothing in addition to that prescribed in OPLAN 316 . This group also had military winter clothes .
 The unites were still short a few key personnel and a few items of equipment, they were placed on a twelve-hour alert status . Although the unites are still short of key personnel, they have been placed on an alert status.
 The 1st Armored Division felt that this posture could also be maintained for approximately two weeks without significantly affecting readiness . The First Armored Division said it could also maintain this posture for about two weeks .
 The 2nd Brigade and the 3rd Battalion, 2nd Artillery, had already commenced their move . Fort Stewart was not scheduled to close at Fort Stewart until about 12 November .
 All vehicles of this force, including tracked vehicles, were to be unloaded upon arrival .
 Personnel of till force were equipped with some garrisontont7pe clothing in -addition to the prescribed military winter clothing . Personnel of the armed forces were armed with garrisons on the ground .
 Although not required, the' 1st Araored Division planned to place this force under the suss uniform and off-post restrictions as the Tapk Force and the Floating Reserve . The Tapk force and Floating Reserve are not required .
 The 1st Armored Division concluded that a somewhat leaser state of readiness approximately a 24 hour alert atatus — could be maintained for an additional 30 days, or until about 30 December, provided certain reatrictipns were relaxed .
 Measures proposed by the 1st Armored Division included a controlled relaxation of paas and uniform policies for all concerned .
 Questions have also been made aa to the possibility of a ""Stand-Down"" for these forces . In addition to the above situation, queries were also made .
 The 1st Armored Divieion assumed that this phrase meant DEFCON 4 status or perhaps an even lower readinesa condition . The said phrase was assumed to be DEFCon 4 status .
 Task Force CHARLIE would require/ a maximumof 48 hours to regain its current operational readiness . Division Floating Reserve would require approximately 72 hours .
 The On-Call Force' could meet any required readlneas posture commensurate with the time required to move and deploy Taak Force CHASLIE and the Division Floating Reserve .
 The division requested authority from ClNrARLANT to dispatch an additional 80 peraenxel to Fort Lauderdale for such training as soon as the first group completed its training phase .
 The division requested authority to leave the pertinent equipment at Fort Lauderdale until all this training waa completed . The division also requested authority .
 V *\ slat tie vessel was urgently required by CINCARLANT for training purposes .
 The second' ; '-"". ptcblsm was the lack of adsptaess of the CDMET's crew in handling her , • ^ "" > ' i ~own lifting gear .
 Skilled a-anaereial stevedores assisted and ""instructed the *v£ msmitrs of the crew in this operation during che £-efc*.aseal"
 The solution was that eight skilled heavy ""coom operators from Fort Eustls, Virginia, be assigned , to the ship's ccmpiensnt. The solution %r ; f J '] recommended by the Atlantic Terminal Cos-rand 1 s representatives .
 The Joint Chief scf Staff approved tie request for charter of one additional LST on 5 November . The Commander, Military Sea Transport Service, to charter the LST CAL-ASBO at Savannah, Georgia .
 Third Arm pointed out that maintenance, training, and morale would be affected if these units were held in their current readiness posture beyond 9 November .
 Estimated arrival of the On-Call Force has been moved forward to 11 November . The estimated arrival has been delayed until November 11 .
 In the interim, the 1st Armored Division had accomplished certain changes to the forces for OPLAN 316 . In the meantime, the U.S. Army had accomplished some changes .
 The 2nd Battalion, 81st Armor, had been substituted for the 2nd battalion, 52nd Infantry, in the Division Floating Reserve . The latter unit was now &z the On-Call Force .
 The 3rd Battalion, 2nd Artillery, had ""seen added to the On-Call Force"
 In response to an Inquiry from CINCARLANT, the Commanding General, XVIII Airborne Corps — also designated as Commander, Joint Task Force Cuba — submitted a number of comments .
 This resulted from recurring Increases in both the force requirements and fcrce availability as new intelligence Information on Cuba was made ■available . The force requirements have increased in recent years .
 'This seemed to be the next logical step in the development of the . s' stronger 'plan'
 If this conclusion proved to be acceptable, a new concept could then be developed for the use of the various elements of the Task Organization .
 On D-Day the E2ad asd 101st Airborne Divisions would conduct their planned prashuae assault . Marines, in sufficient force, would secure the beachhead at Tarara .
 The 2nd Infantry Division would land over-the-beach at Tarata immediately .
 1st Amoved Division would land through the port at Mariel, using the maximum available assault shipping . The 1st Ir.f entry 'Division — Xeas zbs planned airlanded elements — would immediately follow the 1st . Armored Division would follow 1st Armored Division
 This would enable the use ef the 5th Infantry, the 2nd Armored, or the 4th Infantry Divisions, —the three as a Floating Division .
 The availability of assault shipping, hc*ever, waB was the primary factor which limited the ability to introduce additional fcrces into the initial phase of the operations .
 Current planning factors called for maximum use of the port facilities at Mariel . Unless sufficient quantities of assault shipping were made available, it was extremely doubtful if any more fcrces could be placed ashore within the first eight to ten days .
 Joint airborne exercises called ""SUM SHADE" were conducted for eacb battle group of tie 82nd and 10th Airborne Divisions .
 The experience gained during the Cuban emergency has resulted in the Amy attaining a high state of readiness and the Arpy was ready ir. all respects to execute military operations in Cuba .
 Naval forces involved in Cuban operations included Attack Carriers, with embarked Air Groups . Naval forces were involved in the Cuban operations .
 Anti-Submarine Forces, Amphibious Forces, Fleet Marine Forces, Service Forces, Mine Forces, Submarine Forces and Mine Forces are among the forces involved .
 "All of these naval units contributed significantly to the readiness to execute CINCLANT OPIANS 312/316 if directed"
 "They conducted the surface quarantine operation, and they contributed a major effort in photo reconnaissance and ASW operations," the U.S. says .
 Direct the Commander Naval Task Force to conduct and control operations in support of the Defense of Guantanamo Naval Base and for the selective air strikes provided for in the plan . Direct the CCMNAVTASKFCR to coordinate and coordinate all air operations .
 Advise CINCAFIANT of any Navy/Marine air forces which can be made available for air strikes and reconnaissance operations in Cuba which are not committed to the defense of Guar.car.amc Naval Ease and provide these forces to him for CPCON .
 Naval farces provide logistic and administrative support for naval farces . Provide or arrange for the logistic support of naval farce .
 Provide the Commander, Naval Task Force, and the Naval forces listed in Annex A, Task Organization and Forces . Provide the commander, Naval task force, and . Naval forces .
 Provide logistics and administrative support of Naval, forces . Provide, or arrange, for provision of logistics .
 PAC3M II iy.nl. Assume responsibility for logistic support of PAC3m IIi.nl forces vhen the forces enter CINCLANT's area of responsibility . Assume support for the forces in the area .
 Conduct ASW* AEff» Anti-raider, Mine Countermeasures, and other operations in the Atlantic Command area outside the Cuban area of operations, (Joint Zone Cuba), in order to defend the continental U.S.
 Conduct ASW operations as necessary within the Cuban area of operations, , txL.support of or in coordination with Commander Naval Task Force. Conduct ASWs .
 Phase I provides fcr orderly activation of necessary command and control agencies . The establishment of an advanced state of readiness to reinforce the Naval 3ase at Guantanamo Bay, and possible repositioning of certain naval forces . This phase vould be executed by CINCLANT when ths J
 Assemble joint task force staff augmentation and place on 4 hour movement notice . Movements will take place at 4 hour movements notice .
 Uith embarked Marines to deploy to an area -.ithin 4 hours steaming 6f Guantanamo Bay . Marines will spend four hours in the area .
 "Take all necessary actions to prepare other designated forces for Cuban operations short of actual deployment or interruption of scheduled operations," says the U.S. State Department .
 When directed by the J2Sj CINCLANT would order this phase into execution, it would provide for the most advanced state of readiness attainable short of actual hostilities . It requires major deployments and re-positioning of forces .
 Reserve forces, MATS aircraft, and MSTS shipping will be made available for this phase . Reserve forces will also be available to provide additional aircraft and shipping .
 Carib PHIBRON to COMANTDEFCOM; when Marines disembarked, sail PHIBON to CONUS port for reload . Chop Carib PHibron to COMantDEFCom; when marines disembark, sail PhIBON .
 Task Force, to form and deploy Naval Task Force to vicinity of objective area, is deployed . Task Force is deployed to the vicinity of an objective area in the area of the operation .
 Direct CG FMFLANT to provide air-lifted reinforcement to Guantanamo Bay as required . Direct CGFMFLANT air-lift reinforcement to the Guantanamo Bay area .
 NEW: Direct COMNAVAIRLANT to asfcist CG FMFLANT in air-lift of designated Marine forces . NEW: Air-lifted of designated Marines forces . Air-lift is directed by COMNANAIRlant to CGFMFLANT .
 This phase would be ordered into execution by CINCLANT only after the outbreak of hostilities or a U.S. decision to conduct military operations in Cuba .
 Upon announcement of D-Day, P-Hour, movements and deployments in progress will be adjusted to meet the established times . Movements and deployment plans will also be adjusted accordingly .
 Continue provision and deployment of naval forces as necessary and P""ge 83 of 1""7& Pages dire.:!-.id; chop forces to Commander Naval Task Force upon departure of OtNI'S ports .
 In addition to the';$asks outlined above for 312/316 OFLAHS, CINCLAN . Vice Admiral Alfred GWard, USN would serve as Commander in Chief of the United States Atlantic Fleet if directed .
 COMSECONDFLT was directed to be prepared to provide flag facilities for a CINCIANT command echelon in the objective area if required . Also ordered to be. prepared to . provide flag . facilities for . a Cinciant commandeel in an objective area
 The Navy provided four TACAN equipped ships in the Florida Straits as navigational aids for CINCAFLANT strike aircraft and to assist recovery of ditched pilots .
 The Navy was also to provide small craft in the water area adjacent to the air drop zone near llariel .
 The foregoing tasks were modified to conform to changes in the command structure and to meet additional requirements as they developed . The following task was modified to meet new requirements .
 The mission of the base is to maintain and operate medium base facilities . The mission is to operate and maintain the base .
 It provides fleet units with the minumum support necessary to the accomplishment of training missions . The training facility is a key component of the training program .
 Naval Station, Naval Air Station, Marine Barracks, Hospital, Dental Clinic, Supply Depot, and Public Works . Naval Station . Naval Air . Station . Barracks .
 Fleet Training Group and Utility Squadron 10 are among the fleet commands . Fleet training groups are also in charge of two fleet commands, the Fleet Training group and Utility Squad 10 .
 The Guantanamo Bay area was seired from Spanish forces by United States Marines in June 1898 during the Spanish-American War . The area was taken over by the U.S. in 1898 .
 Although hostilities ceased in 1S9S, it vas not until 1C03 that a formalized lease agreement becveen the new Republic of Cuba and the United States was consummated .
 In 1234, a treaty between the Governments of the U.S. and Cuba confirmed the previous lease agreement . The United States gave the United States a continuing lease on the 5 by 9 mile base . The lease agreement was confirmed in 1234 .
 This lease could only be voided by the United States abandoning the area or by mutual .agreement . The lease is only valid if the U.S. withdraws from the area .
 Policies of military significance concerning Guantanamo have been highlighted since that date . As a result of that date, policies of military importance concerning Guantanamo were highlighted .
 The United States would hold the Naval Base, Guantanams and that overt action against Guantanamo could result in the Joint Chiefs of Staff directing military operations by CIKCLANT in Cuba .
 Commander, Antilles Dofenne Command is assigned responsibility by CIKCLAIJT for the overall coordination of the defense of Guantanamo Naval Pa Se 90 , of the 90 .
 The major combat unit assigned vas vas vas a Marine Battalion to be air lifted to Guantanamo on order . A Marine Battalion will be air-lifted to Guantanamo to be sent to Guantanamo .
 Regimental Headquarters and two Marine Battalion Landing Team* should be placed at-Guantanamo and dependents evacuated . On 12 October COMCARIBSEAFRON recomnewirjd that at tiaa first sign that hostilities were imminent, a Regimental HQ and two
 VA-35 assigned to COMNAVBASE GTMO to arrive at McCalJa by 18 October for primary close air support missions . Prior to the receipt of COIIC.-.llIDr.E.'iFCQN's recommendations, on 11 October CINCLANT
 COMPHIBIANT recommended the immediate reinforcement of Guantanamo . Four days later, COMPHiBIANT said the U.S. should reinforce Guantanamo .
 CG FMFLANT indicated his intention to preposition supplies and ammunition at Guantanamo . Shortly after that he indicated he wanted supplies and ammo at Guantanamo, he said he would be prepositioned .
 VA*35 which had been assigned to COMNAVBASE GTKO was in place at McCalla by 16 October . VA*34 was assigned to the site of the crash of the Challenger Challenger Challenger .
 At this point the build up to improve the defensive readiness at Guantanamo was being rapidly implemented . At this time the build-up to improve security was being rapid .
 The decision had been made that the adequate defense of Guantanamo required the presence of substantial numbers of attack aircraft, naval gunfire support ships and marine ground forces .
 The risk of losing aircraft as well as the air strips in case of pre-emptive attack by Cuban forces was accepted by the government .
 From this time forward the entire combat capability of the Atlantic Command was to be brought to be;ar on the Government of Cuba . The Atlantic Command would be based in Cuba .
 Specific tasks were the evacuation of dependents, the reinforcement of defense forces, the holding of Guantanamo for seventy-two hours without outside assistance and the seizure of selected critical terrain . Specific tasks assigned were the evacuations, the . .
 Three marine rifle companies were in position on the main line of resistance . One and a half rifle companies from the air-lifted battalion from Camp Pendleton were in place . An observation plane was airborne seeking unusual activity in Cuban territory .
 PHI2R0N C was within four hours of the base, but out of the sight of land . October; (f> Naval gunfire ships were occupying three fire support areas; two FSU aircraft;*ere providing airborne CAP and two on strip alert daring daylight; .
 PSU type aircraft of Utility Squadron 10 and ships undergoing refresher, training . GTMG stated that the only AAW capability was being provided by PSU type planes of utility Squadron 10 .
 C0M3ari3SEAFR0N oonci-rring with this recommendation further recommended to CEJCLANCI-T that the HAWK or REDEtZ be pro>*ided for defense against no earning low level air strikes .
 Hjt^'r.i.v.v^ambazone is always a source of great concern to commanders at all levels . The situation is a problem for commanders in the U.S.
 Some were to leave by the aircraft which were bringing in the Marine combat units . Some of the aircraft were to be brought in by the Marines . Some were leaving by the planes which brought in the combat units.
 Most were to be evacuated by surface ships that had been designated . Most were evacuated by the surface ships .
 COMCARIBSEAFR0N was to provide air and surface escort to protect ships and aircraft evacuating non-combatants . It was intended to provide protection for ships and planes evacuating non-combatant during the war .
 Plans were made to have two TAO/AOG readied to haul water when required . To provide a means of emergency water re supply in the event the Base water source was eliminated .
 Base defense plans were to include attack to the Northeast to capture the Yteras water plant . Base defense plan was to include attacking the Northeast . Base plans were also considered to include capture of the plant .
 On 21 October CINCLANFET recommended that two ""-surgical teams be deployed to Guantanamo carrying . fifty pints of whole blood .
 With the foregoing description of the situation at the Naval Base, Guantanamo -and the actions being taken .provide background for the' developments during the period 21 October ■17 November .
 On -23 October the radio instructed local militiamen and soldiers, to report to the military school at San Jus to . The radio instructed locals to report their troops to the school .
 civilian community told to extinguish lights, store water and remain inside . Medical teams were directed to report to the hospital . Civilians were told to remain indoors .
 Several Cuban vehicles including three tanks were observed to the east of the base . To add to the mounting tension, several Cuban vehicles were observed .
 Despite this activity it was worthy Of note that there was still an absence of announcements to the Cuban people about the build up of United States Forces at Guantanamo .
 There was no noticeable change in the Cuban forces outside the fence line . Cuban forces remained in control of the Cuban military .
 In order to acquire as much local and tactical intelligence as possible several requests for aerial photographic coverage were submitted . Several requests were submitted for aerial coverage of the U.S. military .
 Incomiag ir.telligence summaries in mid-November reported that ext&nsivs construction was continuing at the Holguin Airfl&ld in Orients Prcviree .
 Soviets -ere believed to have in Cuba, four task battalicna with i2'*» A-54 tankfc; SNAPPER anti-tank missile; and a Free Rocket Over Ground battalion with 6 lanrahers and 24 rockets .
 Any movement of FROG missiles into poaitissa which threatened the Base he placed In the category of an act unacceptable to the United States. Because of the fact that the FROG could carry a zuclear warded., 33MNA""3ASE GTMO recommended that any movement of
 By 21 October the planned size of the grrvnd fr.r^s had been greatly increased . However, by 21 October, the size had been increased .
 The success of this air m-r-v^ment would havs bees greatly impaired if the airfield had been exoosed to any kind of harraasi-g artillery or morsar fire .
 Adair a 1 O'Donxiel's position as COMNAVBASE (HMO) gave the Admiral clear authority to respond instantly to any attack on Guantanamo .
 By this time the massive reinforcement of the Naval Base was far advanced . The massive reinforcement was far ahead .
 Fleet training had been discontinued and members of the Fleet Training Group were assigned base defense billets . Base training was discontinued and the base defense was assigned to the base .
 COMNAVBASE GTMO reiterated to COMCARIBSEAFRON that adequate defense against air attack was still the greatest weakness .
 VU-10 was providing some air defense capability, but this was not sufficient . VU.10 provided some air defenses, but not sufficient, according to the U.S. Navy .
 Station a 4 plane detachment of WF aircraft at McCalla Air Field to enhance the early warning capability . Station a detachment of 4 plane . Stationed a . 4 plane detachments of . aircraft at . McCalla .
 The CO of MAG-32 arrived on the afternoon of 23 October . It is a continuation of the air build-up .
 To improve the air defense, 6 aircraft were direcced to fly a one hour dawn patrol . 6 aircraft flew a one-hour dawn patrol.
 COMNAVBASE GTMO requested that 2 VFN be on station from sunset to sunrise . 4 VFN was on station at data and dusk . 2VFN was requested to be on Station from sunset until sunrise .
 The air defense was further improved by the arrival of the HAWK battery on 25 October . The HAWk battery arrived in October .
 In addition, the DAHLGREN DLG-12 was directed to load ammunition and proceed to Guantanamo for duty . The DAHL GREN was also directed to prepare for duty in Guantanamo .
 DAHLGREN was. to be designated Anti-Air Warfare Command Post for the Guantanamo Defense Area should base power be destroyed . Once on station the DAHL GREN was designated .
 Windward Sector: Two battalions were deployed abreast en the MaiLine of Resistance . The two battalions are deployed in the Windward sector .
 In reserve were two more battalions comprised of two companies from the Marine Barracks and two companies of CB's and fcur cempar-i^.s . In reserve was two more companies of the Marine Corps .
 2Z FM*~ LANT made some observations to CINCLANT regarding the vulnerability of aircraft at Guantanamo . It was at this point that 2ZFM*~LANT made an observation .
 The minimum number of aircraft ts as*t ypvratio-:al requirements was made . The recommendations were made for the Guantanamo base .
 Maintain aircraft in highest state of readiness to executes emergsrey flyaway . Maintain readiness to execute emergrey flyaways .
 Russia agreed to allow U.S. ships close aboard for photographing missiles on the deck of certain ships departing Cuba . Further improvement in the situation was evidenced when, on 7 Novmeber, the Russian government agreed to have United States ships .
 Sonar contacts were kept in constant surveillance . Sonar contact was kept under constant surveillance. So these were days of continuing what had become routine .
 A/rareful check was kept of all surface operations involving merchant ships, particularly those carrying cargo to or from Cuba . The operation was carried out in Cuba .
 Cuban government press and radio continued to place considerable emphasis on the demand for the withdrawal of United States Forces from Guantanamo . The Cuban government continued to press the withdrawal .
 The evacuation of dependents was carried out very efficiently . The evacuation was very efficiently, says the government minister .
 Despite the personal hardship of leaving their husbands, fathers, pets and belongings, there was a minimum of complaining and confusion . Despite personal hardship, the women were not complaining and confused .
 CNO sent the dependents a message delivering his congratulations and respects on the manner in uhich they were carrying out the evacuation . The CNO also congratulated them on their actions .
 All non-combatants were evacuated by 1630 on 22 October . Except for two Instances, where further hospitalization at Guantanamo was necessary, all were evacuated .
 The normal number of Cuban workers reported for duty during the entire crisis . Except for two or three occasions, Cuban workers were absent during the crisis . Only a small number of Cubans were on duty at the time .
 The few interruptions were Page 9q of the \7L Pages as a result of harassing tactics on the part of the Cuban military . The only interruption was from the military .
 Such tactics as disrupting the transportation and lengthy Interrogation and search were used . Such tactics were used to disrupt the transportation of the suspects .
 At no time did COMNAVBASE Indicate the slightest doubt about the loyalty of his Cuban labor force, nor was there any overt act on their part that should have created such a doubt .
 Certain on-board Cubans volunteered for extra duties on the plane . Cubans were on board to help with the rescue mission .
 40 Cubans were standing watches with the Base Police as the second man in a police patrol . For example, 40 Cuban officers were standing watch with the base police .
 A significant development was the bringing forward of evidence of 2 employees cooperating with Cuban authorities in the harassment of Base employees . 2 employees cooperated with authorities, bringing forward evidence of the harassment .
 The Voice of America continued to broadcast on 22 October . The highlighted program was President Kennedy's speech on the Cuban situation .
 An Air Force C-135 carrying ammunition crashed on 23 October killing the entire crew . The entire crew was killed in the crash .
 By 24 October a circuit from Guantanamo to the White House was ready for operation . The circuit was completed by 24 October . The White House says the circuit was ready to be operational .
 On 31 October COMNAVBASE reported to CNO that a source reported the recovery of an American pilot whose aircraft was reportedly shot down by Russian forces on 29 October somewhere between Banes and Gibara . CNO reported that the pilot's plane was recovered from Russian forces .
 CNO replied that the UN was arranging for the delivery of the shot down pilct, Major Anderson, to the Naval Base . Major Anderson was shot down by the U.N. CNO .
 12 inch water line between t'jjie Tataras River and pump house #5 sustained a leak . Water service was normal except for one occasion on 31 October when the 12 inch line was damaged .
 As emergency measures hotjever, 2 tankers and a water barge were available for fresh water resupply . The emergency measures were called into force in the wake of the earthquake .
 The water problem just like the Cuban labor for?* never became critical. The water issue never became a critical. It was a labor-intensive problem. The problem is a problem.
 On 3 November 2 Marines were critically injured when they inaavstt.trir-.lv entered a mine field . Marines were injured in a mine-filled mine field in November .
 Four other Marines and a Navy corpsman were wounded when they attempted to remove the injured Marines . The wounded Marines were injured when they tried to remove them .
 On 6 November 2 Marine sentries ar.uidenr.allv ran a Ford pick-up truck through the fence line . The truck was driven by an unknown unknown motorist .
 No Cuban officials appeared at this mssticg and the matter was considered closed . The matter is considered closed by Cuban officials .
 A Marine sentry shot and wounded 2 ether Marines when they did not respond to his challenge . Another casua&ty resulting incident occurred at 2330 on 8 November, A Marine .
 Planning and preparations for both offensive and defensive actlcns continued . Planning and . preparations for the 2014 Winter Olympics continued .
 The problems inherent in field living under combat conditions became the issue of the moment . As the sailors and marines became more accustomed to their surroundings and situation, the problems became more common .
 Eating, sleeping, working and recreation existing until combat began or until the situation returned to normal . Eating, . working and . recreation . existing until . combat began . or until . the situation . began .
 A schedule was established for relieving the units on the Main Lice of Resistance so that the troops could enjoy hot meals . A schedule of meals was established to relieve the troops from the troops .
 Watches organized eo that the men could have adequate sleep under more comfortable conditions . Watches were organized to ensure they could sleep under comfortable conditions.
 The CB's with more appropriate equipment added immeasurably to the digging of trenches, clearing of fields of fire, construction of bunkers and eonmancd posts . More complete communications were installed .
 Briefings on the various plans of action, live firing exercises, repair of equipment time now available for all of thig without detracting from the readiness posture .
 There were no critical personnel shortages and the troops were well motivated and offensively minded . The troops are well motivated, offensively minded and well motivated .
 If such a state is possible under the conditions as they existed, the situation had become normal . And, if such an event was possible, it was normal . The situation has become normal, and the situation is normal .
 Thought was given toward sending liberty parties to other Caiibbean islands for rest and recreation . Thought was also given to send liberty parties abroad .
 Credibility of this rumor mounted on 21 November when the quarantine of Cuba was lifted . Cuba was quarantined in November after lifting of quarantine .
 By 28 November 1962, most of the reinforcing Marine units had been ordered returned to their home stations . Plans were being made to have dependents batk to Guantanamo by Christmas .
 Defense of the base still considered of the utmost importance . Nevertheless, defense of the airbase still was considered of utmost importance.
 Four VMA aircraft were in place at Leeward Point together with a detachment of VU-10 . Four of the aircraft were deployed at the time .
 Defense forces maintained equivalent of DEFCON THREE at all times . Foregoing defense forces kept equivalent of DeFCON three at all time .
 Maintained in rsadiness to provide for arrival first company 12 hours and remainder of battalion within 24 hours . First company company expected to arrive 12 hours .
 Other Cuban plans are predicated upon accomplishment of at least the foregoing reinforcement and evacuation of dependents and non-combatants . It should be borne in mind that other Cuban plans .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the establishment of a blockade of Cuba on 23 October . The same day, 23 October, the Joint chiefs of Staff ordered the blockade .
 In their message, the JCS gave the reasons and instructions for the blockade .
 CINCLANTFLT executed his blockade order on 24 October as directed by JCS and CinCLANT . Then, on October 24 October, the blockade order was executed .
 The organization was divided into three task groups that remained in effect throughout the quarantine . The quarantine was quarantined until the end of the week .
 Some of the units were relieved in kind as the operation progressed . However, some of them were relieved by some of the troops .
 COMCRUBESFLOT SIX with 2-Cruisers, 2-DLG; 2-DDG; 9-DD; 2 DDR; 2DDR; 1-EDD assigned CTG 136 . The fleet is assigned to a fleet of six aircraft .
 CTG 136. took station to the west of the general center of this arc and . operated as necessary to replenish the ships on station . CTG . 136. operated as . necessary to . replenish ships .
 The Cuban Air Force and the Cuban airfields were in a poor state of readiness to launch attacks against ships on the ""WALNUT"" stations . Later, it was determined by U.S. aerial reconnaissence that the Cuban Air . Force and Cuban . airfields
 The quarantine arc was readjusted closer to Cuba but seaward of the Bahamas Chain . It was approved by the approval of CINCIANT and JCS .
 Hogle, USN reported as Director and was assigned a staff of 30 officers and men . Hogle was ultimately assigned as Director of the Navy .
 The search effort in an operation such as this one was a monumental task . It was a 'monumental task' to find the missing person .
 Naval Air Patxol Squadrons and the Anti-Submarine Warfare Forces Atlantic Fleet provided aircraft to search the ocean approaches to Cuba .
 At the outset of the Quarantine the U.S. Air Force provided six RB-47 aircraft and four RB-50 aircraft to augment Navy search efforts . At the start of the Qarantine the United States .
 The Navy flew aircraft from such widely separated points as Roosevelt Roads, Guantanamo Bay, Bermuda, the Azores, Argentia, Jacksonville, Key West, Norfolk and Patuxent River .
 These patrol aircraft did an outstanding job of locating ships in the Cuban trade . The aircraft were used to locate ships in Cuba .
 The majority of ships Intercepted were first sighted by aircraft and (hen the quarantine ships were vectored for the interception) Intercepted ships were intercepted by aircraft . Intercepted vessels were intercepted as part of a quarantine .
 The Remington Rand Univac Sea Surveillance Computer System was the primary method of tracking the merchant shipping to and from Cuba . The system was used to track merchant shipping from Cuba to Cuba .
 The best information on point of departure, course and speed for each ship was entered in the computer . Each ship's speed and speed was entered into the computer at the time .
 A read-out every two hours listed the latitude and iongtltude of each ship of (interest) of interest . A read out every 2 hours listed each ship's latitude, ionltude and latitude .
 Initial frequency of the STTSUMS was six per uay which was reduced to three per day commencing 31 October 1962 . Initial frequency was six times per day .
 Others with nonsuspicious cargo -slowed or even stopped - seemingly awaiting guidance from the Kremlin . Gradually these latter ships proceeded to their ports of destination la Caba b* From 5 to 11 November, some of the ships made their way to Caba .
 It was during this phase that CINCLANTFLT promulgated the code name SCOTCH TAPE . The code name was followed by a numeral to designate a suspect ship which might warrant special attention .
 This code name facilitated unclassified reference to a particular merchant ship . The code name was used to refer to a ship in the U.S.
 During this phase, eleven SCOTCH TAPE ships were observed outbound from Cuba . During this period, eleven ships were seen outbound to Cuba .
 Based upon information furnished In the UN by the Soviets to our delegation, these ships were intercepted and inspected for missiles without actually being stopped or -boarded . The Soviets were intercepting and inspecting for missiles .
 Quarantine Operations were held in abeyance on 30 and 31 October 1962 during the visit of Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to Cuba . No offensive weapons were detected oo any of these ships intercepted or photographed .
 Mr U Thant was working directly with Premier Castro attempting to explore ways and means to end the Cuban crisis . Mr Thant worked directly with . Premier Castro .
 Great difficulty was encountered in contacting the Russian ships carrying the missiles out of Cuba, says the Russian ambassador .
 The Soviet delegation to the United Nations had provided the United States with the names of nine Soviet ships, the number of missiles that each ship would carry and the date of departure from Cuban ports .
 The U.S. provided the Soviet delegation with three locations at sea where the USN ships could rendezvous with the Russian merchant ships in question for the inspection agreed upon . In turn, the United States, through the Secretary of State .
 The name, call signs and hull numbers of all USN combatant ships were indicated in the State Department message . The names of all U.S. combatant vessels were indicated .
 It was necessary to initiate an extensive special air and serf ace search to intercept the nine Soviet ships . As a result of the search, the search was carried out .
 This air and surface search caused a great expenditure of time and effort which would not have been required had the Soviets lived up to the agreement for a rendezvous between the various ships .
 When intercepted, they appeared well aware of the Instructions of their government and cooperated in varying degrees from good to poor . They cooperated with each other in various ways .
 BRATSK had been inspected once by CTG 136. by means of surface observations to determine if nuclear material was being transported from Cuba to Russia. CTG. 136. had been able to inspect the site in Cuba .
 As evident from the discrepancies between the Soviet count and the CISCIANTFLT count, the exchange of information between the two countries was not entirely accurate .
 During Phase Ihree, CTF 81 continued routine and special air searches as -necessary to locate and identify merchant ships en route to or outbound from Cuba . CTF continued routine air searches to locate ships en-route to or in-route from Cuba.
 Only one ship was stopped and boarded during the entire Quarantine Operation . Only one vessel was stopped by the entire operation .
 She was boarded on 28 October by a party from the JOSEPH P KENNEDY, Jr., DD-850 . The ship was taken over by the J.P. P. Kennedy, Jr. from a party .
 The cargo was found in order and MARCUIA vas permitted to proceed on to Cuba . MARCUia was found to be in good condition .
 On Tuesday, 20 November 1962, the President of the United States held a press conference .
 JCS directed CINCLANT to lift the Quarantine immediately and to ret:irn tha Atlantic Fleet ships to their respective hornsports and . normal operating areas .
 CZNCIANTTLT on 21 November directed COMASWFORIANT to he prepared to locate and photograph Russian ships leeving Cuban ports with IL-28 aircraft aboard . While operations with respect to Cuba were partially relaxed, it is to he noted .
 This Quarantine Operation was unique in naval annals and it could well herald a pattern of future naval operations . The operation was unique and could herald a new pattern of operations .
 In the first place, it apprcacned but did not reach, the status of a naval blockade in the accepted sense wf the word . In the second place, the blockade was not considered a blockade by the British government .
 In the second place, this operation was directed in great part from the seat of government in Washington, D.C. In the first place, it was directed by the White House .
 There was a steady flow of instructions from Washington to CINCIANTFLT which required rapid dissemination to the operating forces . In this connection, there was a constant flow of information from Washington .
 There was a pressing requirement for a prompt, accurate and complete flow of the current status and results of the operations . Also, there was also a pressing need for a . prompt and accurate flow of . the current . status of the . operations and results .
 The CW communications were generally fast and good, but the requirement for expediting matters required extensive use of the single sideband, voice radio . Voice radio was used in the CW communications .
 One problem noted early during quarantine operations was the lack of uniformity in the method of hailing ships . The problem was noted early in quarantine operations .
 These procedures proved to be very effective and information received by CINCLANTFLT from the Force Commander and his intercepting ships was complete in scope and adequate to the needs .
 The two considerations listed in the preceeding paragraph were fulfilled by CINCLANT readily and with no undue difficulty . The decision was made by the author of the article .
 First, the quarantine effort which approached but was short of a naval blpckadij, provided the United States a position of power from which to conduit diplomatic negotiations .
 At the same time, if diplomatic negotiations broke down, the military forces were positioned and poised to commence military operations . If the diplomatic negotiations break down, military forces would be poised to begin military operations quickly and effectively .
 The operations were closely directed from Washington, presumably to insure that the diplomatic and military endeavors complemented each other and would not at any time be working at cross purposes .
 Er*n sz t im damage incurred did not render either ship incapable of c«7P.~inuing its assigned mission, on the CHESTNUT line . The damage sustained did not stop either ship from continuing its mission .
 The procedures and practices established during the operation vere sound and will provide a point of departure for future operations . In closing out this special Quarantine Plot, it is believed that .the procedures and . practices established in this special quarantine plot are believed to be sound .
 This deployment was directed by COMSECONDFLT in response to a CINCLANTFLT directive that in order to reduce reaction time it was desired that a CVA be located in Mayport or operate in the Mayport area to the maximum extent practicable .
 INDEPENDENCE returned to her home port after 43 days of steady steaming . The ship was deployed to the U.S. Navy .
 On 18 October crNCLANTFLT directed COMNAVAIRLANT to chop ENTERPRISE to ;COMSECONBFLT . COMSECONDFLT was further authorized to alter the schedule »f INDEPENDENCE at his discretion .
 It appears that this relief and schedule change came about as a result of a commitment for INDEPENDENCE to take part in a demonstration in the Virginia Capes Area which would have left a gap to the South between 27 October and 6 November .
 ENTERPRISE had returned to CONUS after a European deployment on 11 October . ENTERPRise returned to the U.S. in October .
 The continued presence in Norfolk of other ships led to some public speculation that her sailing was connected with impending Cuban operations . However, the continued presence of others in Norfolk led to speculation that the ship was sailing .
 OFORD provided the basis for naval actions in support of CIKCLANT OPLAN 312 . This OFORD . provided the . basis for . naval action in support for the . mission .
 Commander Naval Ta6k Force with shore and carrier based aircraft was, commencing at H-Hour, to strike assigned targets In Cuba . The force will provide air defense and close air support to Guantanamo .
 COMCARUIV SIX was iatially designated Commander Naval Force . CCMCARDI7 TWO was to be directed to assume command when appropriate . COMCARDI 7 was directed to take command when necessary .
 CG FMFLANT upon execution was to deploy one MAG to Key West and CHOP it to CINCAFIANT, and, if not previously directed, reinforce Guantanamo with one air lifted battalion and the required sea lifted echelon . CGFMFLANT's plan was to
 If not previously directed, COMPHIBIANT was to terminate his Caribbean exercise, land a BLT from the ready PHTflron and CHOP it to COM GTMO Sector, CARIBSEAFROT and retain' one PHTBRON with embarked Landing Force
 He further stat«d he would gat t3 t3 a more advantageous position, Lat 25N, Long 75W at 2114002. He further said he would like to have his position at a more favourable position .
 Commander Antilles Defense Command on the 20th made certair. recommendations with respect to control of forces . Commander Antille Defense Command made . recommendations for control of . forces .
 These matters and ethers were clarified by CINCIANT Advance Changs to OFLAN 312 . Changs: "These matters were clarified"
 The ENTERPRISE A3 J aircraft will be held ashore on the 20th anniversary of the deployment of the U.S. mission . The mission was directed by COMSECONDFLT, CG FMFLANT and COMNAVAIRLANT .
 OOHSECECGNDFLT was told to take aboard a 20 plane Marine A4D squadron . The squadron is a Marine Air Force squadron with a squadron of 20 aircraft .
 CG FMFIANT was told to provide the squadron and fly planes, personnel and equipment aboard as soon as possible and not later than 21 October . CGFMFIANT has been given a deadline for the squadron to be ready for deployment .
 This change in air. group composition increased the close air support capability . This change of air . group composition . increased the . close air . support capability.
 COMCARDIV SIX requested C0MCARDI7 to inform him of readiness to attack assigned targets in first strike . He stated his desire for early reconnaissance -and destruction -of KOMARs .
 In a follow-up message, C0MCARDI7 SIX further defined approach/retirement areas . He stated his -intentions to remain north of Cuba until after first day of operations .
 On receipt of COMCARDI"" SZi message 13H3ARDT7 TOO cancelled his earlier message . On receipt he cancelled his previous message .
 CIIICLANTFLT directed COMNAVBASE GTMO to evacuate depena*.-i& and non-essential personnel . J-Isr. J-isr. afisr . ordered the evacuation of depena-i& .i&, non-
 While not a part of this force, ESSEX with COMCARDIV EIGHTEEN embarked was at Guantanamo . While not part of the force, it is noted that ESSEEX with COMEIV ETHRIGHT EIGHTEN embarked .
 He stated his ability to strike all assigned targets and intended to restrike as might be indicated by post-strike briefing and reconnaissance . He said he intended to . restrike . as might . indicated by . post-mission briefing and . reconnaissance .
 He planned to keep 4 CAP and 8 CAS aircraft over Guantanamo during daylight, augmenting as the situation might require .
 During this period there was a large volume of traffic relating to target assignments end weapons selection . During this time there were a large number of traffic related to target assignment end weapons .
 ENTERPRise with FISKE, RUSH and HAWKINS commenced movement via Mayaguana and Windward Passages . ENTERPRISE with Fiske, Rushing and Hawkins commenced movement .
 INDEPENDENCE with ENGLISH, HANK, CORRY and O'HARE followed through Windward Passage . InDEPENDENTENTENTENCE with INDEPENTENCE, Hank, Corry, and HARE .
 Such frequent refueiings were not required by the current operations then in progress but were considered a necessity if the force Was to be ready for possible execution of a contingency plan . The force was considered to be prepared for possible contingency plans .
 Alternate day refueiings continued until the departure of COMCARBTV TWO from the area on 5 December . Alternate refueues continued until December 5 .
 Had any plan executed, all units would have been topped off or nearly so at any time, says CNN.com . "Had any plan to execute, it would have operated for extended periods without refueling. It's not clear what happened."
 Fue lings were scheduled to occur at 0630R each day to permit the beginning of limited flight operations on completion . The project was scheduled to be completed at the end of the day .
 The uncertainties of any readiness for contingency plans required all units to be kept at a high logistics level, so a considerable effort was made to maintain this level .
 COKCABDIV TWO also initiated action to shift the GOD basa from Grand Turk to Guantanamo to increase the efficiency of personnel airlifts . The GOD basea is located in Guantanamo Bay .
 Action was initiated by COMSERVLANT on 25 October to provide an AR and AD in the San Juan/ Area by 3 November . Action was started by COM SERVERANT to provide AR and . AD in San Juan area by November 3 .
 USS VULCAN and USS GRAND CANYCN were directed to sail with COMCRUDESFLOT 12 embarked on GRANDCANYON to act as COM CRUDESLANT REP at San Juan . USS VLATAN was directed to act with COM
 It is not considered operationally feastb lotto restrict ammo availability of strike group CVA'a in such an operation by assigning AE's carrying CLOUD loade to the support of the support .
 The afternoon of 26 October ENTERPRISE obtained an ECM ccntact characteristic of SNOOP PIATE radar . Pago 1I5 of J21 Pages: "EnterPRise obtained an EMCCCN ccNact"
 Operating areas were shifted on 27 October to operate south of 18N because of increasing submarine activity . Submarine operations have been moved south of the coast of Jamaica Channel .
 TG 135. continued to the west the evening of 26 October to operate off the southwest coast of Jamaica . TG 135 continued to operate the night of the night .
 This move was ideal for submarine protection and an effort was made to operate in the vicinity of shoals present in the area . The move was made in an effort to operate .
 CTG 135. was directed to send ENGLISH and HANK to 135. when the first two destroyers reported . CTG. was told to send English and Hank to 135 when first 2 destroyers were reported .
 Additional precautions were taken throughout the entire period including all night steaming at darken ship, employing evasive steering, avoiding merchant shipping to the maximum extent feasible .
 TG 135 135. to vicinity 18N 80W ; TEf 135 . to 16N 78W ; and TG 135. logistics support group to the area between. and . the . area between . 18 and 18N . 80W .
 The Windward Passage air patrol was secured on 29 October . Because of the increased distance and transit time involved, the air patrol is secured in advance of the end of October .
 All TF movements and areas were predicated on remaining within striking distance of all targets thoughout the operation . The operation was based on the fact that all TF movements were based on a strikeable location .
 This requirement dictated positioning of ENTERPRISE northwest of Jamaica and north of 19N for optimum tracking of flights from a general position south of Cuba . This requirement required a northward approach to Cuba .
 This factor prevented any great alteration of force position for ' the remainder of the deployment. This factor subsequently prevented any . great . alteration of . force position .
 Due to the number of offerees positioned south of Cuba a proposal was initiated to position a tender at Kingston, Jamaica for TAV purposes . A tender was held at Kingston in Jamaica in 2007 .
 The Guantanamo repair facility was considered the optimum positioning of repair services . This move and the availability of Guantanamo repair facilities were considered to be the optimum location for repair .
 TG 44 transited the Panama Canal and arrived in the Caribbean Area on 9 November . Replenishment responsibility wasassumed for TG 44. vhich .
 TG 135.1 was able to absorb this additional requirement, continue alternate refueling of TG 135 .1, TG 135135.1, and TG 135 135.2 were able to continue . and consolidate when required from MSTS tankers .
 The problem of non-squawking aircraft became increasingly evident in early November . The problem became more apparent in November .
 This problem continued to plague the task force throughout the deployment . The task force continued to be plagued by the problem .
 Stroh, COMCARDIV SIX, departed INDEPENDENCE on 9 November for LEXINGTON at Mayport . Stroh was a member of the U.S. State Department of Homeland Security in Washington, DC .
 The tempo of air operations training has been increased by providing one fully ready CVA and one CVA with slightly reduced readiness .
 This method of alternating the ready duty was continued until the departure of INDEPENDENCE and greatly increased the flight operations .
 O'HARE and W, M. WOOD were at tender availability Kingston and DUPONT at Guantanamo for repairs to shaft bearing .
 ENTERPRISE, J KING, LAWRENCE, RUSH, gWglMS, at sea . FISKE at TAV and C P, CECIL enroute TG 135. TG 135 .
 VA-75 was transferred from INDEPENTENCE to Guantanamo as relief for VA-35 . VA-25 was transferred to Guantanamo in order to provide relief for the wounded . VA 75 was moved to Guantanamo to provide the relief .
 The AIE INDEPENDENCE tow plane* was transferred to ENTERPRISE to continue AA service fpr TG 135.3. and TG 135 .3.3 .
 On 25 November a fatal aircraft accident occurred during the catapult launch of an F-8E aircraft on number 4 catapult, to identify a non-squawking bogey . The accident occurred on 25 November .
 The group retired to the area south and southwest of Jamaica . In order to accomplish subsequent repairs and inspection to the catapult, the group retired .
 Final tender availability alongside YOSEMITE at Kingston terminated on 1 December . The final tender availability with YosEMITE was terminated on 31 December .
 A turnover briefing and conference was conducted on board ENTERPRISE 4 December . The turnover briefing was conducted by ENTERPRise .
 ENTERPRISE returned to Norfolk on 6 December having been continuously at sea for 49 days . ENTERPRise returned home to Norfolk after a total of 49 days at sea .
 OS^S2 was X a;.--rt3i to the strong possibility of Soviet submarine activity *-» the ,; it-'swra Atlantic . OSS2: OS2: The possibility of Russian submarine activity is strong . OS2 was OS2 .
 The contact was cbser^dy;. ■ r iLite surface for fir tsen minute's and then submerged .y.r.m.t.u.y.m . contact .
 TEKEK was found to be dead in the water with an unidentified object alongside . ASW aircraft were able to revisit the area and find the object dead . The object was later found to have been in the ocean with an unknown object .
 By the 22nd of October it was evident that some kind of action against Cuba would be forthcoming . Additional ASW forces would be required in the southern Florida area .
 Both contacts were dead in the water and complete photo and LOFAR coverage was obtained by the aircraft . The aircraft was equipped with a variety of equipment and equipment .
 This actioii required ASWFORIANT to increase ASW surveillance and to prepare for other more active military measures including activation of the Greenland-United Kingdom ASW barrier . The Greenland-U.K. barrier was activated .
 Minimize of communications was also placed in effect world t:ide on this date . Minimize communication was also put in effect on this day .
 MILLS reported the TEREK as being dead in the water with running lights secured . MILLS said the Terek was dead in water . TEREk was reported to have been dead with lights on .
 Aircraft operating from NAF Lajes continued to perform daily surveillance in the vicinity of the TEREK to ensure continuous contact and possible Soviet submarines attempting to rendezvous .
 COMASWFORIANT VP forces were directed to provide VP ASW surveillance of Amphibious Group FOUR in the Caribbean area . Because of the movement of amphibious forces, COMASwFORIant VP forces provided surveillance .
 ASW aircraft were directed to intercept certain Soviet shipping en route to Cuba . Several ASW planes were directed by the Soviet Union to intercept the ships .
 VP aircraft and 10 submarines were directed to deploy to the Naval Station Argentia to provide forces for an Argentia Sub-Air Barrier . On 24 October 17 17 VP aircraft, 10 submarines and 10 VP aircraft deployed .
 Task Group 83.2, , which is a HUK unit, was directed to proceed and rendezvous with the USS INDEPENDENCE group and to provide ASW protection . Task Group was directed by the HUK to proceed .
 As of 24 October, CINCIANTFLT advised thai at least three known Soviet submarines were operating in'the Nor tl* Atlantis . At least three of the submarines are believed to be Russian .
 These three, and perhaps more, could reach the quarantine line within a few days . These three could be the best substantial threat to this force, says CNN.com .
 This action could be a deliberate counter action by the Soviets against quarantine forces, says Fleet Commander .
 The Chief of Staff, United States Air Force offered to use B-52 aircraft for aerial surveillance of shipping . The offer was accepted and areas for patrol were assigned to patrol areas .
 This sighting was oi considerable assistance in keeping GROZNY under surveillance by Navy patrol aircraft . The sighting was . considerable assistance to keep GROzNY under . surveillance .
 On the 26th of October CINCLANTFLT reported his concern over the shortage of ASW torpedoes . He strongly urged an Increase in delivery of these weapons .
 In Argentia, COMBARARGENTIA reported that he was not able to load all aircraft assigned to the Argentia Sub-Air barrier due to the lack of HK-43 torpedoes . This was particularly important in view of Increased ASW activity .
 On 27 October there was an increase in requirements for open ocean surveillance, and for ASW in support of the quarantine line . There was also a increase in requirement for open sea surveillance .
 COMASWFORLANT requested CANCOMARLANT to take the Quonset ASW area under surveillance .
 The submarine situation in the Atlantic basin indicated that Soviet subs were making their transit in areas east of the Argentia Barrier . Soviet subs are believed to have made their transit east of Argentina .
 COMASWFORIANT recommended that the ASW barrier be transferred to the G-I-UR area . COMASwFORIant recommends that the barrier should be moved to the area .
 The recommended action was not taken at this time nor at any time duriag the crisis, it was said . The recommended actions were not taken during the crisis .
 Task Group AIFA identified a Soviet submarine found on the surface as a FOXTROT Class submarine . Task Group identified the submarine as a Soviet sub on 28 October 2013 .
 Identifying numbers were painted out and photographs of the sub were obtained . The sub was painted out in order to identify the sub . Subs were used in the World War II .
 On 30 October the quarantine was suspended commensurate with the visit of U.N. Secretary General U. Thant to Cuba . The quarantine has been suspended .
 ASW surveillance flights, however, continued and submarine contacts were prosecuted . Submarine contacts were also prosecuted .
 ASW air patrols conducted surveillance operations in the Davis Strait, Iceland, Azores area on 30 October and reported no significant contacts .
 In additira, A3WFORLANT forces participated in surveillance operations for Soviet shipping which were to remove offensive weapons from Cuba . The operation was part of an effort to remove weapons from the country .
 The code word ""S22T3H TAPE" was designated for use when merchant ships were kept under actual surveillance by either air or surface or, irs. It was designated to be used by ships under surveillance by air and surface .
 Details of ""SCOTCH TAPE" operations are noted in the section, on Quarantine Operations .
 On 1 November the TEREK was observed continuing on her scuth scuth ws3t2rly •icursa. On 1 Nov the Terek was observed continued to scuth .
 The CALCATERRA who was shadowing the TEREK observed what appeared to be signals from the TereK's search light . The CALcATERRA observed the signals .
 There was no confirmation, however, that TEREK was actually signalling a submarine . No confirmation was made as to whether it was signalling a sub .
 No new s-jbaaria* contacts were made on 1 November and the Argentia sub-air barrier remained cold . No new contact was made in November .
 Investigation of contacts and surrsilZ"" anr.s flights continued throughout the period . Investigation of the incident was carried out in the 1980s . Investigation into the incident continues .
 Task G'riu? .and Task Group Commanders were advised to continue photo ct^-srage cf ships leaving Cuba and to expedite delivery of photos to Washington . Task G.C. Commanders advised to . continue photo . ct*sragecf ships
 The Soviet submarine number 945, designated contact G-18, remained »-n the surface on 6 November .
 A P3A aircraft was launched to search the general area to the north of the Azores . The search is ongoing for the missing person .
 One new submarine contact designated TJ-35 was reported southeast of Bermuda . The contact was reported to be near Bermuda . One new contact was also reported to have been made by a submarine .
 Surveillance would continue until TEREK was in the vicinity of 55N and was observed on its homeward course . Terek would be observed on the homewards course .
 One new submarine contact was reported by a MATS flight southeast -of 'Charleston, NSC., however, . it wa* of low validity . The"" srea' was kept under surveillance .
 A S2F tracker squadron, , was deployed to the Marine Corps Air Station at Cherry Point, E.C. for a period of 4 days to provide ASW coverage .
 The ""read out"" problem was of urgent operational concern . Flight hours spent on one contact erroneously classified due to the unknown phenomena .
 Active shadowing of the Soviet oiler TEREK, the Soviet submarine number 945, the tug PAMIR and the trawler SHK7AL were terminated on 18 Novsmber . The Soviet submarine 945 was also shadowed by the Soviet ship .
 No new contacts were reported and no significant information en old contacts were made . No significant information was made on old contacts made .
 Soviet submarine activity in the Westsrn Atlantic was declining . It was apparent that Soviet activity was declining in the area .
 From the 19th through the 20th of Norxmber ASW forces were primarily employed in ""SCOTCH TAPE"" operations . No significant unidantif isd s""b~ marine activity reported .
 On the 25th of November ""minimize"" was cansailed and operations were reverting to normal conditions . Operation was resumed on November 25th .
 No significant activity occurred from the 28th through the 1st of December . No significant activities occurred during that period .
 More than 620,000 pounds of valuable cargo, and more than 1,000 passengers were transported more than 122,000 miles . More than 2,000 people were transported over 122,00 miles .
 Russian trawlers and fishing factories, Russian merchant ships, an electronic ship, and an ""unfriendly"" submarine . The Russian ships included, Russian targets and fishing factories .
 The foregoing report only spotlights the more significant activities --;f the ASW forces . It cannot adequately depict the many hours of tedious search and tracking by ships, aircraft, and their personnel .
 RADM Tyree's headquarters is located at the Naval Station Trinidad when the Admiral and his staff are not embarked in a flagship . The Admiral's office is located in Trinidad when he is not on a ship .
 During the Cuban crisis COMSOLANT was designated as Commander Task Force 137, (Commander Combined Latin American-United States Quarantine Task Force) This force of combined United States and Latin American Naval Forces took an active part in the quarantine of Cuba .
 United States Atlantic Fleet was in his flagship, USS MULLINKIX, ste«B±Bg-*£f tJa northern coast of Chile, engaged in conducting AfiW exercises of . United States .
 There had been little warning in the Air Force that a crisis was building up over Cuba .
 A strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated . T» halt this offensive buildup, the U.S. government says .
 QOMSOLANT was directed to return to Trinidad with key members of his staff as soon as possible . On Hedsssdar morning, the 24th of October, the government ordered him to return home .
 Senior Chilean and Peruvian officers transferred to MULLMNIX to be briefed on the situation . On request, the senior Chileans and Peruans were transferred to the site .
 MULLINNIX left the UNTTAS III Task Force for Callao, Peru . They returned to their ships, command was .passed to the senior officer, Captain Maza, Peruvian Navy, and the MullinNIX .
 COMSOLANT and most of the members of his staff boarded the UNITAS United States A£r detachment aircraft and flew to Trinidad, arriving the morning of 2$ October . The U.S. detachment aircraft arrived in Trinidad on October 25th .
 The Organization of American States backed the President's stand unanimously . CINCLANTFLT ordered the establishment of a quarantine force which would be placed in position to intercept shipping .
 The force permitted free access to the Caribbean area through the Lesser Antilles passages . However, this force was only available in the Caribbean .
 The OAS Indicated that nations providing forces to the Quarantine Force desired to operate as a combined force under the OAS, rather than under United States command . The nations did not object to being placed under a United States commander . They did not want to be placed under the United
 CINCIANTFLT cancelled his directive and ordered COMSOLANT to report to CINCLANT for operational control . The decision was made to cancel the directive .
 After a brief stop in Panama, the MULLINHTX sailed for Trinidad, arriving on Saturday morning, the 3rd of IJdvember .
 Having only recently returned from an extensive period at sea, most of their crews had been on leave . Most of the ships were 'j^cergoing repair when the quarantine was established .
 The crews were re-assembled and the ships headed for Trinidad, 4500 miles to the north, at high speed . Nevertheless, within the space of five days the crews had to be reassembled .
 They stopped only brief iy. at Rio.de Janeiro and Recife to fuel and arrived at the United States Naval Station, Trinidad on the morning of Thursday, November 8th .
 The ships ordered and paid for the first load of fuel, on arrival, so that they would be turned over to the United States operational control as fully ready as possible .
 By the time the Argentine ships arrived, the COMSOLANT staff had begun to expand in order to be able to properly plan and command the southern phase of the quarantine operation .
 Communication-Liaison Teams were placed aboard the Latin American ships . Many were especially chosen to form Communication Teams to be placed aboard .
 Off icers and men had experience in cryptography and radio communication . They could also speak Spanish or, in a few <Jaseo, Portuguese .
 It is fairly obvious that not many officers and men had the special skills called for and that the few who did have would be widely scattered . The few who had special skills would be scattered .
 One chief radioman came from Point Mugu, California, while another came from Bremerton, Washington and Rota, Spain . Officers arrived from as far away as Bremerten, Washington, and ROTA, Spain, to help .
 COMSOLANT and staff normally consisted of the Admiral, 8 officers and 20 enlisted men . Staff was normally made up of 8 officers, 8 enlisted men and 20 women .
 Staff had expanded to 25 officers and 51 men, £f which 10 Officers and 20 men were earmarked for the express purpose of assignment to Communications-Liaison Teams .
 Argentine officers translated, mimeographed and distributed the Spanish version in less than two days . This was translated into Spanish .
 The combined quarantine potential grew as new ships were added to the Task Force* j On 9 October the Venezuelan destroyers ART ZULIA and ARV NUBVA ESPARTA arrived at the United States Naval Station, Trinidad .
 A third Venezuelan shtfo, the submarine ARV CARTTE, remained on call in Venezuela awaiting orders to take part in the operation .
 There was no need for her services at the time, but it was planned to use her in combined anti-submarine exercises later .
 Argentine Naval Attache in Washington was on hand to greet the Argentine ships when they arrived in Trinidad . RADM Grunwaldt, the Argentine naval attachor in Washington, was with the ships .
 Alonso is the head of the ordnance branch of the Argentine Navy's purchasing commission in Washington . He is the first foreign officer attached to COMSOIANT staff .
 ICDR Jose AH Erlceno, >*». is normally chief of the Venezuelan Navy's communications department, reported in an Assistant Chief of Staff for Venezuelan Operations . Shortly,after, ICDR . Jose . AH Erceno, <*» is < normally Chief of the
 These two offices proved to be extremely valuable to logistics and supply matters, as well as in operations . The two offices will be used in the future of operations .
 The physical plant of the Naval Station, Trinidad and COMSOLANT's headquarters are feeling the impact of the quarantine operations . COMSolant's physical plant, Trinidad, is feeling the effects of the quarantines .
 Naval Station, Trinidad, which provides all communication support for COMSOIANT headquarters when ashore, was unable to provide the number of circuits needed to conduct the operation .
 limitations were due to lack of equipment, age and obsolescence of the equipment installed, and limitations in number of communication personnel .
 In special formation for serial photographs, the ships separated, each to go to her assigned patrol stations . It was apparent that all participants were aware of their roles in the historic event .
 The ZULIA and the NUEVA ESPARTA occupied patrol stations covering the passage between the island of Grenada and the mainland of Venezuela . Venezuela. Venezuela .
 ESPORA patrolled two stations, one in the Guadeloupe Passage and the other off the inland of Monserrat . Further north the ROSAIES patrolled the passage between the islands of Dominica and Guadelouppe .
 As the ships reached their assigned patrol stations, their reports of merchant ship contacts began to reach the C0MS0IANT OPCON Center, where they were recorded and plotted . The ships were sent to their assigned stations .
 The Information was passed immediately to the ships on patrol and proved to be very useful . The Information, developed by the searches was passed to the . ships .
 They were in ax* treaely poor condition, particularly with regard to their engineering plantar, and had to be gives an immediate tinder availability in order to make thea ready of operations .
 A certain amount of press censorship, by ssdzz cf the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, shielded operatises c£ the Quarantine Forces .
 The contribution of the Latin American navies to the quarantine operations was noted by the world press . It was viewed as clear evidence of the solidarity of the free nations of the hemisphere .
 Chief of Naval Operations hailed the Latin American participation in the quarantine as an historic milestcne in hemisphere relations . He personally chanked his counterparts in the Dominican Republic and Venezuela for their contributions .
 TS^M Grenfell had 7 eubmarins squadrons, a submarine division, 5 eubsnarii-s .tsad&rs, and 6 submarine rescus ships, under his cimmaod. As type commander for a-abmsrises, TS
 Aa of 18 October 1962 no unit* of the aranrlsa force of the Atlantic Fleet were employed specifically to support Csbaa operatista. Aa . No unit* was employed specifically for the operation .
 S33N, <2fclaria equipped submarines, vera on station in assigned patrol areas . In samel coaxigaratien. In samal coaxigatien. S33 nespeligarien. vera . vera vera (S33N
 Jh«.i-iijt5R' andNorfolk, with USS MARLIN and U'SS SEA CAT . rstuiizr-^sl^ i_ia.r.i.
 Grenfell, USN, with headquarters at the United States Naval Base Norfolk, Virginia . Grenfell is a U.S. Navy Navy sailor .
 C0MSU3LANT immediately promulgated .an ALSU31ANT to the submarine force setting DEFCON 3 to insure that all submarine units were advised . The ALSU32ANT was issued to ensure that all submarines were advised to prepare .
 DEFCON 3 was attained throughout the Force including Forces at Holy Loch at 0346Z on 23 October . The Force achieved the highest DEFON 3 at 0.346Z at the time .
 The unit commander, best situated for Cuban cisntingency operations, was designated along with 3 SS and 1 APS3 . The unit was designated as the unit commander .
 Units at sea earmarked for deployment directed t2 ret-jrn to port and load cut with wartime torpedo lead and tco off fcr pcaaible extended operations . units at sea were directed to port to port .
 'JSS A2RAHAM LZN3C;IX, tie only SSBN in upkeep at Holy Loch, was in the 13th day of a normal 28 day upkssp. When DEFCON 3 was set on 22 October the 'J SSBN A2
 At 1400Z, 23 October, 15 hours after setting of I-E'yC3j} 3, A3EAHaM LINCOIN deployed to her Polaris patrol area . The mission was completed at 1400Z .
 USS PROTEUS got underway after LIN30LS deployed-.d pracssdsdsd ts £?-£ Irish Sea .
 The schedule of USS THOMAS EDISON undergoing post ahaied-ran availability was expedited by 19 days to permit dspiovms-t to the Valeria petrel area by 7 November . The schedule has been expedited .
 USS PATRICK HENRY arrived in Holy Loch on 20 November 1962 after a 61 day patrol . USS Patrick Henry arrived at Holy Loch after a total of 61 days on the mission .
 On 24 October CINCIANTFLT directed the disestablishment of the Argentia 5ub-Air ASW barrier . All forces reverted to normal operational commanders .
 No unfriendly submarines were detected by barrier forces during the period of the barrier was in effect . The barrier was installed in the early 1980s .
 C0MSU3LANT directed TORSK and CUTLASS to divert and proceed at best speed to the position of the sinking Greek merchantman CAPTAIN GEORGE to render assistance and attempt recovery of survivors .
 TORSK and CUTIASS continued the operation until 17 November when they were re-leased from the SAR mission and proceed to Norfolk . Their search had bean fruitless .
 In the Cuban crisis the all out effort of the Service Force contributed much to the success of the Navy operations . The all-out effort was made to help the Cuban Navy .
 On IS October 1962, Commander Service Squadron FOUR and a detachment of helicopters from Utility Squadron . FOUR embarked in USS TRUCKEE (A0147) to provide . mobile logistic support for PH3BRIG1EX 62 exercise .
 The force sailed for the vicinity of Vieques Island, Puerto Rico for the scheduled exercise* On 22 October 1962 the USS ENTERPRISE and her destroyer screen joined the exercise Task Force and SERVRON FOUR provided the logistic support .
 Also on this date COMSERVLANT activated the SERVLANT war room on a 24-hour basis consistent with the President's announcement concerning the Quarantine of Cuba .
 Ships of the Service Force undergo periodic refresher training in Guantanaxoo area .
 When the evacuation of dependents from GTKO was ordered, HYADES was included as part of the evacuation element . The evacuation was ordered by GTKO, which is a government-run company .
 SERVRON EIGHT were deployed and were post tilled for operations in ports covering the southern U.S. from New Orleans to Norfolk . SERVRon Eighth were deployed .
 As the scope of Naval operations braadenad it became obvious that additional tankers would be required to support the fleet . Additional tankers were also needed for the operation .
 By 25 October replenishment utilizing ELOKOMIN and CKIKASKIA in the southern most sector, NEOSHO and KANKAKEE in the middle sector were operating satisfactorily .
 "Underway replenishment for the force was directed to conform to this line," says the commander .
 As -operations /-progressed, overall, logistic, support -..task required -a . de'-tailed support task organization . The organization is described as a 'tail-tailored' organization .
 This order provided logistic Support, salvage, towing, repair and repair, harbor clearance and such other logistics services as required . This order was ordered by the U.S. Navy .
 Quantities of NFSO were adequate for the majcr portion of the operations . Quantities were adequate, according to the report .
 The Service For;e use cf TAOi's was sens id* red satisfactory aftrs initial difficulties in ""hock ups"" ware resolved . Initial difficulties in "hock up" ware resolved resolved .
 Ko3t s&ips dspl^yed on short notice which resulted in 3ome personnel who were or. leave or liberty being left behind . Ko3s were left behind in the event of short notice .
 C0MSERVDI7 21 and a small staff were assembled and scheduled to sail on 19 November .
 From 31 October through 19 November, with the arrival of all ships on their assigned quarantine stations, daily underway refueling was used to maintain -station ships with at least 70% burnable fuel on board .
 Oilers sought out and delivered their products to the customers and provided general purpose services to the fleet . During this period oilers sought to deliver their products and delivered them to customers .
 On 17 November 1962, forces under Commander Service Squadron FOUR commenced logiBtic support of TG 128.4, the Pacific Amphibious Group . The squadron was part of the Commander Service .
 On 21 November, President Kennedy announced that the quarantine had been suspended and that many of the ships in the quarantine force would be returning soon . The quarantine force had been quarantined .
 Many of the active duty personnel who were extended were to be released . Many of them were to have their contracts extended .
 Even after President Kennedy's speech lifting the quarantine / operations, SERVRON EIGHT's ships continued to support ships in the quarantine force . Even after JFK's speech lifted the quarantine operations, however, SERVERON Eighth's ships continued their support .
 In one 24 hour period, TRUCKEE fueled end consolidated a total of 23 hours . The end of the series was a 24-hour period of 24 hours .
 USS KANKAKEE steamed continuously from 24 October to 5 December . The ship met all. commitments expeditiously .
 Her abilities to accomplish this in the face of the difficulties encountered is a most favorable reflection on the Ingenuity and willingness of a hard working crew . Her abilities are a reflection of her ability to overcome the difficulties faced .
 USS MAZAMA steamed continuously until 3 December meeting all commitments without incident . After joining COMSERVRON FOUR on 15 October, USS MAzama steamed continuous .
 MAZAMA -mads one trip to Roosevelt Roads to pick up ordnance items to fill up her CLOUD stocks which were urgently required .
 MAZAMA personnel accomplished a task that normally would have required two days . MAZAM personnel accomplished the task using just a few houses in Roosevelt Roads . The task would have taken two days to complete .
 There was no liberty or respite from her heavy work schedule and this short period is not considered of sufficient duration -to break her continuous steaming record .
 Service Force Units transferred 1024 personnel by Helicopter or Highline . Service Force personnel transferred by helicopter or highline .
 The pattern of operations was fairly routine for the middle of the fiscal year's second quarter . It was the first time the U.S. government had been in the midst of a recession .
 Fifteen amphibious ships vere deployed either to the Mediterranean or Panama, or else enroute to Norfolk from deployment . Fifteen of the ships are en route to Norfolk, Norfolk .
 An additional twelve ships are deployed to the Caribbean or are enroute as relief . An additional 12 ships were deployed to help with relief .
 Amphibious Brigade Landing Exercise 1962 (PHIBRIGLEX-62) was just commencing . These latter ships plus six others were to constitute the naval forces assigned to the exercise . The exercise was just beginning .
 Four more ships assigned to LOGEX at Onflow Beach, North Carolina . LOGEX is based at the base of a LOGEX shipyard in North Carolina.
 The employment of the remaining ships covered a wide variety of operations such as POM, RFS, AOTU, upkeep and/or tender availability . The remaining ships were employed by the ship .
 A serious problem confronting COMFHIBLANT, Vice Admiral River o, at the time was the shortage of AGC type command ships . The shortage of command ships was a serious problem .
 The POCONG was in the Mediterranean as flagship for CINCUSNAVEUR . The MT McKINLEY was the third AGC assigned to PHIBIANT, the only one available for operations .
 Rear Admiral Pittard was to be Commander Amphibious Task Force 146 . He sailed on 15 October utilizing the FRANCIS MARION <APA-249) as his flagship .
 Rear Admiral Craighill was ashore at Little Creek, Virginia . Because of the unavailability of a flagship COMPHIBRON TOO, Rear Adm. Craighills was ashore .
 The LOGEX at Onslow Beach was terminated and COMPHIBRON 10 departed for Little Creek in order to avoid damage* Because of the weather, COMHIBRON 6, with ships returning from the Mediterranean, was unable to offload at Morehead City so he was directed to
 On 19 October, although he departed formation, COMPHIBIANT remained in the vicinity of the movement unit rather than proceeding to San Juan .
 His continued presence generated some speculation as to the course of future events . His presence has generated speculation about the future of his life .
 COMFHIBRON 6 had arrived in Norfolk and was taking on J fuel and provisions . COMHIBON 6 was flying to Norfolk .
 He was directed to maintain readiness for sea and retain ' all troops on board .
 Amphibious Force was either operationally engaged, ready for sea in 24 hours, or committed to regular overhaul . ELLA had abated sufficiently to ccntinue with the PHI3R1GLEX drills and cperations .
 COMPHIBLANT assumed direct operational control of PHI3R0N 8 . He ordered this Caribbean Ready FHXSRON to proceed at bast speed to the Guantanamo operating area .
 An AKA and 1ST that had been offloading aviation equipment and personnel at Roosevelt Roads were directed to complete o fflo ading and return as quickly as possible to Morehaad City . The two aircraft were ordered to complete their offloading and return .
 TfO LST that were at Panama, under CINCARTB cperationai control, were ordered to return to Little Creek . CincARTB ordered the TfLSTs back to Panama under CincartB control .
 While en route these LSI were diverted to Port Everglades, Florida, for assigment with United States Army armored units .
 Two 1STs which were supposed to .relieve the Panama unit were directed to remain at Little Creek . Two 1sts were sent to Little Creek to remain in the area .
 This entire movement unit then proceeded through the Mona Passage to a point south of the mid-part of the Dominican Republic . The entire movement group then proceeded to proceed southward .
 Ths.se two ships embarked . an RLT Headquarters, a Marine Air Group Headquarters and tie seatail of a battalion which had already been airlifted to Guantanamo . Two ships were embarked . The ships were accompanied by a battalion that had been flown to Guantanamo.
 At this point, C0MPE31ANT was sailing wast, scuta of the Dominican Republic . At this time, the ship was sailing .
 Events were transpiring so quickly that connrurications had seriously back logged* Even high precedence messages required excessive time for delivery .
 These Marines then joined the battalion that had just been flown in from Camp Pendleton, California . These Marines were then joined by another battalion that was flown in .
 One of PHIBRON 8's ships, DESOTO COUNTY, embarked 92 dependents for return to Norfolk . The DESOTO County was the last ship to leave the shipyard .
 Back at Norfolk, COMPHIBRON 10, with an LPH, two AKA, an LSD and two LST assigned, directed to outload Marines from Norfolk and Morehead city, North Carolina and sail for the Caribbean .
 COMPHIBLANT was in position in the Caribbean on 22 October .
 The SANDOVAL Unit, serving as PHIBRON 2 and providing shipping for still another BLT, was made up and ready to sail when loading ports were clear . The unit is serving the PHIBron 2 and provides shipping for more than a BLT .
 ComPHIBGRU FOUR with Movement Unit ALFA and COMPHIBRON 12 were in position in the Caribbean . COMPHUBGRU GRAPHIC FOUR was in position at the time of the attack .
 Within another 48 hours vitually all PHIBLANT ships would be combat loaded ox enroute to loading ports . Within 48 hours, all PHBANT ships are combat loaded .
 By the morning of 23 October C0MPHI3GRU FOUR and Movement Unit ALFA, following COMPBTBIAHT, had retransited north through the Mona Passage .
 The major portion of the Amphibious Task Force in the Caribbean would be at a point nearly equi-distast to either the Havana area or Guantanamo Bay . Here they would meet with COMPHIBRON 6 who was enreute from the United States .
 Rear Admiral Dempsey designated as COMPHIBTRAIAKT, Rear Adm. Dempsey, Rear Admiral Dempsey . Admiral Dempsey has been in charge of the Navy since 1994 .
 Admiral Dempsey was made respon3ibile for Amphibious FoTce ships in loading out ports as well as for repairs and reloading in the event a combat situation ensued . Admiral Dempsey made the decision to allow the ships to be able to reload .
 C0MFHI3LANT and COllPHISGRU FOUR conferred, and it was decided to return to Norfolk . It was decided that CC3MHI3IAN2 would return to the Mt. Mt. C0MH3Lant . The crew of the
 McKINIEJ, shift his flag to Little Creek and assign the AGC to CGMPHIBGRr FOUR, as his flagship . McKINieJ, shifted his flag from Little Creek to Little . Creek . Little Creek .
 ComPHIBGRU FOUR effected a rendezvous with COMPHIBRON 8 near San Salvador . Later COMHIB GRUN GRUNGRUNFOUR effected rendezvous . COMPHBRUN FOUR made rendezvous in San Salvador, Mexico .
 On 24 October the staffs of C0MPHI3GRU TWO and CG, XVIII i rbcrae Corps conferred regarding the armored d iris ion lift from Fort Lauder ale . Four older LSI* COMSTS also had representatives present .
 J had directed CINCPAC to embark the 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade from Camp Pendleton, California and sail as soon as ready .
 This step appeared to be another incremental execution of the Contingency Plan . This step appears to be an attempt to execute the plan without executing the plan itself .
 COMPHIBRON 6 and 12 reported to CCMPHIBGRU FCoR cn 24 October . ComPHIBron 6 and COMHIBRON 12 reported .
 In turn CCMPHI3R0N 6 was directed to take his squadron to a point northward of Northeast Providence Channel . In turn the squadron was directed by the U.S. Coast Guard .
 COMPHIBRON 12 was to proceed to the Coastal waters south of Mayport, Florida . The ship was headed to the coastal waters of the state .
 COMPHIBRON 10, cn the BOXER, joined the rsmaindsr cf his grrqp off Onslow Beach on 25 October . The BOXER joined the . rsmainedsr off the . beach on the 25 October.
 On 27 October the squadron commander was ordered to rendezvous his group off Charleston when loading was completed . The squadron commander had been ordered to .
 During the next few days, the Task Groups either continued loading or else were steaming to, or already located in their assigned holding areas .
 Since no contingency plan had been executed, the prospect of a lengthy holding period became increasingly evident . No contingency plan was executed, and a long-term holding period was increasingly apparent .
 Not all of the Amphibious Force ships were playing their role as members of the amphibious Force . In the meantime, not all of them were playing .
 This versatile 1156 class LST remained uncommitted to the Task Force 44 organ* Izatlon until 6 November . The 1156-class LST was uncommitted for the task force 44 .
 She loaded in five porta, offloaded in three ports and steamed a total distance of nearly 5,000 miles . The ship steamed in five ports .
 COMPHIBRON 6 was authorized to institute a leave and liberty program consistent with the safety of his ships and a 48 hour sailing notice . Upon his expected arrival on 1 November, ComPHIBron 6 was . authorized to . institute leave and . liberty program .
 Only those forces assigned to COM* PHIBLANT, CTF 44 operational control were to be activated under TF 128 . Only those . assigned to . COM*PHPHBLANT forces were activated under the TF 128.
 COMPHIBGRU THREE, with the 5th MEB embarked, was now en route to the Panama Canal . The MEB is now enroute to Panama Canal, where it will be bound for the Panama .
 COMPHTBGRU THREE was further instructed to proceed within 24 hours steaming of Guantanamo and, upon arrival, maintain one half of his forces in readiness at sea .
 The ships of the remaining half could be either at San Juan or Roosevelt Roads for upkeep . Marines exercising ashore at Vieques, or, In Jamaican Eominicar .
 The general plan for the holding period was acme what modified later but essential features remained . This general plan of the period remained acme of what later modified later .
 One EL"" at anchor and one 3LT in port for liberty, logistic support and upkeep not t~> exceed one week . One EL" in the vicinity of San Salvador, one EL" at anchor, and one EL "" at anchor .
 When loading out was completed on 31 October, C0MPHI3LANT disestablished COMPHEJlAriT REP at Norfolk but established a REP in May . Groups would be rotated at weekly intervals .
 A PH3IANT REP was later established at Roosevelt Roads for the benefit of PHZ3GRU THREE ships . This measure proved so successful that a PH3INIANT re-opener was established . The PH3Z3INGRU three ships were later established
 At this point a question arose relative to the control of MSTS shipping Involved in the operation . At this time, the operation was under control of the ship .
 The ba3ic operational pattern of the holding operation was new firmly established . The ba23ic operation pattern has been established .
 Groups maintained northsouth locations in the same order of sequence as for movement to the 'objective area* While in the holding area ships conducted exercises to maintain cptimam combat readiness .
 Each group was required to maintain geographical position, material and personnel readiness to arrive at the objective area well within the required reaction time . The operation was carried out under the name of Operation Trident .
 Ships were sailed to Charleston and Maypcrt for replenishment, upkeep and liberty on a rotsticnal basis and as required . Ships were sent to the ports for repairs and liberty .
 This plan midsized AStf, upkeep and replenishment problems, permitted contact between operational commanders, and afforded the uske&p and liberty necessary for material readiness and hi£h msrals .
 The majcr remaining requirement was for a landing area to conduct rer.sarsals and provide the embarked tawwrps with exercise ashore . The remaining requirement is for the landing area for re-sarsal and exercise .
 Some units had new besa embarked two wa&ks and this problem was dally beccming more urgs . The problem is dally dashing to find a solution to the problem .
 This was the first amphibious operation ever conducted with this number of LPH available . The operation was first to be amphibious in the history of amphibious amphibious operations .
 All RED beach surface units were placed under command of COMPHIBRON 8 and all BLUE beach units placed under the command ofCOMPHIBON 12 . As a consequence of this decision all RED beach . surface units have been placed under . command of . COMHIBON 8
 November, all elements of TF 44 except for two LPH were located in the vicinity of the east coast from Virginia to Florida . November, November, was November .
 The ., two LPH, OKINAWA and THETIS BAY, were on station between San Salvador and Northeast Providence Channel . The . ., 2 LPH and OKINawa, were . on station .
 FHIBGRU THREE with nearly 11,000 Marines and Navy personnel of the Sth MEB embarked, commenced transit of the Panama Canal on 5 November . The MEB is based in Panama City, Florida .
 COMHXBLANT requested that COMSECONDFLT and CCMCRUDESLANT afford naval gunfire ships that had not fired within six months, to qualify at Culebra . The request was made on 8 November .
 "This shortage of gunfire support ships, coupled with the numbers that were not qualified, constituted a serious problem. This shortage of support ships and the lack of qualified ships is a major problem," says the U.S. Navy .
 Forces assigned but which had not been chopped were listed with suitable notation to that effect . Forces assigned were listed in appropriate order to be chopped .
 Reed, USN . USN ALFA ONE C0MPHI3R0N EIGHT mt Mckinley 1 AGC CHILTON '""• ROCKBRIDGE 2 APA CAFRKORNUS ALGOL 2 AKA LINDENHALD
 Marks, USN. Marks is one of the boxing world's best boxers . Marks is a former boxer who has a CTE 128 . Marks was born in New York City .
 USN BRAVO TWO COMPHIBRON SIX CAMBRIA 1 APA OGLETHORPE 1 AKA CASA GRANDE 1 LSD WALWORTH COUNTY YORK COUNTY CTE 128.3.1.1 . LSD WALTWORTH County YORK County
 CTE 128.4.8.8 . Crawford, ' COMPHIBRON ONE 2 APA 1 AKA 1 . AKA Page i&q of 17A Pages . Crawford was diagnosed with CTE after suffering from a brain injury .
 PACARIB Movement Element ALFA TWO NOBLE OKANOGAN PT DEFIANCE GUNSTON HALL COOK CTU 128.4.4 . PACarib Movement Element Alfa Two NoBLE OKAnOGAN OKAN OGAN PT DeFIANCE .
 Meyei, USN . USN COMPHIBRON SEVEN RENVILLE 2 APA WASHBURN 1 AKA BELLE GROVE CARTER HALL 2 LSD CTE 128.4.9.9 . He is a member of the USS USS
 "Some of the Reserve Fleet LST might be activated," says Commander Harmon . Harmon, USN. Harmon, U.S. Harmon .
 The ready availability of cargo and certain amphibious type shipping was most critical . "Ready availability" and "ambulanceable type shipping were most critical," the commander says .
 CNO was advised of the possibility that all eleven LST of the Atlantic Reserve Fleet might be needed . In addition to the possibility of the deployment of all 11 LST, CNO also advised that all 11 of the LST might be necessary .
 Developments concerning these LST were followed with great interest at PHIBIANT headquarters . Developments were followed closely by PHIBIant headquarters .
 Additional LST would have molTad . One of the most difficult problems of the Cuban operatione. cf adequate, timely amphibious lift for the Army Armored Division .
 Late in November CINCLANTFLT recommended to CNO that .as many LST As feasible be transferred to class ""A"" selected Reserre status . If it were decided not to activate the .elersn LST for the . Atlantic Fleet .
 Planning conference scheduled for 12 November to reaolve problem of over the beach transport of Army forces in the contingency plan .
 The fundamental problem, however, was not satisfactorily solved be* cause the Army requirements far exceeded the Navy capability* Upon the arrival of POC0N0 at Norfolk on 12 November, COMFBLANT shifted his flag onto the U.S.
 The deployment of the Amphibious Force, remained generally aa previously described. .. . described.
 Two LPH, OKINAWA and THETIS BAT, had returned to Mayport from the vicinity of San Salvador . However, the two LPH had returned .
 COMFHIBLANT authorised COMPHIBGRU FOUR to donduct full scale landing exercise at Onslow on 16 November . COMPHibGRU Four to d conduct full scale land exercise at onslow on November 16 .
 The risk of exceeding reaction time requirements was reduced by careful observation of weather . Restrictions on the quantity of equipment landed in order to ensure rapid back loading .
 One third of PHTBGRU FOUR would proceed to Norfolk with, troops remaining ashore at Camp Lejeune from seven to ten days . It was planned that following the landing* one third of the . troops would remain at Camp . Lejune .
 At 0700, 16 November 1962, the high point of the Amphibi ous Force participation in the Cuban -operation was reached .
 The largest amphibious landing exercise conducted by the Atlantic Fleet in nearly two decades . Rear Admiral Flttard signalled ""Land the Landing Force" to begin the exercise .
 Six Marine BLTs were landed in the assault, four by surface and two by helicopter . The assault was carried out by the Marine Corps .
 All boat waves landed within one minute of schedule and no boats were broached . All boats landed within a minute of scheduled schedule .
 The successful execution and remarkable timing, achieved without a prior rehearsal, attested to the professional skill and combat readiness of the Atlantic Fleet Navy-Marine Corps Amphibious Team .
 Marine units designated to remain ashore continued the exercise . The remainder of the exercise was backloaded to return to Norfolk, Mayport-^harleston or the holding area .
 Before the Cuban operation ended all embarked Marines and five . increments of the Army's Task Force CHARLIE would be landed in training exercises .
 Indicative of the easing was CINCIANTFLT's authorisation to institute modest leave and liberty programs .
 Although this arejpired a modification to DEFCON THREE, the ability to meet specified resetios times was maintained . Although this is not the case, it is possible to meet reset times at specified times .
 With the lifting of the quarantine operations on 21 November the tempo of operations began to draw rapidly to a conclusion . The quarantine operations were lifted on November 21, 2014 .
 In addition COMPHIBGRU TWO was directed to inspect four chartered commercial LST that had been contracted for . The LSTs were also ordered to be inspected for .
 He was to determine the specific material, personnel and training requirements necessary to make their use feasible . He was tasked with determining the materials and personnel needed to make the project feasible .
 COMSERVLANT was notified that at least two tender/. repair ships were required in the Jamaica-Puerto Rico area .
 Arrangements were made through COMCR'JZSiLANT that the YOSEMITE would remain at Kingston, Jamaica, to provide tender repairs for FHIBGRU THREE ships .
 By 28 November there were stronger Indications of an imminent standdown . Indications that the government is about to stand down were stronger .
 DEFCON FIVE was set in the Atlantic Fleet and Dispersal Ccndition FOUR was ordered in CONUS ports . DEFC ON FIVE and DEFCENT FOUR were ordered . The Atlantic Fleet was set to be deployed in the U.S.
 Shortl y befo re midnight, the uncertainty concerning the stand-down was ended . The uncertainty was ended by midnight .
 C0MPH1BLANT was ordered to load on FHIBGRU THREE ships the maximum number of personnel and equipment . The battalion that had flown from Camp Pendleton, California, to Guantaname.
 A message was received for CGMPHIBIANT to return the II MEF to home station . Immediately thereafter a message was . received for . CGMP HIBIANT .
 On 6 December, TF 128, the greatest assemblage of amphibious power in the Atlantic Fleet in a generation, was dissolved and all ships were reverted to normal operational control .
 Reconnaissance flights over Cuban territory, and Preparation for the defense of GTMO; limited aerial attacks on specif led military targets *a Cuba; and an amphibious assault by the II MEF in joint operations to seize Cuba .
 Aviation units deployed to HAS Key West, NAS Roosevelt Roads and NAS Guantanamo, in preparation for the execution -of OPLAN 312 . Aviation units were deployed to Has Key West and Guantanamo .
 Ground units also were sent to Guantanamo to support the execution of the same plan . Ground units were also sent to the U.S. base in Guantanamo for support of the plan .
 The 2nd Marine Division, together with aviation conanand elements and helicopters, were embarking in preparation for the execution of OPLAN 314/316 . The Marine Division was involved in the operation of the mission .
 Some FMFPAC units augmented by FMFLANT units at Guantanamo . Others were enroute from the Pacific to the Caribbean area .
 The subsequent period until 23 November was spent refining existing plans and conducting exercises of deployed units to maintain proficiency of the troops .
 There were over 40,000 personnel involved in the Cuban crisis . Flest Marine Force was involved in Cuban crisis.
 Prepositioning of ordnance and aviation support equipment was authorized . Pre-positioning was authorized by the U.S. State Department .
 CG FMFIANT was additiarally directed to provide to C0MNAV3ASE GTMO one TP3-15 radar together with technicians to remain until permanent installation of the SPSr40 was completed and operational, this was estimated as net earlier than 1 December 1962
 C3KSiVAT5LaNT and ZZ 7M7LSKT are scheduled to rotate the assignment on a monthly basis . The assignment is scheduled to be rotated by the pair .
 CG FMFIANT recommended that VMA squadrons be based aboard CVA upon execution of the contingency plans . The lack of currently available airfields to support operations in Eastern Cuba was recommended .
 Report one MAG to CKCAFLAKT for planning and to deploy this MAG to Key West and chop to CDICAF1ANT en exesution of this order . Report one . MAG to CDCAFLakT for . planning and . deploying this MAG . Send one MAG
 CG FMFLANT issued a FRAG OSD containing implementing instructions to his forces . The message was issued late on the evening of 20 October .
 The next morning BLT 2/1 from the 5th MEB began to arrive at Guantanamo . The next day the next morning the MEB arrived at Guantanamo Bay .
 The Caribbean ready PHT3R0N 8, with BLT 2/2 embarked, was proceeding to the vicinity of GTMO at best speed . In the meantime, the Caribbean ready is proceeding to GTMO .
 This request was approved and on 27 October tuo YMA squadrons were assigned . Tuo squadrons will be assigned to each other .
 On 21 October a detachment of VMCJ-2 chopped to COMFAIRJAX t» participate in BLUE MOON reconnaissance flights over Cuba . On 21 Oct. VMC-2 was deployed to Cuba for reconnaissance flights .
 The first elements were directed to arrive the night of 21 Cetcber, C0MPHI3IANT . The first element was directed to land BIS 2/2 on the evening of 22 October .
 C0MNAV3ASE GTMO, was directed to evacuate dependents and coxessential personnel . The evacuation of dependents was directed by the U.S. military .
 MAG-14 was ordered to report to CINCAFLANT at Key West and MAG-32 Headquarters was directed to deploy to Roosevelt Roads to assume 0PC3N cf Marine air in that area . MAG-12 was directed by MAG32 Headquarters to deploy .
 After setting .2JEFC0N tweer on 23 October, C3 FMFIA3T was directed to embark the remainder of the 2nd Marine Division a3 shipping became available . The 2nd Marines a3 ship was set to embark in October .
 PHIBRON 8, upon completion of unloading was directed to return to CONUS to embark additional XI tod units . PHIBron 8 returned to the U.S.
 A battery from the 3d IAAM Battalion was ordered to Guantanamo by air to report to the Commanding Officer, MAG-32 . A battery of 3dIAAM Battalion is ordered to arrive at the base .
 COMFHIBIANT proposed on 25 October that provisions be"" made for exercising troops ashore in order to maintain efficiency and readiness posture . The U.S. military said in October that it would exercise troops ashore .
 Mayport, Jacksonville, Savannah and Charleston were recommended by CF FMFLANT . These ports were subsequently used for this purpose . Mayport was the first port to be used for the project .
 Pla nning for embarkation of the II MSF, until 27 October, provided for COMPHTBLANT/CATF and CG, II MEF to embark in the Mt. Mt. Pla .
 24 MarDlv was scheduled to embark in the FRANCIS MARION for command of Landing Group West . COMPHIBGRU FOUR and CG, 4th MEB were embarked in the . FRANCis MARION . COMHIB GRF FOUR was embarked in
 On recommendation of COMPHIBGRU FOUR and CG, 4th MEB, the FRANCIS MARION was deemed inadequate as a cotnnand and control ship for the magnitude of operations planned .
 C3 FH7ZAST recommenced against deploying the entire squadron to prevent an excessivs number of unrevetted and unprotected aircraft being deployed in a vulnerable area .
 The Commanding General &I30 requested and later received OPCON of the 41st Civil Affairs Company to implement the Task Organization of OPLAN 316 . The commanding general requested the task organization be implemented .
 The authorization applies only to forces currently under command of the amphibious force . The authorization applied only to troops under command .
 The requirement for complete air superiority, additional naval gunfire support, was also emphasized . Tthe requirement for air superiority was also discussed .
 Embarkation and deployment of major FMFIANT/II MEF units were completed with the shift of the command post of CG, 2d MARDI7 on 30 October .
 Actions during the following period were directed toward maintaining readiness of deployed forces for a prolonged period, the modification and refinement of the designated plans, and occasional deployment of smaller units .
 CG FMFIANT established 20 December 1962, as the terminal date of the period in which satisfactory readiness could be maintained . After consideration of the posture of II MEF units, and recommendations .
 Individual ships liberty was authorized within the limit of the prescribed reactirn time . Individual ships were allowed to take liberty in accordance with the time limit .
 The other increment was authorized to cenduct . ess-cises on ""iaqujs while maintaining a 36 hour reaction time to ccmplets rsembarkaticri.
 Pages Landing Group, West was authorized to conduct a full scale exercise at Camp Lejeune, followed by separation into three increments . These two increments were scheduled for rotation at 10 days of 17 days .
 The schedule provided fox one increment to conduct maintenance and training la Camp Lejeune, one * increment on liberty in Florida and Carolina ports, and one increment remaining at sea and conducting landing exercises .
 These three increments were scheduled for rotation at seven day intervals . The three increments are scheduled to rotate at seven days intervals .
 It was further recommended that a VMF be deployed from FMFPAC to provide a similar VMF rotation capability . It was also recommended that the VMF should have a similar rotation capability.
 Both requests were disapproved but retained for consideration at a later time . Both requests are disapproved by the council .
 CTNCLANTFLT further directed the II MEP lea* BLT 2/2 and BLT 1/8 to return to hose atationi. The II MEPs are directed to return hose atatationi to hose .
 Commandant of the Marine Corps requested and ' COMPHTBLANT subsequently directed that BLT 1/7 be returned to the West Coast Independently ahead of the 5th MEB to prepare for onward move* ment to the Western Pacific .
 MAG14, T7MA-121, and the Det VMF-235 commenced returning to home bases on 1 December . MAG14 and T7ma-121 were returning to their home bases in December .
 VMF-122 .assumed the 6 plane commitment -at NAS Key West under COMKHESTFOR . Previously provided by Det VMF7235. VMF122 .
 On 6 December, CINCLANTFLT set DEFCON 5 for all Atlantic Fleet Forces at NAVBASE GTMO and in Task Force 135 .
 CINCLANTFLT further directed that a FHXBR0N be sailed to GTMO and Roosevelt Roads to embark BLT '2/2 and MAG-32 less T7MF-115 and return them to home stations by IS December .
 CG, FMFLANT was directed to return by airlift BLT 1/8, the personnel of C Battery, 3d LAAM.Bn, and Hq RLT 6 . CG,FMFLANT returned by airlifted BLT. 1.8 . CG
 On 15 December all FMFLANT/II MEF contingency deployments were terminated and routine readiness measures reestablished . MAG-14 and MAG-32 which have been placed on 48 hour reaction for portions of OPLAN 312 .
 General Lemay approved the plan in principle, and directed General Walter 3.3.5 . The plan was approved by Lemay, who was in charge of the operation .
 COMIAC: "If he should approve the plan, it would receive the full support of the Air Force" Admiral Dennison should approve it .
 The plan was approved, and was adopted by C7NC1ANT as She air es*«uit portion of existing Cuba Contingency Plans .
 CINCAFLANT was to have operational control of all TAG aircraft and those shore-based Navy and Marine aircraft committed to the Cuba Contingency which were not directly related to Guantanamo .
 With approval of the air assault plan, it was necessary to brief all major commanders who had a specific Interest In the plan so that they would know its impact on their mission and forces .
 General Sweeney briefed the Commander, Antilles Defense Command . General Sweeney also briefed the commander of the Antilles defense Command .
 The next day they flew to Guantanamo, and during the briefing there, they were recalled to Washington to meet with the JCS and Secretary Rsbert S McNamara . They met with the Secretary of Defense and Secretary of Homeland Security .
 The Cuban situation had reached its most critical stage — A direct confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Cuban crisis had reached a critical stage .
 The newly discovered ballistic missile sites had altered the purpose of the plan from the original objective of defeating Cuban air to one of the new objective . The new objective was to prevent deStraeSftgs missile attacks on the United States .
 All AFLANT forces were placed on full alert status and placed into their employment bases in Florida . The situation was described as a major security breach .
 The missile sites were immediately targeted as first priority and target materials were rushed by special air courier to the combat units . The missile launch was the first of its kind .
 Conferences held with Army, Navy and Marine planning groups to iaaurs maYlrosa integration -of effort and the fullest exploitation possible of the air assault plan in the event the Invasion *plan should be implemented .
 TA3 aircraft at the Fiwrica employment bases increased vary rapidly . TA3 planes were deployed in the country's capital, Abu Dhabi .
 Continental Air Defense Command Forces were also made available to the direct support of the Cuban operations . Continental Air Defence Forces were made available for the Cuban operation .
 October ZOtlh was established as the target dace when essential elements to support the air assault plan were to be put in place . October ZZtlh established as a target .
 Combat forces were ready and crews were thoroughly briefed on their missions and targets . The U.S. military said it was ready to engage in combat .
 War readiness material such as munitions, fuel and vehicles were in place . More were enroute, and backup depot stocks <oere available .
 144,000 rockets and over 3,700 napalm boobs were positioned in support of the Cuba plans . 144,00 rockets were positioned to support the Cuban plans . The operation was part of a supply operation .
 The fuel required to support the operation was calculated at over one million barrels, and this amount and mare was readily available . The fuel needed is estimated to be over 1 million barrels .
 The total tonnage of supplies and equipment, not including fuel that was moved into the employment bases, was over 18,000 tons . Not including fuel moved into employment bases .
 AFLANT forces were ready to execute the air assault plan on 20 October, to sustain operations, and to move into invasion operations, if required . AFLant forces were able to move to Key West, New Mexico, to maintain operations .
 The target date could not have been met without the full cooperation and willing assistance of all concerned . The targets were met with the cooperation of all parties involved in the project .
 Teampotk and singleness of purpose prevailed between the military services, and full support was received from, the JCS and the Governmental agencies in Washington, DNI .
 The operation was also unstintlngly provided by the Air Force . Within the air force, support was also provided .
 The personnel at the SAC bases* McCoy and Homeatead, rendered every assistance in an outstanding team effort that overcame ail obstacles .
 The remainder of the force was on IStninutc ground alert . Strategic missile forces wore placed on maximum readiness . SAC bombers assisted greatly in the quarantine operations .
 Air Defense Command and Continental Air Defense Forces immediately moved into southern Florida bases to protect the area from air attack . The area was protected by the U.S. Air Force to protect it from air attacks .
 Air Force air defense intercepters in Florida flew more than 2,000 individual fighter patrols . They maintained a 24-hour orbit of several strategic points off Florida . Air Defense Intercipters flew 2,200 individual fighter patrol patrols .
 North American Air Defense Command Forces were on 5 to 15 minute alert . All North American air defense forces were on alert . North America Air Defense Forces are on alert for 5-15 minutes .
 MATS provided airlift support, air-sea rescue forces., and weather service, all essential to the full success of the plan .
 Within 48 hours of notification, MATS airlifted a force of Marines from California to Guantanamo, Cuba . Also, within 48 hours, a force from California was also flown to the U.S.
 MATS aircraft assisted greatly in the airlift of thousands pf personnel and tons of cargo into the southeast United States . MATS planes helped airlift thousands of personnel and cargo .
 The Air Force Logls-. tica Command and the Air Force Comaunicatlcn Service met the 20 October target date . It was largely because of the outstanding efforts of the Logls- tica command and the . Air Force . Logs-. tic Command and Air Force
 In Short, it was full team effort, with air staff providing the guidance and overcoming those obstacles which were beyond the capabilities of the air commands involved . Air staff provided guidance and overcame those obstacles .
 Reserve pai-t^cipation in the Cuba crisis did not begin or sud with this active duty per led. However, reserve pai.t^Cipation in Cuba crisis .
 Reserve fleets airlifted almost two and one-half million pounds more and over 120O passengers into Florida . Hone, over 700,000 pounds of equipment into the Florida employment bases, in addition, during the crisis period, nearly two and 1,500 pounds more .
 Inactive reserve fleets assisted by re-deploying almost 1500 passengers and over one and one-half million pounds of equipment back to the home bases .
 Reserve aircraft recovery and base support units which were not recalled were of great help to the regular units of SAC, TAC, and ADC In deployment and dispersal operations .
 The Air National Guard Forces were not .committed and constituted an immediately ready reserve of seven fighter squadrons .
 Additional Air Guard fighter squadrons were available if the President determined the situation to be serious enough to mobilize those units previously called up for the Berlin crisis .
 Squadrons were available to replace TAC squadrons facing Cuba, or to deploy to the newly threatened area . In the event that a threat developed in some other area, these squadrons were readily available .
 Plans had been developed and distributed to accomplish the rapid mcoilization of both Air Guard and Air Reserve Forces . Plans for the rapid co-ordination of both forces were developed .
 Reserve units were notified of the recall order late on Saturday night of 27 October . 937. of assigned personnel reported by 0900 hours the next morning, the appointed recall hour . As a result, the recall hour was the appointed hour .
 Reserve personnel handled their mobilization tasks tn a smooth and prefessional manner, and with high morale . The reserve personnel handled the mobilization tasks in a smooth manner, according to the report .
 "They deserve great credit for their ability and willingness to respond," says CNN.com chief executive John Defterios .
 Included among the Air Force personnel were 7 Air Liaison Officers, 32 Forward Air Controllers, and 6 combat control teams, all to be airdropped alcr-g with .
 The remaining Air Force personnel were to be airlanded to operate the airfields and handle the airlanding aircraft . The remaining airmen would be airlifted to the airfield to handle the landing aircraft .
 Of the more than 17,000 Army personnel to be introduced on D-Day, 14,500 were paratroopers . That is comparable to what the United States Airborne Forces dropped during the Normandy Invasion in Normandy .
 In summary, the United States Air Force was ready for the Cuban crisis . The soundness of the U.S. Air Force organization was proven .
 The validity of the Unified Command action was demonstrated . All services were able to join together in a well integrated team effort to gain maximum military effectiveness .