 It tells how the secret was shared, sanctioned, and, at times, willfully ignored by the top political and military officials of the United States since the Eisenhower years . It also tells how it was shared and sanctioned by top political, military officials since Eisenhower years.
 Senior U.S. officials being quoted about what they knew and when they knew it . Most of them are being quoted for the first time in this new book . The book includes interviews with senior American officials .
 Israeli officials say U.S. policy on Israel's nuclear arsenal is hypocritical . They say it's hypocritical to pretend that Israel's nukes do not exist . Israeli officials speak out because of hypocrisy, they say .
 Israel subjects all journalists, domestic and foreign, to censorship . Israel subject all journalists to censorship, including foreign journalists . Israel has a history of censorship, censorship and censorship, according to the report .
 Under Israeli rules, all material produced by journalists in Israel must be submitted to military censors . Military censors have the right to make changes and deletions if they perceive a threat to national security .
 Those in the past who have broken the rules have been refused reentry to Israel . Those who do not comply with the rules will not be allowed back into Israel .
 Israelis who talked were not critics of Israel's nuclear capability, nor would they feel secure without the bomb . Those who talked weren't critics of Israeli nuclear capability .
 A full and open discussion of the Israeli nuclear arsenal is essential in a democratic society, the authors say . They spoke because they believe that a full discussion of Israeli nuclear weapons is essential .
 The first KH-11 had been launched on December 19, 1976, after Jimmy Carter's defeat of President Gerald R Ford in the November elections .
 The intensive security system was given a jolt in March 1979, when President Carter decided to provide Israel with KH-11 photographs . President Carter gave Israel the photographs in exchange for Israel's use of military technology .
 The agreement gave Israel access to any satellite intelligence dealing with troop movements or other potentially threatening activities as deep as one hundred miles inside the borders of neighboring Lebanon, Syria, Egypt, Jordan, and Jordan .
 Jimmy Carter's decision to provide that high-tech imagery was suspected by some American intelligence officials as being a reward for Menachem Begin's successful Camp David summit with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat .
 The KH-11 was the most important advance of its time, a former official of the National Security Agency says . Every military and civilian intelligence agency in the government seemed to have an urgent requirement for it, he says .
 The goal of the KH-ll's managers was to carefully plan and ""prioritize"" the satellite's schedule to get it to the right place at the right time, while avoiding any abrupt shifts in its flight path .
 With good management, the multimillion-dollar satellite would be able to stay longer in orbit, provide more intelligence, and be more costefficient . The satellite, with its limited fuel supply, would have to stay in orbit longer .
 Carter's decision to give Israel direct access to the KH-11 disrupted the careful scheduling for the satellite's future use . It also meant that some U.S. intelligence agencies were going to have less access to satellite .
 The key element of the sixty-four-foot-long satellite was a downward-looking mirror in front of the camera that rotated from side to side, like a periscope, enabling the satellite to track a single location as it moved across the atmosphere .
 The result was a stereoscopic image of unusually high quality that could be even further enhanced by computer technology .
 A SECRET AGREEMENT 5 could jeopardize their own access to such information and thus reduce their status as insiders . A secret agreement could also jeopardize the status of insiders, according to the agreement .
 The Israelis viewed the KH-11 agreement as a reaffirmation of respect and support from the Carter administration . Carter administration had abruptly cut back intelligence liaison with Israel and other friendly nations as part of a restructuring of the CIA .
 The Israelis saw the men running the Carter administration as naive and anti-Semitic . The Israelis were accustomed to far warmer treatment by Presidents Richard M Nixon and Gerald R Ford . But the men did not fully understand how entwined Israel's primary foreign intelligence service, Mossad, had become
 The 1979 agreement on the KH-11 was no less than the twenty-eighth in a series of formal Israeli-American cooperative ventures in strategic intelligence since the 1950s .
 Nothing has ever been officially disclosed about these arrangements, many of which were financed off-the-books . The director of central intelligence maintains a special contingency fund personally maintained by him .
 Through the 1960s, one of the most sensitive operations in the Agency was code-named kk mountain . It provided for untold millions in annual cash payments to Mossad . The CIA's internal digraph, or designation, for messages and documents dealing with Israel .
 Mossad authorized its agents to act, in essence, as American surrogates throughout North Africa and in such countries as Kenya, Tanzania, and the Congo . In return, Mossad agents were authorized to act as U.S. surrogates in those countries .
 Other intelligence agreements with Mossad revolved around the most sensitive of Israeli activities in the Middle East . American dollars were being used to finance operations in Syria, and inside the Soviet Union .
 Some of the Soviet activities apparently were financed by regular Agency disbursements . But the complex amalgamation of American financing and Israeli operations remains one of the great secrets of the Cold War .
 The Israelis had responded to Admiral Turner's 1977 cutback 6 THE SAMSON OPTION in liaison . The Israelis responded to the cutback by reducing their flow of intelligence back to Washington .
 The KH-11 agreement in March 1979 was made inevitable not by the success of Camp David but by the failure of the CIA's failure to anticipate the growing Soviet pressure on Afghanistan in 1978 and the continuing upheavations in Iran . In the Israeli view, the agreement was inevitable because of
 Mossad's information was far superior to the CIA's. There were large Jewish communities in both nations . Many shopkeepers in Kabul, Afghanistan's capital, were Jewish .
 Most galling to the President and his top aides was the CIA's embarrassingly inept reporting on Iran . Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, a United States ally of long standing, had been overthrown in February 1979 in a popular uprising .
 CIA had failed the President and forced the U.S. leadership to turn once again to Israeli help in trying to anticipate world events . The CIA failed to anticipate the President's decision to turn to Israel .
 Lubrani was attached to the Israeli delegation that negotiated the March 1979 KH-1 1 agreement in Washington . It was no accident that he was involved in the negotiations . The KH 1 1 agreement was signed in 1979 .
 KH-11 imagery provided to Israel depicts any military activity inside the border of Israel's four neighbors . The imagery carries the highest classification marking in the U.S. intelligence community .
 The photographs, once processed, were to be picked up by Israeli military attaches at a special Pentagon office controlled by the Defense Intelligence Agency . The photographs were then sent to Israel's military attachers .
 Israelis were not to be given any intelligence that could help them plan preemptive strikes on their neighbors . Israel was not given intelligence that helped them plan pre-emptive strikes against neighbors .
 Official says he and his colleagues anticipated from the outset that Israel would do everything possible to get around the restrictions of the agreement . The official added that he and colleagues expected from the start that the Israeli government would try to circumvent the restrictions .
 Israeli arguments were that the limitations should not apply to the joint enemy of the U.S. and Israel — the Soviet Union . One of the immediate Israeli arguments was that the limits should not be applied to the Soviets . The Soviet Union was a joint enemy .
 In the months ahead, there would be constant Israeli pressure for access to satellite intelligence on the Soviet supply lines to Syria and the training of Iraqi combat divisions in western Iraq .
 1979 agreement included language permitting Israel to make specific requests for satellite intelligence . Nonetheless, Israel was once again an essential ally .
 The package was too much for British intelligence officials, who were described as ""mad as hell"" about Israel's being provided with the chance to obtain intelligence that they — World War II allies and fellow members of NATO — could not get .
 There were suspicions that someone in a senior position in British intelligence was funneling vast amounts of technical information to Moscow . U.S. officials learned by the end of the Carter administration that the existence of the KH-11 system were known to the Soviets .
 In the fall of 1982, a former high-level GCHQ employee named Geoffrey A Prime, of Cheltenham, was arrested on sex charges, and he subsequently confessed to spying for the Soviets .
 British newspaper reports that senior British officials had known of Prime's betrayal for two years before the arrest but had not told their American counterparts . Reports: Senior British officials knew of the betrayal for 2 years before arrest but did not tell American counterparts.
 The incident led to inevitable tension between the intelligence services of the two allies . It led to tensions between the two countries .
 The stern American position was more than a little offset by the fact that a junior CIA clerk named William T Kampiles had been sentenced to forty years in jail in 1978 after his conviction for the sale of a top-secret KH-1 1 technical manual to the Soviets .
 Kampiles received $3,000 for the manual, which included no photos of the KH-11 satellite . The manual did not reveal how good the satellite's optics could be .
 Israel did have a secret agenda in its constant maneuvering for KH-11 access, but that agenda only became clear to a few top Reagan administration policymakers in the fall of 1981 . The trial of Kampiles raised a 8 THE SAMSON OPTION .
 President Reagan's national security adviser was sipping iced tea on the sundeck of his suburban Virginia home . Richard V Allen shuffled through a week's worth of unread cables, many of them highly classified . Allen was a national security advisor to Ronald Reagan .
 Israeli nuclear reactor at Osirak, twelve miles southeast of Baghdad, bombed . Israel informed Washington that they had successfully bombed the reactor . White House situation room was staffed around the clock .
 Allen immediately telephoned Reagan, who was spending the weekend at Camp David . Reagan was in the nearby Catoctin Mountains of Maryland . Allen immediately called the president .
 The President, he was told, had just boarded his helicopter for the trip back to the White House . The President was just boarding his helicopter .
 The President took the phone call amid the background thumping of the helicopter blades . The President was in the helicopter as he spoke to reporters .
 At least 16 other KH-11 technical manuals were missing, and there was testimony to the effect that Kampiles — and others, if they wished — were able to leave the premises without any security check .
 Others at the meeting agreed that some sanctions against Israel were essential . Vice President George Bush and Chief of Staff James A Baker III also agreed .
 The President's private acceptance of the raid was not reflected in the administration's public actions . President Obama accepted the raid, but his private acceptance wasn't reflected in his actions .
 Reagan was delighted by the attack on the reactor at Osirak . Allen: Reagan was "very satisfied" with the attack . Allen said Reagan was 'very satisfied' with the result .
 The Israeli bombing triggered worldwide protest . The White House announced the suspension of a scheduled delivery of four more F-i6s . The sale of the F-6s was a continuation of the 1975 sale .
 There was controversy inside Israel, too, over the bombing, which had been debated at the highest levels of the Israeli government since late 1979 . The bombing, in 1979, sparked controversy in Israel .
 Yitzitzhak Hofi, the director of Mossad, and Major General Yehoshua Saguy, the chief of military intelligence, both opposed the attack . No evidence that Iraq was as yet capable of building a bomb, they said .
 After the Israeli strike, the American 10 THE SAMSON OPTION were joined in futile dissent by Yigael Yadin, the deputy prime minister of the Israeli government .
 Saguy argued that the adverse reaction in Washington would be a more serious national security threat to Israel than the Iraqi reactor . Saguy continued to inveigh against the mission .
 Saguy suffered for his dissent; the chief of military intelligence was not told of the mission until June 4, three days before it was scheduled to take place . Saguy was forced to leave the country .
 Saguy renounces any responsibility for the raid and threatens to withhold intelligence . Saguy responded by renouncing any responsibility and renouncing responsibility for raid .
 The attack had been carried out, as planned, in two minutes, and the likelihood of any detection was slight . The likelihood of detection was very slight, the police say .
 Menachem Begin, buoyed by the success, stunned his colleagues on June 8 by unilaterally announcing the Israeli coup . Begin stunned colleagues by announcing the coup, which he declared unilaterally .
 Prime Minister says Israel was ready to strike again, if necessary, to prevent an enemy from developing the atomic bomb . The next day, as Israel was besieged with protests, the prime minister defended the operation . Israel's prime minister vowed that Israel would strike again if necessary .
 Israel bombed only one of two major targets at the site; it had destroyed the reactor as planned but left the nearby reprocessing plant untouched . The Israeli officials knew that Begin's remarks were descripexperts .
 It was in the reprocessing facility that plutonium could be chemically recovered from spent reactor fuel rods . The facility was used to make plutonium from spent fuel rods in the early 1950s .
 I I tive not of the nonexistent underground weapons facility at Osirak, but of one that did exist in Israel . A secret agreement was made with the Israeli government . The agreement was reached in secret .
 Begin also said the Iraqi government had hidden the facility from the IAEA . The IEA had inspected the reactor at Osirak in January 1981, under provisions of the 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty .
 Israeli government spokesmen attempted to recoup the next day by telling newsmen that Begin had misspoken . The underground facility was only four meters, not forty, below the surface . The next day, Begin said the facility had only been four meters underground .
 Begin had visited the underground facility at Dimona at least once since becoming prime minister in 1977 . Israeli officials told me they had been provided in the days before the raid at Osirak with a detailed memorandum about it .
 Begin's public remarks suggested he had simply transferred what he had seen and read about Dimona to Osirak, officials said . Officials suggested that Begin, in his public remarks, had simply . simply transferred . what he . had seen . and read of Dimona, officials suggested .
 Hofi was criticized by Israel's intelligence community . Hofi: "There was no doubt in the Israeli intelligence community about which politician Hofi criticized" Hofi said .
 Israeli intelligence services saw evidence Iraq had begun moving Scud missiles closer to the Iraq-Jordan border . Israel says it saw evidence in the days after the June 7 raid that Iraq had moved some of its Soviet-supplied missiles .
 If the Scuds were to be moved farther west into Jordan, Dimona would be in range of a retaliatory strike by the Iraqis . Dimona is located in Dimona, Jordan, which is located near Jordan .
 Dimona had operated around the clock for eight months a year to produce and reprocess weapons-grade plutonium for nuclear weapons . Unlike the reactor at Osirak, it had not yet begun full-scale operation .
 An Iraqi strike could scatter deadly radioactive contamination for dozens of miles . The Iraqi strike is expected to scatter radioactive contamination around the world .
 Israeli officials had ordered dome-shaped reactor and underground reprocessing plant at Dimona to cease all operations . Both were kept out of service through the end of the year .
 The Israeli Air Force was also instructed to keep intelligence aircraft in the sky on a twenty-four-hour alert . The Israeli air force was told to keep an intelligence aircraft on an alert .
 There is no evidence that Washington saw or understood any of the Israeli defensive actions . Washington did not see or understand any of Israel's actions .
 A few British intelligence officials immediately suspected that Israel had used the high-resolution photography to target Osirak . They complained to their American counterparts about it .
 Ronald Reagan's director of central intelligence had inadvertently played a key role . William J Casey, Reagan's former director of intelligence, was a key figure in the case .
 Casey was an enthusiastic supporter of the imagery-sharing program from the moment he took office . He ordered that the Israeli liaison officers be provided with a private office near CIA headquarters .
 13 gence officers processed the KH-11 imagery to make sure that all essential intelligence was turned over . The goal, apparently, was to give the Israelis direct access to the American .
 Only Israelis, so the reasoning went, would know what was important to Israel . Only Israelis know what is important to the country, the argument said .
 The CIA director authorized a small, ad hoc committee of experts to review the matter . Osirak was confronted with serious questions about Israel's abuse of the agreement .
 In little more than two years, the Israelis had expanded what had been a limited agreement to the point where they were able to extract virtually any photograph they wished from the system .
 Israel requested KH-11 coverage of western Russia, including Moscow . Most surprisingly, the Israelis had requested and received extensive coverage of west Russia . Israel also requested and got coverage of Moscow .
 These included renewed espionage activities inside the Soviet Union, aid for the anti-Communist Solidarity movement in Poland, and economic and military support for Jonas Savimbi's UNITA resistance movement in Angola .
 Casey insisted upon and apparently received Israeli promises of support for what emerged in the early 1980s as one of his near-obsessions — covert aid to the anti-Communist Renamo insurgency in Mozambique . Casey also insisted on Israel's promise to provide covert support for the anti
 Despite the successful visit, Casey was embarrassed and rankled by the fact that his newfound colleagues in Israel had not seen fit to inform him in advance of the planned attack .
 His CIA failed to anticipate the first serious foreign policy crisis in the Reagan administration . His CIA thus had not anticipated the crisis, Reagan's CIA says .
 The freeze led to enormous complications throughout 14 years of the nuclear program . Secretary of defense for policy for policy recalls frustration at knowing that Israel was "edging deeper into the overhead"
 Israeli military officers were permitted to attend Pentagon meetings at which future missions and orbital flight paths for the KH-11 were discussed . A former high-ranking NSA official recalled his anger upon learning early in the Reagan administration that Israeli military officials were allowed to attend meetings .
 This officer depicted the direct access provided to Israel as ""a compromise" The officer said the access to Israel was a "compromise"
 The Israeli officer assigned to the Pentagon was only relaying Israel's intelligence needs to the men in charge of the KH-11 program, an intelligence officer says . The officer said he was relaying Israeli intelligence needs .
 The KH-11 funneled its real-time imagery back to Washington . The Israeli, in return, was allowed to ""stand by" as the plane funneled it back to the Pentagon .
 A State Department official who was involved said he and Secretary Haig viewed the arguments about Israeli access as ""an intelligence community theological debate" The State Department was involved in the debate .
 15 in the Pentagon who informally had provided the expanded access to the Pentagon have been granted expanded access . A secret agreement was reached by 15 people in Washington .
 It was agreed in the White House after the ad hoc review that the photographs could continue to flow to Israel . But with the initial 1979 restrictions emphatically back in force, the restrictions were still in force .
 Allen personally relayed that message in the fall of 1981 to Ariel Sharon . Sharon was the controversial and hard-line Israeli general and war hero who had been named defense minister in August . Allen was the defense minister of the Begin government .
 Israel sought Reagan's approval for pre-positioning of American military forces, joint use of airfields, joint planning for military and political contingencies in the Middle East and Persian Gulf . The United States financing of the receiving station, or downlink, for the KH-11 satellite imagery
 Israeli proposals were viewed as excessive and were much watered down during negotiations over the next few months, to Sharon's dismay . Sharon was dismayed by the watered down proposals .
 Sharon pushed especially hard on the downlink issue, also insisting that the receiving station be ""dedicated"" — meaning that the encoded signals to and from the satellite to downlink could be read only by Israel . Sharon also insisted that the sending station be 'dedicated' - meaning that
 The United States would be in the untenable position of not being able to know what intelligence the Israelis were obtaining from its own satellite system . The U.S. would not be able to tell the Israelis what intelligence they were getting from their own satellites .
 The bombing at Osirak led to no significant changes in the U.S. -Israeli relationship, nor were serious questions raised about Israel's need for so many KH-11 photographs from so many places .
 Despite the brief flap over Israeli access, there were no lessons learned and KH-11 photographs continued to flow to Israel .
 The French had also been the chief suppliers of nuclear materials and expertise to Iraq in return for oil . The French were embarrassed as well as outraged by the Israeli attack .
 Ariel Sharon concluded that the United States was not a reliable strategic ally . Sharon concluded after the cabinet room meeting that the U.S. was not an ally in Israel .
 Israel intercepted intelligence on the Middle East and Soviet Union from the most sensitive agencies in America . Israel had been told it would no longer be able to get such intelligence from the U.S. The agency was controlled by a clandestine Israeli intelligence agency .
 An American Jew working in the U.S. intelligence community volunteered his services to the agency several years earlier . He would soon be put to work spying on his country for Israel .
 No one in Ronald Reagan's White House considered Sharon's request for a KH-11 downlink in Tel Aviv in terms of Israel's nuclear ambitions . It's almost certain that no one in Reagan administration considered the request .
 Israel was itself a nuclear power that was targeting the Soviet Union with its warheads and missiles . The Israeli government was itself itself targeting the USSR with its nuclear weapons .
 Bergmann was a brilliant organic chemist and director of the chemistry division at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel's preeminent research facility . Bergmann came to prominence after Israel's successful War of Independence in 1948 — the first Arab-Israeli War .
 He was chairman of Israel's Atomic Energy Commission, set up in 1952 . He was outspoken advocate of nuclear research for peaceful purposes .
 Bergmann was a picture of charm and wit at international conferences on nuclear science . Cigarette constantly in hand, he said .
 By 1947, Bergmann was telling friends that the large phosphate fields in the Negev desert contained meager, but recoverable, traces of natural uranium . Bergmann: "By 1947, the phosphate fields had been found in phosphate fields"
 Within two years, a department of isotope research was established at the Weizmann Institute . Young Israeli scientists were being sent abroad to study new fields of nuclear energy and nuclear chemistry .
 A joint research program also was begun with the nascent French Atomic Energy Commission . Joint research program was also begun in France .
 He announced — two years after the fact — that an Israeli Atomic Energy Commission had been established . He announced two years later that he had established an Israeli atomic energy commission .
 The next year Israel signed an agreement with the United States, under the Eisenhower administration's Atoms for Peace program, for cooperation in civilian uses of atomic energy . Israel signed a deal with the U.S. under the program .
 Washington helped finance and fuel a small nuclear reactor for research at Nahal Soreq, south of Tel Aviv . The reactor is located in Nahal, Israel, and is located near Tel Aviv, Israel's capital .
 The agreement called for inspection rights to the small reactor under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 . The agreement provided for an Israeli guarantee that the nuclear materials would not be diverted to weapons research .
 David Ben-Gurion bragged to visitors that Israel would build its own atomic reactor . Israel would use natural uranium and locally manufactured heavy water in its own nuclear reactor .
 Nuclear energy, Ben-Gurion promised, would soon be producing the electricity and creating the desalinated water needed to make the Negev desert bloom . Nuclear energy will soon be produced, he said .
 Bergmann's dream of nuclear power plants was sincere, but it also amounted to a totally effective cover for his drive to develop the bomb . Bergmann was sincere but it was also effective cover to develop nuclear weapons .
 Ben-Gurion was the man in charge of all of this, with the aid of his brilliant young protege Shimon Peres . Peres was thirty years old when Ben Gurion appointed him director general of the ministry of defense in late 1953 .
 Bergmann's Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, as the public was not told in the radio address, was under the direct jurisdiction of Peres and the defense ministry .
 Nuclear power was not Ben-Gurion's first priority, he says . The desert would glow before it bloomed, he writes .
 The bomb would have to be privately financed by wealthy American and European Jews who shared their dream of an ultimate deterrent for Israel . These three men would find an international ally to help create the bomb and, equally important, would accept from the beginning that .
 Israel's nuclear ambitions in the early 1950s were not foreseen in Cold War Washington . Israel's atomic ambitions were not seen in the U.S. in the 1950s .
 Egypt's corrupt King Farouk was overthrown in a coup in 1952 . Gamal Abdel Nasser emerged in 1954 as premier . Egypt's radical new leader, Gamal Nasser, emerged as premier in 1954 .
 British troops, after a stay of more than seventy years in Egypt, were on their way out of North Africa . British troops were stationed in Egypt for more than 70 years .
 By 1955 the French government was facing insurrection from three former colonies, Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria . The French government faced insurrection from former colonies Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia .
 Morocco and Tunisia would gain their independence by 1956, but Algeria's opposition National Liberation Front was strongly supported by Nasser . Nasser became the main event for Algeria, whose opposition was supported by the opposition .
 The bloody war, with its 250,000 dead, came close to destroying France over the next five years . It provided inspiration to Arab revolutionaries throughout the Mideast .
 Nasser, with his talk of Pan-Arabism, also rattled the Israelis, who instinctively turned to the U.S. Nasser also rattled them, who turned to Israel .
 Ben-Gurion had tried for years to join in a regional security pact with Washington . The Israeli leader had no success with the U.S. with no success .
 Ben-Gurion offered to send Israeli troops to fight alongside the U.N. forces in South Korea . The Israeli prime minister's offer was rejected by the United Nations .
 Israel's position on the Korean War enraged Moscow and led to a rupture in diplomatic relations . The United States, England, and France had agreed in their 1950 Tripartite Agreement that all three nations would maintain the status quo in the Middle East by not providing any significant quantity of military equipment
 Eisenhower administration came into office in 1953 with no intention of changing the policy . Eisenhower administration had no intentions of changing policy .
 Israel tried, nonetheless, to establish some kind of a special relationship with President Eisenhower, with no luck . Israel tried to establish an informal relationship with the president, but it never happened .
 In the mid-1950s, a year-long series of renewed talks on a mutual security treaty with Washington went nowhere . In the 1950s, the U.S. and South Korea had renewed talks .
 Ben-Gurion considered offering Eisenhower U.S. bases in Israel in return for a security commitment . At one point, he told his biographer, Michael Bar-Zohar, he considered offering the bases in exchange for security .
 Eisenhower essentially maintained an embargo on arms sales to Israel throughout the eight years of his presidency . There were equally unsuccessful strategems to purchase fighter planes and other weapons .
 The effect was to limit U.S. influence in the Middle East and deny Washington a chance to have an impact on Israeli foreign policy, the author says .
 The policy suited the men around Eisenhower, many of them Wall Street lawyers . They thought that U.S. oil supply would be jeopardized by arms trafficking with Israel .
 Ben-Gurion's private nightmare in these years was of a second Holocaust, this time at the hands of the Arabs, aides knew . The Israeli prime minister's nightmare in the years was that a second Jewish Holocaust would be at hands of Arabs . Ben Gurion's nightmare was of
 Ben-Gurion repeatedly warned that Israel's only security would come through self-defense and self-reliance . The Israeli prime minister said Israel's security would depend on self-defence and self reliance .
 Ben-Gurion believed that he understood Arab character and was persuaded that as long as Arabs thought they could destroy the Jewish state, there would be no peace and no recognition of Israel . He was persuaded by the Israeli prime minister that there would not be peace with the Arab world .
 Survivors of the Holocaust came to believe in ein brera, or ""no alternative,"" the doctrine that Israel was surrounded by implacable enemies and therefore had no choice but to strike out . Many Israelis believed in 'no alternative' doctrine: Israel surrounded by enemies and had no
 For these Israelis, a nuclear arsenal was essential to the survival of the state . Israel's nuclear arsenal is essential to its survival, says Israel's former president .
 In public speeches throughout the 1950s, BenGurion repeatedly linked Israel's security to its progress in science . In the 1960s, he said that science was vital to Israel's future .
 Ben-Gurion, Shimon Peres, and Ernst Bergmann believed that Israel's independent arsenal finally could provide what President Eisenhower would not . President Eisenhower refused to give Israel the nuclear umbrella .
 The Israelis in charge of those posts knew Bergmann to be the most uncompromising and effective advocate for nuclear weapons . He was most directly responsible — along with the French — for Israel's status by the end of the 1960s as a nuclear-weapons state .
 Bergmann and the French got it done in the Negev desert, just as Oppenheimer kept the Manhattan Project undiscovered in the desert at Los Alamos .
 He was on the fringe of a circle of eminent scientists, including Ernest Rutherford in England and Marie Curie of France, who were the cutting edge of what would become an international race to unravel the mystery of nuclear fission .
 As a nuclear physicist, Hans Mark had 24 THE SAMSON OPTION books and more than five hundred papers on polymer science . Hans Mark published twenty books and over five hundred scientific papers .
 While in Berlin, Bergmann and Mark worked together and published joint papers on the chemical structure of rubber, paint, and adhesives . Mark and Bergmann worked together in Berlin .
 Bergmann's father was one of the most eminent rabbis in Berlin . He was a close friend of Chaim Weizmann, the RussianJewish biochemist and Zionist then living in England .
 Little is known of Bergmann's defense work for the British before the war . It is in those years that he first became involved with the defense of Palestine . Bergmann became involved in the defense efforts of Palestine during the Second World War .
 The Hagannah, the military arm of the Zionist movement in Palestine, asked Weizmann in 1936 for a chemist to help produce an effective high explosive for use in the underground war against the Arabs and the British .
 Dynamite was far too dangerous to handle in the climate of the Middle East . Dynamite is not the first time it has been used in the Middle Eastern region .
 Weizmann assigned the mission to Bergmann, who got it done and then signed on as a member of the Hagannah's technical committee . Bergmann was assigned to work on the mission .
 In 1939, Bergmann traveled to Paris on behalf of the Hagannah . He shared his findings with the French, whose army was then operating in North Africa, a biography says .
 Bergmann left England shortly after Germany invaded Poland in the fall of 1939 . Bergmann was in Poland when it invaded Poland .
 Weizmann worked for twelve years for the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in California, one of America's main nuclear weapons facilities . He had worked for 12 years beginning in 1955 for the laboratory .
 For four years he served as a division leader in experimental physics . For four of those years, he was division leader of experimental physics. He served as division leader for four years .
 Mark had been driven out of Europe in 1938 and ended up doing research for a Canadian paper company in Ontario . Mark was driven from Europe to work for a paper company .
 By 1940 he was running a laboratory at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn . Two years later he became dean of faculty and turned the institute into a haven for Jewish refugees .
 Oppenheimer and his colleagues in the Manhattan Project were being wooed by Weizmann as early as 1947 . Weizman wooed them to spend time doing research in Israel, and they were repeatedly asked to do research there . Oppenheim and von Neumann's colleagues in
 He also took a military flight with Bergmann and Shimon Peres to visit Elat at the southern reach of the Negev .
 Israeli officials who worked in 1958 at Dimona recall no visit by Oppenheimer . Dimona, then in the early stages of construction, was built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Weizmann had been instrumental in the 1930s in setting up Palestine's first research facility, the Daniel Sieff Institute . He had set up the institute in Palestine .
 According to Shimon Peres, Weizmann approached Albert Einstein, then teaching at Princeton, and asked him to recommend one of his students to run the institute . Einstein was a teacher at Princeton and was teaching at the time .
 Einstein suggested Bergmann, who didn't get the job for reasons not known . Einstein instead suggested Bergman, who died in 1945 .
 Inorganic chemistry was directed by Aharon Katchalsky, later Katzir . Aharon was a specialist in the electrolytic properties of chain molecules . He was a pioneer researcher in the related field of musclepowered robotics .
 Bergmann established the nation's first institute for defense research under Shimon Peres . Bergmann moved to the ministry of defense after Ben-Gurion's request .
 Even in 1948, Bergmann was constantly speaking about a missile capability for Israel, says Peres . More than forty years later, Peres would tell an Israeli newspaper reporter that Bergmann would tell a reporter .
 Mark became a constant commuter between Brooklyn and Israel after World War II . He served on planning boards and as a scientific adviser to the fledgling Weizmann Institute .
 Bergmann's interview was as close as he ever came to publicly discussing the bomb . Bergmann died at the age of 92 . He was the last person to publicly discuss the bomb in a public interview .
 Bergmann couldn't resist sharing what he knew when he was alive . Bergmann's career spanned more than 30 years .
 He would operate at the highest levels between Washington and Jerusalem for the next two decades . He would be at the top level of diplomatic relations between Israel and the U.S.
 Israel's needs in the late 1940s and early 1950s coincided perfectly with France's. France's needs for Israel in the 1950s and '60s coincided with that of France's need for Israel . Israel's need in the '50s and 60s was met by France's
 Both nations were far from having any technical capacity to build a bomb, nor was there any internal consensus that a bomb was desirable . Both nations had no technical capacity for a bomb .
 Ben-Gurion, Peres, and Bergmann would spend much of their careers engaged in a bitter fight inside the Israeli government over their dreams of a nuclear weapons program .
 In 1950, he was the first to sign the Stockholm Appeal, a Soviet-backed petition calling for a ban on 28 THE SAMSON OPTION all nuclear weapons . He was also the first person to sign a petition against the use of nuclear weapons in 1950 .
 French scientists had been excluded from a major role in the American and British bomb programs of World War II . Joliot-Curie's politics kept France isolated from the bomb programs .
 Joliot-Curie was dismissed after signing the Stockholm Appeal . He was replaced by Pierre Guillaumat, who had served during the war with the French secret intelligence service .
 The French plowed ahead with no help from the United States, which viewed France's Atomic Energy Commission as being riddled with Soviet agents . The U.S. viewed the French Commission as a Soviet agent .
 A socialist who fled to England in 1940 at the fall of France, he became friendly with Bergmann . He traveled to Tel Aviv in 1949 and traveled to Israel in 1949 . How the two men met is not known .
 Some Israeli scientists were permitted to attend Saclay, the newly set up French national atomic research center near Versailles, and participate in the construction of Saclay's small experimental reactor .
 It was a learning experience for the nuclear scientists of both countries . It was the first time the two countries had a nuclear deal .
 Israel would decide exactly what sort of collaboration to seek and what kind of contribution could be made in a joint endeavor, considering Israel's capacities and resources . Then we would decide what sort to seek, considering the country's capacity and resources, the minister says .
 France authorized the construction of a natural uranium-fueled reactor capable of producing, after chemical reprocessing, about twenty-two pounds of weapons-grade plutonium a year . A critical decision for France, and thus Israel, came in 1951 .
 The chain reaction would be moderated by graphite, a technique used by the U.S. and the Soviet Union in their huge plutonium reactors .
 Surveyors had found large deposits of natural uranium a few years earlier near Limoges, in central France . The discovery made it easy for Guillaumat to discard an alternative method for powering the reactor .
 French technicians did not yet know how to enrich natural uranium . Enriched fuel, if available at all, would have to be imported, says French technician .
 France needs to rely on foreign suppliers to achieve its atomic independence . But relying on international suppliers would rob France of any chance of achieving its goal .
 The decision to produce weapons-grade plutonium would irrevocably propel France down the road to a nuclear bomb . But the French public and its military leaders did not know, Guillaumat, Perrin, and the Israelis had to know .
 Construction began the next year at Marcoule, in the southern Rhone Valley, in southern France .
 Saint-Gobain Techniques Nouvelles was granted a contract to build a chemical reprocessing plant on the grounds at Marcoule .
 The natural uranium, once burned, or irradiated, in the reactor, breaks down into uranium, plutonium, and highly toxic wastes . Once burned, the natural uranium is burned, it breaks into uranium and plutonium .
 The irradiated fuel needs to be transported, cooled, and then treated before the plutonium can be separated and purified . The plutonium can then be purified and separated .
 These steps can be accomplished only by remote control and in a specially built facility — the reprocessing plant — containing elaborate and very expensive physical protection for the work force .
 There was renewed controversy inside Israel over the constantly expanding Israeli presence in France, but Ben-Gurion held firm . The Israeli ambassador to France was assassinated in 1968 .
 Ben-Gurion: 'Don't listen to Shimon; he and Bergmann are spinning tales. There were people who told him to listen to him' Shimon: "There were people ... who went to Ben Gurion and told him, don't listen"
 Israeli scientists were the only foreigners allowed access to the secret French nuclear complex at Marcoule . They were only allowed access throughout the secret complex .
 One obvious reason for the carte blanche was the sheer brilliance of the Israeli scientists and their expertise, even then, in computer technology . Even then, even though then-Israeli scientists were experts, they still had expertise .
 The French would remain dependent for the next decade on Israeli computer skills . The first French nuclear test took place in i960 — the first took place on i960 .
 Many of France's leading nuclear scientists were Jewish and strong supporters of the new Jewish state, which was emerging — to the delight of these men — as France's closest ally in the Mideast .
 No Frenchman had stronger emotional ties to Israel than Bertrand Goldschmidt, a nuclear chemist who had served during World War II with the U.S. in Israel . French scientists were permitted to work directly with the Americans doing nuclear research .
 He had become an expert in the chemistry of plutonium and plutonium extraction . He was an expert on the chemistry, extraction of plutonium, and plutonium .
 He also had helped build an experimental reactor fueled with natural uranium and moderated by heavy water .
 As a first-rate chemist, he had been offered a chance to stay in the U.S. bomb program after the war . He chose to return to France and join its Atomic Energy Commission .
 After intense negotiations, American security officials permitted him to do so, but refused to release him from his wartime pledge of secrecy . After intense talks, he was allowed to leave the country, but was not released .
 "That was a reasonable compromise"" — and one that was quickly disregarded," she says . "I'm not sure what happened," she adds .
 Goldschmidt was a Jew whose family had suffered, as had most Jewish families in Europe, during the war . His family suffered as did most of Europe's Jewish families during the conflict .
 His wife was a member of the eminent Rothschild banking family, whose contributions to Israel and Jewish causes were measured in the tens of millions of dollars . His ties to Israel were heightened by marriage .
 Goldschmidt and his wife had made the pilgrimage to Israel in the early 1950s . They were taken by Ernst Bergmann for a memorable meeting with Ben-Gurion at his home in the Negev .
 He also was among the few outsiders permitted to visit the completed reactor at Dimona in the 1960s . Dimona was a classic example of illicit proliferation .
 Having a nuclear weapon was considered a good thing in the fifties and sixties, he said . The important fact to understand, he added, with some discomfort, is that having a nuclear bomb was considered to be congratulated for .
 The Weizmann Institute developed the improved ion exchange mechanism for producing heavy water and a more efficient method for mining uranium .
 Bergmann himself came to France to negotiate the sale with Pierre Guillaumat . Goldschmidt recalled that Bergmann came to discuss the sale of the mines .
 The procedure did produce heavy water far more easily and much more cheaply than other methods, as advertised, but also much more slowly . The procedure produced heavy water much more easily than others .
 Israel would remain on a cash-and-carry basis with the French in its nuclear dealings . The deal would see Israel remain on the cash and carry basis with France in its dealings .
 He believed he could revive that spirit and set an example by resettling in the desert with his wife . He said he wanted to set example and set example by moving to the desert .
 Ben-Gurion would be replaced by not one but two people, for he decreed that his jointly held positions of prime minister and defense minister be separated . The two men would be the prime minister of Israel and defense .
 No two men could have differed more in their approach to the Arab question than those of George W. Bush and Barack Obama .
 Sharett, who had lived in an Arab village as a child, believed that peace with the Arab world was possible, but only through military restraint and with the possible intervention of the U.N. Sharett . Sharett lived in a village and spoke Arabic .
 As prime minister, he would begin secret peace negotiations with Nasser . He would be prime minister of the Arab Arab state .
 Ben-Gurion designated Pinhas Lavon, more hard-line than Sharett on Arab question, as new defense minister . Sharett was more moderate on the Arab question than Ben Gurion's predecessor .
 His goal was to ensure that Sharett's views would not go unchallenged . His goal, obviously, is to ensure his views are not allowed to be unchrenged .
 Ben-Gurion arranged for another hard-liner, Moshe Dayan, to become the new army chief of staff . Dayan was the first hard-liners to become Israel's army chief-of-staff .
 Ben-Gurion's concerns about Sharett did not extend to the nuclear question . Sharett was the prime minister of Israel during the early 1950s .
 Sharett shared the 34 THE SAMSON OPTION Old Man's ambition for the ""Enterprise,"" without sharing BenGurion's confidence in Bergmann . Sharett's personal diaries — yet unpublished in full in English — make clear, as well as his voluminous personal
 Sharett wrote off Bergmann ""as a chemist sunk in research and teaching with no ability to oversee the 'problem' "" — one of many synonyms for the bomb . Bergmann was a chemist "sink in research and teaching"
 Dayan and Peres sought to stifle Sharett's dovish policies and secret talks with Egyptians . How to handle the Arab question was the dominant issue, however, and over the next year .
 Scandal broke in mid-1954 when Egyptian authorities announced the arrest of an Israeli spy ring that had bombed and sabotaged American, British, and Egyptian targets earlier in the year in what became known as the Lavon Affair . The spy ring was arrested in Egypt in 1954 and
 The goal of the bombings had been to derail pending British and American negotiations with the Nasser government . Egypt was to remain isolated from the Western powers .
 Sharett accepted Lavon's resignation in January 1955 . An internal investigation was unable to determine who had given the order for the sabotage activities .
 Ben-Gurion was recalled from retirement from retirement to replace Lavon as defense minister . He was recalled a few days after Lavon was recalled to replace him .
 The Old Man's immediate public mission was to restore the army's morale and the citizens' confidence in the government . He was in charge of the army and the people's confidence in government .
 He entered office, however, more convinced than ever that a policy of military reprisal was essential . Any interference with defense planning, he warned Sharett in writing, would force him to resign .
 Sharett, in his diaries, made it clear that he was convinced that Dayan was involved in both the original unauthorized operations inside Egypt and the subsequent attempt to shift the blame to Lavon . Sharett's diaries reveal that he believed Dayan had been involved in the original
 Dayan's involvement raises the possibility that Ben-Gurion had personal knowledge of the operation and, in fact, had approved it . Any involvement of Dayan, of course, inevitably raises the . possibility that .
 Ben-Gurion responded to a cross-border attack by Palestinian guerrillas, or fedayeen, by authorizing a large-scale retaliation against an Egyptian military camp at Gaza . On February 28, 1955, after taking office, he authorized a large scale retaliation against a military camp
 The Israeli attack, which killed thirty-six Egyptians and Palestinians, was led by Lieutenant Colonel Ariel Sharon, whose reputation for skill and brutality already was well established .
 The Gaza attack escalated what had been a series of skirmishes into something close to guerrilla war . Arab casualties were four times greater than Sharett had been told to expect .
 The raid ended the secret contacts between Sharett and Nasser . It resulted in Egyptian decision to step up its fedayeen attacks from Gaza . The raid also resulted in Egypt stepping up its attacks .
 Nasser responded to the increased tension by turning to the Communist world for military aid . Nasser turned to the communist world for help .
 Egypt received a promise from Chou En-lai, the Chinese premier, for arms as many arms as Egypt could afford . He traveled in April 1955 to the Bandung Conference of African and Asian nations .
 The first temple and Jewish state, as every Israeli schoolchild knows, was destroyed in 537c by the Babylonians . In late 1954, the coalition government led by Pierre MendesFrance, one of fourteen coalitions that held office during the chaotic Fourth Republic, had granted authority for
 The second temple was destroyed by the Romans ind., although Jews continued to live in the area through the centuries .
 Modern Zionist resettlement of Palestine began in the 1880s . Jews had become a political force in Palestine by 1917, when Britain pledged to establish in Palestine ""a national home for the Jewish people" with safeguards for the other inhabitants .
 Senior officials of the ministry of defense thus were brought into nuclear planning for the first time . Senior officials from the defense were brought in by the government .
 Many French military men had been skeptical of an independent nuclear deterrent . That attitude was changed by France's disastrous defeat at the hands of Ho Chi Minh at Dienbienphu, North Vietnam, in 1954 .
 France could not depend on its NATO allies to protect purely French interests, it was clear to many Frenchmen that France couldn't depend on them to protect its own interests .
 The casbahs and deserts of Algeria were turning into a killing field . This was especially true in Algeria, where the bloody revolution and French repression were turning the casbahahs and desert deserts into killing fields .
 In January 1955, the French government fell again and a new socialist government headed by Guy Mollet assumed power . In January 1956, the government was overthrown and replaced by a socialist government .
 Mollet took a much harder line on the war in Algeria and those Arab leaders, such as Nasser, who supported the revolutionaries, in Algeria . Mollet also took a hard line on Algeria's war against the Arab Spring, and Nasser's support for the revolution .
 Israel was now widely seen as one of France's most dependable allies . Israel had been intensively waging guerrilla war against Egypt .
 Mollet agreed later in the year to begin secretly selling high-performance French bombers to Israel . The sales, arranged by Shimon Peres, were from one defense ministry to another, with no diplomatic niceties .
 Arms continued to flow from France to Israel for the next twelve years . Arms flow continued from France and Israel to Israel from France .
 Israel agreed to begin sharing intelligence on the Middle East, the U.S. and Europe with the French . In return, Israel also agreed to share intelligence with France in return .
 Israeli intelligence networks in North Africa were particularly good, former Israeli officials recalled . Jews there tended to live and work as merchants and businessmen in the Arab quarters .
 Of special significance were the more than 100,000 Jews in Algeria, many of them trapped by the violence and irrationality of both sides . Many of Algeria's Jews were trapped by both sides of conflict .
 Jews were encouraged by the Israeli government to provide intelligence on the leadership of the National Liberation Front . Those Jews were also encouraged to cooperate with the French .
 The Israelis understood that no plutonium weapon could be made without a reprocessing plant, and they also understood that the construction of the plant would be impossible without a French commitment .
 French Atomic Energy Commission was scheduled to begin construction in mid-1955 on its own chemical reprocessing plant at Marcoule . Israeli scientists had been involved at every step along the way .
 Having the French say yes could, ironically, trigger a crisis inside the top ranks of the Israeli government . Israel's foreign policy has been criticized by some in the past for its policies .
 A French commitment would force Peres and Bergmann to inform the cabinet that Israel was going to build a secret nuclear complex . Peres would have to tell the cabinet of Israel's plans to build the complex .
 Levi Eshkol, the finance minister, shared Ben-Gurion's belief in ein brera, but also was convinced that a nuclear-armed Israel would be financial madness . Eshol: "A nuclear-army Israel is financial madness. It's financial madness
 Eshkol would hold on to that view after becoming prime minister in 1963 . He would hold that view when he became prime minister .
 The Canadian government announced it had agreed to build a heavy-water research reactor for the Indian government . The reactor will be built in India .
 The Canadian offer included no provision for international inspections, since no international agreement on nuclear safeguards had yet been promulgated . The Canadian government's offer was rejected by the UN .
 BenGurion once again served as both defense minister and prime minister . In late 1955, a new Israeli government was formed with Bengurion serving as prime minister and defense minister .
 Israel's Mapai plurality in the Knesset eroded in the summer of 2008 . Moshe Sharett. Sharett says Mapai was a party that had a plurality of votes in the Israeli parliament . Sharett: "Mapai is a party to the left"
 There would be no American security agreement with Israel . A few months later, the long-standing direct talks between Jerusalem and Washington also collapsed .
 On June 10, Ben-Gurion authorized General Moshe Dayan to open secret negotiations with Paris on a joint war against Egypt . On that day, Dayan opened secret talks with Paris, Israel, to prepare for war .
 In July, Nasser, as expected, nationalized the Suez Canal, bringing the outraged British government into the secret planning for war . Nasser's nationalization of the canal was expected to bring the British government in the planning .
 Shimon Peres was shuttling between Paris and Tel Aviv on behalf of BenGurion . The line between public policy and personal diplomacy was eroding daily, to the muffled protests of many inside each government .
 Mapai is the most centrist and pragmatic faction of Israel's socialist-Zionist movement . Within the labor movement there were three main parties, the dominant one was Mapai . Mapai was the dominant party in Israel .
 Achdut Avodah, the Unity of Labor, was domestically more socialistic than Mapai . Mapai was more hawkish and nationalistic in foreign policy .
 The General Zionists, conservative on economic matters and moderate on defense and military issues, lost seats . They are considered moderate on military and economic matters .
 The most hawkish political factions in the mid-1950s were the group led by Moshe Dayan and Shimon Peres . Mapai, Achdut Avodah and Herut led by Yisrael Galili and former 1948 War of Independence hero Yigal All
 Ben-Gurion, Dayan, Peres, and Galili were hawks of Realpolitik considerations . They believed in force as a necessary ingredient of international relations . Ben Gurion and Dayan believed force was necessary for international relations.
 Moshe Sharett quietly resigned as foreign minister that summer . Sharett's resignation was one of the most dramatic changes in French history .
 The Israeli public would not learn of the deep divisions at the top of its government until the publication of Sharett's personal diaries in 1980 . Sharett would not be the first Israeli government leader to publish his diaries .
 Sharett's replacement was Golda Meir, the minister of labor, whose main qualification, Ben-Gurion would later acknowledge, was her ignorance of international affairs . Sharett was replaced by Meir herself, who was later admitted to having no knowledge of international matters .
 Meir endorsed Ben-Gurion's argument for preventive war; nonetheless, her ministry would be repeatedly bypassed . Meir would be bypassed by Peres, Dayan, and Bergmann as Israel broadened its involvement .
 Ben-Gurion formally sought French help for the Israeli bomb in mid-September . Suez War against Egypt was six weeks away and with no international protest over the Canadian reactor sale .
 Israeli nuclear scientists working at Saclay had been involved since 1949 in planning and constructing the French experimental reactor, known as EL 2 . EL 2 was powered by natural uranium and moderated by heavy water . The reactor is now in operation in France .
 Uranium was indigenous to Israel, and there was some heavy water available locally in Israel . Heavy water, if needed, as seemed likely, could be supplied by the French or illicitly purchased from Norway or the United States .
 Ben-Gurion already had picked out a location for the Israeli reactor . The reactor would be located in an old abandoned winery at Rishon LeZion .
 They said when the Americans will realize we have a nuclear capacity, they will give us the guarantee of survival . They said that when the U.S. will realize that they will . realize they have a . nuclear capacity they said that . will give them the guarantee .
 Bergmann and Peres had dinner with Francis Perrin and Pierre Guillaumat at the home 40 THE SAMSON OPTION of Jacob Tzur, the Israeli ambassador to France . Four days later, on September 17, on Sept. 17, they had dinner in Paris .
 There is no written record of the meetings, and it is impossible to determine what happened when . There is also no record of when the meetings took place .
 Israel sought French help for the bomb at least six weeks before the shooting started in the Suez War . What is clear, nonetheless, is that Israel sought help from the French six weeks earlier .
 Israelis viewed the conduct of their partners in the Suez War as a betrayal . Many Israelis viewed their partners' conduct of the war as betrayal . The Suez war was fought in the 1950s and '60s .
 Israel's immediate tactical goal in the war was to destroy the Egyptian Army and its ability to support and train the growing Palestinian fedayeen movement . The Egyptian Army is believed to be supporting and training the Palestinian movement .
 Keeping the Arab world in disarray has always been a focal point of Israeli strategy . Nasser, with his calls for Pan-Arabism, was a serious national security threat, Israeli eyes said .
 The Israelis believed that a humiliating Egyptian defeat in the Suez War inevitably would lead to Nasser's overthrow . The Israelis also believed that Nasser would be overthrown .
 The battle plan called for Israel to initiate the attack on October 29, sending paratroopers into the Sinai and destroying the ability of Egypt to operate from Gaza . The attack would destroy Egypt's ability to operate in Gaza .
 France and Britain would then demand that both sides halt hostilities and withdraw ten miles from the Suez Canal, creating a buffer zone . Britain and France would then want both sides to withdraw from Suez .
 France and England would launch bombing and airborne assaults on November 6 to neutralize and occupy the canal . The Egyptians, who owned the canal, refused to do so . When the Egyptians refused to take part in the attacks, the French bombed and bombed the Egyptian canal .
 Israel stormed through the Egyptian Army and had captured all of the Sinai by November 4 . The Sinai was captured by Israel in 2007 .
 There was nothing, other than a U.N. call for a cease-fire, to stop the Israeli Army from crossing the Suez and taking Cairo .
 Guy Mollet began THE FRENCH CONNECTION 41 urging Anthony Eden, Britain's prime minister, to move up the date of their combined assault, but Eden refused . Eden was made anxious by the fast pace of the Israeli Army and the United Nations ceasefire call .
 The British and French finally landed, as prearranged, on the morning of November 6 at Port Said, only to stop again when the Soviet Union issued what was perceived in Israel to be a nuclear ultimatum .
 Soviet telegram to Ben-Gurion accused Israel of 'criminally and irresponsibly playing with the fate of peace' with its own people . The telegram was sent by the Soviet Union .
 There was also a threat to send troops as ""volunteers"" into the Middle East . There also was a threat .
 Israel, deserted by its two allies, was forced to agree to a cease-fire and the deployment of the U.N. peacekeeping force in the Sinai . Israel was then forced to rely on the United Nations' peacekeeping forces in Sinai .
 The Israelis were disappointed by the French and enraged by Eisenhower . Ben-Gurion had believed Eisenhower would never turn away from supporting Israel in the weeks before the presidential elections .
 There was a widespread belief in Israel and France that the U.S. backed down in the face of the Soviet nuclear threat .
 The Suez War was viewed by Washington not as an anti-Soviet or anti-Communist move, but as a last-ditch attempt by two powers . "You Americans screwed us," one former Israeli government official said, recalling his feelings .
 On November 6, after learning of the French and British cease-fire, Ben-Gurion sent Peres, accompanied by Golda Meir, to Paris . Peres and Meir arrived in Paris on November 6 .
 Mollet fought against the cease-fire but felt he had no choice but to go along . Mollet had fought against Britain's withdrawal, but was forced to accept it . He felt he was 'no choice' but to accept the withdrawal of his troops .
 Mollet was now going to have to persuade Ben-Gurion to accept a U.N. peacekeeping role in the Sinai . Even worse, Mollet had to persuade him to accept the role in Sinai .
 Israel would have to withdraw from the land for which its paratroopers had fought and died . Israel would then have to pull out of the land where its soldiers had died .
 There was no connection between one sentence and England and France — to stanch their continuing international decline . There were no connections between the two countries .
 Eisenhower believed that Nasser and other Third World leaders much preferred alliances with the United States rather than with the Soviets . Nasser was more likely to become pro-American if the administration disassociated itself from the Middle East colonialism of England and France .
 The President was distressed at the two American allies for continuing to practice what he viewed as their colonialistic policies . The President also resented the obvious Israeli belief that he would pander to the American Jewish vote by endorsing the Suez War .
 Eisenhower's realization from the secret U-2 overflights had taken place a few months earlier . Israel had purchased sixty Mystere attack aircraft from the French, not the twenty-four they had publicly announced publicly .
 The existence of U-2 overflights was then the government's biggest national security secret . No public mention was made of the larger-thanreported Israeli purchase .
 Israel's unhappiness with Eisenhower was matched by Guy Mollet's sense of guilt and shame at France's failure to carry out commitments made to his fellow socialists in Israel . Mollet: France's failed to carry on commitments made by his fellow French socialists .
 Ben-Gurion agreed to withdraw his troops from the Sinai and accept a U.N. peacekeeping role in return for France's help in building a nuclear reactor and chemical reprocessing plant in the Sinai in exchange for French help .
 Israel was no longer interested in an experimental reactor, such as at Saclay, but in the real thing . Israel wanted to build a reactor patterned after Marcoule, Israel says .
 The deal was struck, although it would be nearly a year before Peres would conclude the final negotiations . The deal would be almost a year after Peres concluded the negotiations . It would be more than a year to complete the deal .
 Mollet formally cleared the way later in 1956 for the French nuclear weapons program by establishing a committee on the military use of atomic energy . Mollet also established a committee to be led by the army chief of staff .
 Israeli scientists were on hand as observers when the first French nuclear test took place in i960 . i960 was the first nuclear test to take place in French territory .
 A major complication for Peres in working out the official government-to-government agreement was the continuing collapse of the French governments . Over the next few years, as weapons-grade plutonium began rolling out of Marcoule, the French strategic goal would be to build a nuclear reactor .
 Guy Mollet's government fell in mid-1957 anc ^ was replaced by one led by Maurice Bourges-Maunoury .
 There were last-minute qualms about the Israeli reactor expressed by Christian Pineau, the new foreign minister . Pineau's foreign minister expressed concern about the reactor .
 Pineau's meeting with Peres came in late September 1957, when the Bourges-Maunoury administration was being voted out of office by the French National Assembly . Peres signed authorization for the reactor in September .
 In essence, the formal authorization for Dimona was signed by an official who was already out of office . The official who signed the authorization for the construction of Dimona says he was not in office .
 The nuclear tests in the South Pacific enabled France to develop its nuclear deterrent, the force defrappe, by the mid-1960s . France had ambitions to independently target the Soviet Union with intercontinental missiles .
 Charles de Gaulle would stun Washington and its allies by pulling France out of NATO in 1966 . De Gaulle pulled the pull from NATO in the wake of the Arab Spring .
 The Soviets would conclude, Gallois's reasoning went, that there was no military target in Paris or anywhere in France that was worth the risk of having one nuclear bomb falling on Moscow . The Soviets concluded, so Gallois wrote, that no military targets in Paris were worth a risk .
 A nuclear-armed France would no longer need to wonder if the U.S. would come to its defense in a nuclear crisis . France would also have to worry about whether the United States would respond to a Soviet retaliation .
 Gallois was taken very seriously by the Israelis, and France's force defrappe became the role model for Israel's strategic planning . Israel's decision not to count on the American nuclear umbrella led to its decision to not rely on France .
 Israel would complement its new reactor with a major research effort to design and manufacture longrange missiles capable of targeting the Middle East and, eventually, the Soviet Union . Israel would also seek to design, manufacture, manufacture and target long range missiles .
 Ernst Bergmann would now have to begin putting together a nuclear arsenal . The reactor at Dimona was just the beginning for Bergmann . Bergmann had to start putting together his own nuclear arsenal.
 Bergmann's role in developing Israel's nuclear arsenal remains a state secret today . Bergmann worked for Israel in the 1950s and '60s . He helped develop Israel's first nuclear weapons .
 In the years after his death, as the Israeli nuclear arsenal became fixed, he became a virtual nonperson . He became a victim of stringent Israeli security and the self-censorship .
 Shimon Peres eulogized Bergmann, with whom he worked closely for 13 years, as one of the seven founders of the State of Israel . In a book he wrote that was published in the U.S. in 1979, he wrote about Bergmann .
 Chaim Weizmann considered Bergmann to be ""a future candidate for the presidency" of Israel . Peres did not mention nuclear weapons, but he did report that Weizman considered Bergman to be a future candidate .
 By the spring of 1957 it was clear that the old winery at Richonel-Zion wouldn't do . A new site was needed for the larger reactor, known then as EL 102 .
 Peres convinced Ben-Gurion to locate it at Dimona, near the ancient city of Beersheba, in his beloved Negev .
 Money was transferred directly to Paris from the prime minister's account . Saint-Gobain, then two years away from completing the plant at Marcoule, was selected .
 Saint-Gobain's engineers were given access to the initial construction plans for the reactor . They were stunned by what they learned from the initial plans, and were stunned to learn .
 The French-Israeli agreement called for the plant to be capable at its peak of producing 24 million watts of thermal power . But its cooling ducts, waste facilities, and other specifications suggested that the plant would operate at two to three times that capacity .
 It takes three megawatts of thermal power to produce one megawatt of electrical power . Dimona's electrical power output thus would be eight megawatts .
 Nuclear scientists have determined that one megawatt-day of production will produce one gram of plutonium . Nuclear scientists determined that . one megwatt-a-day production will . produce 1 gram of . plutonium .
 Dimona's reported output of twenty-four megawatts would produce about seven kilograms of enriched plutonium per year, enough for two low-yield weapons . If the reactor were operating 80 percent of the time, it would have enough plutonium to produce two weapons .
 Thousands of tons of imported machinery and hundreds of imported technicians turned a quiet corner of the Negev desert into a French boom town . Over the next few years, hundreds of engineers, engineers, wives, children, mistresses, and cars .
 Eisenhower came into the presidency in 1953 concerned about the lack of aerial intelligence on the Soviet Union . Eisenhower ordered the CIA to do something about it .
 Lundahl analyzed reconnaissance photos for the Navy during the war and stayed in the business afterward . Lundahl had analyzed photographs for the U.S. Navy .
 One of his first moves was to entice Dino A Brugioni, then compiling dossiers on Soviet industry for the CIA, to join his staff . One of the CIA's first moves in the 1950s was to bring in Dino Brugio, who was compiling d
 Brugioni was another World War II veteran who had served as an aerial photographer and radio and radar specialist in lead bombers with the Twelfth Air Force in Italy .
 Brugioni was recruited by the CIA in 1948, the year after it was established . Like Lundahl, he was very good at what he was doing . He had been recruited in 1948 .
 The two men would remain colleagues and close friends for the next forty years . They would remain close friends .
 Eisenhower's next major step was to authorize a daring reconnaissance program . The program was primarily targeted at the Soviet Union . It was assigned to the CIA and the Air Force .
 The aircraft, built under cover by the Lockheed Aircraft Company in Burbank, California, would be able to fly and glide for almost eleven hours — covering more than five thousand miles — at heights greater than 65,000 feet . The U-2 was able to use only one thousand gallons
 Special lenses, cameras, and thin film developed, enabling the spy plane to photograph a path from Moscow to Tashkent, southeast of the Ural Sea, in one take .
 The U-2 went operational from a secret base in West Germany on July 4, 1956 . It was the first U.S. aircraft to go operational in the country .
 Moscow overflown on the next day, and dramatic photographs — code-named chess — of the Kremlin and the Winter Garden were later shown to the President and his advisers . Moscow was overflown and dramatic photos were shown to President .
 A second U-2 base was authorized in Turkey; later there would be more bases in Pakistan and Norway .
 Soviet sites were photographed, mapped, and targeted, all within a few days, by American missiles and bombers from the Strategic Air Command .
 By August 1949, four years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Soviets had managed to explode their first atomic bomb, using plutonium . The Soviets detonated their first bomb using plutonium in August 1949 .
 The first bomb, like its predecessor, was the most basic in the atomic arsenal . That first bomb was a fission weapon . The first atomic bomb was the fission bomb .
 Such weapons consist of a small core of fissile material surrounded by high explosives . Such weapons have been used in the U.S. since the 1980s .
 The explosives are triggered inward in a precise sequence (measured in nanoseconds), suddenly and intensely compressing, or imploding, the core of the core . The detonation sequence is measured in nanosconds, and is triggered inward .
 The fissile material goes ""supercritical"" and begins discharging neutrons at a much faster rate than they can escape . American intelligence had been unable to locate all the Soviet nuclear facilities in the early 1950s .
 Despite tonnage, SAC could not guarantee that the Soviets' nuclear retaliatory capacity would be destroyed . U.S. cities were left open to retaliation against the Soviet Union .
 Well before the end of the war, Edward Teller and other American nuclear weapons designers understood that a far more powerful nuclear device, with fission as merely a first step, was theoretically possible . Well before end of war, U.S. knew that a more powerful device could be
 The new weapon, developed under the code name of ""Super," was the hydrogen bomb . The hydrogen bomb, known to today's physicists as a fusion device, was known as the fusion device .
 Scientists at Los Alamos developed a two-stage device, with two separate components inside a single warhead case . After much trial and error, scientists developed the device .
 Deuterium, a hydrogen isotope twice the weight of hydrogen, or lithium deuteride, could be used as the thermonuclear fuel . lithium is a lithium isotope that could also be used in a nuclear reactor .
 Deuterium is the main fuel of the sun, and is burned there at temperatures of 18 to 36 million degrees Fahrenheit . It is burned in the sun at 18-36 million degrees Celsius .
 A thermonuclear fuel, once ignited by fission inside a hydrogen bomb, would burn at a speed, temperature, and pressure greater than it burned at in the center of the sun . American physicists conducted experiments and came to understand, with appropriate awe, that such a fuel would burn
 A key to the hydrogen bomb was the initial triggering of a fission device, for only fission was capable of generating the heat and, as scientists later came to understand, the radiation needed to burn the fuel .
 The fusion of deuterium and tritium, another heavy hydrogen isotope that is a by-product of lithium, could produce a thermonuclear explosion of fifteen megatons . That is one thousand times greater than the Hiroshima bomb .
 The Soviets, at one point known to be at least three years behind the American thermonuclear bomb program, moved 50 THE SAMSON OPTION ahead in the science of making doomsday weapons .
 The first Soviet two-stage hydrogen bomb was successfully tested in 1955 . Six years later Soviet scientists detonated the largest known hydrogen bomb, with an explosive force of fiftyeight megatons .
 At its height in 1988, the Soviet nuclear stockpile totaled an estimated 33,000 warheads . That's slightly more than the U.S. maintained in 1967, its peak year . At its peak in the 1980s, the United States maintained 33,500 warheads .
 In the beginning, everything was secret — even the existence of the CIA as well as its Photographic Intelligence Division . The CIA's Photographic intelligence Division was also secret .
 The first U-2 flights over the Soviet Union had provided dramatic evidence that the Soviets were not nearly as advanced in conventional arms as the Pentagon had assumed . The U.2's first flights over Soviet Union provided dramatic proof .
 These revelations were of the utmost importance and were immediately presented to President Eisenhower himself, as well as other top officials . The revelations were presented to the president himself, Eisenhower himself .
 Lundahl was head of the U-2 intelligence unit . Lundahl soon found himself becoming the American government's most listened-to briefing officer .
 Eisenhower had been infuriated by Israel's attempt to mask the extent of its military buildup prior to the 1956 Suez invasion . Eisenhower and the men around him, including John Foster Dulles, the secretary of state, and his brother Allen, the CIA director .
 The administration's truth-teller continued to be the U-2, whose pilots, including Gary Francis Powers, later to be shot down, were assigned to overfly the Soviet Union .
 Lundahl briefed President John F Kennedy in the Oval Office in October 1962, after a U-2 overflight produced evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . But there were other standing U.2 targets in .
 51 especially in moments of crisis — and that description fit the Mideast in 1958 . The Middle East in 1958 was a time of crisis .
 Egypt and Syria had merged early in the year to form the United Arab Republic . The Arab world was immediately thrown into political turmoil after the Arab Spring .
 Muslim opposition, sparked by Egypt and Syria, led to violence in pro-Western Lebanon . U.S. marines waded ashore in July to protect the regime of President Chamoun .
 The Iraqi monarchy, also proWestern, was overthrown in a bloody coup d'etat and replaced by a military dictator, Abdel Karim Qassem . The Iraq monarchy, which was pro-Western, has been overthrown by a pro-West coalition government .
 Gary Powers and his colleagues had continued intermittently to overfly the Middle East . Powers and colleagues were now steadily back at work in the area .
 The CIA's photo interpreters were suddenly seeing a lot of activity at an Israeli Air Force practice bombing range south of Beersheba, an old Bedouin camel-trading center .
 Photo interpretation was still a fledgling science in 1958, a hands-on business . Photo interpretation is still a pioneering science in the 1950s .
 The developed film from the U-2 missions was rushed to the CIA's Photographic Intelligence Division, printed, analyzed, mounted on boards if necessary, cleared with Allen Dulles, and then immediately taken to the White House .
 Eisenhower remained an avid consumer until the last days of his presidency . Access to the photographs and briefings often was limited to the President and immediate aides .
 The Soviet Union eventually learned of the U-2 operations and began to complain bitterly, in private, about the American violations of its airspace . Secrecy was paramount .
 The Soviets were aware in advance of the take-off time for each mission, the Pentagon says . The U.S. was alarmed by the fact that the Soviets knew the time of each mission .
 The National Security Agency reported that the Soviet military and civilian aviation authorities had established a pattern of abruptly grounding all air traffic before a U-2 flight was scheduled to depart . The agency was responsible for monitoring Soviet signals intelligence .
 The elimination of all airplane traffic, of course, made it much easier for the radar system to plot the U-2 flight paths, and thus provided more time for the intended targets to take countermeasures .
 The mystery was solved early in the U-2 program by a group of Air Force communications technicians at Kelly Field in Texas . None of whom had any knowledge of the operation or any clearance for such knowledge .
 Air Force analysts were able to deduce that a special intelligence operation was in existence as well as predict each flight simply by monitoring the extensive and poorly masked communications between Washington and U-2 airfields .
 The U-2 communications system did not change, and, one of the never-ending ironies of the intelligence world, the high-level American intelligence officer who brought the evidence of Soviet awareness to the attention of the plan . There also was a continuing and essential need for close coordination
 Plutonium and tritium, for example, occur in nature only in minute amounts and must be manufactured by irradiating lithium in a nuclear reactor . Plutonium is produced in a small amount of time .
 Among the inevitable by-products of the manufacturing process are radioactive gases, which are vented into the atmosphere . The process is often followed by radioactive gases .
 The analysts of the early U-2 photography learned to look for huge or distinctive chimneys, or "smokestacks,"" as the photo interpreters called them . The chimneys were studied intently to see if they were linked to a nuclear weapons facility .
 Brugioni recalls seeing the first signs of what would become the Israeli nuclear reactor . He says he saw the first sign of the Israeli reactor .
 One clue is the fencing off of a large, barren area a dozen or so miles outside the small desert town of Dimona . One clue, not immediately understood, is that a large area is fenced off .
 Brugioni and the photo interpreters assumed that the Israelis were setting up an ammunition-testing site . The Israelis were believed to be testing ammunition for ammunition .
 A new road from Beersheba, twenty-five miles to the north, was observed, leading directly to the fenced area . The area is fenced away from Beerba, 25 miles from the north .
 The site was no longer just another point of reference amid the thousands of feet of U-2 negatives flowing into CIA headquarters . The site is now a focal point for the U.2 negatives .
 The subterranean digging began in early 1958; soon afterward, cement began to pour into heavy foundations . Cement began to be poured in heavy foundations in 1958 .
 For example, you can draw a circle ners was accused of a security violation . You can also draw circles and circles in a circle .
 53 twenty-five miles in diameter in most areas of the world and understand how man spends his life by studying that circle . The circle is over 53 miles wide and is 53 miles long .
 You see cattle grazing, hog and poultry pens, and conclude that people eat meat . People eat meat because they want to eat meat, not just cattle grazing .
 "There was a fear that Nasser would get together [with the Arab world] and they'd take Israel," he says . The fear of Nasser getting together with Arab world was a real fear, he adds . "There were fears that they would take Israel. There was a
 Eisenhower authorized the U.S. Air Force to provide fighter pilot training and courses in aerial reconnaissance and photo interpretation to the Israelis . Eisenhower secretly authorized the training .
 There was no way that Lundahl and Brugioni could wink at the imminent construction of a secret nuclear reactor . Lundahl: "There were no way they could wink"
 They and their colleagues in the U-2 shop believed strongly in Israel's right to exist . But equally convinced that an Israeli bomb would destabilize the Middle East, they say .
 They knew that they were dealing with political dynamite, and chose to wait . Speculation would be deadly, but they chose not to speculate .
 The pouring of concrete footings for the reactor's circular dome was all the evidence Lundahl needed . Lundahl says the reactor will be the first to build a circular dome in the world .
 Lundahl rushed the early raw photographs to the White House; it was late 1958 or early 1959 . Lundahl's photos were taken in late 1958 to early 1959. Lundahl was the photographer who took the photos of the President .
 The special secrecy of the U-2 was heightened by the fact of the lack of any written notes or documents . Brugioni and Lundahl recall the dates of specific events, such as the date of Lundahl's briefing on Dimona to Eisenhower .
 No declassified documents about such briefings are available to the public in the Eisenhower Library in Abilene, Kansas .
 The photo interpreters were provided with communications intercepts and reports of Soviet and Eastern European refugee interrogations . They were also provided with reports compiled by special American and Israeli intelligence teams .
 The assumption was that since most of the nuclear weapons installations behind the Iron Curtain were carefully camouflaged, the photo interpreters needed all the help possible . Most of the photos were taken at the request of the photographer .
 A refugee's random comment about a secret factory somewhere in the Soviet Union often triggered a major discovery . The discovery of the secret factory was often made by refugees .
 The CIA's Photographic Intelligence Division offered three categories of follow-up photos . The CIA has a photo collection of the most recent images .
 Phase One was the immediate report — presented as soon as possible, as were the early photos of the Israeli reactor . Phase One is the immediate response to the crisis . Phase Two was the early report . Phase Three was the initial report .
 A Phase Two report, presented overnight, would require Lundahl's shop to enlarge the intelligence photos and mount them for display . The report would be presented overnight . Lundahl: The report will be presented to the House of Representatives .
 Phase Three report called for extensive analysis based on many more overflights over many weeks . Phase Three is based on extensive analysis of the overflights .
 There would be special assignments for the U-2S. and an extensive series of photographs . There would also be a series of special assignments .
 Lundahl anticipated a Phase Two or Three request on the Israeli intelligence request . Lundahl said the request was likely to be part of a Phase II or Third request .
 There was "no additional requirement. Instead, he recalled — still amazed, more than thirty years later — there was no additional requirement," he said .
 Lundahl: 'nobody came back to me, ever, on Israel. In fact, over the next years, nobody came back' Lundahl says .
 No one told him not to fly over the Negev, the U-2 continued to overfly the area . But no one was told not to do so .
 Lundahl relayed the findings to Lewis Strauss, chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, and a few AEC aides who were among the handful of officials in the Eisenhower administration cleared for U-2 intelligence . Lundahl also relayed findings on Dimona to Strauss .
 Lundahl's standing orders called for him to proFIRST KNOWLEDGE 55 vide all nuclear intelligence to the White House and then, unless directed otherwise, to the AEC commissioner . Lundahl: "All nuclear intelligence should be given to White House"
 None of the communications between Eisenhower and BenGurion about the ominous construction in the Negev has been made public . Such letters have been written .
 Ben-Gurion hoped to be invited to visit Washington for direct talks with the President . Ben-Israel had hoped to meet President Barack Obama in Washington .
 There was no subsequent reply from Eisenhower, the former official said . Eisenhower replied, "Yes"
 "The White House,"" he confirmed, also mystified, ""never encouraged us to do further briefings" The White House never encouraged us, he said .
 Few of the private messages between Eisenhower and Ben-Gurion on any subject have been made public by the Eisenhower Library .
 General Andrew J Goodpaster, Eisenhower's military aide in the White House, explained that the diplomatic exchanges between the two were ""very closely held"" and not available at the time to close subordinates .
 LundahPs interpreters had watched, via the steady stream of U-2 imagery, as the construction teams dug two separate sites in the desert . The Americans did not immediately know, of course, that they were French-led .
 There was an early attempt to estimate how large the sites were going to be by measuring the ""spoil"" — the amount of cubic feet of dirt unearthed each day .
 American photo interpreters had watched in World War II as the Germans moved their industrial plants and factories underground in futile attempts to avoid heavy Allied bombing .
 At some point after 1958, the Israelis, using covered trucks, could be seen hauling away the dirt and debris from each day's digging . The Israelis used covered trucks to remove the dirt from the site .
 There was very strong circumstantial evidence by then that the second underground site at Dimona was being readied for the chemical reprocessing plant that was essential in order to make weapons-grade plutonium .
 The best evidence of Israel's intent came from an analysis of the striking similarities in layout between Dimona and Marcoule . The French nuclear facility is located in the French territory of the French city .
 The French facility was being constantly overflown in the late 1950s by civilian transport planes equipped with hidden cameras . The planes belonged to American diplomats and military officers assigned to the embassy in Paris .
 By 1959, the reactor and the chemical reprocessing plant at Marcoule were known to be in full operation . By 1959 it was known to have been in full operations .
 As the Dimona reactor was completed, there was less to be learned from the U-2 overflights . The Dimona reactors were completed in 1961 .
 The U-2 imagery could only depict what was on the surface . The intelligence community would spend years trying to find out for certain whether Israel had built a chemical reprocessing plant .
 American military attaches were assigned to find a reason to travel to the desert . The CIA station even offered to buy wine for any seemingly casual group that wanted to picnic .
 Special automatic cameras with preset lens settings were developed by the CIA for the attaches . The CIA developed the cameras for the attachees .
 The CIA began urging attaches to pick up grass and shrubs for analysis . The plant is believed to have been a chemical reprocessing plant .
 The theory was that traces of plutonium and other fission products, if being produced, would be in the environment . It was hoped the fission product would be released into the atmosphere .
 The Israelis responded by planting large trees to block the line of vision of any would-be candid photographers . They also increased their perimeter patrols around Dimona .
 One American military attache was nearly shot by Israeli guards after overstepping the ground rules set up by the American embassy in Tel Aviv . The attache overstepped the rules that had been established by the embassy in Israel .
 The United States remained unable to learn categorically whether the Israelis were operating a chemical reprocessing plant . The cat-and-mouse game would continue for the next ten years, with the Israelis shielding the expanding construction at Dimona .
 American Jews who were committed to Israel were also committed to the security of Israel . Many of the most complicated issues involved the question of U.S. Jews .
 A few American nuclear physicists were known to have emigrated to Israel after World War II . One was a veteran of the Manhattan Project who had worked until 1956 in the most sensitive areas of nuclear reactor design .
 Jewish physicists and scientists began returning from visits to Israel by the late 1950s . They returned with increasingly specific information about Israeli interest in nuclear weapons . Jewish physicists returned with information about Israel's interest in nukes .
 CIA tipped off about the fact that Israel was raising large sums of money for Dimona from the American Jewish community . CIA had even been tipped off by the U.S. government .
 By the end of 1959, Lundahl and Brugioni had no doubt that Israel was going for the bomb . Lundahl: "Israel was going to bomb. It was not the first time that Israel had gone for a bomb"
 There also was no doubt that President Eisenhower and his advisers were determined to look the other way . There also had been a lack of interest in the killing of the young .
 If you're a senior officer, you learn to read the tea leaves quickly — and keep your mouth shut . Senior officer: "If you're an officer, it's important to keep quiet"
 The vast majority of those who knew what was going on at Dimona thought it folly to waste such prodigious amounts of money on a doomsday weapon that might or might not work when conventional weapons such as tanks, guns and aircraft were desperately needed .
 The concept of underdeveloped and underfinanced Israel as a superpower seemed ludicrous . Israel is now a superpower, but the concept of it is ludicrous .
 By the early 1960s, Dimona had hired many of the most skilled Israeli scientists and technicians away from local research and manufacturing companies . The move led to a much-criticized slowdown in the growth of the nation's industrial base .
 There also were moral objections from a few members of the scientific and academic community, including two of the original members of Israeli Atomic Energy Commission . The decision was approved by the Israeli government .
 Four more members of the commission resigned, essentially because they had nothing to do . By 1957, as construction began on the reactor, four more had resigned . The reactor was scheduled to be completed in 1964 .
 The only commission member still on the job was its chairman, Ernst David Bergmann .
 Bergmann, David Ben-Gurion, and Shimon Peres were waging what amounted to constant war — all in secret — to keep the Israeli bomb project alive . Bergmann: "The Israeli government was in constant war to keep it alive"
 The most threatening problem came from Israel's partner in secrecy — the French . The French are Israel's most secretive partners in the country .
 Charles de Gaulle won a seven-year term as president of France's newly constituted Fifth Republic in December 1958 . He had promised to find an acceptable compromise for ending the war in Algeria .
 The war, which de Gaulle continued to prosecute, had sharply divided the nation . Vietnam War would later divide the United States . All other issues, such as the question 60 SAMSON OPTION of continued support for Israel, seemed secondary .
 De Gaulle was known to be emphatically in favor of an independent nuclear deterrent for France . But it was not known how he might react to the profound French commitment to Dimona .
 Contracts had been signed and money paid, and the work was proceeding at Dimona . Contracts had already been signed .
 Hundreds of French engineers and technicians poured into the Negev in 1957 . Beersheba bustled with construction as new apartment complexes and residential units were thrown together .
 Housing also was made available to the thousands of North African Jews who emigrated from Morocco and Algeria, hired to do the digging and building of the reactor .
 European Jews were slowly recruited from government and private businesses throughout Israel to serve as scientists and managers . They, too, were provided with housing in Beersheba . They were also provided with houses .
 There was a caste system in the desert, and the French were on top, as they repeatedly made all too clear . The French were repeatedly made clear of the caste system .
 Even those Frenchmen who were Jewish did little to ease the tension . Many considered themselves to be of a different class and social standing than their Israeli colleagues .
 Algerian and Moroccan Jews were mistreated by their Israeli employers . Ironically, the Algerian, Moroccan Jews also suffered mistreatment .
 One standing INTERNAL WARS 61 rule was that the Moroccans and Algerians would be hired only for fifty-nine days and then dismissed . This avoided paying any of the many benefits that came with tenure , which was reached after two months .
 North African Jewish laborers would be rehired for another fifty-nine days . After a few days off, the laborers would return to work again .
 The North African Jews were ""treated like slaves"" by French and Israelis alike . The French and Israeli Jews were treated like slaves by both sides .
 The Israeli scientists and technicians had absorbed much of the French technical data by then . Many plans were modified extensively on the job . The reaction was, an Israeli recalled, "Go. Go"
 Abraham Sourassi, one of the senior Israelis at Dimona, endeared himself to his countrymen by declaring, ""Good riddance,"" upon hearing of de Gaulle's disenchantment with Dimona .
 The long hours, hard work, and French smugness did not diminish the excitement of being involved with Israel's most important secret . "The long hours" and "hard work" didn't diminish their excitement, says the author .
 Israel had been racked by a series of spy scandals by the late 1950s . Intelligence operatives in the sixty-man Soviet embassy in Tel Aviv were believed to especially target the scientific community .
 Shimon Peres insisted on the creation of a new intelligence agency, initially known as the Office of Special Tasks . The agency was created to provide security for the burgeoning nuclear operation .
 Peres was handpicked by Peres to be the director of Israel's largest military intelligence agency . He was a tall, quiet former military intelligence officer named Binyamin Blumberg . Peres is now the Israeli prime minister .
 The Office of Special Tasks, placed inside the defense ministry, would become one of the most successful intelligence agencies in modern history . After Blumberg's resignation more than twenty years later, it was responsible for one of Israel's worst mistakes, the recruitment of Jonathan Pollard .
 Blumberg's sole mission in the late 1950s was protecting Dimona, and he made it a point to be involved in the details .
 Dimona's security office rejected an excellent prospect because of distant relatives in Eastern Europe . One Israeli responsible for recruiting scientists told of having a excellent prospect rejected by Dimona security office because of his relatives in eastern Europe .
 The top scientists were provided with double pay and subsidized seven-room apartments in Beersheba, Israel . Space unheard of in those years in Israel .
 Those who stayed long enough were given possession of the apartments, worth at least $50,000 . They were allowed to sell the apartments at their leisure .
 Beersheba inevitably became an international city . As the pace and intensity of construction grew, the city became more international .
 Up to 2,500 French men, women, and children made their life in the Negev . The French presence was palpable .
 There were special French schools for the children, and the streets were full of French autos . The streets of the city were filled with French autos and French cars .
 All of this was duly reported by foreign diplomats and military attaches assigned to embassies in Tel Aviv .
 There were constantly recurring rumors of the bomb, but the cover stories somehow held . The INTERNAL WARS 63 cover stories were usually about desalinization or agricultural research .
 Ian Smart was a young British diplomat on his first foreign assignment in the late 1950s . Smart was third secretary of his country's small embassy in Tel Aviv, Israel . Smart died of a heart attack in the early 1960s .
 He would go on to become an international expert in nonpro-proliferation, but in those years he was merely curious — and suspicious .
 From the road, you could see the cooling tower base of the dome and the beginning of the rib structure . And from the road you could . see the . air dome, the . cooling tower and the . rib structure of the . dome .
 The Israeli government has told the British embassy a series of stories about Dimona . The British embassy has been asked about the activities at Dimona by Israel .
 One early claim, recalls Smart, was that the area was a desert grasslands research institute . Smart: "One early claim to be that the region was a research institute" Smart: 'One of the biggest challenges in the world is the discovery of the desert'
 Smart himself heard a second explanation while driving with a group of Israeli Defense Force troops in the Negev . Smart says he heard the second explanation in a car accident .
 Smart: "I was reporting the 'suspicion' that this looked like a nuclear reactor. Throughout the last year of his stay, Smart adds . Smart adds that he was reporting "suspection" that the reactor looked like nuclear reactor .
 Eisenhower administration was in its third year of U-2 overflights of Dimona by i960 . i960 was expanding its coverage of the U.2 program .
 Art Lundahl, Dino Brugioni and their colleagues in the U-2 shop at the CIA were now requesting systematic overflights of the French nuclear test site near Reggane, Algeria, in the Sahara .
 The French successfully tested their first nuclear bomb in February i960; it had a yield of more than sixty kilotons, three times larger than the first American test at Los Alamos . The French had successfully tested the first nuke bomb in 1992 .
 CIA knew that an Israeli scientific team had been at the test site as observers . Israeli scientists were also observers . CIA knew an Israeli team was also at the site .
 Israeli scientists also had been tracked to a nearby French chemical and biological weapons testing site in the Sahara . Israeli scientists had been tracking to the site of French chemical weapons testing .
 All of this was immediately shared with the Eisenhower White House, Brugioni said . "All of this is immediately shared"
 The Israelis and French continued to monitor the U-2 overflights, but they also continued to operate with the most stringent secrecy at Dimona . The Israeli and French operated with the utmost secrecy .
 The sophisticated equipment for the reactor and processing plant was assembled by the French Atomic Energy Commission in a clandestine workshop in a Paris suburb . It was assembled in clandestine workshop and transported by truck, rail, and ship .
 The heaviest equipment, such as the reactor tank, was described to French customs officials as components of a seawater desalinization plant bound for Latin America . Officials say the heaviest equipment was described by customs officials to be part of a desalinizing plant .
 Israel turned to Norwegians, who invented electrolysis method for producing large quantities of heavy water . Israel also needed illicit shipment of illicit shipments of heavy-water, which was too slow to rely on the process .
 Norway exported heavy water to French Atomic Energy Commission in 1950s . Sales to French atomic energy Commission had only one condition — that the heavy water not be transferred to a third country .
 French Air Force secretly flew as much as four tons of water — stored in oversized barrels — to Israel sometime in 1960 . That stipulation was ignored by the Air Force .
 The essential facts in Pean's book were verified by the author of this book in subsequent interviews with French and Israeli officials . Pean: "The essential facts were verified"
 Officials raise questions about the motives of some of those who aided Pean . Those officials raised questions about some of the motives .
 Many of the French companies that had been involved in the construction of Dimona in the early 1960s were working under contract for Iraq at the time of the bombing of Osirak in 1981 .
 The Research Company for Financing and Enterprise was set up to handle the extensive contacts and negotiations with the Israeli government and various Israeli subcontractors who would actually build Dimona . It was the subsequent politiPoliti firm, the Research Company, which was set to handle negotiations .
 All contracts were funneled through Peres and his colleagues in Mapai, Israel . There was no problem of security among the subcontractors, he says .
 The huge expense of Dimona was a constant source of dissent inside the Israeli government . Israel was in a struggle to match Egypt in the rapid arms buildup in the Middle East .
 Egypt acquired its first Soviet advanced fighter plane, the MiG-21, in i960 . Israel continued to purchase the most advanced warplanes available from the French .
 Both countries obtained bombers from their international patrons . Both were continuing research into ballistic missile delivery systems . Both countries were continuing to develop ballistic missiles .
 By 1961, Egypt's military expenditures had reached nearly $340 million, twice as much as Israel was spending . Egypt spent $340million on its military in 1961, more than Israel did .
 Critics of Israel's nuclear program saw the Egyptian arms buildup as the most compelling argument against investing money at Dimona . Israel's finance minister and commerce minister were among those who opposed the nuclear program .
 Israel's 1957 con ~ tract with the French for the construction at Dimona has never been made public . Just how much Israel was spending on the bomb in these years is impossible to estimate accurately .
 One estimate put the cost of the reactor alone at $130 million . One rough estimate, published by the Israeli press in December i960, put the reactor's cost at $ 130 million .
 A detailed study of overall nuclear start-up costs was published in 1983 by Thomas W Graham . A few private and public officials cooperated fully with Pean and provided him with documentation .
 Graham concluded that France had spent between $10 billion and $15 billion to assemble its secure strike capability, including thermonuclear weapons . He said as much as half of the cost was spent on delivery systems, with as much of the money spent .
 India would have to invest as much as 23 percent of its annual defense budget in the nuclear area, Graham says . India would also have to spend 10 to 23 percent on nuclear defense, he says .
 Israel's strategic goal was to achieve nothing less than a secure strike capacity, with themonuclear weapons and missile and aircraft delivery systems capable of reaching targets in the Soviet Union . Israel's aim was to reach targets in Soviet Union, Israel said .
 The cost of Dimona was heightened by the fact that so much of the facility at Dimona, including its chemical reprocessing plant, was being built underground . Dimona's ambitions were heightened because of the fact of the plant's construction underground .
 The difficulties of working below the surface could only skyrocket the already high costs of ventilation, waste disposal, and worker safety . The difficulties will only increase the already already high cost of ventilation and waste disposal .
 Other significant cost factors included the obligation to pay workers well in union-dominated Israel, and the extensive security needed to protect a secret facility . The French facility is the largest in the country and employs foreign nationals .
 Israel's ultimate commitment undoubtedly amounted to many billions of dollars . Israel's commitment to Israel's sovereignty was undoubtedly enormous . Israel has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Ben-Gurion understood that getting Dimona complete would not be possible only if it were not being financed out of the Israeli budget . The construction of Dimona will be completed at the end of the next year . The state of Israel's Dimona is estimated to be worth $1
 Israel already was receiving, according to American intelligence estimates, hundreds of millions a year in gifts and contributions from American Jews alone .
 Sometime in i960, Shimon Peres decided to form a special group of trusted and discreet donors that became known as the Committee of Thirty . The committee of Thirty was formed in the wake of i960 .
 Peres would brag to an interviewer that ""not one penny came from the government budget" Years later, Peres bragged to an interview he would say that "no penny" came from a government budget .
 The project was financed from contributions I raised from Jewish millionaires who understood the importance of the issue .
 Former Israeli government officials confirmed that at least one group of foreign contributors was permitted to visit Dimona in 1968 . Dimona was completed in 1968, after its completion .
 Israeli officials estimated that by the mid-1960s Israel was spending hundreds of millions of dollars annually on its nuclear program . The Peres operation produced a small percentage of the funds .
 Yigal Allon, Yitzhak Rabin and Ariel Sharon believed that Israel's essential advantage over the Arabs was the quality and training of its military personnel . The Israeli general and commando leader, Ariel Sharon, believed that the quality of Israel's military personnel was an advantage over
 If Israel had nuclear weapons, experts say, it would be impossible to deny them to Egypt or other nations in the Middle East . The analysis continued, they said, if Israel possessed nuclear weapons they would not be denied .
 Israel was, in essence, facing what amounted to a domestic brain drain . Israel is facing what amounts to what is known as a 'domestic brain drain' Israel was facing a domestic head drain .
 By the late 1960s, Moshe Dayan, as one of the few military men who supported the bomb in these early years, was an anomaly . By that time, he was a leader of the Jewish community in Israel .
 Nonproliferation experts eventually came to understand that there was a correlation between the attitude of military officers toward the bomb and a national commitment to going nuclear .
 Senior military officers in both Israel and India objected bitterly to the nuclear weapons arsenal in its early development . Many senior military officers objected bitterly in the early development of the weapons arsenal .
 Once the bomb joined the military arsenal, dissent from dissent ceased, dissent ceased . The bomb was banned in India in the late 1970s and Israel in the 1980s .
 Government funding for such research had been drastically cut back . Industry was lagging behind science. Government funding had been cut back, and industry lags behind science .
 Scientific innovations still took place, but few engineering companies were able to turn those ideas into profitable goods that manufacturers could put into production .
 Officials who worked at Dimona in those years acknowledged the predatory hiring practices . The nation's chemical industry was a prime target, officials said .
 The only facility off-limits was the small research reactor at Nahal Soreq, near the Weizmann Institute . The reactor is located in the middle of the country .
 At its height, the former official said, fifteen hundred Israeli scientists, many with doctorates, worked at Dimona . Dimona is located in Israel's largest industrial hub in Israel .
 First overt sign of de Gaulle's unease over France's nuclear commitment to Israel came in May i960 . France wanted Israel to make a public announcement about the reactor at Dimona and submit it to international inspection .
 Couve de Murville: Without such acts, France would not supply raw uranium to the reactor . France says it would not be able to provide raw uranium for the reactor without the aid of the French .
 "From the very first moment, I felt sympathetic admiration for this courageous fighter and champion," says Oscar De La Hoya . De LaHoya: "I was impressed by his courage and courage"
 Bertrand Goldschmidt's personal notes of the meeting show that de Gaulle was worried about the potential for international scandal if France's involvement with Dimona became publicly known .
 Ben-Gurion gave his view of the Arab threat, but de Gaulle insisted that the Israeli prime minister was exaggerating the danger of destruction that threatens you . De Gaulle: 'Exaggerating the threat of destruction'
 Saint-Gobain's work on the underground reprocessing plant was delayed for more than two years, but in 1962 a new French contractor arrived and finished the job .
 Ben-Gurion was pleased with de Gaulle's promises of continued military aid, but he was not willing to trade an Israeli bomb for French warplanes . The Israeli prime minister was not prepared to trade a bomb for a French plane .
 Shimon Peres was able to work out a compromise in talks with Couve de Murville that centered on what amounted to an Israeli lie . The compromise would dominate Israel's public stance on nuclear arms for decades . Over the next few months, the Israeli government would work out an Israeli
 The Israelis assured France that they had no intention of manufacturing an atomic bomb . They said they would not do any reprocessing of plutonium .
 French companies would continue to supply the uranium ore and reactor parts that already had been ordered and not demand any foreign inspection . French companies will not demand foreign inspection of uranium ore or reactor parts .
 Israel would make public the ex70 THE SAMSON OPTION istence of its nuclear reactor and continue its construction at Dimona without any official French government help . Israel would continue to build the reactor without official French help .
 With the friendly summit behind him, Ben-Gurion did nothing to change the status quo at Dimona .
 The privately owned French construction firms and their employees maintained a vigorous presence at Dimona until 1966 . They continued to be well paid under the existing contracts . Dimona was built in the 1960s .
 Finney was hired away from United Press International by bureau chief James A Reston . He was considered a solid addition to the news staff — but he had yet to bust a big one .
 Finney was sent by the Times's redoubtable columnist Arthur Krock, then the patriarch of Washington columnists, to his desk . Finney: "The messenger was the Times columnist's wife of the day" Finney says Krock was "a great writer"
 Krock was known to young bureau reporters such as Finney for his remoteness . He was known for his daily long lunches with senior government officials at private Metropolitan Club .
 Finney had established good rapport with John McCone, chairman of the AEC . McCone was a wealthy Republican businessman from California . Finney and McCone had established a good rapport .
 Finney got the story and McCone was able to duck responsibility for giving it to him . Finney was the star of the show, but McCone says he's not responsible .
 McCone's leak to Finney would be his parting shot as AEC commissioner . A few days later he announced his resignation on Meet the Press, the NBC Sunday television interview show . McCone leaked Finney's leak .
 There is no evidence that the Israeli government ever claimed to Washington that the construction at Dimona was a textile plant . Finney was a prominent critic of the government in the 1980s .
 Dimona was a research facility (usually for agriculture) or a chemical plant . American and European diplomats who inquired about Dimona were informed it was research facility or plant .
 Buchwald told of an Israeli cab driver who had driven an American diplomat to Dimona in search of a suit, at wholesale prices, from the textile plant . Six months earlier, Buchwald had been driven by an Israeli cabbie who was looking for a suit .
 Another scientist ""rushed in with a Geiger counter, a slide rule, and two robot arms" Another scientist rushed in with Geiger counters and slide rule .
 McCone replaced Lewis Strauss as AEC commissioner in July 1958 . There is no evidence that Strauss, who also received regular briefings on Dimona, shared his knowledge with McCone .
 McCone, as AEC chairman, was a member of the United States Intelligence Advisory Committee, the top-level group at the time . A former CIA official who was McCone's long-time aide says he was "in on the action from the beginning"
 McCone was committed to the concept of nuclear nonproliferation . He was also aware of the fact that Eisenhower was ending his eight-year reign in the White House .
 By December i960, work at Dimona had progressed to the point where the reactor dome had become visible from nearby roads in the Negev . The dome was more susceptible to being photographed by military attaches .
 Nikita Khrushchev's rage led Eisenhower to order an end to all reconnaissance flights over Russia . Eisenhower's Paris summit meieting scheduled for a few weeks later led to an end .
 The Powers fiasco did not diminish the fact that Eisenhower and Khrushchev had made steady progress over the previous year in drafting a comprehensive treaty banning all nuclear tests . Such testing was suspended by both nations until September 1961 .
 Dimona may have played a role in the sudden concern over nuclear proliferation . That success had led to an overall heightened sensitivity about nuclear proliferation, and may have led to concern over Dimona .
 Even before McCone summoned Finney, there was a coordinated effort to make Israel acknowledge what it was doing at Dimona .
 Such unanimity of purpose and widespread access to sensitive intelligence about Dimona wouldn't happen again — ever — ever . Such unanimities of purpose would not happen again, he says .
 By the date of McCone's appearance on Meet the Press, Washington had been awash for at least ten days with new information about Dimona .
 Even Christian A Herter, the usually detached and preoccupied secretary of state, was in on it . Even Christian Herter was involved .
 Armin H Meyer, a senior foreign service officer soon to be posted as ambassador to Lebanon, recalled his surprise in early December at finding Herter seemingly upset upon being given a photograph of the reactor, as taken from a highway .
 Herter was given the top job after the death of John Foster Dulles in May 1959 . Herter had gone so far as to call in Avraham Harman, the Israeli ambassador, for an explanation .
 Something must have happened in the nuclear field that gave him the safety to raise the issue . Something must GOING PUBLIC have happened .
 He asked an aide to approach the French and find out whether they indeed were helping the Israelis .
 Farley quietly raised the issue with a deputy to the French ambassador . Farley came away convinced that the fears about a French connection were warranted .
 Herter was instructed by the White House to give a formal diplomatic protest to the French . Farley was enough of an expert to know that the reactor at Dimona was obviously too large for pure research .
 Couve de Murville, the French foreign minister, was in Washington for a meeting . He was in the U.S. to meet with President Barack Obama .
 Farley assured the State Department that the Israeli reactor was benign and that any plutonium generated in its operation would be returned to France for safekeeping . Farley was approached, Farley recalled, but assured the U.S. that the reactor was harmless .
 Farley says he and his colleagues in the bureaucracy did not begin to realize the extent of Couve de Murville's dissembling . They had no idea that it was France that had made the Israeli bomb possible, he says . Farley: At the time, of course,
 The statement played into the hands of de Gaulle's ambitions for the force de frappe . The statement, while undoubtedly correct, played . into the . hands of the . forces .
 The Joint Committee on Atomic Energy was summoned urgently from Christmas recess to a secret briefing on Dimona by CIA and State Department officials . House and Senate members of the Joint Committee were summoned urgently .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles arranged for President-elect John F Kennedy be be briefed . CIA Director Dulles also arranged for John F. Kennedy to be briefed by the CIA Director .
 It seems clear that none of this could have taken place without the explicit approval of Dwight Eisenhower . Eisenhower approved the demarche to the French, the briefing of the joint committee, and the President-elect of the .
 Washington also was sharing its concern with its allies, and it was that communication moved the diplomatic concern about Dimona onto the front pages . The U.S. also was concerned about the situation .
 The dispatch was written by Chapman Pincher, known for his close ties to the British intelligence and nuclear communities . He is known for close ties with the UK's nuclear industry .
 Pincher had gotten a tip from a senior figure in British atomic weapons research . His concern was that an Israeli bomb would necessarily be ""dirty"" — that is, generate a lot of radioactive fallout .
 Pincher, in a telephone interview, said that his next step was to call an old contact in Mossad and verify the story . Pinchers said that he next step is to contact an old Mossad contact . He said he would then verify the account .
 McCone's leak to John Finney, his strong statements on Meet the Press, and his later actions in the Kennedy administration would get him labeled by some as anti-Semitic .
 McCone, as he would demonstrate anew as CIA director, was dead set against any nuclear proliferation . McCone repeatedly railed against the GOING PUBLIC 77 French as well as the Israelis. McCone was the CIA director in the 1980s .
 He also was offended by the Israeli and French lying about their collaboration in the Negev . He viewed Washington's acquiescence in those lies with contempt .
 Myron B Kratzer, AEC's director of international affairs in December i960, recalled being telephoned a few hours before McCone's farewell appearance on Meet the Press by a State Department colleague . State Department colleagues told to urge McCone to downplay the Israeli issue
 Deputy Minister of Defense Shimon Peres, forewarned by Ambassador Harman and perhaps by Mossad, began working up the cover story . Peres' deputy minister of defense worked up a cover story, perhaps with Mossad .
 There was a widespread suspicion in the prime minister's office that the truth about Dimona had been leaked to the British press . The French had continued to urge the Israelis to make public the existence of the reactor since the June summit meeting .
 Peres's immediate goal was to keep his and Ben-Gurion's dream on track . Betrayal by an ally was, for the Israelis, always the expected; Peres' immediate goal .
 Norway given the right to inspect the heavy water only once in the next thirty-two years . Norway was given a pledge of peaceful use and was given the rights to inspect heavy water .
 The twenty-ton purchase of heavy water was obviously much more than required to fuel a twenty-four-megawatt reactor . Nor* McCone, perhaps anticipating a return to public life, did play the game nonetheless, saying on television that there was only ""informal and
 He also said he did not know whether any of the nuclear powers had aided Israel . He said he would not know if any nuclear powers aided Israel in any way .
 It was the first time members of Israel's parliament had been officially told about the reactor construction . It was first time they had been told of the project .
 He and his colleagues simply did not believe that the talkative Knesset had a prominent role to play when it came to security issues . He said he did not think that the Knessot had a role in security .
 Ben-Gurion and his immediate associates were prepared to say whatever was necessary for what they believed to be the good of the state . They were not contemptuous of the Knesset, whose deliberations on the issue were held in the House .
 In his biography of BenGurion, Michael Bar-Zohar tells of the prime minister's determination to shield his and the Israeli Army's responsibility for the brutal 1953 slaying of seventy Jordanians in the border village of Kibiya .
 A statement was issued in Ben-Gurion's name blaming the inhabitants of nearby Jewish border settlements . A statement blamed the atrocity on the residents of nearby settlements .
 The nun committed no sin in lying, Ben-Gurion argued, ""because her lie was designed to save human life" Ben Gurion argued . The nun's lies were designed to "save human life," he said .
 79 other issues were accepted with respect with respect, but saw themselves as pragmatists . Unlike the Knesset, they believed in acting first, then talking, then acting .
 Knesset members accepted Ben-Gurion's view that it would be inappropriate to assert their legislative rights in a debate over Dimona . Knessot members, for their part, accepted that it was inappropriate to . assert legislative rights .
 The Knesset was only too eager to accept any government statement denying the intent to produce nuclear weapons . The Israeli government has said it has no intention of producing nuclear arms .
 Even Ernst David Bergmann's categorical denial of any plan to make the bomb was accepted without challenge . Bergmann was widely known for his involvement with the bomb, but his involvement in the bomb is widely known .
 Bergmann still serving as chairman and sole member of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission . There had been no commissioners for him to chair for years . Bergmann was in the embarrassing position of still serving .
 Commission members moved en masse to physics department at Weizmann Institute, sources say . Senior government officials hostile to nuclear development refused to allocate funds for them .
 Two of the former commissioners emerged in the 1960s as critics of the nuclear programs . Others, such as Amos Deshalit, ended up being closely involved with Dimona .
 Eisenhower administration retreated in the face of Israeli's shameless denials . The Israeli statements were not challenged in subsequent days and weeks by the Eisenhower administration .
 Effort has been to create more excitement than facts as revealed by Israelis warrant . Effort to create 'excitement than facts', Israeli officials say .
 The notion of ""stilling atmosphere"" would define America's enduring policy toward the Israeli bomb . "Stilling atmosphere" would define U.S. policy .
 Senator Bourke B Hickenlooper interrupted Herter's discussion of Dimona . Herter was discussing the new element in the Middle East when Hickenloper interrupted .
 The powerful senator also knew that he was just blowing off steam in a secret hearing . He also knew he was blowing off his anger in the hearing .
 No one in the lame-duck Eisenhower administration was going to do anything more to take on Israel . Eisenhower administration would not have done anything more than take on the country .
 Strauss certainly knew as much about Dimona as anybody in the intelligence community by the time he left the AEC in 1958 . Strauss knew more than anyone else about the Dimona than he did in the 1950s and '60s .
 There is no evidence that he raised questions about the Israeli weapons program while in government . Neither was known to have ever discussed Dimona after leaving office .
 McCone did not tell McCone, a devout Roman Catholic, about it . McCone is a devout Catholic . He did not say anything about the incident .
 Strauss chose not to talk about the Israeli nuclear program because, as a Jew with deep feelings about the Holocaust, he approved of it . Strauss: "As a Jew, I approve of it. As a Jew"
 Strauss viewed America's nuclear arsenal as essential to survival against the Soviet Union . Strauss: Those who disagreed with him were not merely wrong, they were Communist dupes . Strauss was a conservative investment banker from Virginia who rose to admiral in the Navy Reserves .
 Oppenheimer was one of the original members of the Atomic Energy Commission . He had left his Wall Street firm after the war to serve until 1950 as a member of the commission .
 Strauss and his five fellow commissioners now found themselves proprietors of all fissionable materials . They also were responsible for operating the nation's 84 nuclear reactors and developing atomic bombs .
 Civilian control of the nuclear arsenal was so total that the commission initially did not tell the military either the number or yield of the bombs being manufactured . The commission initially didn't tell the Joint Chiefs of Staff's early nuclear war planning, creating havoc with early nuclear planning .
 Strauss quickly emerged as the strongman of the commission . He became even more powerful in 1953 when Eisenhower asked him to return to the AEC as chairman .
 Strauss supported loyalty oaths for citizens with access to nuclear information . Strauss: "Loyalty oaths should be given to citizens who have access to the nuclear information"
 He was insistent on continued nuclear testing and publicly took issue with those who claimed that fallout from tests was dangerous to human health .
 He fought against attempts by the Eisenhower administration to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty or any other nuclear arms agreement with the Soviet Union . He also fought against talks by President Eisenhower administration .
 Strauss sided with those in the government and Congress who sought to prevent the passing of weapons information to the European allies in fear that the Soviet bloc would gain access to it .
 Atoms for Peace was a program that called for America's allies to be provided with American nuclear technology and nuclear fuel under international safeguards . Eisenhower administration program called for U.S. allies to get nuclear technology under safeguards .
 Smaller nations had no incentive or desire to develop nuclear weapons, experts say . Smaller countries had to be supplied with enriched uranium or plutonium needed to drive nuclear power plants, they say .
 Strauss was, not surprisingly, a proponent of private enterprise . Strauss worked hard to ensure that industry — and not the government — would be permitted to build and operate nuclear power plants .
 J Robert Oppenheimer sparked a furor in the early 1950s by calling on the U.S. to abate the arms race by forgoing the hydrogen bomb . The AEC commissioner became best known to most Americans for his dislike of Oppenheim .
 Strauss led the fight to strip Oppenheimer of his security clearance in 1954 . Strauss led a bitter and successful fight to get him stripped of security clearance . The hearings centered on his loyalty and integrity .
 Strauss directed the FBI to monitor Oppenheimer's movements and tap his telephone, including calls to his attorney, in an effort to make sure that the clearance would be denied . Strauss's activities were not always in the open; evidence subsequently was revealed showing that Strauss had directed .
 Strauss's tactics and his prickly public demeanor ensured that he would never be well liked . Strauss played a major role in American nuclear policy until his death in 1974, at age seventy-seven . Strauss died in 1974 .
 Even close associates viewed him as aloof, arrogant, and calculating . Many others viewed his demand that he be called ""Straws"" as a sign that he was defensive about being Jewish .
 Dwight Eisenhower would later describe him as among the ""towering governmental figures"" of Western civilization . Eisenhower trusted his judgment and called him a "towering government figure"
 Eisenhower offered Strauss a series of top jobs, including secretary of state and White House chief of staff . Eisenhower offered him top jobs after Strauss decided to leave the AEC in 1958 . Strauss eventually agreed to become secretary of commerce .
 Strauss was caught being less than candid with the Senate Commerce Committee . The 1959 confirmation hearings were a disaster . Strauss was rejected by the Senate .
 He was the only cabinet nominee not to be confirmed during Eisenhower's two terms . He was only the eighth such rejection in American history .
 He also continued to advocate the use of atomic energy . In 1964, he visited Israel to consult with the government on a proposed nuclear-powered water desalinization plant .
 Strauss met and befriended his Israeli counterpart, Ernst David Bergmann . Strauss attended most of the international conferences on the peaceful uses of the atom .
 Neither Strauss's biographer nor his son, Lewis, knew that Strauss and Strauss had met . Strauss's relationship with Strauss was a relationship shared with few; neither knew that they met .
 Strauss's friendship with Bergmann provides the strongest evidence of Strauss's sympathy for the Israeli nuclear weapons program . The friendship is strongest evidence that Strauss sympathizes with Israel .
 In fall of 1966, Strauss used his influence to get Bergmann a two-month appointment as a visiting fellow at the prestigious Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton . Bergmann died at the age of 92 in September 1986 .
 Strauss, who never graduated from college, had joined the institute's board of trustees during World War II . Strauss continued to be one of its major contributors and fund-raisers . Strauss was a major contributor to the institute .
 The institute rarely dealt with chemists — its fellows are physicists and mathematicians . The rules were bent for Strauss, but he was allowed to work .
 Bergmann was forced to resign his posts at the defense ministry and as head of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission after his continued objections to Prime Minister Levi Eshkol's decision to delay full-scale nuclear weapons production . In part because of pressure from President Lyndon B Johnson, President Johnson
 It was only after Bergmann arrived, Kaysen added, that he learned who he was and what he did . Bergmann is a former police officer in Germany . He was arrested in 2009 after being found guilty of sexual assault .
 It became clear that he and Strauss were close, and that he was working on [the Israeli nuclear] weapons program . The Israeli nuclear weapons program was 'clearly clear' that Strauss was working for Israel .
 Bergmann was clearly telling Kaysen all that he had told Strauss . It was also obvious that Bergmann had told him what he had said to Strauss .
 Strauss was ambivalent about his Jewishness and so opposed to any spread of nuclear weapons technology . Strauss was in favor of a nuclear-armed Israel, says Kaysen, a distinguished political economist who had been deputy assistant to President for national security affairs .
 Strauss's political life was so mired in turbulence, the public and the press never had a chance to get more than a glimpse of his private feelings about being Jewish and his guilt about not doing more in the 1930s to save Jews caught up in the Holocaust . Strauss's guilt about
 Eisenhower had briefly toyed with the idea of naming him secretary of defense, but decided that his Jewishness would cause too many problems with the Arab nations in the Middle East . In DUAL LOYALTY 87 1957, Eisenhower decided to give him the title of defense .
 Strauss's activities on behalf of a Jewish homeland apparently were not known, not even to his close associates in the Atomic Energy Commission . Strauss worked for the Jewish community in the 1950s and '60s .
 Strauss had been asked by the American Jewish Committee to attend an international conference in London on the Jewish plight . Strauss had attended the conference in 1933 . Strauss was asked to attend the conference .
 The conferees agreed that an ""astronomical sum"" of money from the United States must be raised to help resettle what could be millions of Jews .
 Strauss, then fervently opposed to a Jewish state in Palestine, was the only delegate to raise his voice in dissent during the conference, a position he came to regret . Strauss was the last delegate to voice his opposition to a state of Israel in Palestine .
 Strauss would spend much time trying to convince the British government to donate a large chunk of colonial Africa for resettlement by European refugees, Jews and non-Jews alike . Six years later, Strauss would try to convince a large part of Africa for European refugees and Jews .
 Strauss and American colleagues agreed that as much as $300 million could be raised . Strauss and his American colleagues, who included Bernard Baruch, were agreed that the money could be used .
 Strauss carried a letter to London from Baruch in the late summer of 1939 noting that the land to be ceded in Africa could be "cleaned up with modern equipment" Strauss carried the letter to the British Embassy in London in 1939 .
 Missing from the Baruch-Strauss proposal is any thought or concern about the Africans who lived in the areas to be ceded . The proposal is also missing from any thought of the African people who lived there .
 Any such resettlement would have resulted in internal conflict similar to that raging then — and now — between the Israelis and those Palestinians who were ousted from their homelands by the Zionist movement . Israel's settlement would have inevitably led to internal conflict .
 More than fifteen hundred delegates from seventy nations, including Israel, took part . Israel's delegation was led by Ernst Bergmann, who led the delegation .
 Moshe Sharett, then foreign minister, received a full report from a deputy . Deputy thought it important to tell Sharett that at least three hundred delegates were Jewish .
 In 1978, Brugioni and Robert Poirier noticed that the camps were in direct alignment with the reconnaissance path for the Farben complex . The camps were aligned with the reconnaissance path for Farben .
 Brugioni knew from his own experiences that reconnaissance cameras were always turned on well before the target was reached . He said he knew from himself that the cameras would be turned on before they were reached .
 The photographs were invaluable as a historical record . The Nazis had forbidden any photography while the camps were in operation . President Jimmy Carter personally presented a monograph based on them to the President's Commission on the Holocaust .
 Allied warplanes also were attempting to break the back of the Luftwaffe in late 1944 by heavy raids on all of the synthetic fuel plants in Germany, Brugioni said . The photo interpretation and bomb damage assessment is another demand for photo interpretation .
 Strauss, nonetheless, worked hard at reining in his intense feelings about being Jewish and about the Holocaust . Many former subordinates from the AEC remarked in interviews about his unrelenting hostility to Germans and his reluctance to deal with Germans on any issue .
 The former chairman followed the tradition of fasting during Yom Kippur, the holiest Jewish holiday . Myron Kratzer, who is also Jewish, did not find out until Strauss left the AEC .
 Strauss had been asked by Eisenhower after his retirement to head the American delegation to an international meeting in Vienna, and on Yom Kippur, Kratzer recalled, "Strauss did not show up"
 Strauss's background and strong feelings about the Holocaust cannot be disregarded in analyzing why he did not tell anyone, especially John McCone, about Dimona . Strauss's history and his strong feelings should be considered in his decision .
 Strauss's actions have been a real concern to the American intelligence community since the creation of Israel in 1948 . The issue of ""dual loyalty" has been a very real concern for the U.S. intelligence community .
 American Jews were routinely barred for many years from dealing with Israeli issues inside CIA headquarters . None of the early station chiefs or agents assigned to Israel was Jewish .
 Edward W Proctor, who served as deputy director for intelligence in the mid-1970s, was not given access to all of the sensitive files in connection with Israel .
 Jews were excluded from Hebrew language training (at one time called ""special Arabic"") in the National Security Agency . Such training is a prerequisite for being assigned to NSA field stations that intercept Israeli communications .
 There was a flat ban in the Navy communications intelligence agency (known as the Naval Security Group) on the assignment of a Jew to a Middle East issue .
 There was a widespread belief among American foreign service officers that any diplomatic reporting criti90 THE SAMSON OPTION cal of Israel would somehow be delivered within days to the Israeli embassy in Washington . There was — and still is — still is, a widespread believed among American .
 In 1963 the Kennedy administration agreed with Israel that neither country would spy on or conduct espionage activities against the other . In 1963, Kennedy administration informally agreed with Israeli government that neither would spy .
 The agreement was sought by American officials, a former Kennedy aide recalled, in an attempt to limit the extent of Israeli penetration of America . The deal was sought in an effort to limit Israeli penetration, the aide said .
 The truth is that Jews and non-Jews alike looked the other way when it came to Israel's nuclear capability . Israel has a nuclear capability, Israel's President Barack Obama says .
 The notion of dual loyalty solely as a Jewish problem is far too narrow . The Jewish survivors who became Israelis had and still have enormous appeal to Americans of all backgrounds, says David Frum .
 The primary effect of ""dual loyalty"" has been a form of self-censorship that has kept the U.S. government from dealing rationally and coherently with the strategic and political issues raised by a nuclear-armed Israel .
 The issue is not whether rules or laws have been broken, but that very few officials who supported Israel, Jewish or not, have used their position to try to obtain a complete and accurate picture of the Israeli nuclear program .
 Government bureaucrats in nonproliferation field often accused of being 'zealots' and not fully trustworthy . Those who even tried to learn all there was to learn about Dimona were accused of not being trustworthy .
 Being Jewish inevitably raises questions, even among the most fair-minded of men . Yet, being Jewish inevitably raised questions . Yet being Jewish raised questions even among most of the most .
 He knew there was evidence inside the CIA suggesting that American and European Jews had been directly involved in the financing and construction of Dimona from the start .
 In interviews for this book with senior officials of the U.S. nuclear weapons program, none expressed any doubt about Israel's nuclear ambitions . In interviews with senior U.N. officials of this book, none of them expressed doubt about Israeli nuclear ambitions.
 Most told of close personal friendships with Israeli physicists who were working on the Israeli weapons program . Most of the physicists were physicists who worked on Israeli weapons programs .
 No one with the sophistication and expertise of Lewis Strauss could have had any question about the significance of a secret reactor in the Negev . Strauss' expert says he had no doubt about the importance of the secret reactor .
 His widow, Alice, still spry in 1991 at the age of eighty-eight, acknowledged that her husband, who was very close-mouthed about his work, would have approved of Israel trying to defend itself .
 Strauss's failure to discuss Dimona with John McCone may have been done in the belief that he had an obligation to ensure that what happened to the Jews of Europe under Hitler could not happen again . Strauss may have thought he had a duty to ensure the Jews were not targeted .
 Similar choices were made over the next thirty years by Jews and non-Jews in the U.S. government, who looked the other way when it came to Dimona .
 Many American Jews, perhaps understandably, believe the question of ""dual loyalty"" is an issue that should never be raised in public . Many Americans believe the issue should never ever be raised .
 Non-Jews fear that any discussion of Jewish support for Israel at the expense of the U.S. would feed anti-Semitism . They fear that they are convinced that any Jewish support of Israel precludes primary loyalty to the United States .
 A public accounting of Israel's nuclear capacity would trigger renewed fears among Arab nations of a worldwide Jewish conspiracy . A second issue, in terms of U.S. Jewish support for Israel, is that any public accounting would trigger Arab fears of a Jewish conspiracy and a redoubling of Arab
 Many senior nonproliferation officials in the U.S. were convinced by the early 1990s that the Middle East remained the one place where nuclear weapons might be used . The Middle East was one place in the world that might be the only place to use nuclear weapons .
 Strauss's former subordinates in the AEC find it difficult to believe that his Jewishness would have been the reason that he would not tell John McCone about Dimona .
 Wells: Whether Strauss did or did not tell McCone wasn't that important . Wells: In Wells's view, it's not important whether Strauss told McCone what he did or didn't tell him .
 Wells had been in Israel in 1958, he recalled, and learned then — as had any government official — that Israel was building a nuclear reactor . Wells was in Israel when he learned then that the country was building its own nuclear reactor, Wells said . Wells: "I learned then,
 Feinberg shared the early dreams of his good friend Ernst David Bergmann of a nuclear-armed Israel . Feinberg also had been a ""player"" — to use his word — who shared his dreams of a nuke-armed nation .
 He served publicly as president of the Israel Bond Organization, while privately helping to raise some of the many millions of dollars needed to build the controversial reactor and reprocessing plant at Dimona .
 Feinberg accepted that the expanding and expensive operations at Dimona had to be financed outside of the normal Israeli budget process . There were too many critics of the nuclear program inside and outside Israel to raise money any other way .
 The unwanted publicity at the end of the Eisenhower administration had only added to Ben-Gurion's and Shimon Peres's determination to protect the secret .
 Feinberg became an inside advocate for Ben-Gurion and Peres . President Kennedy established himself as firmly opposed to the Israeli bomb . Feinberg was more than just a fund-raiser in all this .
 Feinberg remains proud of his support for Israel and its secret weapons program . Feinberg: "I'm proud of my support of Israel and my support for the country"
 His most pitched battle on behalf of Israel came in the early days of the Kennedy administration when he successfully fought off initial Kennedy insistence that an American inspection team be permitted full and unfettered access to Dimona .
 Feinberg was invited to a White House meeting with the President, who had won the worldwide admiration of Jews for his decision to recognize the State of Israel earlier in the year . Feinberg is a Democratic campaign finance committee member .
 Feinberg told Truman's aides that he would be able to guarantee the money by the end of the day . Feinberg arranged for Truman's whistle-stop train campaign to be met by local Jewish leaders at each stop .
 Among Feinberg's prize possessions is a seven-page handwritten letter of thanks and praise from Truman . Feinberg says Truman wrote a letter of praise and thanks .
 Feinberg estimates that he and his Jewish colleagues raised ""in the neighborhood of $400,000"" during the 1948 whistle-stop campaign . Feinberg is credited with raising more than $1 million .
 Truman understood the rules and at some point discussed naming Feinberg ambassador to Israel . Feinberg was the first to be named ambassador to the country .
 Feinberg's account of his bankrolling of Harry Truman is A Presidential STRUGGLE 95 found in none of the contemporary histories of that period,* and cannot be fully verified . Feinberg: "A Presidential Struggle 95" is not found in any of the
 Strong evidence is available that Feinberg's role was as pivotal as he suggests, but there is not enough evidence to support his claim . Feinberg is a prominent figure in the history of American politics .
 Feinberg's intervention was crucial during the whistlestop campaign, says Clifford . Clifford, a Truman aide and poker-playing crony, has a vivid recollection of Feinberg intervention .
 Keeping the campaign alive, he recalled, was ""as difficult a task as anybody ever had" Keeping a campaign alive was "as difficult to do," he said .
 One of the radio networks refused to broadcast a much-touted Truman foreign policy speech unless it was paid for in advance . This was the pre-television era . Disaster loomed in Oklahoma City when the speech was broadcast nationally .
 I always gave credit to Abe for saving that particular program and saving us that embarrassment. Abe was responsible for saving us from embarrassment, I said .
 Feinberg was also active in fund-raising for Adlai E Stevenson, the losing Democratic candidate in 1952 and 1956, and was a strong backer of Senator Stuart Symington, Democrat of Missouri, for the Democratic presidential nomination .
 A few weeks after Kennedy's * Campaign historians were not the only ones who missed the Feinberg story . None of the contemporary daily press or television journalists covering events in 1948 wrote about the financial ties between Feinberg and the Truman campaign .
 I told Kennedy I was going to get in touch with Abe Feinberg, who I thought was a key Jew . "I told Kennedy, who was Jewish, that I thought he would be a good man," he said .
 Kennedy's message was enough for the men at Feinberg's apartment . The men were able to send Kennedy a message to Feinberg . Kennedy says he's not sure what happened .
 Kennedy had gone upstairs to a separate room with Ribicoff to await their judgment, Feinberg recalled . Kennedy had been in the room at the time of the alleged incident .
 The group agreed on an initial contribution of $500,000 to the presidential campaign . More to come, with more to come .
 Kennedy was anything but grateful the next morning in describing the session to Charles L Bartlett, a newspaper columnist and close friend . The next morning he described the session in a letter to Charles Bartlett .
 Kennedy's social friends and colleagues agreed that Kennedy had gone through prep school at Choate and Harvard College with few close Jewish friends . He had driven to Bartlett's home in northwest Washington and dragged his friend on a walk, where he recounted a much different version of the meeting .
 Kennedy was a close schoolboy friend with Alan Lerner, his biographer says . Lerner was one of Kennedy's closest schoolboy friends, according to Schlesinger, Jr., Jr.
 Bartlett recalled Kennedy promising to himself that ""if he ever did get to be President, he was going to do something about it"" — a candidate's perennial need for money and resulting vulnerability to the demands of those who contributed to the campaign . Bartlett also recalled Kennedy's promise to
 Presidential elections, Kennedy declared, were ""the supreme test of the democratic process"" in the United States . Presidential elections were the ultimate test of democracy in the U.S. Kennedy declared .
 Despite Kennedy's tough words to Bartlett, Feinberg's influence inside the White House was established by the end of Kennedy's first year in office . Feinberg did little to diminish it over the next two years, and the young President did little .
 The goal was to broaden the base of a candidate's financial support and reduce dependence on specialinterest groups and the wealthy . The goal of the goal is to broaden the base and reduce reliance on special interest groups .
 In 1962, Kennedy submitted five draft bills to reform presidential campaign financing to Congress . None of the five bills survived .
 Kennedy tried again in 1963, submitting two more draft bills to Congress; again neither survived . Kennedy's draft bills were never passed, but he tried again .
 The political expediencies that forced him to be ambivalent about Dimona had to be frustrating had been frustrating . He said: "The political opportunities forced him to be ambivalent about Dimona must be frustrating"
 Kennedy eventually agreed to a series of facesaving American inspections of the Israeli nuclear facilities . The label ""inspection"" hardly does justice to what the Israelis would permit .
 Kennedy appointed former campaign aide Myer Feldman as presidential point man for Jewish and Israeli affairs . Kennedy's complicated feelings about Jewish political power and the Israeli issue were summed up in Feldman appointment .
 President viewed Feldman as a necessary evil whose highly visible White House position was a political debt that had to be paid . Feldman's strong support for Israel was widely known, and his support for the country was widely seen .
 In 1966, President Lyndon Johnson promoted Wilfred to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit . President Johnson was anxious to do something for his friend Abe Feinberg .
 Robert Kennedy pushed for the nomination of Edward Weinfeld, widely considered to be the most distinguished jurist on the lower federal court . Kennedy understood that he could never match Abe Feinberg's influence with Johnson .
 Wilfred Feinberg was chief judge of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in 1980 . Feinberg served with distinction and went on to become chief judge in 1980. Feinberg also served as chief judge at the Court for Appeals .
 President's most senior advisers desperately sought to cut Feldman out of the flow of Middle East paperwork . The result often was bureaucratic chaos .
 He sent nothing to Feldman, because Feldman was getting involved in issues in which he had no business . "He sent nothing, because he sent nothing," he said. "I'm not going to send anything to Feldman," he added .
 The White House staff aides might well have been taking their cues on treating Feldman from their young President .
 Kennedy, having provided special access for Feldman, couldn't resist making wisecracks behind his back . Kennedy was having special access to Feldman, but he couldn't help Feldman .
 Robert Kennedy publicly expressed his cynical view of Feldman in an interview published in 1988 by the John F Kennedy Library .
 Wiesner played a major role on disarmament issues for the Kennedy administration . He served as a board member of the Weizmann Institute and repeatedly ran into Ben-Gurion on visits to Israel .
 Wiesner thought Ben-Gurion's answer to the question marked him as a liberal in his eyes and limited his access to Israel . That answer, he thought, marked him a liberal and limited him access to the Israeli government .
 President knew firsthand, as those around him only suspected, that Israel was intent on building the bomb . He had been allowed to visit Dimona in 1962 and knew firsthand .
 Israel's bomb, and what to do about it, became a White House fixation . It was part of the secret presidential agenda that would remain hidden for the next thirty years .
 None of the prominent John F Kennedy presidential biographies say anything about a nuclear-armed Israel or even mention Abe Feinberg .
 The U-2 intelligence collected by the CIA's Arthur Lundahl and Dino Brugioni continued to be treated as higher than top-secret . The CIA continued to treat the intelligence collected as higher-secret, leaving a huge gap .
 State Department appointed William R Crawford, a young foreign service officer, as director of Israeli affairs . Crawford was appointed shortly after Kennedy's inauguration in 1963 .
 Early on, Crawford recalled, the Air Force attache in Israel managed to snap yet another long-range photograph of the reactor dome at Dimona . Crawford recalled that the photo was taken by the attache of the Israeli Air Force .
 The idea was to reassure the Egyptian president that Dimona was not a weapons plant . It was to prevent Egypt from beginning its own nuclear research .
 The inspection of Dimona was to be carried out by an independent team of experts from the International Atomic Energy Agency . Israel agreed in principle to permit the IAEA to replace the United States in the twice-a-year monitoring of its small research reactor at Nahal Soreq
 The letter was forwarded to the office of George Ball, then the under secretary of state,* and dispatched . It was then sent to George Ball's office, rewritten and dispatched.
 Ben-Gurion's letter to Kennedy has not been made public, either by the U.S. or by Israel . Crawford recalls the tone of the letter, which was published in the 1960s .
 In that first exchange, Crawford said, Ben-Gurion did not agree to the IAEA inspection of Dimona . Crawford: In that exchange, the Israeli leader agreed to an inspection of the Dimona site . Crawford said that Ben-gurion agreed to the inspection .
 Israel's bomb program, and the continuing exchange of letters about it, would complicate, and eventually poison, Kennedy's relationship with David Ben-Gurion . The bomb program would complicate and poison the relationship between the two men . Kennedy's letters would complicate his relationship with the Israeli leader .
 Israeli prime minister had been rebuffed in seeking a state visit to Washington . With the aid of Abe Feinberg, he contrived a May 1961 visit to the United States .
 Ball's office held on to the letter for days, eventually provoking a complaint from the White House . Feinberg refused, and the letter was eventually sent to Ball's attorney .
 Ben-Gurion was anxious about the session, in fear that continued American pressure over Israel's nuclear weapons project would lead to an unwanted flare-up . He was anxious that the continued pressure over the project would end up leading to a nuclear crisis .
 Dimona already was on politically shaky ground among the various factions inside Israel . A flap between Ben-Gurion and Kennedy on the issue could be devastating to the concept of a nuclear-armed Israel .
 No public record of the Kennedy-Ben-Gurion meeting has been released, and it is not reliably known what transpired on the nuclear issue .
 Ben-Gurion later recalled that he once again asserted that Dimona was being constructed solely for research purposes . He said Dimona would only be used to build a research facility .
 Kennedy brought up the RabiWigner visit to Dimona and expressed satisfaction with their conviction that the reactor was designed for peaceful purposes . Kennedy also expressed satisfaction that Dimona was designed to be peaceful .
 Nobel Prize winner Wigner won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1963 . He was visiting Israel when he was asked to visit Dimona by the Israelis .
 He ""vaguely"" recalled being accompanied by Rabi, a 1944 Nobel laureate, in interviews in 1989 and 1991 . He said he was accompanied by the Nobel laureate .
 Wigner urged the U.S. to begin building the atom bomb before World War II . He cautioned that his memory had faded with age . Albert Einstein had urged the United States to build the bomb before WWII .
 Ben-Gurion's most memorable moment came when he was leaving the hotel room . The former Israeli prime minister was leaving his hotel room at the end of the day .
 Ben-Gurion, known to his associates as B.G., made similar complaints to Abe Feinberg . He made the complaint to Feinberg, known as "B.G.G."
 Ben-Gurion's complaints about Kennedy and the pressure about Dimona unquestionably linked to an all-important agenda that was remaining on track . The complaints were also linked to the ongoing pressure on Dimona .
 In April, a Norwegian official spent two weeks conducting Norway's first inspection of the heavy water that had been sold to Israel . The inspection was conducted for the first time .
 The inspection, closely monitored by Ernst Bergmann, couldn't have gone better . The inspection went well, with the inspection being closely monitored .
 Dimona was not yet in operation, and the water, still in its original shipping barrels, was stored near the small and totally innocent Nahal Soreq research reactor at Rehovot .
 Hauge's report to the Norwegian foreign ministry was astonishing in its uncritical acceptance of all of Bergmann's assertions . Hauge reported to the foreign ministry in Norway .
 Professor Bergmann at an earlier point had given in104 THE SAMSON OPTION formation to his colleagues in the United States about the reactor . But Israel had not kept America officially informed of the reactor, Bergmann said .
 Norway's heavy water would be used to power a twenty-megawatt ""research reactor"" that would be a model for a much larger power reactor .
 The multistage, solid-propellant Shavit II soared fifty miles into the upper atmosphere . It was said to be designed to measure upper atmospheric winds as part of a series of experiments .
 Kennedy was far from persuaded by inspections by Rabi and Wigner that Dimona was anything but a nuclear weapons production facility . Kennedy, despite his remarks to Ben-Gurion, was not persuaded .
 There was no Shavit I, Shimon Peres told a political rally on the night of the launch, because of the possibility that the name would be corrupted to Shavits Aleph, since aleph is the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet . A nu* There was
 Ben-Gurion, who was admitting nothing, would back off . And there was no indication he would back down . The Israeli prime minister is not expected to do so .
 The Israeli prime minister, in subsequent private communications to the White House, began to refer to the President as ""young man" Kennedy made clear to associates that he found letters to be offensive .
 President's apprehension about the Israeli bomb undoubtedly was a factor in his surprising appointment of John McCone to replace Allen Dulles as CIA director in the wake of the Bay of Pigs debacle .
 McCone had spoken out against the White House's much-desired test ban treaty with the Soviet Union . McCone was a prominent Republican who spoke out against test ban .
 There is no public record of what the two men discussed, although Ben-Gurion's latest annoying letter had arrived only days before . The Soviet Union had announced the resumption of nuclear testing, ending the informal U.S.-USSR moratorium .
 Kennedy complained to Walt Elder, his executive assistant in the CIA, that Kennedy had complained to him about the fact that he was getting conflicting advice on the whole range of nuclear issues .
 Kennedy asked McCone to prepare a written analysis of the issue and report back within a few weeks . Kennedy has asked him to prepare an analysis and report within weeks .
 President tossed the report aside and offered McCone the CIA job . McCone did so and, upon his return, as he told Elder, the President tossed it aside .
 McCone would join the administration with enormous credibility with the press, with the Congress, and especially with Dwight Eisenhower . Eisenhower was quietly going about life in retirement in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania .
 In one of their first meetings after McCone took the job, Kennedy complained about Ben-Gurion's letters . The letters continued to shrug off the issue of international inspection of Dimona, the White House's key demand .
 Kennedy talked to McCone about it and McCone said, 'Write him a stiff note. Kennedy talked about it' McCone told Kennedy to write him a 'stiff note'
 Mention the United States' international obligations, and our suspicions of the French . Mentioning the U.S. obligations, mention the United Nations' obligations .
 McCone would dictate a detailed memorandum to the file, which was then made available to Elder for further action and safekeeping . Elder would call the White House and say, 'I'm on my way to see the President/ "" After such meetings, McCone would immediately dictate a
 McCone, recognizing that the Israelis were keeping close watch over the U.S. intelligence officers inside their country, told his men, ""We can't do our job without leaving traces"
 It also could end the debate about what Israel was, or was not, doing at Dimona . The Israeli government has been criticized for its handling of the site .
 The CIA's on-the-ground agents, obviously recruited from a foreign country, were unable to get inside . The CIA was unable to find the location of the attack .
 The U-2 once again proved that photographs — even sensational ones — weren't enough . The U.2 once more proved that .
 By December 1961, CIA officials had set up a new agency, the National Photo Interpretation Center, with Arthur Lundahl in charge . Lundahl was in charge of the new agency .
 NPIC came through early with a huge photographic mosaic of Israel, capturing not only Dimona but all other possible nuclear facilities . NPIC captured Dimona and other possible sites in Israel .
 Increased economic aid and a series of private letters had led to a warming of relations by mid-1962 . Senior Egyptian officials were reassuring the White House that they also desired improved relations with the U.S.
 The question of Dimona was repeatedly raised at Arab League conferences on defense and foreign ministry issues during 1961 . No resolution was reached except for a shared Arab determination to build up conventional arms .
 The Kennedy administration reassured the Egyptians that it would continue to press until it obtained IAEA inspection rights to Dimona . Israel agreed to provide a summary of the findings to Nasser .
 Ben-Gurion had no intention of permitting a legitimate inspection — for obvious reasons . The state of Israel was not allowed to inspect any of the buildings .
 He had been tipped off about the inspection demands by Myer Feldman and relayed his political complaints through him . He said he never discussed the matter directly with the President .
 He said he'd been instructed to tell me to change my mind and release the planes . "He told me he'd be instructed to change his mind," he said .
 Feinberg and Ben-Gurion could not overcome continued presidential pressure for inspection of Dimona . In the end, however, the end of the war would not overcome presidential pressure .
 In late 1961 a group of prominent Israeli scholars and scientists had privately banded together to form the Committee for the Denuclearization of the Middle East . Two former members of Bergmann's Atomic Energy Commission were among them .
 Kennedy administration authorized sale of Hawk surface-to-air missiles to Israel in mid-1962 . Ben-Gurion's decision to permit inspections was the Kennedy administration's decision, he says .
 The administration had spent months secretly reviewing and analyzing the Hawk sale . The sale was carefully laid the political groundwork in an attempt to avoid a political explosion in the Middle East .
 The ambassadors chose the Hawk sale as ""least damaging"" to American interests . Egypt and other Arab nations would be informed in advance of the sale .
 Kennedy did not tell his ambassadors that inspection rights to Dimona were at stake . Dimona inspection rights are at stake, he says .
 Myer Feldman was dispatched in August to inform the Israeli government of the sale and what Jack Kennedy wanted in return . That message was personally relayed to Ben-Gurion by Myer .
 Feldman, asked about his mission, said that it would be ""too strong" to suggest that inspection of Dimona was a ""quid pro quo" in return for the Hawks . Feldman said it would not be 'too strong' to suggest it was a 'quid pro
 Dimona did not have to be inspected by the International Atomic Energy Agency . Dimona was not inspected by IAEA, but did have to undergo inspection .
 Ben-Gurion had insisted in his private exchanges with Kennedy that such inspections would violate Israel's sovereignty . The Israeli prime minister had insisted such inspections violate his country's sovereignty.
 The White House eventually agreed to send a specially assembled American inspection team into Dimona . Dimona was the first reactor to be built in the 1960s .
 There were extensive practice sessions in the fake control room . Israeli technicians sought to avoid any slips when the Americans arrived .
 The goal was to convince inspectors that no chemical reprocessing plant existed or was possible . The goal is to convince them that no such plant exists or is possible .
 One big fear was that the Americans would seek to inspect the reactor core physically, and presumably discover that Dimona was utilizing large amounts of heavy water . Much of the heavy water was illicitly obtained from France and Norway . The reactor was operating at far greater output than the acknowledged twenty-
 The American team spent days at Dimona, climbing through the various excavations, but finding nothing . Many facilities had yet to be constructed, many of them still had to be built .
 They did not question the fact that the reactor core was off-limits . They gave no sign that they were in any way suspicious of the control room .
 The Israelis stationed engineers in a concealed area in the control room to monitor the machinery and make sure that nothing untoward took place . The Israelis even stationed a few engineers in the concealed area .
 None of the Americans spoke or understood Hebrew . The cover-up was made much easier by the fact that none of the U.S. knew Hebrew .
 The Americans were led by Floyd L Culler, Jr., a leading expert in the science of nuclear reprocessing . Culler was deputy director of the Chemical Technology Division at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee . The first uranium for American nuclear weapons had been enriched .
 Culler said he reported to the White House that the reactor he and his colleagues inspected was nothing more than a standard reactor . Culler: At the time, Culler reported the reactor was a "standard reactor" Culler says he reported it to White House .
 Culler retired in 1989 as president of the Electrical Power Research Institute in Palo Alto, California . Culler was surprised but not shocked that his team had been duped by a false control room .
 i960 the CIA's photo interpretation team concluded that a site was being excavated at Dimona for a chemical reprocessing plant . Culler was far more disturbed to learn that by i960 team had concluded that site was excavated in Dimona . i960 had even attempted to
 Such intelligence had not been provided to him, he said, and should have been . Such intelligence was not provided, he added .
 Culler shrugged off the Israeli cheating as inevitable, but not necessary . Culler shrugs off the issue as inevitable but not needed .
 He viewed his inspection as ""part of the game of wearing away, of finding ways to not reach the point of taking action"" against Israel's nuclear weapons program .
 He is not convinced today, he said, that Israel was wrong to develop its own independent deterrent . He said he is not at all convinced today that Israel should have developed its own deterrent .
 Culler wrote his secret report on inspection during stopovers in Athens and Rome . Culler dutifully included an account of the Israeli concern .
 CIA 'got to me as soon as I got off the plane'" in Washington, he added . He was rushed into a debriefing .
 The constant bargaining over Dimona was a factor in aborting an ambitious Kennedy administration initiative to resolve the Palestinian refugee issue . Kennedy administration had to abandon an ambitious initiative to solve the Palestinian refugees issue .
 Like all American Presidents since 1948, Kennedy came into office with a belief that he could find a way to bring long-term peace to the Middle East .
 As a House and Senate member, Kennedy had always been a public supporter of Israel . Kennedy had repeatedly expressed understanding of the aspirations of Arab nationalism and sympathy for the plight of the Palestinian refugees .
 In a February 1958 speech before a Jewish group, he declared that the refugee question ""must be resolved through negotiations, resettlement, and outside international assistance" He declared that refugees must be resettled through negotiations and resettlement .
 Kennedy asked for innovative ideas, and suggested another try be made to resolve the Palestinian refugee problem in the West Bank and Gaza Strip stemming from Israel's victory in the 1948-49 Arab-Israeli War . Kennedy's department suggested that the problem be made .
 Individual refugees would be asked in a confidential questionnaire if they wanted to return to a former home in Israel . The State Department came up with a new twist, in which individual refugees will be asked if they want to return .
 Those who ruled out a return would be compensated by Israel for the seizure of their property . They would be given a chance to emigrate to another Arab country or anywhere else in the world .
 There had been bitter protests by Arabs during the Eisenhower years over the failure to implement the United Nations resolution .
 State Department studies showed that no more than 70,000 to 100,000 Palestinians would opt to return to their seized Israeli homesteads over ten years . That number was deemed manageable by the U.S. State Department .
 Israelis also would be given veto power over every returning Palestinian, in an attempt to minimize the security risk . The Israelis would also have veto power on every Palestinian returning to the region .
 President Kennedy authorized a major — and highly secret — State Department effort to implement the new variant of Resolution 194 . A workable compromise was accepted by the Arab states and endorsed by the White House .
 BenGurion's decision not to torpedo resettlement project was based on his belief that the Arabs would never accept direct negotiations on any issue with Israel, Meyer says . Meyer served as ambassador to Jordan, Iran, and Japan before retiring in 1972 .
 When expected last-minute Arab rejections did not come, Meyer said, ""Israel panicked,"" and provoked a wave of intense political pressure from American Jews upon the White House . Meyer: "Israel panicked"
 In the end, President Kennedy backed down, bitterly disappointing his State Department supporters by doing so . Kennedy was already in a war with Ben-Gurion over Dimona .
 Ben-Gurion, then embattled in the most serious crisis of his political career, was forced out of office . One solution was to help get him out of the cabinet . The Israeli prime minister was forced to resign .
 Kennedy made what amounted to a direct move against the prime minister's leadership . A few days after Christmas 1962, Kennedy made the move . Kennedy made it a few days before Christmas 1962 .
 Meir made no secret of the fact that she resented BenGurion for permitting his acolytes, Shimon Peres and Moshe Dayan, to operate behind the back of the foreign ministry . She and other party members who had been born in Eastern Europe, such as
 The declassified memorandum on the Kennedy-Meir meeting contains no specific mention of nuclear weapons . Some paragraphs were deleted for national security reasons . There is little doubt that Kennedy pointedly raised the issue .
 The memorandum further shows that Kennedy made an extraordinary private commitment to Israel's defense . Kennedy made a private commitment, according to the memorandum .
 Our position in these matters may seem to seem to be asking Israel to neglect its interests, says Israel . Israel has a history of neglecting its interests in the Middle East, says the UK .
 The reason we do it is not that we are unfriendly to Israel, but in order to help more effectively. The reason is that we help Israel more effectively, says Israel's prime minister .
 In case of an invasion the U.S. would come to the support of Israel, Israel says . "I think it is quite clear that in case of invasion the United States would support Israel," she says .
 President Kennedy expressed his regret that Arab resettlement plan had failed . He said he would not give up trying to find some solution to the refugee situation .
 What we want from Israel arises because our relationship is a two-way street, he says . Israel's relationship with the U.S. is a 'two-way' relationship, he adds .
 Kennedy's commitment to Golda Meir, along with his decision to sell the Hawk missiles, amounted to a turning point in U.S. foreign policy toward Israel . Kennedy's decision to buy Hawk missiles from Israel was one little noted today even today .
 Kennedy offer might have been enough, if Israel's goal had been to forge a military partnership with the U.S. Kennedy offer was enough, but it wasn't enough . Kennedy offer may not have all been enough for Israel .
 John McCone remained agitated about the Israeli bomb and the failure of his agency to determine whether a chemical reprocessing plant was buried underground at Dimona .
 Kennedy was more outspoken than any other Kennedy insider on the issue . At a 1962 Washington dinner party, he publicly reprimanded Charles Lucet, a senior French official, for France's role in the Israeli bomb .
 McCone then turned his back on Lucet and did not speak to him for the rest of the evening . France's high standing with the President and his wife, who were both Francophiles, was a pointed rebuff .
 In early April 1963, Shimon Peres flew to the capital to meet at the White House on the still-pending Hawk sale . Peres was directly asked by the President about Israeli intentions .
 Kennedy: An Israeli nuclear bomb would create a 'very perilous situation' Kennedy: "An Israeli nuke bomb would ... create a very perilous situation"
 "We have been diligent about keeping an eye on your effort in the atomic field. That's why we have to be vigilant about keeping a watch on your efforts," says NASA .
 The administration's lack of specific information about Israeli intentions was complicated by the fact that many senior members of Congress supported the concept of a nuclear-armed Israel .
 The reactor went critical sometime in 1962 with no significant problems, and was capable of being operated at more than seventy megawatts, far greater than the twenty-four megawatts . Lucet was offended by McCone's action and relayed the incident to Bertrand Goldschmidt .
 Running the plant hotter would create more plutonium by-product to be reprocessed, and a larger nuclear weapons stockpile than any outsider could anticipate . Running a hotter plant would create a larger stockpile than anyone could anticipate, he says .
 Later that year, private French construction companies at Dimona, always eager for business, began again to work on the vital chemical reprocessing plant underground . Despite de Gaulle's insistence that France would have nothing more to do with the Israeli bomb .
 The French would build at a furious pace for the next three years, at high pay, finishing the reprocessing plant and the elaborate waste treatment and safety facilities that were essential .
 Israeli and French scientists continued to cooperate at the French nuclear test site in the Sahara . The experiments became more weapons-oriented as the experiments became weapons-orientated .
 By late 1961, the French were perfecting a series of miniaturized warheads for use in aircraft and, eventually, missiles . The French had begun to begin testing underground tests in 1961 . The tests were part of the French effort to develop miniaturization of warheads .
 There were further tests in the early 1960s of a more advanced Shavit rocket system, with no more public announcements . CIA analysts assumed that the long-range rocket was meant for military use . There were no further public announcements of the system .
 In 1963 Israel paid $100 million to the privately owned Dassault Company of France for the joint development and manufacture of twenty-five mediumrange Israeli missiles . The company was one of the world's most successful missile and aircraft firms .
 The Jericho I missile would be able to deliver a miniaturized nuclear warhead to targets three hundred miles away . It was anticipated that the missile, to be known to the U.S. intelligence community as the Jericho I, would be capable of delivering a mini-nuke war
 By spring of 1963, Kennedy's relationship with Ben-Gurion remained at an impasse over Dimona . Kennedy's correspondence between the two became increasingly sour .
 The Kennedy exchanges with Ben-Gurion also have not been released to U.S. government officials with full clearances . None of those letters has been made public .
 The President made sure that the Israeli prime minister paid for his defiance . Israel's prime minister was forced to apologize for his actions in Israel .
 In late April, Egypt, Syria, and Iraq united to form the short-lived Arab Federation . Such unity was Ben-Gurion's recurring nightmare for Israel .
 He proposed in a letter to the President that the U.S. and Soviet Union join forces to publicly declare the territorial integrity and security of every Middle Eastern state . He instinctively turned to Washington, he said .
 Kennedy rejected Ben-Gurion's offer of a state visit and expressed "real reservations" about any joint statement on the issue with the Soviets . Kennedy rejected offer of state visit .
 President Obama requested that the United States sign a security treaty with Israel . He requested the U.S. sign a treaty with the Israeli government .
 On June 16, 1963, Ben-Gurion abruptly resigned as prime minister and defense minister, ending his fifteen-year reign as Israel's most influential public official . A few weeks later, the Israeli prime minister abruptly resigned .
 Ben-Gurion's last years marked the resurgence of scandal, public distrust, and polarization that marked his last years . The many accounts of his resignation have accurately described his resignation accurately described the resurgence .
 Lavon took his case to the Knesset's foreign affairs and defense committee . Ben-Gurion refused Lavon's request, and Lavon won't accept it . Lavon: "I want to be able to live in peace"
 He charged that Ben-Gurion, Peres, and Dayan had undermined civilian authority over the military . Then he made sure that his allegations were leaked to the press .
 The next step was a cabinet-level committee, set up at Levi Eshkol's instigation, that was to recommend procedures for investigating the Lavon allegations .
 Committee cleared Lavon of authorizing failed operation in Egypt . Lavon was cleared of authorizing the failed operation . Committee was supposed to be dealing with procedural issue .
 Ben-Gurion accused the committee of overstepping its mandate, resigned once again, and called for a new government in an unsuccessful effort to annul the decision . Ben-Israel resigned again after the committee's decision .
 Many opposed Ben-Gurion's violation of political norms and successfully moved for his dismissal from the Histadrut job . Levi Eshkol and Pinhas Sapir were also opposed to the move . Many of those who opposed the move also opposed Lavon .
 Ben-Gurion, arguing that someone had lied, continued to insist that a judicial inquiry be convened . He continued to argue that someone lied, however, that someone should be held accountable . Ben-gurion argued that someone must have lied .
 The public came to see him as a stubborn old man who was trying to keep the issue alive . The affair tarnished his reputation and made what seemed to be his dictatorial methods of running the government more vulnerable .
 Dayan never became prime minister, and Peres waited twenty years for the job . Dayan was the prime minister of Israel, but Peres was never prime minister .
 A second public scandal surfaced in 1962 and 1963 when it was reported that Egypt had developed — with support from some West German scientists — what were alleged to be advanced missiles capable of hitting Israel . Egypt was accused of developing missiles with West German support .
 Golda Meir and her supporters took a hard line on the Egyptian-West German activities, warning that the coalition posed a danger to Israel's national security . Meir: The coalition poses a threat to Israeli security .
 Ben-Gurion was far more skeptical of the threat posed by Egypt's dalliance with West German scientists . In his public statements, he emphasized the contribution that West Germany had made to Israeli security .
 Ben-Gurion had just completed a successful, and secret, negotiation with West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer for modern weaponry, including small arms, helicopters, and spare parts . What the public did not know was that the public had just learned of the deal .
 For Ben-Gurion, there now was ""another Germany,"" profoundly different from the Germany of Hitler's time and far more willing than France and America to keep Israel armed . Israel was far more likely to be armed than France, America and France and Israel did .
 Ben-Gurion's point of view was ignored in the wake of press hysteria over the German aid to Egypt, with newspaper talk of German ""death rays"" and renewed ""final solutions"" — all of which turned out to be exaggerated . Ben-Israel was ignored by the press hysteria
 Street riots in front of Knesset in 1952 to protest initial Israeli-West German talks over compensation for the loss of Jewish lives and property in the Holocaust .
 Cash-starved Israel eventually accepted more than $800 million in reparations . The reparations were eventually accepted by Israel . Israel accepted the reparations for more than a decade .
 In June 1959, a furor over the sale of Israeli munitions to West Germany resulted in another brief resignation . Ben-Gurion resigned after a call for new elections . In November 1959, the Israeli prime minister resigned again .
 Tired and distracted after years of leadership, the Old Man was looking forward to writing his memoirs and telling his version of the history of Israel and Zionism . The Old Man, who was looking to write his memoir, was tired and distracted .
 Levi Eshkol, like Ben-Gurion, was a product of Eastern Europe . He turned to Palestine and Zionism at an early age . Levi is the new prime minister .
 Eshkol moved quickly to lighten government control of the press . He also set up an independent broadcasting authority to ease government monitoring of state-run TV . Ben-Gurion had bitterly resisted the reforms .
 Eshkol had spent the last eleven years as finance minister, much of it in a struggle against funding for Dimona . Ben-Gurion was less committed emotionally to the concept that hundreds of millions of dollars should be spent each year on nuclear activity .
 Kennedy was confronted with intelligence reports showing that Israel, far from slowing down its nuclear program during his presidency, had been expanding it . Kennedy wasted little time in urging nuclear restraint on the new Israeli government .
 Israel's Jericho I missile was another factor in the continued White House pressure on Eshkol . Israel's missile was also a factor in continued pressure on the White House .
 U.S. experts considered the Jericho's guidance system to be highly unstable and inaccurate, suggesting only one type of warhead made sense . The analysts concluded that only a single type of weapon made sense.
 Kennedy's persistent pressure on Israel stemmed from his belief that Israel had not yet developed any nuclear weapons; that it was not yet a proliferator . Kennedy: "Israel not yet has yet developed a nuclear weapon"
 There is evidence that once Israel actually began manufacturing bombs — as the French had done — the President was prepared to be as pragmatic as he needed to be . There is also evidence that President George W. Bush was pragmatic once Israel started manufacturing bombs .
 Kennedy remained resolutely opposed to a nuclear Israel to the end . But he did change his mind about de Gaulle's bombs .
 At the time, the French had refused to sign the Limited Test Ban Treaty, and de Gaulle had announced that France would continue to test its bombs in the atmosphere .
 President casually praised Senator Mike J Mansfield, the majority leader from Montana, for his support for the treaty .
 The two great nuclear powers together have the power to kill three hundred million people in the short space of a day . President Obama hopes to lessen the chance of a military collision between the two nations .
 In 1958, President Eisenhower recommended, and Congress approved, an amendment to the 1946 act that permitted the United States to exchange nuclear design information and fissionable materials with the British . France, of course, was enraged by the exclusion .
 Lyndon Johnson had been left in the dark on sensitive national security issues by the President and his top aides . Kennedy's successor, Lyndon Johnson, had to be kept informed of national security matters .
 Two of his closest advisers, lawyers Abe Fortas and Edwin L Weisl, Sr., felt deeply about the security of Israel . Two of them were not particularly religious, but felt deeply religious .
 Kennedy administration continued to antagonize the French on nuclear issues . Kennedy administration had a history of antagonism .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara was distressed at France's nuclear independence and its continued testing in the Sahara . McNamara campaigned against the force defrappe in 1962 .
 Europe should buy U.S. arms and rockets to build up conventional forces, he said . Instead, he insisted, Europe should build up its conventional forces and let the United States handle nuclear deterrence .
 He had delivered essentially the same message a few weeks earlier in Athens, enraging not only de Gaulle, but America's NATO allies . U.S. President George W. Bush also delivered the message in Athens .
 Continued U.S. opposition to the force de frappe was one reason for de Gaulle's 1966 decision to remove France from NATO's military organization and evict NATO headquarters from French territory .
 McCone assured the Vice President that the Senate was indeed backing the President, and the placated Vice President reversed course . McCone said the Senate backed the President .
 His wife, Lady Bird, told a Texas historian years after Johnson's death that he had returned "burst with overpowering revulsion and incredulous horror at what he had seen"
 Johnson's congressional archives contain a full set of United States Army photos taken two days after the liberation of the death camp on April 30, 1945 . There are no photographs of the visit .
 Johnson's sensitivity to the plight of European Jews had begun even before World War II . He was urged by Jewish supporters in his home district to cut through Washington's red tape and get asylum in America for German refugees .
 Erich Leinsdorf, the eminent conductor, was among those whose deportation Johnson had prevented . Once the refugees got into the country, Johnson had worked hard to keep them in .
 Deportation to Austria after the Nazi Anschluss in Vienna meant slow death in a concentration camp . Deportment to Austria was meant to be a slow death .
 Johnson won the respect and the financial backing of the Jewish community in Texas by taking on the Leinsdorf case, and others, and finding a way to circumvent the rules .
 Five weeks after taking office, he dedicated a newly constructed Austin synagogue, Agudas Achim, as a favor to James Novy . Novy, a longtime Texas political ally and Zionist leader, was chairman of the building committee . He dedicated the new building to a longtime political ally
 He was the first American President to do so, yet only a few newspapers took note of the event .
 Jews in Europe found it extremely difficult in the 1930s to get visas for the United States . American immigration quotas went unfilled. Jews in the U.S. found it difficult in Europe to obtain visas .
 Between 1933 and 1938, only 27,000 German Jews were granted entry visas to the United States, far less than the 129,875 permissible under the quotas . Between 1933-38, Jewish immigrants were granted less than permitted under quotas .
 Lyndon Johnson was consumed by the Vietnam War, and what he saw as the struggle of a small democratic nation against the forces of Communism .
 Israel was perceived as a besieged democracy standing up to the Soviet Union and its clients in the Arab world . But Israel likewise stood up to Israel's position in the Middle East . Israel is perceived as standing up against the Soviet Russia and its Arab clients .
 Johnson's strong emotional ties to Israel and his belief that Soviet arms were altering the balance of power in the Middle East drove him to supply Israel with offensive weapons . Johnson was the first publicly to commit America to its defense .
 The American Jewish community eventually would be torn apart by Johnson's continued prosecution of the Vietnam War . Jewish leaders insisted that Johnson's steadfast support of Israel entitled him to loyalty on Vietnam . Others continued to oppose the war on principle .
 In the early years of his presidency, Johnson echoed Kennedy's policy by urging Israel to submit Dimona to IAEA inspection . In the 1960s, Johnson said Dimona should be submitted to inspection .
 His support for nonproliferation and his desire to end the Cold War were motivated by his belief that only by relaxing of international tensions could he achieve his ultimate goal . His ultimate goal was the extension of the New Deal to all Americans .
 Prime Minister's dilemma was not whether to go nuclear, but when and at what cost, in terms of the competing need to equip and train conventional units of the army, navy, and air force . The prime minister's dilemma is not whether he should go nuclear .
 The debate over the nuclear option had surfaced in the nation's newspapers, in deliberately innocuous language, long before Eshkol took office . The nuclear option was first discussed in the U.S. newspapers long before the president took office in 2009 .
 In April 1963, Dayan wrote an article for Maariv, the afternoon newspaper, urging the Israeli arms industry to keep pace with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser's effort to build nuclear weapons . Dayan: "Israel's arms industry must keep pace"
 Nuclear energy cannot be ruled out, the ex-prime minister was quoted as saying, ""because Nasser won't give up. Because Nasser will not give up," he said .
 President Obama has a large desert in which to test atomic weapons . That means atomic weapons — and he has large desert desert in order to test .
 The Eshkol government, under pressure from President Kennedy and then from Johnson, worked at keeping the lid on . It had no qualms about stretching the truth to do so .
 In December 1963, Shimon Yiftach, director of scientific programs for the defense ministry, publicly told a group of Israeli science writers that the advanced reactor at Dimona would produce plutonium as a by-product .
 Yiftach insisted that the Israeli government had no plans to build a separate plant for chemically reprocessing plutonium . The Israeli government has no plans for a separate plutonium plant .
 Yiftach, who had been trained at the Argonne National Laboratory in Illinois, was one of Israel's leading experts in the chemistry of plutonium . He knew that French construction companies had started up once again on the underground reprocessing plant .
 Eshkol's apprehension about committing Israel to the mass production of nuclear weapons did not impede the steady progress at Dimona . Dimona is a major source of Israeli nuclear weapons .
 By mid-1964, the reactor had been in operation for almost two years . The plant was essentially completed and ready to begin producing weapons-grade plutonium from the reactor's spent uranium fuel rods .
 Israel's nuclear facilities eventually would include a weapons assembly plant in Haifa, to the north, and a wellfortified nuclear storage igloo at the Tel Nof fighter base near Rehovot . Israel would also have a weapons production facility in the north .
 Dimona under constant watch of Israeli troops, electronic detection systems, and radar screens linked to a missile battery . Extreme security is a way of life inside the nuclear complex, and especially at Dimona .
 Such detonations, known in the weapons community as ""zero yield,"" produce a fission yield that is low, but discernible . The detonations are considered to be a reliable measurement of the overall weapons assembly system .
 In early 1965, completion of the underground reprocessing plant removed the last barrier to Israel's nuclear ambitions . It also heightened the ongoing debate inside the government over the issue .
 Floyd Culler's annual visits to Dimona continue to produce nothing . The Israeli cover-up was constantly being improved and embellished by Binyamin Blumberg and his colleagues in the Office of Special Tasks .
 In the mid-1960s, Dimona's managers came up with a new method of hiding its underground world . Dimona is now one of the world's most famous football clubs .
 Members of the Israeli Defense Force's 269th General Staff Reconnaissance Unit were ordered to the nuclear facility a few weeks before the arrival of a Culler inspection . One former 269th member recalled to bring with them, eight semitrailers loaded with grass .
 During the 1967 Six-Day War, an Israeli Mirage III was shot down when its pilot, either confused or dealing with equipment problems, ventured into Dimona's airspace . It was sod — all for camouflage,"""
 Israel claimed, without evidence, that the plane was headed for Dimona . Israel said it was headed to Dimona, but did not provide evidence .
 Low-yield tests are reliable enough to be useful to countries with considerable weapons testing experience, says Taylor . Taylor in 1988 paper presented to an arms control seminar in London .
 The scene remains vivid in his memory, because he'd never before seen sod sod . The former officer says he was never before before seeing sod . He says he's never seen sod in his life .
 It was as if the White House believed there really were two atoms, one of which was peaceful . "Peaceful" was peaceful, says White House .
 American teams had conducted the inspection two times a year until then, without incident . Under the original 1955 agreement that had set up the small research reactor, the reactor was constantly being used for medical and scientific research .
 The request was consistent with the Johnson administration's policy of strengthening IAEA safeguards . The Johnson administration insisted that all countries participating in the Atoms for Peace program submit to international inspection .
 Former nonproliferation official: Bilateral American inspections were weak . Another factor in the switch to international safeguards was the belief that the bilateral U.S. inspections are weak .
 In return for the Israeli acquiescence, the U.S. agreed to provide forty more kilograms of enriched uranium, under safeguards, for Nahal Soreq's research program .
 Both nations could make missiles, Bundy told Bundy on May 18, two weeks before the Eshkol visit . Bundy told the President that the difference was that the Israelis could make nuclear warheads to put on their missiles, while the UAR couldn't . Bundy said the difference between the
 Bundy and his colleagues did not know what Israel was doing with a secret nuclear reactor in the Negev . Bundy says it's inconceivable Bundy and colleagues didn't know what was happening at the time .
 Eshkol wanted to buy American M-48 tanks, and was delighted when Johnson agreed to use the prestige of his office to persuade West Germany to sell the tanks . Israel wanted the tanks to be sold out of its NATO stockpiles .
 Such a purchase, even if circuitous, would be a first for offensive weapons, and would open the U.S. arms pipeline .
 Eshkol's mission in coming to America was to get what he could — in the way of U.S. arms and commitments — without making any real concessions on Dimona, which, of course, he could not . He could not make any concessions, which he could
 He had told the White House prior to his arrival that he would continue to accept the Culler inspections of Dimona . But he wanted nothing to do with the International Atomic Energy Agency .
 Israel argued that it should not be forced to place its national laboratories under IAEA aegis until all of the world's nuclear powers did so . Israel offered the public argument, as did other putatively nonnuclear nations, that it shouldn't be forced . Israel said it should
 The White House staff had to anticipate hard bargaining on the Arab and IAEA issues . Eshkol's delegation included Peres, who was violently opposed to international inspection and to the sharing of anything about Dimona .
 NSC aide Robert Komer suggested that the President try to change Eshkol's mind on both issues . Nonetheless, he said that Johnson should try to get the President to change his mind .
 This could have the gravest repercussions on U.S.-Israeli relations . The earlier we try to halt it the better chance we have, he says . This could be the worst of the worst, he adds .
 Komer: Israel's apparent desire to keep the Arabs guessing is 'highly dangerous' Komer says Israel's desire to 'keep Arabs guessing' is dangerous .
 To appear to be going nuclear without really doing so is to invite trouble, says CNN.com's John Defterios . "To appear to go nuclear without realising it's a mistake, invite trouble," he says .
 Komer served for years with the CIA before joining Bundy's National Security Council staff . Komer had few illusions at the time about what was going on underground at Dimona .
 His recommendations to the President, as he had to know, had no chance of being accepted by the Israelis, nor could they even serve as a negotiating device . The Israeli government has no way of accepting the recommendations .
 Raising a ""to-do"" to put Israel ""firmly on notice" was not going to stop the bomb . Raising the bomb threat would not have stopped the bomb, he said . Raises a 'To-do' to put the bomb on notice was not
 Johnson was emphatic in telling Eshkol that international inspection of Dimona would calm the Arabs and slow the Middle East missile race . Johnson said the inspection of the Dimona will calm the Arab world and slow its missile race.
 The President also reminded Eshkol that the Soviet Union was becoming more of a factor in the Middle East . An Israeli reassurance on Dimona could go a long way toward keeping the Russians out .
 If Nasser thinks Israel is getting better missiles than he has, he'll be forced to pay Soviet price to get missiles . This is our whole point too — if he thinks Israel's missiles are better than he's got, it will be a price .
 You urge Eshkol to agree both to Dimona reassurances, and to IAEA controls . Therefore, you urge him to agree .
 Israel is more fearful of its future than Washington, says Komer . Komer: "All in all, we understand why Israel, being under the gun, is more scared than Washington"
 Israel, of course, was willing to play along in any way to get more American arms . Israel, Israel, had a history of buying arms from the U.S.
 The proposal was not found in any of the declassified documents in the Johnson Library . It was this proposal that led to the June i summit meeting .
 Eshkol was far from a pacifist; he had no ambivalence about continuing Israel's chemical and biological weapons programs . He had, for example, no ambivalent about continuing Israeli's ongoing chemical, biological weapons program . He was a strong advocate for Israel; he was
 Dimona was costing upward of $500 million a year, more than 10 percent of the Israeli military budget . Dimona is costing more than $5 billion a year to build .
 The meetings were attended by senior officials of the leading Israeli political parties, as well as many defense experts . The meetings are attended by many Israeli politicians, defense experts and politicians .
 Dimona supporters convinced most of the leadership that only nuclear weapons could provide the absolute and final deterrent to the Arab threat . The Arab threat was bolstered by rapidly growing Soviet economic and military aid from the Soviet Union .
 In its place, argued nuclear advocates, would be the Samson Option . The Samson Option would be replaced by the nuclear option, they argued .
 Samson was captured by the Philistines after a bloody fight and put on display in Dagon's Temple in Gaza . Samson's eyes were torn out and his eyes torn out for public entertainment in the Temple .
 He pushed apart the temple pillars, bringing down the roof and killing himself and his enemies . With that, he pushed apart a temple pillar and killed himself .
 There was, for example, no private computer industry in Israel by the late 1960s . American intelligence officials had rated Israel for years as an international leader in computer software design .
 Podhoretz, asked years later about his essay, said his conclusions were just that — his conclusions, and not based on any specific information from Israelis or anyone else about Israel's nuclear capability . He said that his conclusions are just that .
 Arab and Israeli press routinely published exaggerated accounts of each side's weapons of mass destruction . The Arab, Israeli press has been accused of exaggerating the extent of their claims .
 In Israel, there were alarmist accounts of Soviet and Chinese support for an Egyptian nuclear bomb . In Israel there was alarmist reports of Soviet support for Egypt's bomb .
 Egypt publicly suggested that it had received a Soviet commitment to come to its aid in case of an Israeli nuclear attack . President Gamal Nasser warned in an interview that ""preventive war"" was the ""only answer"" to a nuclear-armed Israel . Egypt, in turn,
 The officials at the top in Israel understood the difference between public perceptions and private realities . Israel's prime minister said the Israeli government was prepared to deal with the situation .
 The Arab world would not be able to develop sophisticated nuclear weapons for twenty-five years — until 1990 . Binyamin Blumberg prepared an analysis of the Arab world before Midrasha .
 Israel as yet had no long-range aircraft or missiles in place that were capable of accurately delivering a bomb to targets inside the Soviet Union . No Arab nation would dare wage war against Israel, so the Israeli leadership thought, without Soviet backing . Israel's primary nuclear target was always Israel's
 Johnson lost interest with each passing year in waging political war with Israel over the bomb . It was more than good enough for Johnson, who was losing interest in waging war .
 The President of Israel signed a pledge of support for Israel in 1966 . The pledge was part of the pledge to support Israel's defense of the country's sovereignty .
 For Johnson, this meant that the Cold War was moving to the Arab world, with Israel serving as a surrogate for America . Johnson: "For Johnson, it meant that . Israel served as a proxy for America. The Cold War is moving to Arab world"
 Rafi was joined by reluctant but loyal Peres, who became Rafi's power broker, and the restless Dayan, who had recently resigned as agricultural minister .
 Rafi would now become an opposition party, and play the role that had traditionally belonged to right-wing groups . The Rafi party would now play a role traditionally belonging to right wing groups .
 The issue emerged as a dominant one in the 1965 elections, although it was played out in code language . The issue was a dominant issue in the 1960s .
 Peres and Ben-Gurion constantly criticized what they euphemistically called EshkoPs ""big mistake," referring to Eshkol's hesitations about opening a nuclear weapons assembly line at Dimona .
 It was an ugly election, with insults and accusations from all parties, all parties . It was the ugly election with insults, accusations and accusations of all parties. It was ugly election .
 Ben-Gurion's profound belief that Israel could survive only by relying on the state, not on volunteerism . Many Israelis understood, in a way that no outsider could, that the debate was not only about defense policy or the bomb, but also about the state itself .
 Many aspects of this debate coalesced in Ben-Gurion's unwavering support of Israel's nuclear arsenal . Many of his critics say he was a strong supporter of the nuclear arsenal.
 Some of his opponents in the 1965 election viewed Dimona as nothing more than a collection of competent scientists and bureaucrats, with unclear ideological affiliations, who had created a powerful weapon away from public scrutiny .
 For many, the election was perhaps a last-ditch struggle between an Israel that relied on the use of science, objective knowledge, and the state . For many it was a struggle between Israel that continued to utilize the willing spirit of dedicated volunteers .
 The election amounted to a brutal referendum on his dream of returning to power, and the end of his role in the public policy of Israel . Israel's prime minister has been in office since 1994 .
 The country seemingly rejected the efficient ""can do"" approach of Ben-Gurion, Dayan, and Peres in favor of the social-democratic and volunteerist goals of the Meir-Eshkol wing of Mapai .
 Many in the Eshkol cabinet viewed his departure as long overdue, and it showed . Bergmann was angered and hurt when a ministry of defense official came to his apartment within an hour of his resignation . Ben-Gurion was an inveterate diarist .
 Myer Feldman recalls being accompanied on one of his last scheduled meetings with Ben-Gurion by Teddy Kollek, the mayor of Jerusalem and longtime associate of the Old Man . Feldman: "Myer's last meeting with the old man was one of the last to be held in
 Ben-Gurion scribbled away in his notebook as he waited for his guests . The two men stood waiting for him to scribble away in a notebook .
 Decisions about the future of nuclear weapons in Israel would now be made by the highest political authority . Decisions would be made in Israel's highest political decision .
 The nuclear weapons issue, even if depicted as "long-term scientific planning,"" had moved into the open inside Israel . Nonetheless, the nuclear issue, was depicted as a long-term plan, even though depicted as 'scientific planning'
 Israel's nuclear option continued to be an issue solely for government insiders, who weren't talking . In the U.S. where all foreign policy was rapidly becoming consumed by the Vietnam War, the issue was an issue .
 President Johnson and his advisers would pretend that the American inspections amounted to proof that Israel was not building the bomb . The inspections would leave unblemished America's newly reaffirmed support for nuclear nonproliferation . Israel's then-President Johnson would pretend to be proof that it was not
 Arthur Lundahl and Dino Brugioni had learned that there was little to be gained by relaying information that those at the top did not want to know . The men and women analyzing intelligence data and writing reports for their higher-ups understood .
 There was much known, for example, about the Israeli Jericho missiles, rapidly being assembled by Dassault . Dassault was also working with Israel to build the missiles .
 "I even designed three warheads for it — nuclear, chemical, and HE — as a game. I even designed a game," he says . "I designed three weapons for it," he adds .
 Ex-CIA official: Israel could target and fire a nuclear warhead . What Israel could do, the former CIA official said, was successfully target and shoot a nuclear weapon .
 The official says he decided to bootleg a copy of the intelligence report to senior officials in the Pentagon and State Department . The official said he was risking his job by doing so . He said he wanted to get the report to his senior officials .
 Even James Jesus Angleton, the CIA's director of counterintelligence, had problems with the Israeli bomb . Angleton was responsible for liaison with Israel .
 Angleton was legendary — and feared — for his insistence on secrecy and his paranoia about Soviet penetration of the Agency . The moody Angleton became notorious for his secrecy and paranoia . Angleton died at the age of 92 in October .
 Angleton was a master of backchannel and ""eyes only"" reports . His increasing inability to deal with the real world eventually led to his firing in late 1974 . Angleton's glaring faults in counterintelligence apparently did not spill over to Israel*
 Angleton worked closely with members of the Jewish resistance in Italy while serving with the Office of Strategic Services at the end of World War II . Thousands of Jewish refugees and concentration camp survivors were being illicitly funneled from Europe into Palestine, then under British control .
 One of Angleton's closest colleagues was Meir Deshalit, a resistance leader and Israeli intelligence official who had been posted to Washington in 1948 . Angleton was one of the CIA's top agents .
 Deshalit was the brother of the physicist who had done much to develop Israel's nuclear arsenal before dying of cancer in 1969 . He was the older brother of Amilahahamamamilahamil, who died in 1969 of cancer .
 Angleton and his office linked Angleton to Operation chaos, the massive and illegal spying by the CIA on antiwar dissidents in America . Angleton's office was involved in Operation chaos . Operation chaos was the massive spying on anti-war dissidents .
 Angleton suggested that he could provide better stories dealing with Communist penetration of the antiwar movement and CIA operatives in the Soviet Union, if the domestic spying story was not published . Angleton, in a telephone conversation with me before the story was published, suggested he could give better stories,
 Angleton telephoned me early at home and complained that Cecily, his wife of thirty-one years, had learned only by reading my story that her husband was not a postal employee . Angleton claimed he had told her he was a postal worker, as he had said .
 I mumbled something about a newsman's responsibility to the truth, hung up, and telephoned an old friend who had served in the CIA with Angleton . "I mumbled about the responsibility to truth," he said, "but then hung up"
 Cecily knew from the beginning what her husband did for a living, and had left him three years earlier to move to Arizona, only to return . He laughingly told me that Cecily of course had known from the start that her husband had a living .
 His assignment was one of the most important assignments in the 1950s and early 1960s, the height of the Cold War, because of the continuing flow of Soviet and Eastern European refugees .
 Angleton and his Israeli counterparts ran the ""rat lines,"" as the Jewish refugee link became known . Angleton ran the 'rat lines' as the "rat lines" as Jewish refugees crossed the border .
 It was the Jewish refugee operations, as many in the CIA understood, that provided the West in the early postwar years with its most important insights into the Soviet bloc . The CIA understood that Jewish refugees helped provide the West with valuable insights .
 Some of the programs were financed off the shelf by CIA contingency funds, as part of kk mountain . The programs were funded by the CIA .
 Angleton's love for Israel and shared views on the Arab and Soviet question didn't keep him from investigating any Israeli or American Jew he suspected of trafficking in classified information . Angleton was a counterintelligence officer in the early 1950s .
 CIA knew from its analysis of the fallout of the ongoing French nuclear tests in the Sahara that the increasingly modernized and miniaturized French warheads were based on U.S. design .
 A former U.S. nuclear intelligence official recalls suspicion that Israel's quid pro quo for French help at Dimona included access to design information purloined from the government's nuclear laboratories at Los Alamos and Livermore, California .
 Angleton's personal files, secured with black tape, revealed what obviously had been a longrunning study of American Jews in the government . No evidence of such a link was found, but intelligence community investigators were surprised to discover .
 Angleton had constructed a matrix of the position and Jewishness of senior officials in the CIA and elsewhere who had access to classified information of use to Israel . Angleton's files showed that he had constructed what amounted to an intelligence matrix .
 Someone in a sensitive position who was very active in Jewish affairs in his personal life scored high on what amounted to a Jewishness index . Someone in such a position scores high on the index .
 The Angleton matrix suggested that at some point a suspect who measured high enough on the Jewishness scale was subjected to a full-bore field investigation .
 Samuel Halpern, executive assistant to the director of the CIA's clandestine services, was under constant investigation by Angleton . Angleton was a Jew who served for years as a CIA executive assistant .
 His father, Hanoch, was active in Zionism before World War II . He emigrated to Palestine and worked with Ben-Gurion and Moshe Sharett after 1948 .
 He also was a sponsor, through the chaos program, of a highly secret CIA operation involving the Agency's purchase of a Washington trash company .
 The firm, known in the CIA as a proprietary, had contracts to pick up garbage at various Third World embassies, including the Israeli embassy . The firm was known as proprietary .
 Another stop was the offices of B'nai B'rith, a powerful Jewish social and volunteer organization with worldwide activities .
 The trash would be systematically sorted and analyzed for any possible intelligence . It would be the first time trash has been analyzed for intelligence purposes .
 Angleton's first intelligence report on Israel's plans to build the bomb was filed routinely in the late 1950s . The report was made available to those who needed to know inside the CIA's Directorate of Operations, the unit responsible for clandestine action, a senior official says .
 Angleton continued to produce intelligence on Dimona, also based on information supplied by his personal contacts . Angleton never learned the extent of Israel was deceiving Washington about its nuclear progress .
 Angleton had been given periodic briefings in the late 1950s and early 1960s by Lundahl or Brugioni on intelligence collected by the U-2 overflights of the Negev .
 His forte was human intelligence, or humint, as the intelligence community calls it, and not technical intelligence, such as the U-2 imagery . "He was a real funny guy,"" Brugioni recalled .
 For all of his mystique and freedom to operate, Angleton, too, was stymied by the Israeli bomb . Angleton was a CIA operative in the early days of the Cold War . He was killed by an Israeli bomb in the 1980s .
 His reports on Dimona, buttressed by the U-2 data, did not even result in an official CIA estimate that Israel was going nuclear .
 They didn't have any understanding of Israel; didn't know what made them think of Israel . "They didn't understand Israel," says Israel's ambassador to Israel .
 It is not known how many CIA analyses on the Israeli bomb were produced in the early 1960s . The one memorandum that does exist was astonishingly inept about Israeli attitudes .
 The paper, entitled ""Consequences of Israeli Acquisition of Nuclear Capability,"" was dated March 6, 1963 . It was made available nearly twenty years later at the John F Kennedy Library without any deletions .
 Israel had no intention of going public with the bomb in fear of U.S. and worldwide Jewish disapproval that would result in international reprobation and diminished financial support from the Diaspora . The bomb was dropped by Israel in 1994 .
 Such flawed intelligence analyses went a long way toward keeping the men at the top officially ignorant of what no one wanted to know . Such flawed analyses went to keep them from the public eye .
 In public, the Johnson administration was firmly opposed to the spread of nuclear weapons anywhere in the world . Official acknowledgment of an Israeli bomb would have presented Washington with unwanted dilemma .
 China exploded its long-awaited first nuclear bomb on October 18, 1964 . Israel was not considered a nuclear weapons state on that date . The bomb was the first to be detonated in Israel .
 Whatever their differences, all four states are sober and serious states, with long experience as major powers in the modern world . Whatever differences, the four states have long experience of being major powers, they are sober .
 Communist China has no such experience . "The expensive and demanding effort tempts other states to equal folly,"" the President said. .
 Six weeks later, McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk discussed what they considered the administration's real policy options at a secret meeting on nonproliferation .
 Rusk mentioned the possibility of having an Asian group of nuclear weapons countries . Rusk said the real issue was among Asian countries and not between northern countries and the Asians .
 Johnson also reassured the nation that his administration had not been surprised by the Chinese test . Nevertheless, he said that he was not surprised .
 The Chinese bomb was fueled by enriched uranium, not plutonium, as predicted by the CIA . The U.S. intelligence community was aghast to learn from air sampling that the Chinese bomb had been enriched uranium .
 The American guess had been that China would chemically reprocess plutonium from the spent uranium rods in a reactor, as at Dimona . The U.S. had been hoping that the Chinese would use the reprocess to make plutonium .
 Some in the CIA believed that China might have stolen or otherwise misappropriated the enriched uranium for its bomb . Confronted with evidence to the contrary, some in the U.S. believed that the Chinese had stolen or . otherwise stolen the material .
 The U.S. might require us to guarantee the security of nations that renounced nuclear weapons, he said . He pointed out that adoption of a nonproliferation policy by the United States might require a guarantee of the security .
 "Any intimation to the contrary would be very disturbing throughout the world," says President Obama . "We are very proud of our achievements," says Obama .
 McNamara said we had to stop the leaks that come out of meetings like this . McNamara added that we had . to the stop leaks . The leaks come from the meetings, he said .
 McCone sorely felt the loss of John Kennedy; his relationship with Lyndon Johnson was much less intimate and his advice not always welcome . McCone's relationship with LBJ was less intimate .
 McCone's solution to the Chinese bomb (and to the problems with North Vietnam) was to send in the Air Force . McCone: "The Air Force is the answer to the problem of North Vietnam"
 There was no mention of this extraordinary debate in McGeorge Bundy's seemingly comprehensive history of the atom bomb, Danger and Survival, published in 1988 . Bundy's 'Danger and Survival' was published by 1988 .
 Bundy could have added that there were a few Americans in high Washington positions in 1964 who had no doubt then that India's desire for the bomb was quite truly Indian . Bundy: There were no doubt in 1964 that the desire for a bomb was truly Indian in India .
 One thought was to use unmarked bombers to strike at the Chinese, thus avoiding identification . Another thought was that unmarked bombers would also avoid identification . The Chinese are believed to be the biggest threat to China .
 McCone resigned as CIA director in 1965, despite his support for Johnson's continuing escalations in Vietnam . He resigned in 1965 despite support of Johnson's continued escalation of Vietnam campaign .
 McCone knew that Floyd Culler's inspections were accomplishing little . He also understood what Israel's continuing refusal to permit full-fledged international inspections meant .
 CIA director found that Johnson "didn't understand the implications" of the inspection issue and didn't want to hear about it, Elder says . Elder says Johnson didn't "understand the implications"" of inspection issue .
 Johnson's understanding that good nonpro-proliferation policies made for bad politics made for good politics . Johnson: "Good nonprosproprosiferation policies are bad politics. It's bad politics," Johnson said .
 The President needed no one to remind him that any serious move to squeeze the Israelis on their nuclear weapons program would lead to a firestorm of protest from American Jews, many of whose leaders had consistently supported his presidency and Vietnam War .
 He got another reminder of the political danger of nonproliferation from a special panel on that subject . He convened a few weeks after the Chinese test .
 The distinguished panel, headed by Roswell L Gilpatric, returned on January 21, 1965 — the day after Johnson's inauguration — with a report that amounted to an indictment of past and present policy . It was the first time a panel of defense experts had been asked to examine the
 Panel members included the retired Allen Dulles, the former secretary of state Dean Acheson, and the former White House science adviser George B Kistiakowsky .
 President should reconsider a controversial plan to create a multilateral force that would give NATO members, including the West Germans, a joint finger on the nuclear trigger, the report says .
 Soviet Union was insisting that any proposed nonproliferation treaty prohibit a separate European nuclear force . The Soviet Union viewed the MLF as nothing more than a vehicle for providing the West Germans with the bomb .
 Its premature release could start the ball rolling in an undesirable manner, Rusk said . Rusk added that the release could hinder future negotiations on a nonproliferation treaty .
 The report went nowhere, despite the President's promise of further consultations with Gilpatric . The President promised to consult further consultations .
 Robert Kennedy based his maiden Senate floor speech on many of the recommendations of Gilpatric's panel . Kennedy was elected to the U.S. Senate in June . The White House says the panel's recommendations were ignored by Kennedy .
 Nonproliferation continued to be treated as a topic fit only for arms controllers in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency . Glenn Seaborg recalls the Gilpatric report .
 President Johnson held out for two years before agreeing in secret talks with the Soviets to drop the MLF . The move cleared the way for the 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty .
 Israel was increasingly seen by the Johnson White House as a regional American bulwark . In the mid-1960s, the Soviet Union had stepped up its military and economic aid programs in the Middle East .
 It was inevitable that high-level interest in the issue of international inspection for Dimona began to wane in 1967 . The A-4E Skyhawks began arriving in Israel, as the routine Floyd Culler inspections proceeded, and as America got more and more enmeshed in the
 Israeli senator's remarks caused a sensation in Israel, but were little noted elsewhere . The comments were made in Israel .
 In mid-1966, the Israeli government delayed in accepting nearly $60 million in possible American aid for the construction of a much-needed nuclear desalinization and power plant . The aid was contingent on an Israeli commitment to permit an IAEA inspection of Dimona .
 Continued insistence on IAEA inspections made the Israelis walk away, without any explicit explanation, from the project . Continued American insistence on inspections led the Israelis to walk away .
 The proposed desalinization plant was studied for the next decade, but the American conditions were never accepted, and the plant was never built . The plant never was built .
 The same argument was used a few years earlier by the U.S. and its allies to justify the deployment of nuclear missiles in Europe . The Warsaw Pact tank and troop superiority was used to justify nuclear missiles .
 The growing danger of proliferation became starkly clear during the Kennedy administration . A group of scientists at Los Alamos successfully designed a nuclear bomb from the open literature .
 The laboratories' primary targets continued to be the reactors and research centers in the Soviet Union and China . Intelligence units eventually began monitoring the transfer of nuclear technology and those that were viewed as "nth" nations .
 We were even able to do mock-ups of their weapons system — go from the warhead back through the plant . We were able to mock-up the weapons system, including a warhead and a plant .
 Israel was always at the top of his list, the official recalled . South Africa was always followed by Israel, followed by South Africa, he said .
 His Knesset statement was initially reported in Israel and Nuclear Weapons, by Fuad Jabber, published in 1971 by the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London .
 Jabber wrote that the conference, known as the International Assembly on Nuclear Weapons and sponsored in part by the IISS, had issued a call for ""a serious effort"" to negotiate a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East . Jabber said the conference had, in fact, issued
 Such ore, known as yellowcake, served as the raw fuel for the heavy-water reactor at Dimona . The sale of yellowcake was not monitored by the IAEA in Vienna .
 The first known shipment of ore from South Africa to Israel had arrived in 1963 . Ten tons of ore was reported to have arrived in the country .
 In subsequent years, clandestine shipments of South African yellowcake began to arrive at Dimona, often escorted by a special operations unit of the Israeli Defense Force .
 Israel's goal was to prevent outsiders from learning that the reactor was operating at two to three times greater capacity than publicly acknowledged . The reactor was capable of reprocessing greater amounts of plutonium, Israel says .
 At least some of the later clandestine shipments from South Africa became known in the late 1960s . Intelligence officers in Los Alamos and Sandia were carefully watching — by satellites and other means — most of the major uranium mines in the world .
 The intelligence about Dimona and its nuclear potential became highly compartmentalized after Israel's Six-Day victory in 1967 . The White House decided to side more openly with Israel in the Middle East, and thus harder to access .
 America's corona and gambit satellite systems had by the mid-1960s begun to produce high-resolution photography from their orbital perches in outer space .
 Any interesting intelligence on Israel was now being routed to Livermore and Los Alamos . CIA's Office of Science and Technology headed Carl E Duckett headed by Lundahl's National Photo Interpretation Center .
 As a civilian Army expert on Soviet missile systems, he had been regularly consulted in prior years by Lundahl and Brugioni on U-2 photo intelligence . He had been told nothing about the findings on Dimona .
 Duckett got his own special access to the Israeli intelligence . Duckett joined the CIA, where he got access to Israel's intelligence .
 In the beginning, Duckett and colleagues would openly discuss the day's findings . Brugioni recalls long meetings in the late afternoon, usually over a few drinks, with Duckett .
 Lundahl and Brugioni soon came to understand Duckett was no longer sharing all of his information about the Israeli bomb . The U-2's spy flights were no longer as important, and there was no need for them to know, Lundahl says .
 It was the first of many disconnects that would come to dominate the processing of U.S. intelligence on Dimona .
 He constantly sprayed his throat with a vaporizer, wore yellowing white suits with brown-and-white shoes, and walked with a shambling gait, an outsized Sydney Greenstreet .
 Barbour spoke no Hebrew and by the end of his stay in Israel still had little to do with the people of the country, rarely attending educational, cultural, or social events . Barbour's visit to Israel was the last of his time in Israel .
 John F Kennedy appointed Israel's first president in 1961 by President Kennedy . He remained on the job for the next twelve years . He was beloved by Israel's leadership .
 Barbour's long assignment as ambassador was not a testament to his intelligence and competence, but to his understanding of when and when not to accept every Israeli assertion at face value . Barbour operated the American embassy as a subsidiary, if necessary, of the Israeli foreign ministry .
 The ambassador often reminded his questioning subordinates that he was not a servant of the Department of State or its secretary, but a President's man . The State Department's historical office lists George P Marsh, minister to Italy from 1861 to 1882, among others .
 Barbour was unfailingly courteous and correct to his subordinates . He rarely interfered with the job of those working in his embassy . A graduate of Exeter and Harvard, he rarely interfered in his job .
 Field reports had no impact; they simply disappeared into the bureaucratic maze . Field reports were published by the U.S. Department of Justice, but they were never published .
 Barbour ordered his staff to stop reporting on nuclear weapons in Israel after the Six-Day War . Barbour did nothing to keep the nuclear weapons alive .
 Barbour's assignment at that moment was to insulate Lyndon Johnson and his men from those facts that would compel action, and he did his President's bidding . Barbour: "He did his president's bidding. He did his . President's assignment was to . insulate Johnson and
 Barbour's important role in the history of U.S.-Israeli relations was hidden by his insistence on a low profile . His knowledge of Israel's nuclear capability was hidden from the public, he says .
 He was a virtual nonperson to the American correspondents assigned to Israel . He rarely met with them, unlike most ambassadors, and never spoke on the record .
 His reclusiveness was legendary in his five-story building located near the beach at Tel Aviv . The embassy is located in a five-storey building near Tel Aviv beach .
 There were afternoon rounds of golf, weather permitting, dips in his pool, and an occasional evening of bridge .
 "Everything I do is designed to keep Jews off the President's back,"" Barbour said .
 Barbour also was phobic about using a newly installed State Department telephone scrambler system . State Department scrambler is designed to protect conversations from being intercepted .
 Bill Dale repeatedly urged Bill Dale to send embassy reports by mail, especially if intelligence was adverse to Israeli interests . He said: ""Israel has friends all over the State Department"" and would intercept the information .
 Barbour's weekly staff meetings were only for senior subordinates . Most junior members of the embassy staff had no contact with the ambassador and could go months or longer without even seeing him .
 Barbour asked if it was possible to cash a check in the embassy, aide says . One aide recalls being asked by Barbour in 1967, six years after he became ambassador, whether it could be done in embassy .
 His sister, Ellen, served as embassy hostess during her extended annual visits to Israel . He didn't bother with his sister's job .
 Barbour's closest associates were not fellow Americans, but senior officials of the Israeli government . Golda Meir, who became prime minister in 1969, and Aharon Yariv, director of military intelligence from 1964 to 1972 .
 Of course, no senior Israeli official would talk to an outsider about nuclear weapons . Barbour, in the end, shared that taboo .
 Barbour's men reported before the June 1967 war that Israel had completed its basic weapons design and was capable of manufacturing warheads for deployment on missiles . Yet it was Israel's men who said before the 1967 war they had completed their basic weapons .
 Israel also may have had crudely manufactured bomb or two ready to go, but no decision had been made by Prime Minister Eshkol to begin mass production .
 Spying on Dimona was not the responsibility of the Central Intelligence Agency, as in most foreign countries, but left to the United States Army, Air Force, and Navy attaches assigned to the embassy . The Agency's espionage functions included the monitoring of Soviet activities and the providing of special cameras
 The 1963 restrictions on the CIA's operations inside Israel were a sop aimed at avoiding any undue embarrassment for the Israeli government . U.S. officials acknowledged that the restrictions on CIA operations in Israel were intended to avoid embarrassment .
 The few espionage attempts organized by the CIA before 1963 had gone nowhere, in part because of the nature of Israel's closeknit society . Israel's ability to monitor the activities of the Americans assigned to Israel also helped .
 All of the United States embassy contacts with Israeli citizens and government officials were funneled through a special liaison office of the Israeli foreign ministry . U.S. embassy contacts were — and continue to be — funneled into the office .
 American intelligence and military officials who tried to evade the liaison system would be carefully watched . It was understood that U.S. officials would be closely watched by the system .
 Israel, with its steady stream of Soviet and Eastern European Jewish refugees, remained the most important country for collecting intelligence on the Soviet Union . Those operations were left to James Angleton and his men in Washington .
 It was sometimes hard for a newcomer, like John McCone, to keep things straight . McCone: "It's not easy for a new president to keep the facts straight"
 Peter C Jessup, the CIA station chief in the early 1960s, recalled being peremptorily ordered to fly to Rome early in McCone's tenure . Jessup was then on a grand tour of CIA facilities in Europe .
 McCone wanted the questions about Israel put to rest, and urged the station chief to put ""his staff"" to work . McCone: "His staff"" should work.
 Jessup added that his ""staff"" at the CIA station consisted of two aides . At the time, the bemused Jessup said, his 'staff' at the . CIA station was only two aides, he said .
 Despite difficulties, the U.S. embassy staff kept on trying to find out what they could about Dimona . Despite the difficulties, they wanted to do their job .
 Getting close to Dimona's barbed-wire fence was fun and dangerous . One American officer was chastised by Barbour after being caught by the Israelis with a butterfly net outside the fence .
 Colonel Carmelo V Alba was the United States Army's military attache to Israel in the mid-1960s . He spent many weekends cruising in the Negev with long-range telescopic camera .
 He did so at least once a month, shipping the film off to Washington, with no reaction — until one of his photographs showed "evidence of activity at Dimona"
 CIA station chief John Hadden sent Alba to Beersheba to do a census of French names on the mailboxes of apartment complexes . Hadden began his tour in 1963 as CIA's station chief in the city . Alba was sent out to do the census .
 William Dale, as the second-highest-ranking American diplomat, was given wide latitude in the day-to-day management of the embassy . Dale encouraged his staff to find out what it could, but Barbour did not interfere with the hunt .
 The embassy's scientific attache was a physicist named Robert T Webber, who shared Dale's interest in Dimona . The embassy was also a physicist .
 It was a hunt, and the men in the embassy got a break sometime in 1966 from an unlikely source . An American Jew living in Israel, an American Jew, was the key to the hunt .
 Dale and the rest of the embassy staff stayed on good terms with the many American citizens who chose to live abroad . Dale: "The embassy staff did all over the world — as American diplomats do all of the world"
 Americans in Israel were routinely invited to embassy parties and picnics . Alba got Hadden in trouble with the Israeli foreign office by inadvertently putting Hadden's license plates on a jeep .
 All diplomatic cars in Israel were required to have special license plates . The plates were removed from the private cars of newly arrived diplomats and placed on the walls for decoration .
 It arrived with no plates, and the colonel ordered the mechanic to grab a set at random from the walls and throw them on . The colonel, in a hurry, ordered a set of plates to be thrown on the plane .
 Hadden retired from the Agency a few years after returning from Israel . Hadden said he never paid any attention to organizational charts and titles .
 Max Ben was helping the Israelis set up a pharmacology institute under U.N. auspices . Ben was a Princetontrained pharmacologist who was helping to set up the institute under United Nations auspices.
 He had become a close friend and confidant of Ernst Bergmann's while in Israel, he claimed . He claimed that friendship led to the invitation to take a firsthand look at the reactor .
 Bob Webber agreed to discuss what he knew on a more sophisticated level with Dale . He talked to Dale and then agreed to talk with him about his role in the story .
 Ben explained years later that his purpose in taking up the issue with Dale and Webber had not been to inform on Israel's nuclear progress, but to try to pass word of the accomplishments at Dimona to Washington .
 He brought Webber and others into the embassy's most secure room . The group drafted a highly classified dispatch to Washington summarizing their intelligence .
 The paper had to be approved by the ambassador, who was approached with trepidation . The paper was published by the embassy in London .
 Dale thought it was, Dale thought, the embassy's most definitive report by far on Dimona . Dale thought the embassy report was, perhaps, the most definitive by far .
 Webber eventually was replaced as science attache by someone much less interested in Dimona . Colonel Alba was reassigned as an aide to the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 Dale: More revealing information about Israeli intentions was provided early the next year by another American Jew . Dale: Adding to the frustration, Dale said, was the fact that more revealing information was provided soon after by another Jew .
 The embassy was entertaining a group of American government officials en route from India after attending a regional meeting of U.S. economic and commercial attaches . The embassy is in India at the time .
 On the next day, Eugene M Braderman, then a deputy assistant secretary of state for commercial affairs, approached Dale, "looking ashen" Dale . The next day he was approached by an official, who said Dale was looking ashen .
 Israel decided in early June 1967 to preempt the increasing Arab buildup in the Sinai and go to war in June 1967 . Israel decided to go on the attack in order to prevent an Arab buildup .
 A year of steady tension had culminated two weeks before in an Egyptian blockade of the Israeli port city of Elat .
 An increasingly confident Nasser had sent his troops to occupy Sharm el Sheikh on the southern tip of the Sinai Peninsula . He had blocked the access of Israeli shipping to the Strait of Tiran, which leads from the Red Sea to the Gulf of Aqaba and then to Elat
 Israel considered the Egyptian move to be an act of war, but — under pressure from the Johnson administration not to attack — the Eshkol government wavered . Israel considered Egypt's move to Egypt to be a war move, but under pressure, the government didn't attack .
 The prime minister, confronted by a public that wanted to initiate war with the Arabs, was viciously criticized for his indecisiveness and lack of military experience . The public wanted to start a war with Arabs .
 Braderman, now retired and living in Washington, recalled the 1967 visit to Israel and said it was ""possible that I'd said something like that"" to Bill Dale .
 Dale's recollection certainly reflected his general view of the issue of Jewish loyalty . Dale's memory reflects his views on Jewish loyalty, he said . He added that Dale's recollections reflect his general views on loyalty .
 Begin, now a minister without portfolio, is serving in the Israeli government for the first time in his political career . The appointment means that he was serving in government for first time . Begin was appointed as Israel's first minister without a portfolio .
 Dayan's nomination as defense minister had to be much more difficult for Eshkol . It amounted, in essence, to an acknowledgment that he was unable to lead the nation in wartime . Dayan: "It amounted, to . essentially, to be . to acknowledge that he
 Dayan, with his romantic image, was as admired among the population as the hesitating Eshkol was not . Dayan's romantic image is as admired as his reluctance to speak out .
 Israel struck first on June 5 and achieved its stunning victory in six days, humiliating the Soviet-supplied Arabs . Israel seized Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, Jordan's West Bank, and Syria's Golan Heights . And, most stirring of all, brought the Old City
 Israel suddenly finds itself in control of one million more Palestinians . Israel suddenly found itself in . control of 1 million Palestinians .
 Wally Barbour spent much of the war in the Israeli war room . He shared the jubilation throughout the nation — and in much of America — over the victory .
 There was no pretense of objectivity in his reporting to Washington . His views and those of the Israeli leadership were identical, he says .
 Barbour urged that Washington downplay the Israeli Air Force's rocket and strafing attack on the USS Liberty, a naval intelligence ship, on the third day of the war . Barbour also urged that the U.S. downplay Israel's attack on USS Liberty .
 The incident triggered resentment throughout the U.S. government . The incident sparked resentment in the United States .
 Dale was to inform the embassy's military attaches that they were no longer to report on Dimona . They were told not to undercut the Israelis by conducting operations with their British or Canadian counterparts . Dale was also told to inform military attaches not to be undercut by British or Israeli counterparts .
 Clifford: It was 'inconceivable' that Israel destroyed the Liberty by error, as it claimed . Clifford: The Liberty was destroyed by error . Clifford says it was 'ineceivable' Israel destroyed it in error .
 A former senior intelligence officer recalled that ""a big change took place"" inside the Agency after the Six-Day War .
 Nixon and Kissinger were renowned for preferring Mossad's intelligence assessments on the Middle East to those supplied by the CIA . This became especially true in the Nixon administration; Nixon and Henry A Kissinger preferred Mossad assessments .
 In his next post, with the State Department's Policy Planning Council, he again tried to raise questions about Dimona . The State Department says Dimona is a state-run agency .
 One of his early assignments on the council, the State Department's in-house think tank, was to work on nonproliferation .
 He wanted to include a chapter on Dimona, but was refused permission to discuss that issue with members of Congress or members of the Atomic Energy Commission . He also wanted to discuss Dimona in a new book .
 When he protested, a senior State Department official threatened to discuss his conduct with the secretary of state . Dale said the Israeli bomb ""was the most sensitive foreign policy issue in the United States,"""
 The Israeli bomb disappeared after 1967 as a significant issue in the American embassy . With Barbour staying on and on, the Israeli bomb appeared less significant in the embassy .
 Arnold Kramish, an American expert on nuclear fuel cycles, was invited to visit the reactor . The Israeli reactor was built in 1961 and is now in operation .
 The embassy's view was that much of the international concern about Dimona had been deliberately fostered by Israel . But, Zurhellen added, it was not the first time the embassy had seen the concern .
 A strong element of their policy is to convince others they have the bomb, U.S. says . U.N. says it is a 'strong element' of its strategy to win control of the bomb .
 Israel and Egypt engaged in escalating air and artillery battles in the late 1960s and early 1970s . Egypt's army and air force had been reinforced by the Soviet Union after the Six-Day War .
 After the inauguration of President Richard M Nixon in January 1969, Barbour was even less than uninterested in Dimona . He exorcised the issue with President Richard Nixon .
 A senior American intelligence officer recalled summoning a group of staff aides to provide Barbour with a special briefing on the Israeli nuclear weapons program . Barbour, then in Washington, was in Washington when he was in charge .
 Barbour had many good reasons for not wanting to tell President Nixon bad news . President Nixon had a good reason for not telling him bad news.
 He was increasingly phobic about death, Zurhellen said, and kept an oxygen tent near his bed . He was also phobic of death, he said .
 The ambassador also continued his easygoing work habits . Zurhellen recalled only two occasions in five years together when Barbour stayed at the embassy after noon .
 Barbour hadn't had a State Department physical in years, and knew he'd never pass one . The appointment, as were all such assignments, was contingent upon medical approval .
 In 1970, Barbour made one of his rare public appearances, sharing a podium with Prime Minister Golda Meir at the opening of an American school .
 When it came to Dimona, Barbour did what Israel wanted — without asking . Barbour says Israel did what it wanted without asking for help .
 Many of his former colleagues in the Foreign Service were confounded and distressed when he agreed to become a board member of the American branch of Bank Leumi, the Israeli state bank . His support for Israel was profound and heartfelt; nonetheless, he was confounded .
 Many State Department officials consider such appointments to pose an obvious conflict of interest . There was nothing illegal in doing so, but many State Dept. officials consider it to pose a conflict .
 Barbour, characteristically, couldn't have cared less about what his peers thought . Barbour remained on the board until his death .
 Israel's first nuclear missile field is under construction at an obscure site known on the map as Hirbat Zachariah, west of Jerusalem .
 The expertly concealed shelters were not identified for years by the American intelligence community . They were to be burrowed into the ground at the end of an unmarked road lined with cameras .
 Tahal was negotiating with the shah of Iran to build a forty-two-inch oil pipeline to relay Iranian crude to the Israeli port cities of Elat and Ashdod . The pipeline was being built by Tahal, the governmentowned water planning corporation, .
 The smooth barrels through which the missiles would be launched had been imported into the country marked as lengths of pipeline . Smooth barrels had been brought in from around the world marked as smooth barrels .
 The first shelters represented a new kind of military security for the U.S. Nonetheless, Allon clearly understood, as Allon said .
 Missile tubing also may have been shipped to Israel described as water mains . Water mains may also be used to connect missile missiles to Israel .
 "We're a people,"" added the observer, ""who have come back from the dead"
 He stunned his cabinet colleagues by warning Egypt in a public speech at Haifa that Israel would reply in kind to any Egyptian attack on a population center using advanced weapons . A few days later, he stunned his colleagues by saying Israel would respond in kind if Egypt used advanced weapons against Israel .
 As a member of the prime minister's select committee on national security issues, Allon had great credibility . Allon was a key member of national security committee . He said: "Allon's great credibility"
 No Israeli official had ever publicly acknowledged the existence of a nuclear missile system . Allon's cryptic assertions were privately attacked by other government officials as a breach of security .
 Israel's missile program, code-named Project 700, had been envisioned years earlier by Ernst David Bergmann . Project 700 was the final, costly step toward the Samson Option, Bergmann said .
 Project 700, if fully authorized by the prime minister's national security committee, would be $850 million . Project 700 would be more than was budgeted for all Israeli defense expenditures in 1967, an official says .
 The cost of the nuclear program continued to be the major barrier to the bomb . The staggering price of the missiles was more than matched by other elements of Israel's nuclear system .
 Dayan was among the first in the Eshkol cabinet to predict that the Soviets would fill the power vacuum in the Middle East and become the major threat to Israel . The Soviets were searching for any foothold they could get in their ideological struggle with the United States, he says .
 Dayan was articulating the sense of isolation that had worked its way into the top levels of the Israeli leadership, in a way not felt since the 1956 Suez Crisis . Dayan: "Israel's isolation in Israel has been a problem since the Suez crisis in 1956 .
 Charles de Gaulle had responded to the war by accusing Israel of being the aggressor and canceling all of France's arms sales to Israel, abrogating twelve years of close French support for Israel .
 De Gaulle also delayed the pending shipment of fifty previously purchased Mirage III jet fighters . The French president delayed the shipment of 50 previously purchased fighters .
 President Nikolai V Podgorny made a triumphant state visit to Cairo in late June . He was greeted by hundreds of thousands of cheering Egyptians . The visit was part of a successful state visit by the Russian president .
 Planeloads of Soviet arms began arriving shortly thereafter, initiating an extensive and rapid buildup of the depleted Egyptian war stores . All of the weapons would be renewed within a year .
 Moscow eventually sent Soviet advisers and high-performance MiG fighters to Egypt . Russia was granted preferential treatment at four Mediterranean harbors as well as virtual control of seven Egyptian air bases .
 The Soviets were similarly generous in their support for Syria and Iraq, the other losers in the Six-Day War . The Soviets also supported Iraq, Syria and Syria .
 The Soviet fleet was suddenly being deployed in greater force in the Mediterranean . Two or three ships — obviously attempting to intercept Israeli communications-parked off the Israeli coast — were seen .
 There was no response to these provocations, as seen by the Israelis, from the world's other great superpower, the U.S. The United States. No response to the provocations from the US.
 In August 1967, Arab nations gathered for the first postwar summit at Khartoum . They agreed on what became known as the ""three no's"" — no peace, no negotiations, and no recognition .
 Dayan's drive for the bomb was heightened by his conviction that Israel could not depend on the U.S. to deter a Soviet attack . Dayan: "I think Israel can't depend on America to deter Soviet attack"
 In a crisis, Israel either would or would not — as in Suez — be supported by Washington, depending on the White House's assessment of its international and regional interests . In Suez, the U.S. would not support Israel in such a crisis .
 Dayan believed Moscow would be willing to come to the aid of the Arabs not because of a deep concern for the Middle East, but to protect its prestige and international interests . Dayan said Moscow would also want to help the Arab Arab population .
 Dayan was convinced that the superpowers would dictate events in the Middle East unless Israel took steps to arm itself fully . Dayan: "Whatever their motives, Israel will not be able to defend itself"
 Israel's survival, in Dayan's view, was dependent on its ability to mass-produce nuclear weapons and target them at the Soviet Union . The French goal was to target its force defrappe at Moscow, Dayan said .
 Dayan's mission in late 1967 and early 1968 was to convince his fellow cabinet members that if the Soviets could be persuaded that the Israeli threat was credible, they might decide that there was no Middle East war worth fighting .
 A credible Israeli bomb also would deter the Soviets from taking any steps in the Middle East that would jeopardize Israel's survival . The Israeli bomb would also deter Soviet moves in the Mideast, such as supplying an Arab nation with a nuclear weapon .
 Israel developed its first bomb in a suitcase, Moscow also would be told . Moscow would be reminded that there was no way to stop Mossad from smuggling a nuclear weapon across the border by automobile or into a Soviet port .
 As for the rest of the world, including the United States, there would still be studied ambiguity on the question of whether Israel had the bomb . The U.S. would still have studied ambiguity .
 Israel learned from U.S. intelligence that Soviet Union had added four major Israeli cities to its nuclear targeting list . Tel Aviv, Haifa, Beersheba, and Ashdod were added to the list of targets .
 Kissinger met privately with a group of Israeli scholars at the Jerusalem home of Major General Elad Peled . Peled was director of Israel's Defense College, where Kissinger had taught the year before . Kissinger taught at the Defense College in 1968 .
 Second, that no American President would risk World War III because of territories occupied by Israel . No American president would risk a war with Israel, President Obama says .
 The United States did not obtain a physical copy of the Soviet nuclear targeting list until the early 1970s . By early 1968, it was obvious that the overwhelming victory was obvious .
 Some human intelligence about Soviet targets did exist, but it was known only to a few in the CIA and elsewhere . That information could have been passed along to the Israelis, the author says .
 Yitzhak Rabin, the army chief of staff, flew to Washington in mid-December 1967 . He said as much in a meeting with General Earle G Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 America's Jewish community responded to the June victory with showers of money and increased visits . Tourism was booming in late 1967, and so was the Israeli economy .
 Israel's success cemented its relationship with Washington, ambassador says . Ambassador Walworth Barbour told his doubting staff in the U.S. embassy in Tel Aviv that success had cemented it .
 America failed to respond to Nasser's closing of the Strait of Tiran and blockade of Elat . America had proved its basic unreliability as an ally a month before the SixDay War . Nasser had closed the strait and Elat, but U.S. failed to
 Eisenhower promised in writing after the Suez debacle in 1956 that the U.S. would use force, if necessary, to keep the strait open . Israeli foreign ministry documents showed that Dwight Eisenhower had promised to do so in writing .
 Israel felt betrayed upon learning that the State Department considered Eisenhower's commitment had expired when Eisenhower left office in 1961 . Israel called on Johnson to keep that commitment after Nasser's blockade .
 Only a treaty ratified by the U.S. Senate was binding on subsequent administrations, Israel told . Israel was told that only a treaty signed by the United States Senate could be binding .
 Washington, without knowing it, was playing into the hands of Moshe Dayan and his nuclear ambitions . Washington was playing a role in the creation of the Israeli state of Israel in the 1970s .
 By the early 1970s a full-scale nuclear weapons program, including warheads and missiles, would be chewing up more than 10 percent of Israel's overall budget — nearly $1 billion . One Israeli official recalled seeing estimates indicating that by the early 70s, Israel's weapons program would be
 In his view, an Israeli bomb would only lead to conflicts with the U.S. and a lessened flow of American contributions, he says . An Israeli bomb could lead to conflict with the United States, he adds .
 Dayan, one Israeli official recalled, made a critical decision early in 1968 . Dayan made the decision in the wake of the Arab Spring, Israel's prime minister .
 He telephoned Sapir and asked him to spend a day with him, just as he had done with Allon . Sapir asked Sapir to spend the same day as Allon and Allon, but he refused .
 The two men went to Dimona. u He showed him the whole thing, from A to Z,"" the Israeli said. "He showed him all of the things he wanted to do,""
 There is no evidence that the Israeli cabinet ever made a formal decision about Dimona . Dimona is Israel's largest industrial hub in the Middle East .
 Production of the first assembly line bomb, whether officially sanctioned or not, was quickly known to the top layer of national security officials . The bomb was widely applauded .
 Mapai and Achdut Avodah had agreed to join forces to run as a bloc for seats in the Knesset in 1965 . An Israeli recalled that champagne was broken out at the meeting .
 The Israeli who used that phrase in an interview was fluent in idiomatic English . He was trying to describe the essence and import of Sapir's comment to Allon .
 Moshe Dayan unilaterally decided that he had received the support of the key money men and had all the authority he needed to turn Israel into a nuclear power . A former government official explained the bureaucratic procedure behind the decision to open Dimona's assembly line .
 Dimona, ostensibly a twenty-four-megawatt reactor, was purchasing an eight-year supply of uranium . Even if such a sale could be arranged, no one in Israel was willing to let the world know that Dimona was buying uranium .
 Time magazine reported that shortly after the Six-Day War, Dayan ""had secretly ordered the start of construction"" on a reprocessing plant . Mossad's solution was to approach one of its agents in West Ger* In April 1976, Mossad approached one of their agents in
 The article provided the world with its first hard information about the Israeli weapons program . The article, despite its confusion about the reprocessing plant, was already finished by 1967 .
 The story carried no byline, apparently because it was reported by David Halevy, who, as an Israeli citizen, was subject to government censorship . Halevy reported the story as a citizen of Israel, subject to censorship .
 Halevy, a former intelligence and army officer, was known for good contacts inside the Israeli government and intelligence community . Halevy's basic source was Moshe Dayan, an Israeli government official denied the story .
 The sale was approved by Euratom in October, and the uranium was shipped out of Antwerp aboard a vessel . The Scheersberg A had been purchased, with Mossad funds, by another Israeli agent-in-place in Turkey .
 The ore ore was transferred to an Israeli freighter guarded by gunboats and taken to Israel . Once at sea, the ore was taken to an Israel freighter, according to reports .
 The disappearance of the huge shipment of uranium ore was known, of course, within months to Euratom . It wasn't much longer before U.S. and European intelligence agencies reported internally that Israelis were involved .
 It took nine years, nonetheless, before word of the uranium hijacking reached the press . The affair eventually became the subject of a 1978 book, The Plumbat Affair . It took 9 years to reach the press, but the story was eventually made public .
 Israel's response to the book and to the earlier newspaper accounts was to continue to deny that it had a nuclear capability . Israel continues to deny it has any nuclear capability.
 No one, except for a few public-interest advocates and a few reporters, seemed to care . No one seemed to seem to care. No one else seemed to notice.
 America did so, bitter Israelis noted, while the Soviets continued to resupply their allies . U.S. resupplies its allies, Israel said, while Russia did so .
 Johnson also publicly eschewed any firm commitment to defend Israel in a crisis . Johnson also eschewed a firm commitment .
 Prime Minister Eshkol was eager to make a second state visit to Washington in January 1968 to plead for the sale of F-4 jet fighters to balance the Soviet introduction of MiGs into Egypt .
 The F-4 was the most advanced fighter in the U.S. arsenal . The Pentagon and State Department argued that Israel did not need such aircraft to maintain a military advantage .
 Introducing the top-of-the-line F-4S into the Middle East would be an unwarranted and unnecessary escalation . Israel would remain superior with the previously supplied A-4 Skyhawk bombers .
 Rostow's suggestion that it would be possible to link the Phantom sale to the NPT was farcical, given Israel's commitment to Dimona and the ample U.S. intelligence — much of it supplied by Wally Barbour's embassy in Tel Aviv — about that commitment .
 The issues would stay the same for at least the next twenty-three years . The issue would be debated for the next two decades .
 Rostow had to know that the Israeli military had gone on a virtual rampage at the end of the Six-Day War in the newly occupied areas of Jerusalem, the West Bank and Golan Heights . The Israeli military ransacked and destroyed Arab homes in an obvious attempt to drive Palestinians
 More than one hundred Arab homes were demolished in the Old City of Jersualem on the first night after the war by Israeli troops . Israeli troops operating under floodlights with bulldozers with bulldozer .
 Moshe Dayan later accused the Israeli soldiers of taking ""punitive"" action in the village . Dayan ordered cement and other goods to be provided to the villagers for rebuilding .
 There was a brief period after the war in which many senior Israelis openly questioned the wisdom of holding on to the occupied lands . Many senior Israelis, among them Dayan and David Ben-Gurion, openly questioned Israel's decision .
 The goal, said Critchfield, was to reach a quick accord on trading land for peace before the Israelis began settling the occupied territories . The goal of the deal was to be reached quickly before the Israeli settlements began .
 Dayan and Zamir were convinced that such a step would be ""a disastrous development,"" said Critchfield . Zamir and Dayan said such a move would be a 'disastrous development'
 Bundy met with Nicholas D Katzenbach, then the under secretary of state, at the White House . Bundy was invited to a White House meeting with the then-secretary of state . Bundy is now a successful businessman .
 Angleton argued that if we do not act now with Dayan's and Zamir's support, there will be settlements in the West Bank . Angleton said if we don't act now we will be faced with settlements in West Bank, settlements will continue .
 As we walked out, Mac said he'd forgotten how passionable Angleton could be . Mac said, Td forgotten how passionate Angleton was .
 Revisionists' position emerged as the government's policy over the years . The Revisionists have been in touch with the government for decades .
 The Israeli intransigence over return of the territories, coupled with the rearmed Arabs' desire for revenge, doomed United Nations Resolution 242 . Resolution 242 called for Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territories in return for Arab commitments of territorial integrity and peace .
 It had been unanimously approved by the United Nations Security Council in late November 1967 . The U.N. Security Council had approved the move in November 1967.
 Johnson-Eshkol summit meeting in early 1968 at the President's ranch in Texas . Meeting was held at Johnson's ranch at the end of that year .
 Eshkol and his advisers had sat through a day of briefings at which a series of Senate and Defense Department officials argued against selling F-4S to Israel .
 Within weeks of the summit meeting with Eshkol, Johnson was presented with a CIA estimate concluding— for the first time — that Israel had manufactured at least four nuclear warheads .
 President Obama ordered CIA Director Richard M Helms to bury the report, and Helms obeyed the order, as he always did . The report was buried by Helms, who always did.
 Duckett had briefed Teller in the past and, as he acknowledged, stood in awe of him . Duckett: "I stand by him. He's a great man"
 Teller explained that he had just returned from Israel . He had many contacts in the Israeli scientific and defense community . Teller had a sister living in Tel Aviv and was a frequent visitor there .
 Teller was careful to say that he had no specific information about Israeli nuclear weapons . Teller: "No specific information" was given to Israel .
 Teller told Duckett the Agency was waiting for an Israeli test before making any final assessment about Israeli nuclear capability . But it was his understanding, Teller said, that the Agency is waiting for the Israeli test .
 The Office of Science and Technology had just distributed a top-secret estimate on nonproliferation . Duckett decided that an update, known inside the intelligence community as a ""Memo to Holders,"" would be dispatched .
 The company's owner, Zalman Mordecai Shapiro, insisted that the uranium loss — first reported by Shapiro in 1965 — was routine . Shapiro, a devout Jew with close ties to Israel, insisted the loss was a by-product of the difficult task of enrichment .
 Duckett and many others in the intelligence community thought otherwise . Duckett thought otherwise. Duckett was wrong to say he was wrong . He was wrong.
 Duckett acknowledged that he had no evidence that Shapiro's uranium had been diverted to Israel, but made an assumption that it had . Duckett: "made an assumption"" that Israel had diverted uranium to Israel while preparing updated Israeli estimate .
 Duckett says the CIA didn't have much to go on with the Teller report and Shapiro's suspicions . Duckett acknowledged that the CIA had little evidence of Shapiro's alleged involvement .
 The Agency had been unable to determine whether Israel had built, as suspected, an underground chemical reprocessing plant at Dimona . The Agency was unable to find out whether the plant was built underground .
 The Agency also had not been able to penetrate any of the military commands or intelligence services of Israel . The Agency was also not able to break into any of Israel's military commands .
 No Israeli had defected to the U.S. with nuclear information, no Israeli defected . No Israeli defector to the United States had nuclear information . No Israelis have defected since then .
 The National Security Agency and its electronic eavesdropping also had not been much help, Duckett said . He said early evidence suggested some Israeli Air Force pilots had practiced bomb runs in a manner that made sense only if nuclear weapons were to be dropped .
 Duckett was now willing to state in a top-secret written report that Israel was a nuclear power . Duckett's report was published in the 1970s .
 The revised estimate was more than a little bit sensitive, Duckett knew, and he cleared it first with Dick Helms . Duckett: "Duckett knew that he was going to have to clear it up to the point"
 The CIA director told Duckett not to publish the estimate in any form . Duckett also declared that he himself would be the messenger with bad tidings .
 By 1968, the President had no intention of doing anything to stop the Israeli bomb, as Helms, Duckett, Walworth Barbour, William Dale, and a very few others in the U.S. government came to understand .
 Moshe Dayan's unilateral action to push Dimona into full-scale production carried what should have been a huge risk . A nuclear-armed Israel would find it impossible to sign the Nonproliferation Treaty, and Israel thus would not get its F-4S from the Johnson
 The pressure from the Washington bureaucracy on that issue remained intense, especially at the Pentagon . Clark Clifford, who had replaced Robert McNamara as secretary of defense at the end of January, was adamant .
 In October 1968, one month before the presidential election, Johnson formally approved the F-4 sale in principle, but left the bargaining over delivery dates and other details to be negotiated . The sale was approved in October 1968 .
 Paul C Warnke, the assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs, recalled thinking there still was an outside chance that Israel could sign the NPT in exchange for immediate delivery . Warnke: "An outside chance" Israel could be forced to sign the deal . Israel signed the N
 Warnke called in Yitzhak Rabin, newly named as Israel's am* Helms, despite his public image as a suave spymaster . Rabin was more of a bureaucrat than most newsmen and government officials in Washington could imagine .
 An angry President ordered a twenty-four-hour halt to all CIA intelligence collection and reporting on Vietnam . Helms's senior deputies recalled the occasion in the last year of the Johnson administration .
 The President's goal was to prevent a leak, and his assumption seemed to be that if he could stop the voluminous traffic to and from the CIA, he would do just that . The goal of stopping the traffic to the CIA was to stop the flow of information .
 Senior CIA staff were sure that Helms would ignore, or override, the irrational presidential order . Of course, shutting off the communications link had its obvious perils, and the senior CIA staff was sure .
 Helms followed orders and stopped the traffic . Although he most certainly knew better, Helms knew better .
 A Warnke aide, Harry H Schwartz, also was at the meeting and recalled an even tougher Warnke remark . Warnke aides said the remark was a tough one .
 The ambassador was enraged by the encounter, which he subsequently claimed had nothing to do with nuclear weapons . The ambassador, of course, was enraged .
 In his memoirs, Rabin depicted the basic issue as Warnke's insistence that the U.S. be permitted to have on-site supervision of every Israeli arms manufacturing plant and every defense installation .
 He began passing ""broad hints"" to Israel's supporters in Congress and elsewhere to generate support for the F-4 sale, he says .
 Abe Feinberg was one of the few Americans who could get the President to change his mind . He and Major General Mordecai Hod, the Israeli Air Force's chief of staff, went to see him . Feinberg's visit to Israel was the first time the President has changed his
 Paul Warnke: F-4 sale tied to Israeli acceptance of the NPT . Warnke dramatically drew his hand across his neck in a meeting of his staff members .
 The treaty, he wrote, was ""the most difficult and most important ... of all the agreements reached with Moscow"" during his presidency . The treaty was the most difficult to reach with Moscow, he said .
 There's also no evidence that Johnson felt he was in debt to the Israeli government for its support of his policies in Vietnam . American Jews, despite that support, were overwhelmingly hostile to the war .
 Johnson's decision not to stop the sale had given Israel a high-performance aircraft capable of carrying a nuclear weapon on a oneway mission to Moscow .
 It was perhaps, perhaps, nothing more than his farewell gift to the Israeli people and his way of repaying the loyalty of Abe Feinberg . Abe's farewell gift was a farewell gift, perhaps just as he paid tribute to the people of Israel .
 Feinberg enjoyed the greatest presidential access and influence in his twenty years as a Jewish fund-raiser and lobbyist with Lyndon Johnson .
 By 1968, the government of Israel had rewarded Feinberg for his services by permitting him to become the major owner of the nation's Coca-Cola franchise . Feinberg was awarded the title of Israel's Coke franchise in 1968 .
 A lot of people were afraid publicly to give as much as they could, so * Israel had rewarded other financial supporters with similarly lucrative business deals . U.S. had been afraid to give publicly, so had rewarded others with similar deals . Israel had been rewarded with lucrative deals .
 Tricontinenal Pipelines, Ltd., an international investment group controlled by Baron Edmund de Rothschild, was given the concession to operate a sixteen-inch oil pipeline between Elat and Haifa, via Ashdod .
 The contract was signed by then Finance Minister Levi Eshkol on behalf of Israel . It committed the state to ship at least 1. million tons of oil through the pipeline for the next fifteen years .
 Edmund de Rothschild was a major contributor to Dimona's start-up costs . Abe Feinberg was also a key contributor to the company's $1.5 billion-a-decade success .
 Feinberg's special status became clear to some in the White House after the press revealed that Walter Jenkins had been arrested a week earlier in the bathroom of a Washington YMCA on homosexual solicitation charges .
 Arrest took place three weeks before the 1964 presidential election . The arrest took place before the election .
 Johnson telephoned Feldman and Bill Moyers, another trusted aide and sometime speechwriter, to clean out Jenkins's safe . Johnson ordered them to do so .
 Feldman knew Jenkins was especially trusted on national security issues . Feldman also knew that Jenkins is especially trusted with national security .
 What he and Moyers did not know was that they would find the Feinberg money . Moyers and Feinberg didn't know that the money would be found .
 Moyers, asked about the incident in early 1991, said his memory was vague, but acknowledged that ""circumstances did lead me to believe"" that Jenkins had a private cache of money in his safe . Moyers said he believed Jenkins had money in the safe .
 Moyers said he doesn't know whether the cash was meant for the Democratic campaign . Moyers: "I don't know what happened to it. It's a mystery"
 Moyers, now a prominent television personality, recalled the time in the Johnson White House when a North Carolina man came to see him . Moyers is now a well-known television personality .
 "He'd take from friends and adversaries just because he thought that's the way the system worked," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says he'd take things from his friends and enemies just because of the system .
 A year earlier, Israeli military attaches had asked for a Low Altitude Bombing System for nuclear weapons . He had been stunned a year earlier when a group of Israeli military attach had come into his Pentagon office .
 The computerized bombing system provided time for an aircraft to drop its weapons and roll away to avoid the blast effects . The system was designed to allow the aircraft to roll away from the blast .
 Don't ever haul one out, because your little government will disappear . Don't get a government out of your pocket, because it will disappear, says President Obama .
 The underground laboratories at Dimona had their precedent in the Jewish struggle after World War II against the British mandatory power in Palestine .
 Ben-Gurion angered British authorities by insisting that they adhere to strict limits on Jewish immigration to Palestine . The limits were set in 1939, after three years of Arab revolts . The British authorities had angered David Ben Gurion and his followers .
 British ruling meant that hundreds of thousands of Eastern European Jews were unable to escape the Holocaust . The British ruling had meant that . Hundreds of thousands had been forced to flee the Holocaust in Eastern Europe .
 Those who survived were again denied a chance to come legally to Palestine . And now those who had somehow managed to survive were again being denied a legal visa .
 The heavily outnumbered and outgunned members of the Hagannah, the Jewish underground, began the inevitable guerrilla war against the British troops with little other than guile and determination .
 One of the war's most imaginative operations involved what seemed to be yet another farming kibbutz . It was set up in 1946 about fifteen miles outside Tel Aviv, adjacent to a large military base .
 The kibbutz's administrative building was constructed, seemingly at random, within a half mile of the base . The building was built within the site of a military base in Israel . It was built in the middle of a half-mile radius of the site .
 Metal for bullets had been shipped into Israel disguised as lipstick tubes . Metal for the bullets cleared British customs without challenge . Metal was shipped to Israel disguised in lipstick tubes and it cleared customs in Israel .
 The underground facility had been ""scooped out,"" said Feinberg, in twenty-seven days . Feinberg said the underground facility was "scoooped out" in less than a week .
 The men and women who worked underground alternated that work with farming . Those who completed a shift in the arms factory were ordered to muddy their shoes and sit under sunlamps so they could appear to be innocent .
 British soldiers and officers were constant customers of the kibbutz's bakery and laundry . Over the next two years, British soldiers were constant — and unsuspecting — customers . The bakery, laundry and laundry offered their services to the military .
 Feinberg recalled that a few of the British soldiers even made a point of coming to the kibbutz's Friday-night Shabbat dinners . Feinberg recalls that some of the soldiers even came to the Friday night dinners . The British soldiers were involved in the Kibbut
 Today the underground bullet factory is known as the Ayalon Museum . It is a popular attraction for schoolchildren in Israel .
 Dimona's chemical reprocessing plant looked, on the surface, very much like an ordinary administration building . Located a few hundred feet from the reactor, it looked like a nondescript two-story windowless facility .
 The building had thickly reinforced walls, not an unusual safety feature, given its location . The building is located in the middle of the country's poorest neighborhood .
 A bank of elevators on the top floor was bricked over before foreign visitors, such as Floyd Culler, were permitted to enter the building .
 Vanunu began working at Dimona in August 1977 and spent much of the next eight years assigned to various tasks inside the reprocessing plant, formally known as Machon 2 .
 A special pass was needed to enter the plant, and all movement inside, even to and from the bathroom, was to be closely monitored . All movement inside was — in theory — to be monitored .
 Vanunu, once at work in the Tunnel, found that the stringent security existed in theory only . He found that security existed only in the tunnel .
 He was laid off in mid-1985 as part of a government-wide cutback . Constantly in trouble for his public pro-Arab views, he had been laid off .
 Vanunu appealed through his union, powerful as are all unions in Israel, and won back his job . His union is powerful and powerful, and he appealed to be reinstated .
 He smuggled a camera into the reprocessing plant during an overnight shift and wandered around undetected for some forty minutes . He took fifty-seven color photographs of the plant .
 He was fired after calling for the formation of a Palestinian state during an Arab rally . A few weeks later he was fired from his post in Israel . He was later fired from the post after he called for an Arab state .
 Vanunu negotiated a settlement from Dimona's management that gave him severance pay and a letter attesting to his good record . Even then, again with help from his union, he was able to negotiate a settlement with management .
 A combination of factors — disenchantment with his life, distress at the treatment of Arabs in Israel, and what he had learned inside Dimona — drove him to exile in Australia and eventually to London .
 Vanunu's photographs proved to be critical in establishing his credibility . The newspaper's editors and reporters were appropriately skeptical .
 Israeli operatives have long-standing ties to the London newspaper world . Israeli government closely monitored by its operatives in London .
 Copies of some of Vanunu's sensational photographs had been made available in London — before publication of the Sunday Times story — to an Israeli intelligence agent masquerad .
 Mossad ordered Mossad to get Vanunu out of London and into Israeli custody . The photographs were sent by courier to the office of Prime Minister Shimon Peres .
 The lonely Vanunu was enticed by a Mossad agent named Cindy Hanin Bentov (a pseudonym) to leave for Rome a few days before publication .
 Vanunu has told family members he was taken by taxi to an apartment in Rome, where he was drugged and returned to Israel by ship to stand trial . He has said he was then taken to Rome by taxi and taken to a Rome apartment to be drugged .
 In March 1988, he was sentenced in March 1988 to eighteen years in a maximum-security prison . He was sentenced to 18 years .
 Vanunu's Times interview and his photographs of many of the production units in the Tunnel, or Machon 2, provided the first extensive evidence of Israeli capability to manufacture fusion, or thermonuclear, weapons . The American intelligence community .
 American intelligence also obtained a copy of many of the Sunday Times 's interview notes with Vanunu . Those notes, some of which were also made available to the author, provided much more specific detail .
 Senior U.S. officials say unpublished notes are highly credible . Vanunu notes are based on intelligence from experts who have worked in nuclear weapons production .
 The most exhaustive analysis of the Vanunu statements and photographs was conducted by the Z Division, a special intelligence unit at the Livermore Laboratories . Experts are considered to be the final word on proliferation issues .
 It is responsible for analyzing foreign nuclear weapons, with emphasis on Soviet weaponry . It is also responsible for analysis of Soviet weapons .
 There was no evidence in the Vanunu materials of additional cooling capacity for Dimona's reactor . The output would have had to have been increased to produce enough plutonium for two hundred warheads .
 Vanunu, however, explained that a new cooling unit had been installed at the reactor while he was employed at Dimona . He explained that the cooling unit was installed at a new reactor .
 Vanunu's photographs of what apparently were full-sized models of Israeli nuclear weapons were of interest to the U.S. The photographs were of what appeared to be full-size models of Israel's nuclear weapons . Vanununu was a member of the United States' intelligence
 Israel is capable of making one of the most sophisticated weapons in the nuclear arsenal, experts say . They concluded that Israel was capable of manufacturing a low-yield neutron bomb . A neutron bomb could be a neutron bomb, they say .
 Vanunu describes the cooling unit to Frank Barnaby, a nuclear physicist and former employee of Britain's nuclear weapons installation at Aldermaston . Such weapons, which first came into the U.S. stockpile in the mid-1970s, utilize enhanced radiation .
 Barnaby spent two days with Vanunu, at the request of the Sunday Times t in a continuing effort to verify his account . Barnaby: "We are trying to get the truth out of this man's story"
 Barnaby is director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute . The institute is funded by the Swedish government . Barnaby became director of an arms control study group funded by Sweden .
 The mock-ups are accurate replicas, in terms of external design and size, of a normal warhead . American nonproliferation experts assumed that the Israelis' models were carefully prepared .
 The weapon actually is a two-stage thermonuclear device that utilizes tritium and deuterium . The device is not lithium deuteride, but lithium deutide .
 The Vanunu information helped American intelligence experts date the progress of the Israeli nuclear arsenal . The information also helped U.S. experts date Israel's nuclear arsenal to date .
 Vanunu revealed that Unit 92 in the Tunnel had been painstakingly removing tritium from heavy water since the 1960s . Unit 92 had been attempting from the earliest days of Dimona's production to manufacture ""boosted"" fission weapons .
 The United States began experimenting in the early 1950s with boosting, which dramatically increases the yield, or destructiveness, of a single-stage fission device . The U.S. began experimenting with boosting in the 1950s . Boosters dramatically increased the yield of the fission weapon
 Boosting is a process in which small quantities of tritium and deuterium are inserted directly into a plutonium warhead and designed to flood the warhead with additional neutrons at the moment of fission . Boosting produces a bigger kick, or yield, with smaller amounts of
 Vanunu emigrated with his family to Israel in 1963 . He was assigned to work at a new production plant for lithium 6, another essential element of the hydrogen bomb . He also told the Sunday Times of returning from a vacation in 1980 .
 In 1984, a new facility for large-scale production of tritium was opened . It was opened in 1984, he said .
 Lithium is irradiated in the reactor, then moved to Unit 93, where it is heated to release tritium in a gas form . Unit 93 also releases helium and hydrogen, along with helium and helium .
 The gases are then driven under high pressure through an asbestos palladium column and separated . The process is then used to separate the gases from each other and separate them .
 The helium is stored in powdered uranium and can again be released by heating . The helium can be released again by heating or by using powdered uranium .
 Up to twenty grams of tritium are used in each neutron warhead . The opening of Unit 93 suggests that fullscale production of neutron weapons began .
 As described by Vanunu, Dimona includes the reactor and at least eight other buildings, or Machons . The most important of which is the chemical reprocessing plant, the most important .
 Machon i is the large silver-domed reactor, sixty feet in diameter, that can be clearly seen from the nearby highway . The reactor is located in the center of the world's largest nuclear plant .
 The uranium fuel rods remain for three months in the reactor, which is cooled and moderated by heavy water . The reactor's fuel rods are cooled and cooled to a maximum of three months .
 Heavy water cooled by ordinary water flowing through heat exchanger, creating steam . Steam in a nuclear power plant would drive a turbine and create electricity .
 The steam in Machon i is vented into the atmosphere, creating a radioactive cloud . Instead of steam, the steam in the atmosphere is released into the sky .
 Machon 3 converts lithium 6 into a solid for insertion into a nuclear warhead . Machon also processes natural uranium for the reactor . The reactor processes lithium 6 and natural uranium in a reactor .
 Machon 4 contains a waste treatment plant for the radioactive residue from the chemical reprocessing plant in Machon 2 . Machon 3 contains a treatment facility for radioactive waste from the reprocessed plant . The waste treatment facility is located near Machon 1 .
 Machon 5 coats the uranium rods with aluminum to be consumed in the reactor . The uranium rods are coated with aluminum and consumed in a reactor .
 The rods, once stacked in the core of the reactor, provide the fuel needed to sustain a chain reaction . They capture weapons-grade isotopes of plutonium .
 Machon 8 contains a laboratory for testing samples and experimenting on new manufacturing processes . It also is the site of Special Unit 840, where Israeli scientists have developed a gas centrifuge method of enriching uranium for weapons use . Machon is also home to a laboratory where scientists test samples and
 Machon 9 also has a laser-isotopereprocessing facility for the enrichment of uranium . Machon is located in the heart of the world's largest nuclear facilities .
 The shells buttressed by the heavy uranium, which is much denser than lead, can easily penetrate thick armor plating . The shells are a staple in modern arsenals and are buttressed with heavy uranium . They are also a staple for the military .
 Army Colonel Carmelo Alba photographed venting vent in 1965 . It was one of those ventings, apparently, that was photographed by Colonel Alba .
 Some U.S. tanks were equipped with uranium armor plating for added defense against Iraqi attacks . Some of the American tanks also had uranium armor .
 Dimona's most essential facility is the reprocessing plant in Machon 2 . Vanunu spent most of his career at Dimona .
 plutonium, a by-product of the fission process in the reactor, is extracted by chemical means from the spent uranium rods . It is used to extract the plutonium from the rods in a reactor .
 The residual uranium is reprocessed and reconstituted for use in new fuel rods . The uranium is then used to fuel rods in new nuclear reactors .
 There are at least thirty-nine separate units in the six underground levels of the Tunnel . The most important is the production hall where the spent uranium rods undergo reprocessing .
 Before reprocessing can begin, rods must be cooled for weeks in water-filled tanks . This reduces radioactivity by a factor of several thousand by several thousand .
 The radioactive rods are still lethal and are always handled by remote control . Even then, they are still handled with lead shielding behind lead shielding . The radioactive rod is still lethal .
 The Tunnel's production hall dominates levels one through four below ground . Work there is monitored by a large control room that includes an observation area known to technicians as ""Golda's Balcony,"" a reference to Golda Meir's frequent visits .
 The end result of the chemical processing is a weekly average of nine "buttons" of pure plutonium . Vanunu says the weekly average is nine 'buttons' of plutonium a week .
 The plutonium is fabricated by machine in a secure area on level five, the only floor in the Tunnel to be denied access . Vanunu was denied access to the area .
 Other chemicals, including lithium compounds and beryllium, also are machine-fabricated on the fifth level .
 Once completed, weapons parts are moved by convoys of unmarked cars, under armed guard, to another facility to the north for assembly into warheads . Vanunu: "Once completed, the weapons parts move by convoy of unmarked vehicles, under guard" The facility is not known to Van
 The final stage of warhead production takes place at a defense plant north of Haifa operated by Rafael, the top-secret Israeli research and manufacturing agency . Rafael is responsible for Israel's most sensitive weaponry .
 The Tunnel remained in operation around the clock for thirty-four weeks a year . It was shut down from July to November for routine maintenance and repair . Vanunu says the Tunnel remained open for 30-24 weeks .
 American nuclear experts say the methods used to reprocess the spent uranium at Dimona are essentially routine . The industrial solvents and solutions used by the Israelis are the same as those relied upon at the Savannah River Plant in Aiken, South Carolina, where state-of-the-
 The reactor would be producing enough enriched materials for four to a dozen or more bombs a year, depending on warhead design . Vanunu's information about the rate of plutonium reprocessing is correct — a steady production rate of 1kg weekly .
 Dimona could be producing 16 to 20 kilograms of weapons-grade plutonium per year . Enough plutonium could be enough for four or five warheads, experts say . Dimona is believed to be capable of producing enough plutonium for four warheads .
 Dimona's reprocessing plant is underground, underground and sophisticated, experts say . The plant is located in the heart of the city's industrial heartland . Dimona is one of the world's largest factories .
 You need threefoot lead walls, all automated; people in suits; robotics; robotics. You need 3ft lead walls all automated . You need people in suit suits, robots, robots and robots to make the walls .
 The price of ventilation shafts, air intakes, and fan systems drives up construction costs . That drives up the price of air shafts and other parts of the shafts .
 Going underground posed enormous engineering risks that could be met only by master planning and expert intelligence . Going underground also posed enormous risks, experts say .
 The U.S. Atomic Energy Commission's Savannah River Plant in South Carolina had thick, lead-shielded doors that protected the work force on custom-made coasters with specially engineered motors for opening and closing .
 The possibility exists that the Israelis determined from the outset that they could avoid such problems by finding out what had gone right — and wrong — from the Americans who built the Savannah River Plant . The official said the possibility exists, the official said .
 It is impossible to even roughly determine the amount of plutonium that has been produced at Dimona without knowing the power output and operating history of the reactor .
 The general accuracy and scientific validity of Vanunu's statistical data added to his credibility with U.S. intelligence officials . Vanununu: "The general accuracy" and validity of his statistical data helped him gain credibility .
 That kind of intelligence is crucial to not having to reinvent the wheel, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Blumberg's agents were operating all over the world, collecting available technical information and setting up front companies in Europe and Latin America for the purchase from the United States of high-tech equipment .
 Robotics was used in hot weapons laboratories where humans could not work . Robotics was an important early use in the U.S. for weapons .
 The precision involved in machining the thin plutonium hemispheres and placing them around the gases needed to create boosted nuclear weapons was achieved only after the use of remote control .
 Aharon Katzir became an intellectual force inside the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission . He was world-renowned for his research into robotics at the Weizmann Institute .
 Katzir's pioneering work in converting chemical energy into the energy of motion . Katzir is credited with turning chemical energy from chemical energy to motion . His work was first published in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Katzir's team at the Weizmann Institute also was concentrating on the development of artificial muscle tissue for use in robots . Katzir: "Weizmann's team is concentrating on developing artificial muscle tissues for robots .
 His research was heavily funded by the United States Air Force's Office of Scientific Research . The Air Force was interested in utilizing robotics in outer-space research .
 The Air Force had no idea that it was helping to research research for the Israeli nuclear arsenal, nor did it know it was being done at Dimona .
 Despite such comments, there remains no actual evidence that Israel needed outside help for its nuclear weaponry .
 George A Cowan spent more than twenty years designing nuclear weapons at Los Alamos . Cowan acknowledged that there always was a close association with Israeli physicists from the Weizmann Institute .
 Hans Bethe recalled three visits to the Weizmann Institute during which his hosts would ""take me anywhere and discuss anything with me. Similarly, physicist Hans Bethel, who helped design the first American nuclear and thermonuclear weapons, recalled three trips to the Institute .
 "They knew I was interested in nuclear power reactors,"" he added . "Yet they never offered to take me to Dimona," he said of the nuclear plant .
 The extraordinary degree of master planning that had to take place at Dimona was little appreciated by senior officials in the Israeli chain of command . Vanunu disclosures gave Washington the most specific evidence of an Israeli reprocessing plant .
 Shimon Peres has confided to friends that during the early construction of Dimona he often signed requisition orders and other technical documents on behalf of the Ben-Gurion government .
 Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger were convinced that Israel's nuclear ambitions were justified and understandable . Nixon and Kissinger were inaugurated on January 20, 1969, in Washington, DC .
 The two American leaders also shared a contempt for the 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty, which had been endorsed in public by Lyndon Johnson . The two leaders shared contempt for each other .
 Nixon dismayed arms control community by urging Senate to delay ratification of NPT until after election . NPT ratification was delayed until after the election of Hubert H. Humphrey .
 He said he was concerned about the NPT's failure to permit the transfer of ""defensive nuclear weapons" such as mines or antiballistic missile systems, to non-nuclear powers .
 Nixon and Kissinger had simultaneously issued a presidential order to the bureaucracy undercutting all that was said in public . In the secrecy of their offices, only a few in the government knew . Only a few knew .
 I heard him say that if he were the Israelis, he would get nuclear weapons . "I heard him saying he would like to have nuclear weapons," he said of Israel . "If he were not the Israelis," he added .
 Kissinger also told his staff in the first months of 1969 that Japan, as well as Israel, would be better off with the bomb than without it . Kissinger also said in 1969 that Israel and Japan would benefit from the bomb more than from it .
 Halperin was convinced that nuclear weapons were essential to the national security of both nations . He was convinced, he said, that the U.S. and Israel should have nukes .
 Kissinger's support for Israel's nuclear weapons program was widely known to the Israeli leadership . Kissinger met with General Elad Peled at General Peled's home in 1968 to discuss the issue .
 Floyd Culler inspections of Dimona ended in 1969 . Culler inspection was a sign of the administration's stand . Dimona was the site of the largest nuclear reactor in the world .
 The inspections, begun in 1962, had long been considered by the U.S. arms control community to be important in principle but in practice to have marginal utility . They dragged on without change, nonetheless, through the Johnson years, through Johnson years .
 Israel resented the inspections as an intrusion on its sovereignty . There also was fear that Culler or one of his team might actually stumble onto something useful . Dimona began gearing up in the late 1960s for the full-scale production of warheads .
 Culler's inspection in 1969 seemed to some Americans to be PRELUDE TO WAR 21 I especially pointless, in the wake of President Johnson's lastminute decision to allow Israel to purchase its much-desired F-4S without insisting on Israeli ratification of the NPT in
 Washington found it convenient to end the charade, and the inspections ended . But now Washington finds it convenient, and inspections ended.
 Israel had gone nuclear, and there was nothing that the U.S. could — or wanted to — do about it . The U.N. could not do anything about it, but it was not a matter of concern .
 The Smith story also revealed that a manufacturing plant had been set up near Tel Aviv for the production of solid propellants and engines for the missiles .
 The Symington peg helped Smith get the story published a few days later . The reporter awaited the attention he was sure the article would attract from others in the media .
 The Times' competitors say it's impossible to confirm the story . Neither did any of the Times's newspaper competitors .
 The decision not in terms of costs, but as stemming from a concern that the nuclear-powered plant would become too much of a target for Arab terrorism in the wake of the Six-Day War and the renewed War of Attrition with Egypt . The reporter did hear from the Israeli embassy
 By mid-1971, the White House's permissive attitude toward the Israeli bomb made it possible for even those responsible for monitoring the shipment of sensitive materials to look the other way .
 Glenn R Cella was assigned that summer to handle political-military affairs on the State Department's Israeli desk . He also was named the department's representative on the Middle East Task Force, an interagency group whose main mission was to monitor American arms transfer policies .
 Cella, who had served in Morocco, Algeria, and Egypt, began asking about the Israeli bomb . He quickly learned of Duckett's suppressed estimate . Cella: "It's not a bomb. It's a bomb," he said .
 If pressure on Israel to stop its nuclear weapons program, it would not come from the task force or the State Department, he says . He learned that if there was going to be any pressure, it wouldn't come from State Dept. or task force .
 Israel was then pushing for the immediate shipment of more F-4S . The State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research had been ordered to make a study of the military balance in the region .
 Cella's dismay that the study made no mention of Israel's nuclear capability . Cella was dismayed by the lack of mention of Israeli nuclear capability, Cella says .
 Cella was notified that an Israeli request for the sale of krytrons had been routinely approved by his Pentagon counterpart on the task force . A few months later, Cella received a notification that the Israeli request was routinely approved .
 Krytrons, the inquisitive Cella was informed, were sensitive electronic timing devices used to trigger strobe lights . Cella is told they are sensitive timing devices that trigger strobes .
 The high-speed device, whose export usually is closely monitored, is essential for the precise detonation of the chemical explosives that cause implosion in a nuclear weapon . A Pentagon official should have known about the device, the official says .
 A year later the U.S. budget included funds earmarked for the supply of two supercomputers to the Weizmann Institute . The funds were earmarked in the United States .
 Richard Helms, the consummate bureaucrat, continued to please his superiors by stifling significant intelligence about the Israeli bomb . Helms' role in stifling intelligence about Israeli bomb led to his resignation, he says .
 He'd also come to a personal conclusion about Israeli intelligence, he said . He said he was convinced Israel was funneling American satellite information to the Soviet Union .
 Helms convinced the Israelis were doing it on behalf of the Soviets . Helms was convinced the Israeli government was behind it .
 Israel wanted satellite imagery of the Soviet Union because of its own nuclear targeting needs . Israel wanted the satellite imagery because it wanted to target targets in its own own nuclear target zone .
 Helms asked for help, Duckett said, and a series of educational briefings was arranged, amid great secrecy, in his office . Duckett: To his credit, he said, Helms sought help .
 At the first session, Helms was asked by his instructor, one of the Agency's leading experts in nuclear fission, whether he'd ever studied physics in high school . Helms says he's been studying physics since high school, but he's not interested in nuclear science .
 Helms spent a day with Duckett and other government officials at the nuclear underground test center in Nevada . Helms eventually spent the day at the Nevada test center .
 Richard Nixon appointed ambassador to Iran by Richard Nixon in early 1973 . He served nearly eight years as the head of the CIA before becoming ambassador to the country .
 Long recalled once being asked by a superior to put that response in writing, in a formal diplomatic note to a Middle Eastern nation . Long said he was asked to write that response to a Mideast nation .
 Curtis F Jones similarly spent his career as a Middle East expert in the Foreign Service . His final assignment was as director of Near East, North African, and South Asian affairs for the Bureau of Intelligence and Research .
 The easing of the pressure from Washington removed any constraints on Dimona and the Israeli leadership . Dimona correctly interpreted the end of the Culler inspections as an American carte blanche, writes David Gergen .
 The technicians and scientists at Dimona began operating in the early 1970s exactly as their American and Soviet counterparts had done in the first days of the Cold War . The Israelis made as many bombs as possible, the Israeli scientists say .
 These ranged from huge thermonuclear city busters to an atomic warhead for a jeep-mounted bazooka . City busters were created by the Soviets in the 1960s .
 The missiles had been capable since 1971 of hitting targets in southern Russia, including Tbilisi, near the Soviet oil fields, and Baku, off the coast of the Caspian Sea, as well as Arab capitals .
 There also was a squadron of nuclearcapable F-4 fighters on twenty-four-hour alert in underground revetments at the Tel Nof air base .
 The specially trained F-4 pilots were the elite of the Israeli Air Force . They were forbidden to discuss their mission with any outsider . The F4s were forbidden from talking to outsiders about their mission .
 The long-range F-4S were capable of flying one-way to Moscow with a nuclear bomb . The daring pilots would have to be resupplied by an airborne tanker to make it home .
 By this time, Dimona had solved many of the basic problems of weapons miniaturization . The smaller warheads provided Israeli weapons designers with an array of options that included the development of low-yield tactical weapons .
 The United States had done its part by approving the sale of long-range 175mm and 203mm cannons to the Israeli Defense Force in the early 1970s . Those weapons, capable of striking targets twenty-five miles away, also became part of the Israeli nuclear option .
 American intelligence later learned that Israel had experimented by fusing together two long-range artillery barrels to produce a cannon capable of hurling a shell more than forty-five miles . The cannon was able to fire a cannon more than 40 miles .
 Gerald Bull, a controversial Canadian arms designer, supplied shells with range extended as much as 25 percent . The shells were designed by Bull for the U.S. Army . Bull was a controversial arms designer for the Canadian government .
 Bull had accomplished for Iraq's artillery what he had done for the Israelis at the time of his death . Bull was killed by Iraqi troops in 2003 .
 There was highlevel Israeli concern over Bull's success in constructing a ""supergun"" for the Iraqis . Bull built a weapon that provided Iraq with the ability to threaten Israel with long-range chemical, biological, or conventional high-explosive shells .
 Bull's initial contracts with Israel phased out in the mid-1970s . He later did business with South Africa and China from an eight-thousand-acre compound straddling the Vermont-Canadian border .
 Bull's partners in SRC during much of the 1970s included the Arthur D Little Company, a highly respected management research firm . SRC was founded by Bull in the early 1970s .
 Four executives from Arthur D Little were on the SRC board of directors . Arthur Little executives from the company were also on SRC's board . SRC was founded by Arthur Little, a subsidiary of Arthur Little .
 An American who visited Israel in 1973 was told of the intended use of the long-range cannons . He dutifully reported to U.S. intelligence . This American was an official at one of the United States Army's weapons testing facilities .
 There also were suggestions, added the American, that Israel had targeted Damascus, Syria's capital, during the Yom Kippur War .
 A senior State Department intelligence official recalled widespread concern in the early 1970s over the ambitious Israeli artillery program . A State Department official said there was widespread concern over the program .
 As the Israeli weapons program prospered, there was a new element of caution inside the Israeli government and the military commands .
 The political struggles and infighting were put aside as the new weapon became standardized for battlefield use . The new weapon was a weapon of choice for the military .
 No nuclear weapon could be armed and fired without authorization from the prime minister, minister of defense, and army chief of staff . The Israeli leadership had to work out procedures for the actual use of the nuclear weapon .
 He insisted until his death that his activities on behalf of South Africa had been sanctioned by the American intelligence community . People realized the moment that the bomb was upon us that we'd become targets, too.""
 Dayan's standing among his peers in the military and the upper echelons of the Israeli government was far lower than among the public . He was considered overrated as a military leader and suspect because of his incessant womanizing and his financial wheeling and dealing . There was categ
 "We wanted the Arabs to know what we had"" — without explicitly saying too much. We wanted to be honest about what we were doing," he said. "I wanted to make sure they knew what I was doing"
 Dayan, with his public statements and leaks, blurred that tactic . Dayan's leaks to the press have blurred the tactic, he said .
 He and Peres felt like they were almost parents"" of the nuclear complex, he said . He said .
 Dayan lost no authority, but it was made clear to him he was no longer welcome at Dimona . He no longer had a military need to know anything about the Israeli nuclear program, he says .
 Aharon Katzir, the innovative physicist in charge of Dimona, was killed in a Japanese Red Army terrorist attack at Lod Airport near Tel Aviv in May 1972 . There is no evidence that Katzir was specifically targeted .
 Dayan outraged many of his countrymen after the Six-Day War, when the biblical lands of the West Bank and Gaza were once again open to academics and archaeologists . His replacement, Shalheveth Freier, was a nuclear engineer .
 Dayan, with the help of the troops, would remove artifacts for his personal gain . Dayan would then remove artifacts — many of them invaluable — for his own gain . Many of the artifacts were invaluable .
 He eventually established an antique garden in the rear of his home in Zahala, an exclusive suburb of Tel Aviv .
 The minister of defense's activities led to occasional critiques in the Israeli press, but no government investigation . No government investigation was launched into his activities .
 Americans who served as diplomats and military attaches in Israel have acknowledged the purchase of antiques from Dayan . Dayan invariably insisted on payment in American dollars .
 Freier also enjoyed high standing among international scientists . Freier was particularly well known to American nuclear weapons designers .
 In 1973, two Israeli scientists received a West German patent for a laser process that could cheaply produce as much as seven grams of uranium enriched to 60 percent U-235 in twenty-four hours . The process was patented in 1973 and was patented by West German scientists .
 Dimona opened a special Machon for the production of laser-enriched uranium . The research paid off six years later, according to the research .
 The burgeoning nuclear bastion at Dimona may have officially remained a secret to the world . The Israeli intelligence community discovered in the early 1970s that the Soviet KGB had penetrated the top offices of the defense ministry and intelligence establishment .
 One of the detachment's most senior officers was Reuven Yerdor, an accomplished linguist who cracked a Soviet code . He cracked a code that masked communications between KGB headquarters in Moscow and its regional base .
 The Israelis began poring over the backlog of undeciphered Soviet message traffic . Many of the major secret decisions of the Israeli defense ministry, including those dealing with nuclear weapons, were being reported to Moscow within, in some cases, twelve hours .
 The team was headed by Shin Beth, Israel's internal security agency . It included members from Mossad and Prime Minister Meir's office . The team includes Mossad, Shin Beth and the Prime Minister's Office .
 It was unable to find out how the KGB was able to transmit its intelligence out of Israel . The KGB continued its spying during the secret inquiry .
 Investigators were able to determine that only a small number of Israeli officials had access to all the material that had been funneled to the KGB . At least one of Golda Meir's personal aides was at the center of the investigation .
 A few of the suspects, including the aide, cleared themselves by passing lie detector tests . Others chose not to take the test, and the matter was left unresolved, to the investigators .
 The Soviets understood that no amount of surveillance could prevent Israeli agents from smuggling nuclear bombs across the border in automobiles, aircraft, or commercial ships . Israeli agents smuggled nuclear bombs into the U.S. in cars, aircraft and commercial ships, the Soviets believed .
 Israel's leadership, especially Moshe Dayan, had nothing but contempt for the Arab combat ability in the early 1970s . Israel's leaders had nothing to say about the Arab Arab forces in the 1970s.
 Israel's main antagonist in the Middle East was and would continue to be the Soviet Union . Israel's view of Israel's Mideast conflict was that of Soviet Union as its main enemy in the region .
 One of the most nagging questions of the inquiry had to do with the transmission of the intelligence . Dimona's arsenal, known by the Kremlin to be targeted as much as possible at the Kremlin, was targeted at targets .
 At one point, a knowledgeable Israeli said, the investigators turned to the National Security Agency for help . But the NSA was unable to come up with an answer, the knowledgeable Israeli says .
 Years later, an Iranian general spying for the KGB in Iran was arrested and found to be carrying an American satellite communication device . He had used the device to file his intelligence reports .
 Israel had a steady flow of American arms and American acquiescence in its continued control of the occupied territories, where settlements were systematically being constructed . Israel had to rely heavily on the arms of the U.S. to maintain control .
 The death of Nasser in September 1970 had not altered the basic equation in the Middle East . Anwar Sadat was, in the view of Golda Meir and her cabinet, nothing more than yet another unyielding threat to Jews .
 The new Egyptian leader had been jailed by the British authorities during much of World War II because of his openly pro-German stance and his public endorsement of Hitler . The fact that his actions were more anti-British than pro-British was of little solace to the Israeli leadership .
 Sadat broke new ground by offering Israel a peace agreement shortly after taking office . Sadat was the first Arab leader willing even to discuss such a commitment .
 The Sadat offer was rejected out of hand by Golda Meir . Meir viewed the compromise as nothing more than a starting point for extended negotiations .
 Egyptian president tried again in mid-1972 to get Washington's respect . He abruptly ordered Soviet troops and advisers out of Egypt to demonstrate, in part, that Egypt was not pro-Communist . That did not happen, and the bitterly disappointed Egyptian president, in trouble at home and ridiculed
 Nixon and Kissinger mistakenly viewed it as only reaffirmation of their policy of support for Israel . Kissinger and Kissinger were astonished, as was the rest of the world, at the ouster of the Soviet ouster .
 Kissinger went further and privately reviled Sadat as a fool who, by acting unilaterally and emotionally, had thrown away an opportunity to use the Soviet explusion as a bargaining tool . Sadat's actions were seen as a mistake by Kissinger, Kissinger said in a statement .
 Israel, preoccupied by the Soviet threat, saw the expulsion as diminishing any real chance of war . Israel was preoccupied with the threat of Soviet invasion of Palestine .
 On paper, Israel's army and air force were more than a match for even the combined forces of the Arab Mideast . Israel's air force was more than match for Arab forces than even combined forces in the region .
 There would be no peace, perhaps, but there was no immediate threat to continued Israeli control of the captured territories . Israel would not be able to find peace with the Palestinians, perhaps .
 In August, Keating and his deputy, Nicholas A Veliotes, paid a courtesy call on Moshe Day an, whom they found to be not just confident, but swaggering .
 There had been constant talk that summer of an impending Arab attack, Veliotes recalls . The embassy had been put on a higher alert, and the embassy was on higher alert .
 He described Arab armies in the desert as 'rusty ships slowly sinking' as if the desert were a sea . He described the Arab armies as 'Rusty ships sinking'
 Israel wasn't ready when Sadat attacked across the Sinai and Syria invaded the Golan Heights on October 6, 1973 . Yom Kippur is the holiest day of the year for a Jew and is the Day of Atonement .
 Israeli soldiers were being killed as never before; some units simply fled in disarray from battle . Israeli soldiers died in the battle, but some units were simply fleeing from the battle . Some Israeli soldiers had never been killed in such a battle .
 Five hundred tanks and forty-nine aircraft, including fourteen F-4 Phantoms, were lost in the first three days of the war .
 In the Sinai, Egyptian forces, equipped with missiles and electronic defenses, blasted through the Bar-Lev defense line along the eastern bank of the canal . The Egyptian forces soon had two large armies on the east bank .
 Only a few Israeli tanks stood between the Syrians and the heavily populated Hulla Valley . The region is heavily populated and heavily populated by Syrians .
 The extent of Dayan's panic on Monday, October 8, has never been fully reported, but it is widely known among Israelis . Dayan is believed to be the only person in Israel to panic over the situation .
 One of Dayan's functions as defense minister was to provide the censored media with a daily briefing on the war . Dayan was in charge of controlling what media and editors-in-chief wrote .
 There was talk in a later meeting of appeals to world Jewry, distribution of antitank weapons to every citizen, and last-ditch resistance in the civilian population centers .
 Israel called its first nuclear alert and began arming its nuclear arsenal . Instead of a nuclear alert, Israel called it its first ever nuclear alert . Israel is now armed with its nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. used that alert to blackmail Washington into a major policy change . The White House responded to the alert, saying it would be a violation of the law .
 Meir's closest aides, the so-called kitchen cabinet, assembled for what turned out to be an all-night session . Meir was assassinated in 1968 .
 Dayan and Meir were among those in attendance, including the army chief of staff . Israel Galili, a longtime confidant of Meir, was also in attendance .
 The kitchen cabinet agreed that the nuclear missile launchers at Hirbat Zachariah, as many as were ready, would be made operational . Eight specially marked F-4S that were on twenty-four-hour alert at Tel Nof, the air force base near Rehovot,
 The initial target list included Egyptian and Syrian military headquarters near Cairo and Damascus . Initial target list includes Egyptian and Syria military headquarters . Initial targets included military headquarters in Egypt and Syria .
 No weapons were targeted on the Soviet Union, but there was little doubt that the Soviets would quickly learn what was going on . The U.S. did not send any weapons to the Soviets, but it was hoped they would learn .
 Israeli intelligence was intercepting indecipherable signals from what were presumed to be Soviet operatives inside the country . The encoded messages were beamed throughout the early morning .
 All of the key players are now dead, and none left any record of what took place . None of the players left any records of what happened .
 There is widespread knowledge of what took place at the crucial meeting, but in subsequent years those who were there — including stenographers and advisers — have never talked publicly about it .
 The only significant objections came from within the nuclear community, some of whose senior officials — but not Freier — were said by an Israeli source to have accused the senior officials, in essence, of panicking . Israeli source: Senior officials accused senior officials of panic; Freier was not
 Their view was that the situation had not yet been reached for weapons of last resort, which were then code-named, appropriately, the ""Temple" weapons . The situation was then called the "Temple weapons"
 One former Israeli government official who was in the prime minister's office that night depicted the chain-smoking Meir, who slept very little during the early stages of the war, as confused and concerned .
 The basic decision to arm the weapons of last resort was reached easily, he said . There were far more complicated discussions of how many warheads to arm and where they were to be targeted, he added .
 There was a separate, preliminary briefing by technical experts from Dimona, led by Shalheveth Freier . The weapons and targets that were available for immediate assembly were also discussed .
 One Israeli assumption was that the Soviets would learn — as they had learned other secrets inside Israel in recent years — of the nuclear arming . Israel assumed they would urge their allies in Egypt and Syria to limit their offensive and not attempt to advance beyond pre-1967 borders .
 A Soviet warning was given, according to Mohammed Heikal, editor of Al-Abram, the leading Egyptian newspaper, and eminence grise to Nasser and Sadat . And a Soviet warning, he says, was given .
 The information was given to General Mohammed Abdel Ghany el-Gamasy, Egypt's chief of staff, by a Soviet intelligence officer . The officer had worked closely with elGamasy when he was chief of military intelligence .
 Moshe Dayan visited the front and returned to Tel Aviv ""with a scary report"" that was presented to Golda Meir's equally alarmed kitchen cabinet . The Soviet message also reported, Heikal recalled, that Moshe . Dayan had visited the . front and . returned
 There was widespread rage inside the Israeli cabinet at the Nixon White House, aimed at Henry Kissinger, over what was perceived in Israel as an American strategy of delaying the resupply in an attempt to let the Arabs win some territory, and some self-respect .
 Kissinger, just sworn in as secretary of state, would direct negotiations . Kissinger would direct the negotiations. Kissinger would also direct negotiations.
 The same question was asked again, in a second telephone call, at 3:00m. A third telephone call was made to the same person at the same time .
 Kissinger was told of the desperate situation of the Israeli military and the need for more tanks and aircraft . Kissinger was accompanied by Peter W Rodman, his longtime assistant, and Dinitz, accompanied by General Mordecai Gur . Dinitz and Kissinger met at 8:20m. in
 Dinitz insisted that he and Kissinger needed to be alone during Map Room meeting . Kissinger wrote that Dinitz told him and Kissinger that they needed to get alone . Dinitz died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head .
 Rodman and Gur, who both could be trusted with the most sensitive information, were dismissed . Gur and Rodman were dismissed from their roles .
 Kissinger could, and did, reject ""out of hand and without checking with Nixon," Kissinger wrote . Kissinger rejected the request . Kissinger wrote: "It was a request that Kissinger could reject out of hand"
 A more complete account of the Dinitz message would undoubtedly show that it was closer to blackmail, as Kissinger knew, and it worked . Kissinger knew that the message was likely to be blackmailed .
 Word of the Israeli nuclear arming also came from the Soviets, according to a former IsraSeli intelligence official . Word of Israel's nuclear arming came from Soviets, a former intelligence official says .
 The Israeli intelligence agency intercepted a Soviet warning to Washington about the Israeli arming of nuclear weapons . The warning was also intercepted on the morning of October 9, an Israeli official says .
 Kissinger has never talked publicly about the Israeli nuclear arming . His closest advisers at the time, including Rodman and William G Hyland, said they knew of no such information .
 Kissinger privately acknowledged that there had been an Israeli nuclear threat to Sadat and Sadat . Kissinger's best source for what happened, nonetheless, is Kissinger himself, who acknowledged that .
 Eilts had been handpicked in October 1973 by Kissinger for the assignment to Cairo . He arrived at the end of the Yom Kippur War . Eilts was handpicked by Kissinger in 1973 .
 Kissinger's first detailed conversation with Kissinger about his new assignment couldn't have been more dramatic . Kissinger: "I'm going to be in charge of the most important mission in the history of American politics"
 Kissinger had stopped overnight in Islamabad, Pakistan, en route to a muchdelayed visit to China . It took took place, at Kissinger's request, at a hastily arranged breakfast in early November .
 Kissinger was far less casual at the time he learned of Israel's intention to build the country . Kissinger was less casual about the decision to build Israel in the 1970s .
 He told none of his colleagues in the cabinet about the nuclear threat, of course . But changed his mind overnight about the need to get military arms — in huge quantities — to Israel .
 He got a little hysterical"" in urging an immediate and massive resupply, CNN.com reports . He got to be "hysterical" in urging immediate resupplies .
 Kissinger's actions led some senior officials to conclude that Israeli use of a nuclear weapon was not out of the question . Kissinger: Some senior officials concluded that Israel could use a nuke .
 Kissinger referred to the Israeli nuclear threat in his first extended private meeting in Cairo on November 7, 1973, with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat . The meeting was a precursor of Kissinger's famed Middle East shuttle diplomacy that would begin the next year .
 Sadat said Israel had at least three warheads and was preparing to use them . Sadat told Heikal that Israel had been preparing to launch the attack .
 Sometime in this period, the American intelligence community got what apparently was its first look at the completed and operational missile launchers hidden in the side of a hill at Hirbat Zachariah . The KH-11 is believed to have captured the missile launchers .
 The launchers were left in the open, perhaps deliberately, making it easier for American photo interpreters to spot them . The launchers have been deployed in the U.S. since 2010 .
 One U.S. official also recalled seeing hollowedout nuclear storage bunkers and huge blast doors . Railroad tracks leading to a nearby mobile launching site, official says .
 By mid-October, the Israeli military had successfully counterattacked in the Golan Heights and the Sinai, ending any immediate threat — and the necessity for the nuclear alert .
 Soviet Premier Alexei N Kosygin persuaded Sadat to call for a cease-fire on October 16 . The Soviet Premier flew to Cairo to persuade Sadat of calling for a ceasefire .
 Kissinger flew to Moscow on October 20 and to Tel Aviv two days later, where he received Israeli acquiesence for a cease-fire in place . Kissinger traveled to Moscow and Tel Aviv in October to secure the ceasefire . Kissinger was in Tel Aviv for two days .
 In the meantime, the Egyptian Third Army was in danger of being surrounded and left essentially to the mercy of the Israeli Defense Force . The Egyptian army was left virtually to be surrounded by the Israelis .
 The Israelis continued their offensive in Egyptian territory, moving north and west to a point within sixty miles of Cairo . The offensive continued to move north, west and west .
 The implication seemed to be that Brezhnev would send some of his troops as a blocking force behind the front lines in Egypt to prevent the Israelis going on to Cairo .
 The President earlier had been rocked by the indictment on corruption charges and subsequent resignation of Vice President Spiro T Agnew . The Vice President had resigned after the indictment .
 Arab boycott of oil sales to the U.S. led to the Arab decision to increase crude oil prices dramatically . Another complication was the Arab oil price increase . The Arab boycott was announced by the Arab nations .
 There is no evidence that the Soviets did, in fact, contemplate any significant deployment of their airborne troops, despite their high alert status . The Soviets did not deploy any significant airborne troops .
 Most scholars now agree that Brezhnev's warning to the White House was aimed at forcing Washington to urge the Israelis to adhere to the cease-fire . Most scholars agree that the warning was intended to force Washington to give Israel a go-ahead .
 At least fifty B-52S were redeployed from Guam to the United States . The aircraft carrier John R Kennedy also was dispatched to the Mediterranean .
 There was widespread belief that the alert had been ordered primarily for domestic political purposes and not because the Soviets were ready to move into the Middle East . The nation was still reeling from the continuing Watergate revelations .
 Golda Meir ordered her army to stop all offensive action against Egypt, allowing a U.N. peacekeeping force to impose a cease-fire . This time, the crisis resolved itself quickly .
 A small U.S. Navy intelligence unit, known as Task Force 157, was operating in the Bosporus off Turkey . The unit relayed data to Washington suggesting that one of the Soviet ships leaving the Black Sea en route to the Mediterranean was carrying radioactive material .
 The report from the Navy swept through the U.S. intelligence community and the White House . The White House has been briefed on the findings .
 Many of Kissinger's senior aides and others in the government defended the alert . The Soviets and many in Congress and the American media accused Nixon and Kissinger of overreacting .
 Colby recalled that there had been a steady stream of intelligence reports suggesting that the Soviet Union was preparing some of its most highly trained paratroop units and its transport fleet for deployment to the Middle East .
 On the night of the alert, the U.S. intelligence community ""lost the transport fleet," he said . The American intelligence community "lost its transport fleet", he added .
 The NSC aide added that neither he nor Kissinger anticipated that word of the heightened alert would become known so quickly . The aide said he and Kissinger did not expect word of heightened alert to become known quickly .
 The actions of both Washington and Moscow simply as ""posturing," a senior U.S. official said . Another equally senior American official said he viewed the actions as simply as "posturing"
 It was presumed that several Soviet nuclear warheads had been provided to Egypt for deployment in Scud missiles . The authors wrote that the warheads were likely to be used in Scuds missiles .
 The only flaw in Kissinger account, as told to the Kalbs, is that it was not true . Kissinger account is not true, the only flaw is that Kissinger's account is that he lied .
 The Soviets had loaded nuclear warheads on a cargo ship in a Black Sea port, but never shipped them . One high-ranking American officer, who was in charge of a major intelligence agency at the time, said that reconnaissance had established that they had loaded warheads .
 Kissinger also made no mention of the alleged Soviet warhead shipment in the second volume of his memoirs . Israel issued two nuclear alerts during the crisis, Kissinger says .
 He did emerge, however, from the October crisis with renewed official concern about Dimona .
 Kissinger asked the CIA for a formal National Intelligence Estimate on the Israeli nuclear program . The paper concluded that Israel had at least ten nuclear warheads . It took Carl Duckett's Office of Science and Technology months to prepare and then submitted only to the White House .
 The unit, he explained, was manned by specially recruited Turkish citizens who were not competent to make on-the-spot assessments . They relayed their tapes and other data by commercial aircraft to Washington for analysis .
 Mohammed Heikal insisted that the Soviet reports about the Israeli nuclear arming — while taken very seriously — had no impact on the overall Egyptian military operation . Mohammed Heilikal, for example, insisted that .
 Egypt's military goals, he said, had been sharply limited from the outset . Egypt's Egyptian military aims, he added, were "sharply limited"
 There is clear evidence that Syria also set very limited goals for its military . Syria's army came to a literal stop — with no opposition in front of it — more than a day before Golda Meir's kitchen cabinet met in Tel Aviv to authorize the nuclear arming .
 Any deep penetration inside the pre-1967 borders would have occasioned a massive, and perhaps nuclear, counterattack . The fact that no such advance was planned or sought had much more to do with the myth of Israeli military invincibility than with a specific concern about the weapons at Dim
 The results of the Mossad inquiry could not be learned, but Golda Meir's concern about America's ability to penetrate Israel seemed to diminish as Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy got under way .
 There was one tantalizing public reference, published with little fanfare seven years later, suggesting that the U.S. had known independently of the alert as it took place .
 Secret documents claim that Israel came within hours of running out of essential arms . Israel was close to running out essential arms, secret documents claim . Israel is believed to have run out of vital military supplies .
 American authorities feared the Israelis might resort to nuclear weapons to assure their survival . U.S. feared the Israeli government might use nukes to assure its survival .
 Talbott quickly filed a top-secret one-page memorandum for General Creighton W Abrams, the Army chief of staff . Talbott understood the significance of the information .
 Carl Duckett, who at the time had direct responsibility for the CIA's intelligence on the Israeli nuclear arsenal, first learned of the Talbott message from the author . Duckett also said he had never been informed of any intelligence suggesting that Israel had gone on two nuclear alerts during the Y
 The CIA official was an expert in communications intelligence . He spent three years in Israel in the early 1970s as an undercover liaison officer . One of his assignments was to help the Israelis monitor the sophisticated Soviet radar .
 Israel also was operating with the aid of equipment leased from the National Security Agency, at least three supersecret listening posts . Talbott was accompanied by Colonel Bruce Williams, the United States Army attache in Israel .
 Official prepared classified report on some of the Israeli deception techniques . After the war, the official prepared a highly classified report . He said the techniques were used to relay bogus orders to Egyptian and Syrian forces .
 I did not mention that the conversations [with his Israeli counterparts] got to nuclear threats . "I did mention that [Israeli] counterparts' nuclear threats," he said. "I didn't mention that ... I did mention [that] conversations [got] nuclear threats"
 I knew that weapons available were something to be reckoned with, and they told me that this had been communicated to the Egyptians . The weapons available are said to be something to contend with, according to the Egyptian government .
 Angleton had seen his report on Israeli deception techniques and wanted a special debriefing . Angleton wanted to know more about the deception techniques . The debrief was a special meeting with Angleton .
 It was clear that the room was wired so that Angleton could monitor the conversation . Angleton was in the room at the time of the meeting .
 Angleton's aide would occasionally leave the room to check a fact or line of query with Angleton . Angleton never made an appearance, and his presence was limited to an occasional scraping of his chair .
 Soviet helicopters arrived and began dismantling the equipment, former Israeli intelligence officers say . Within 15 minutes, according to former Israeli officials, Soviet helicopters had arrived and dismantled the equipment .
 In June 1974, Anwar Sadat announced that his country had obtained intelligence indicating that Israel had developed tactical nuclear weapons . Sadat said in June 1974 that he had obtained information indicating Israel was developing tactical nuclear arms .
 The squabble between the two countries was treated perfunctorily by the press and provoked no concern from President Gerald R Ford or his senior aides . President Gerald Ford or senior aides were not concerned .
 A National Security Council official did broach the issue, very gently, with an Israeli diplomat over lunch more than a year later . The issue was raised by the Israeli diplomat .
 Duckett was one of a group of CIA officials who participated in an informal seminar in 1976 . Duckett attended the seminar with members of the American Institute of Aeronautics .
 Such sessions, held at an auditorium near the CIA's main headquarters building at McLean, Virginia, were standard Washington fare . Any remarks were understood to be limited to unclassified materials .
 George Bush, the newly installed CIA director, was forced to issue a public statement assuming ""full responsibility"" for the disclosure of the secret information . Within days, an account of his remarks was published in the Washington Post .
 The real issue, however, was not his drinking but Bush's unwillingness to promote him to deputy CIA director, he says .
 Duckett's 1974 estimate giving Israel ten to twenty nuclear weapons would remain the official U.S. intelligence estimate until the early 1980s . Duckett: Israel was exponentially increasing its nuclear warhead stockpile .
 Duckett acknowledged that there was no specific intelligence behind the estimate . Duckett acknowledges that there were no specific intel behind the intelligence behind it .
 The alleged smuggled uranium also was a major factor in Duckett's 1974 estimate that credited Israel with at least ten bombs . Duckett: The technicians at Dimona could have chemically separated enough plutonium from the reactor to have produced six weapons or more .
 CIA still had no proof that such a plant existed in Israel . Just how Israel would accomplish that feat without a chemical reprocessing plant was not clear, but what was clear was Shapiro's .
 To Duckett and his colleagues, especially Richard Helms, the case against Shapiro was unassailable . The case was made by Duckett, who was in charge of the White House .
 Shapiro was a Jew in the nuclear-fuel-processing business . He was a partner with the Israeli government in some business ventures . Shapiro traveled regularly to Israel and traveled with the government, CIA says .
 Shapiro underwent rigorous national security checks while at Westinghouse . Some of his family had been victims of the Nazis, and he believed in the need for an independent Jewish state . As his career progressed, Shapiro made no secret of his commitment to Israel .
 He became an active member of the Zionist Organization of America . He also generously supported the American Technion Society, which provides equipment to the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa .
 In 1957, he organized a publicly owned nuclear fuel processing firm, with at least twenty-five stockholders, in an abandoned World War II steel plant in Apollo, Pennsylvania . He organized the firm in 1957 .
 By the early 1960s NUMEC was providing nuclear services for at least nine foreign countries . Shapiro was aggressive in the pursuit of work for his young company .
 There was a steady stream of foreign visitors to the factory . The Department of Commerce and the State Department were eager to show off the government's Atoms for Peace effort .
 There were at least three foreign employees at NUMEC, including an Israeli metallurgist assigned to unclassified breeder reactor fuel research .
 NUMEC was required to improve its procedures over handling of classified materials . There also was constant back-and-forth in those years between AEC security officials and NUMEC . NUMEC has been ordered to improve procedures .
 Shapiro would be hounded by suspicions for the next twenty-five years . The most significant evidence against him seemed to be his Jewishness and the fact that one of the major investors in NUMEC shared his support for Israel .
 A number of experienced investigators from the government and the Congress assumed that Shapiro's emotional tie to Israel was enough of a motive for him to commit nuclear espionage, a crime punishable by death under the Atomic Energy Act .
 No significant evidence proving Shapiro diverted any uranium from his plant was ever found . Shapiro was subject of ten years of intensive investigation involving active FBI surveillance .
 Shapiro remained guilty in the minds of many in the government and the press . Shapiro's ties to Israel and alleged NUMEC diversion in any story about the development of nuclear arms in Israel .
 Some of the newspaper and book accounts did note that the charges against Shapiro were never proved . Others simply declared that it was the Shapiro uranium that gave Israel the nuclear bomb . Shapiro uranium was never proved; many others simply declared .
 There is little solace for the U.S. intelligence community in Shapiro's noninvolvement with nuclear diversion . It failed to learn of Shapiro's close ties to Ernst David Bergmann and Binyamin Blumberg . Shapiro's mission was a legitimate mission he did conduct for
 The scrap was chemically treated — sometimes two or three times — in an attempt to isolate the salvageable uranium . The scrap is chemically treated, sometimes twice as much as three times, to try and isolate the uranium .
 NUMEC's larger and more solidly financed competitors did not want to work with NUMEC . It was the kind of work NUMEC had to do . NUMEC was the company's largest and most reliable source of revenue .
 NUMEC converted highly enriched uranium from gaseous uranium hexafluoride into uranium oxide powder . The material was then shipped to the US Navy's huge uranium diffusion plants . NUMEC contracts involved cleaner work, such as conversion of uranium oxide into nuclear fuel .
 As much as 10 to 15 percent of the uranium eventually ended up as scrap and needed to be recovered . That process also created waste .
 NUMEC had to divide uranium being processed into small lots to guard against the horrible possibility of setting off a chain reaction . NUMEC also had to split uranium into lots, creating more opportunity for waste .
 Shapiro's firm was responsible and had to pay enormous penalties for any enriched materials that could not be accounted for . Each missing pound thus meant a loss of more than $4,500 . Under the stringent AEC rules governing the reprocessing of weapons-grade uranium and plutonium .
 The term MUF, for ""material unaccounted for,"" became a common one in the nuclear processing industry . MUF was a common term used in nuclear processing . The term was used to refer to "material unaccount for"
 Making contractors pay for missing materials was the backbone of the AEC's safeguards program . The assumption was that no reprocessing firm would divert or steal uranium if it resulted in a stiff fine .
 The AEC eventually worked out complicated rules for accounting for MUF . Private firms estimate in their regular reports how much missing but accountable uranium was believed to be in a plant's air filtration system or buried in waste pits .
 NUMEC routinely reported seemingly huge losses of enriched materials on any given contract . NUMEC would estimate that 80 percent or more of the lost materials would be recovered upon cleanup . The loss of enriched material was not unusual .
 The AEC accepted such estimates as realistic, and deferred the assessments of any penalties . AEC accepts such estimates are realistic and deferred any penalties for the project .
 The enriched materials handled by the workers at NUMEC were not ""hot,"" as commonly understood, for they had not yet been irradiated in a reactor and thus did not emit penetrating and lethal radiation . Enriched materials were not "hot" as well as "hot," as commonly
 NUMEC employees were exposed to uranium exposure . The danger came from breathing in or otherwise ingesting uranium . It accumulates in bones, where it eventually impacts on bone marrow, causing leukemia .
 Enriched uranium, if breathed into the lungs, also could trigger lung cancer . NUMEC employees were constantly urged to wear face masks . Many refused to do so in the summer .
 Zalman Shapiro's career-destroying problems began in 1962, when he was the low bidder for two complicated Westinghouse contracts, involving the processing of more than 2,500 pounds of enriched uranium . Shapiro was forced to quit the nuclear plant after he was found guilty .
 NUMEC was assured by Westinghouse that 60 percent or more of each hundred kilograms of uranium could successfully be processed . As much as 40 percent of the uranium would be scrap, to be separately recovered . NUMEC says it was assured that the majority of uranium was successfully processed .
 NUMEC found that process was far more difficult than Westinghouse had claimed for one of the contracts, and resulted in only a 35 percent yield of acceptable product . NUMEC also found that the process was much more difficult and resulted only in only 35 percent acceptable product.
 Nearly two thirds of the Westinghouse-supplied uranium ended up as scrap . Much of it was buried in barrels, along with contaminated rags and other cleaning equipment, in two huge waste pits .
 The pits included contaminated waste not only from the Westinghouse contract but from other processing jobs for private companies . Shapiro had not isolated the scrap from each of his contracts, as the AEC demanded . The AEC had demanded that the scrap be isolated from each contract .
 AEC investigators became convinced that Shapiro had deliberately commingled scrap scrap from different contracts as a money-saving bookkeeping measure . Shapiro had used scrap scrap scrap to make money from scrap .
 The AEC tried to resolve the complicated mess in a series of extensive negotiations in 1964 and 1965 . Shapiro constantly cited NUMEC's precarious financial condition to justify his actions . Shapiro's actions were often used to justify the AEC's actions .
 AEC inspectors found that the amount of enriched uranium buried there was not nearly enough to match the huge losses . Portions of the 1963 waste pit eventually were dug up .
 The inspectors concluded that there was a MUF of 93. kilograms of enriched uranium . They also told headquarters that because of NUMEC's ""inadequate and incomplete accounting records,"" a diversion could not be ruled out, although there was ""no evidence"" that a diversion had taken
 The issue was aired at a special meeting in February 1966 of the AEC commissioners and senior staff . The commissioners agreed that NUMEC's employees be interviewed to find out what had happened . NUMEC employees were interviewed in a declassified transcript .
 It was agreed that a trip would have to be taken to Capitol Hill to inform the Joint Atomic Energy Committee of the loss . It was also agreed that the trip would also have to go to inform a trip to Washington .
 China's first nuclear bomb had been triggered by uranium, not plutonium, as the CIA and other intelligence agencies had widely anticipated . The U.S. nuclear community already had been rocked in October 1964 after learning of China's nuclear program .
 A special study into AEC safeguards was commissioned . It questioned the commission's heavy reliance on financial penalties as a sufficient bar against nuclear diversion .
 The CIA found Shapiro's ties to Israel to be of continuing interest . The CIA, nonetheless, found that Shapiro's long-standing ties to the country were of interest .
 NUMEC was a partner with the Israeli government in a business involving the pasteurization of food and sterilization of medical supplies by irradiation . Packets to and from NUMEC were being shipped out of and into Israel .
 CIA station chief was unable to find proof that Israel had a chemical reprocessing plant at Dimona . Reports of Israel's progress in nuclear weaponry began to flow from the American embassy in Tel Aviv .
 Without such a plant, Israel would have needed an independent source of enriched uranium or plutonium to manufacture the bombs, Hadden's informants told him . Hadden: "Israel would have had to rely on a plant to make the bombs"
 Duckett and Helms believed Shapiro had been the source for Israeli progress in nuclear weaponry . The two men would spend the next few years pushing their suspicions on anybody who would listen to them .
 One of the initial stockholders in NUMEC, David Lowenthal, had helped bring illegal immigrants into Israel before 1948 . Lowenthal was one of the early stockholders of NUMEC .
 NUMEC was set up in 1957 by Shapiro as part of a longrange Israeli intelligence scheme to divert uranium, Duckett said . Duckett even came to believe NUMEC had been set up by Shapiro in 1957 .
 Murphy also was appalled by what he considered a lack of security at NUMEC . Murphy told a congressional investigator of seeing uranium pellets scattered ""all over the benches"" during a visit to the Apollo plant . Murphy also said uranium pellets were scattered "all over benches""
 The possibility of a diversion to Israel seemed solid, and Shapiro was put under FBI surveillance in the late 1960s . Shapiro was placed under surveillance by the FBI in the 1970s and '60s .
 Lovett's first act was to insist that the concrete floor of the old plant be protected with stainless steel . Lovett knew that concrete absorbed far more uranium than suspected .
 Shapiro and other company officials ""were deluding themselves,"" Lovett recalled . Shapiro and others were deluded themselves, Lovett said . Lovett: Shapiro and officials were deluding .
 Most of the uranium was not in the plant's waste pits; it was embedded in the concrete floor, clinging to ventilation ducts . It was flushed out with other plant wastes into the local waterways and scattered in the air .
 The continuing controversy over the alleged diversion became widely known inside the tight-knit nuclear community . Shapiro suffered from the controversy .
 In 1967, Shapiro and his partners were forced to merge their interest in NUMEC into the Atlantic Richfield Company . Shapiro, with his special Qjrlearance for atomic energy matters still intact, continued to run the plant .
 Bergmann was especially interested in a nuclear-powered water desalinization plant, Shapiro said . Bergmann wanted to build a water-salinization facility .
 The system, then Israel's largest development project, linked local and regional water conduits to form an integrated network . The system sought to capture all of the nation's rainfall and channel it into reservoirs .
 The National Water Carrier was not completed, however, without a series of disputes with Syria . Israel's goal of bringing water south from Lake Kinneret in Galilee is not complete .
 There were huge stretches in northern Israel where water being moved to the south was in the open, protected only by fencing . The waterway was an obvious target for terrorists .
 El Fatah, an Arab guerrilla group, boasted that it would poison the water . The group later became an important member of the Palestine Liberation Organization .
 At one point, Israeli officials suspected that El Fatah had attempted to cut the fence protecting the water works in what was feared to be an effort to plant a bomb .
 Zalman Shapiro was asked by Israel to devise a rapid and accurate method of determining whether water had been contaminated with toxic materials . It was at this point that he was asked to devise the method .
 Shapiro eventually recommended that a radioactive tracer be added to the water in Lake Kinneret to monitor the flow . Shapiro acknowledged, reluctantly, that he also advised on that issue . Shapiro: "I'm not sure what I think about the future of the lake"
 In the late 1960s, Shapiro convened a series of meetings — some in his home — of American scientists and Israelis to dis250 THE SAMSON OPTION cuss, he said . He said, "How to protect the National Water Carrier from potential terrorists"
 NUMEC was under contract to provide to Israel specialized small power sources . Shapiro refused to spell out the function of the sources, other than acknowledge that they were linked to the security of waterways .
 All of the items shipped were approved by the Commerce Department for export, he said .
 Shapiro would not say whether he knew — as did many American scientists — of the work being done at Dimona . Shapiro says he did not say if he knew about Dimona's work . Shapiro: "It's not clear whether I knew ... of Dimona"
 He denied revealing any American secrets or diverting any materials . But he denied revealing American secrets .
 Duckett and Helms remained convinced that Shapiro was guilty of espionage . Duckett, Helms and Duckett believed Shapiro was a spy .
 Helms urged the FBI to renew its investigation into Shapiro's dealings with Israel . Duckett's conversation with Edward Teller and his early-1968 estimate of Israel's nuclear capacity led Helms to urge the FBI .
 FBI's J Edgar Hoover was in the midst of a bitter dispute with James Angleton's counterintelligence shop over CIA's handling of defectors . Angleton was trying to determine whether the anti-Vietnam War movement was being directed by Moscow .
 Hoover chose to spar with Helms over the Shapiro issue for the next year, according to a former congressional investigator who has reviewed the Senate and House intelligence committees' files on Shapiro . Hoover and Helms spared over the issue for a year .
 Future of nuclear power now depends on public acceptance of fast breeder reactors . Fast breeder reactor capable of generating more plutonium fuel than they consumed .
 The advocates of nuclear power, who included many in the NRC, shuddered at the prospect of more adverse publicity about nuclear reactor safety and possible widespread contamination . Many in NRC shudders at prospect of further adverse publicity .
 Antinuclear groups were being organized around the world and had begun large, and sometimes violent, demonstrations in an effort to halt nuclear power . Antinnuclear groups were organizing around the globe and had started large, sometimes violent demonstrations .
 A high-level briefing by Carl Duckett was arranged to discuss the possibility of a diversion . A high level briefing was arranged by the government to discuss diversion .
 "He didn't say anything that would convince you that was the case," he says . "But the issue from our point, our little world, is that he said what he did," he adds . "We're not going to say that, but that's what he said,"
 Gilinsky's contention was that the NRC had no obligation to determine whether Duckett' s assertions were correct . NRC agreed on the basis of what Duckett said to tighten up procedures for dealing with nuclear materials .
 Most of those at the Duckett briefing were not involved in foreign affairs, Gilinsky says . Gilinsky: "Most of those who attended the briefing did not have a connection to foreign affairs"
 Duckett's briefing to the NRC and his subsequent informal talk at the CIA before the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Association, while ruinous to his career, did provoke another brief flurry of concern over NUMEC at the Ford White House .
 There was independent evidence that Shapiro's problems in operating NUMEC were not as exceptional as the AEC had publicly indicated in the mid-1960s . Independent evidence, moreover, demonstrated that Shapiro was not as bad as he was thought to be .
 More than no pounds could be accounted for by what the NRC study called previously ""unidentified and undocumented loss mechanisms" Study shows that contamination of workers' clothing, losses from scrubber systems, material embedded in the flooring, and residual deposits in the processing equipment .
 By the end of the year the NUMEC case was being actively pursued by the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, one of the most competent and aggressive investigative units in Congress .
 Carl Duckett and John Hadden, both retired from the CIA, cooperated fully with the subcommittees . Duckett telephoned an investigator in the middle of the night and insisted that he go to a pay telephone at a gas station to return the call .
 Hadden suggested that the Israeli government had to have a mole" inside the Atomic Energy Commission . Shapiro had protected Shapiro in the early investigations of a possible diversion . Hadden, meanwhile, was repeatedly suggesting that the government had a u mole"" — a clandestine operative — inside the atomic energy
 The subcommittee investigators seemed to take Duckett' s and Kadden's claims at face value . Duckett, Kadden, Duckett and others have been accused of covering up their innocence .
 The CIA and two congressional subcommittees weighed evidence and what kind of internal checks and balances were imposed on their investigations . But it is through those claims that outsiders can begin to understand how the CIA and Congress weighed evidence .
 In 1990, largely on the strength of her protests, she was elected local councilwoman . She was elected in 1990 . She is now a member of the local council .
 Virostek, then thirty-five years old, lives with her husband and two sons five hundred feet from the Babcock & Wilcox plant .
 She became involved after company officials announced in the early 1980s that they were beginning decontamination operations . The company began decontaminating the site in the 1980s .
 She then began a relentless campaign, through Freedom of Information inquiries, to force information out into the open .
 Virostek said her community was the only one in the immediate area to have a statistically significant excess in the number of cancer deaths . ViroStek said that her community is the only community in immediate area with an excess in cancer deaths.
 Duckett: "I believe that all of my senior analysts who worked on the problem agreed with me fully" Duckett said . Duckett says he believes the problem is a problem in the United States .
 The subcommittee investigators had no way of knowing, of course, how little Duckett and his "senior analysts" had been able to learn about the Israeli nuclear arsenal .
 Subcommittees didn't know Duckett's initial estimate of Israeli nuclear capability was based on assertion by Edward Teller . Teller's assertion was not based on specific intelligence about the capacity of the Israeli reactor or the existence of a chemical reprocessing plant at Dimona .
 There also was no specific evidence linking Shapiro to the delivery of enriched uranium to Israel . No specific evidence links Shapiro to delivering enriched uranium .
 Duckett's 1974 CIA estimate was not without its critics at the time . Subcommittees didn't realize that Duckett had been criticized for his 1974 estimate .
 Intelligence officials at the Atomic Energy Commission insisted that a footnote be added to the estimate pointing out that any information about a diversion of uranium to Israel was unknown to the commission .
 NUMEC was set up for the diversion of funds, a specialist on energy issues for the House subcommittee on energy said . Shapiro's research was conducted by a specialist for the U.S. House Subcommittee on Energy .
 There was a further allegation that CIA operatives in Israel had found ""traces of enriched uranium"" near Dimona that was similar to the enriched products that had been delivered for processing to Shapiro's plant .
 There also was a highly suspicious meeting at the airport in Pittsburgh between Shapiro and Kafkafi, an Israeli scientific attache, who flew from Washington to Pittsburgh for the meeting and returned immediately .
 Myers continued to believe well into the early 1990s that his statements were correct . Myers' statements were incorrect until the 1990s . Myers believes that he was correct .
 David Lowenthal was one of a number of investors in NUMEC, some of whom were not Jewish . Some of Lowenthal's investors were not Jews, Lowenthal says .
 There was no special secure telephone or teletype at NUMEC, Duckett says . Duckett and others who have investigated the alleged diversion say there was no secure telephone .
 Richard Helms may indeed have been convinced that Shapiro was the head of an Israeli spy ring, but there is no known factual basis for that assertion . Helms was convinced by Helms but there are no known facts to support that claim .
 Government investigators say there was no meaningful correlation between the uranium processed in the NUMEC plant and the traces of enriched uranium picked up by American agents outside Dimona .
 Shapiro told investigators that his airport meeting with Kafkafi was arranged because he had not been paid for antiterrorist equipment his company had shipped to Israel . NUMEC was owed $32,000 — a fact he found ""embarrassing"" — but the company needed the money
 Duckett, in a 1991 interview, essentially recanted many of his previous assertions . Duckett has since recanted some of his claims .
 "It was a matter of trying to be sure when you had information that you passed it along," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm sure when I had information, I'm sure that you pass it along. It was trying to keep it safe"
 Peter Stockton also acknowledged in a 1991 interview that he'd had continuing doubts about the credibility of Hadden . Stockton says he had doubts about Hadden's credibility in the past .
 Hadden had been troubled when Hadden told one story to investigators and legislators, he said . Hadden then told a different version of the same event to officials of the Government Accounting Office .
 Many journalists remain convinced that Shapiro diverted uranium for the Israeli bomb . Yet Stockton continued to meet with reporters about NUMEC and continued to spread the same misinformation .
 In their book Dangerous Liaison, Andrew and Leslie Cockburn interviewed Stockton in 1989 . They depicted Shapiro's role in the Israeli acquisition of nuclear weapons as being so ""delicate"" that five American Presidents covered it up .
 Babcock & Wilcox shut down Zalman Shapiro's Apollo plant in 1978 . The nuclear fuels business suffered a downturn, largely because of reduced business from the Navy . The Apollo plant was shut down in 1978 due to a downturn in business .
 Shapiro's insistence that the missing uranium had seeped into the ground or been flung into the air spawned a controversy over nuclear pollution . Babcock & Wilcox, under public pressure, agreed to keep the Apollo plant open in an attempt to determine how much contamination there existed .
 In 1989 the firm began to decontaminate the plant, an expensive process . The process involved the virtual dismantling of some areas .
 Babcock & Wilcox told the community that it would explore ways to return the site to productive use . The company promised that future operations would involve no radioactive materials . Babcock and Wilcox also promised that the site would not be contaminated .
 Company officials acknowledged that many sections of the plant were so contaminated that they had to be dismantled, piece by piece, and buried at appropriate sites . The valuable uranium was removed from the valuable uranium in the plant, officials said .
 Nuclear Regulatory Commission officials admitted that more than one hundred kilograms of enriched uranium was recovered from the decommissioned plant by 1982 . Zalman Shapiro allegedly diverted the amount allegedly diverted to Israel .
 $60 million allotted for cleanup by government and Babcock & Wilcox will not be enough . It also wasn't clear if the $60m allotted for the cleanup would be enough to do the job .
 Labor was more committed than Labor to the Samson Option and the necessity of an Israeli nuclear arsenal . It brought to power a government that was even more committed to Israel's nuclear program .
 Begin and his followers represented a populist-nationalist view of a greater Israel with a right to permanent control of the West Bank . In their view, the mainstream Zionists, represented by men such as David Ben-Gurion, had fought three major wars .
 Israel's military aims were seen as having been dictated by the other side, whose leaders had chosen when and on which front war would begin . Israel's aim was to protect Israel from the Syrian conflict, which began in 2006 .
 Begin and his coalition were determined to use Israeli might to redraw the political map of the Middle East . The 1982 Lebanon War was disastrously disastrous for Begin's government in Israel . Begin's coalition was determined — as they would demonstrate with disastrous effect in Lebanon War — to use Israel's
 Begin's fascination with dramatic military moves was exemplified by his insistence on the bombing of Iraq's Osirak . Begin was a leader of Irgun, the underground Jewish terrorist organization, in the July 1946 bombing of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem .
 The explosion killed eighty-two people, including forty Arabs and seventeen Jews, and led to international condemnation . The explosion was the first of its kind in Tunisia .
 Begin ordered the execution of two British sergeants held captive by Begin's terrorist organization . Their bodies were booby-trapped and left hanging upside down, to the long-lasting horror of many Jews . The British responded by hanging three suspected Irgun terrorists, a week later .
 He and his family had fled to eastern Poland after the 1939 German blitzkrieg . He was arrested by Soviet troops and expelled to a Siberian gulag . Was released into a hastily assembled Polish contingent of the Red Army after the 1941 Nazi invasion .
 Begin had never visited Dimona before becoming prime minister, nor was especially well informed about it . By all accounts, Begin was not particularly informed about Dimona .
 His initial briefings on sensitive national security matters were provided by the outgoing prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin . Israel's new prime minister is expected to be sworn in as Israel's next president .
 Begin strongly endorsed Dimona's plans for the nuclear targeting of the Soviet Union . Ari Ben-Menashe, a former Israeli signals intelligence expert, recalls Begin's endorsement of Dimona plans .
 Carter Ben-Menashe served more than ten years in the External Relations Department of the Israeli Defense Force, one of the most sensitive offices in Israel's intelligence community . He says Israeli military attaches and diplomats were running into a brick wall in Washington .
 He left the ministry in 1987, he said, to work directly for Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir as an adviser on intelligence affairs . He said he left the government in 1987 to be an adviser to Shamir .
 Ben-Menashe claimed that the illegal sale had been sanctioned by his government and the United States . During preliminary proceedings and the trial, the Israeli government provided a series of conflicting statements . The Israeli government said it sanctioned the sale .
 Israel initially told the court that it had no knowledge of BenMenashe . Israel initially said it had been unaware of the allegations .
 Ben-Menashe accused of forging four letters of reference that he obtained upon leaving his job in External Relations . It later accused him of forging the four letters he obtained from his job .
 Ben-Menashe was a low-level translator for the Israeli intelligence community, it said . The letters were genuine, but the Israeli government portrayed him as an Israeli translator .
 Ben-Menashe accused his government of betrayal after Israel insisted to the court that he had been moonlighting as an arms salesman . He began to talk publicly about what he alleged was his involvement in hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of authorized arms sales to Iran .
 He also accused Robert M Gates, a senior CIA official under Reagan, of direct involvement in the sale of arms, including chemical weapons, to Iraq from 1986 to 1989 .
 Ben-Menashe's allegations, which have been strongly denied in Washington and Jerusalem, were still under congressional review as of summer 1991 . The allegations, still under review, were strongly denied by Washington and Israel .
 The author was initially contacted by Ben-Menashe in mid-1990 and began interviewing him in Washington and elsewhere in early 1991 about the Israeli nuclear arsenal and his activities inside the Israeli signals intelligence establishment .
 Ben-Menashe agreed — as no other Israeli would — to be directly quoted by the author on nuclear issues and other matters . He agreed to be quoted directly on nuclear matters, including nuclear issues, by no other Israelis .
 "They were trying to get into overhead and they also wanted to know what our attaches were reporting and what our requirements were," says the government .
 Begin's enthusiastic support for the targeting of the Soviet Union was not known to the U.S. intelligence community . The intelligence community was obsessed with its efforts to prove that Zalman Shapiro had diverted uranium to Israel .
 There was no doubt inside the intelligence community that Israel had the bomb, and yet no one in Washington — not even the new administration of Jimmy Carter — saw any reason to raise the issue .
 The Israeli government continued to publicly deny the existence of any nuclear weapons . The government was worried about a backlash from its American supporters .
 Duckett's remarks were supposed to have been off-the-record, Allon said . Toon reported that Duckett explained to Allon that he dutifully explained to him that he had been joking .
 They asked permission to inspect Dimona and were flatly told that no outsider had visited the reactor since the American inspections had ended in 1969, and none was welcome . None of the visitors were welcome, they were told .
 Congress had just approved an amendment to the Arms Export Control Act making it illegal to provide U.S. aid funds to those nations that sold or received nuclear reprocessing or enrichment materials, equipment, or technology .
 The amendment, as written, had no impact on those nations involved in the transfer or sale of nuclear materials . Israel, such as Israel, had been involved in transferring or selling nuclear materials prior to the bill's enactment .
 The legislation, sponsored by Senator Stuart Symington, also provided for the President to override the law if he determined that termination of such aid would be damaging to American national security .
 Congress and the White House were, in essence, acceding to what had become the arms control community's rationalization * Mordecai Vanunu, in one of his many interviews with the London Sunday Times y told of finding a newspaper clip about the rebuff of the senators der
 Israel was no longer a proliferation problem — it had already proliferated. Israel was already proliferating. Israel had already had a problem. Israel's proliferation problem was already a problem .
 The official said he repeatedly testified that he had ""no evidence" of such weapons existing in Israel . Although he was personally convinced Israel had developed nuclear arms, he said he had 'no evidence' of the weapons .
 If there were any significant items of information that needed to be passed along, the official added, "you told them over coffee" If there was any significant information that was needed, it was said to be told over coffee .
 America's tolerance for nuclear-armed Israel rankled Pakistan's President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq . U.S. tolerance for Israel's nuclear weapons rankled the President of Pakistan's Zia-ul-haq .
 The Israeli nuclear program ""wasn't anything people wanted to talk about or discuss,"" Rathjens said . The Israeli nuke program was not discussed in the 1980s .
 Cooperation between Israel and South Africa on nuclear issues began in earnest after the 1967 Six-Day War . Israel, rebuffed by Charles de Gaulle, was forced to look elsewhere for support after the war .
 Pierre Pean, in Les deux bombes, told of the surprising encounter in Johannesburg in 1967 between a French nuclear scientist and a group of Israeli scientists .
 Israel was trading its expertise in nuclear physics for uranium ore and other strategic minerals that existed in abundance in South Africa . The deal was made with South Africa in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In 1968, Ernst David Bergmann, out of office in Israel but still influential on nuclear issues, traveled to South Africa, where he spoke publicly on the ""move toward international collaboration"" on nuclear matters .
 Bergmann's talk of isolation seemed prophetic as all but three black African states broke diplomatic relations with Israel in the wake of the 1973 Yom Kippur War and Israel's continued insistence on holding on to the occupied territories .
 Many of Israel's former allies in Africa increasingly began to support Palestinian aspirations . Many of the former allies of Israel in Africa began supporting Palestinian aspirations.
 Israel and South Africa, two ""pariah states, had turned to each other with renewed trading and arms sales after the war . Within three years, joint trade grew from $30 million to $100 million a year .
 Dayan left the Israeli cabinet a few months later, when Yitzhak Rabin became prime minister . continuity on key Israeli-South African defense and nuclear issues was assured with Rabin's appointment of Shimon Peres .
 First official state visit by South African prime minister in Israel's history . Two years later, John Vorster, who had sided with Germany during World War II, visited Israel . Vorster's visit was the first official visit by an Israeli prime minister .
 Ben-Menashe committed to a series of joint nuclear tests in South Africa . His agenda included nuclear testing — the issue initially raised by Moshe Dayan — and he won a commitment in principle from John Vorster .
 Vorster's highly publicized visit to Israel resulted in renewal of full diplomatic relations, as well as secret arms transfer agreements . The two countries, working together in defiance of international opinion and United Nations sanctions, emerged as economies that were highly dependent on foreign arms sales .
 Israeli sources put the number of secret military and nuclear understandings between Israel and South Africa at u six or seven"" by the end of the Vorster visit .
 Los Alamos and Livermore had been trying to monitor the shipment of uranium ore from South Africa to Israel since the early 1960s . They failed to see the full scope of South Africa's continuing efforts in nuclear technology .
 In 1970, Prime Minister John Vorster informed Parliament that the nation's nuclear scientists had developed a unique uranium enrichment process involving jetnozzle enrichment and a sophisticated cascade technique .
 South Africa began construction of a pilot plant for the production of enriched uranium, not subject to IAEA safeguards, at a plant called Valindaba near Pretoria . Within a few years, the pilot plant began construction .
 By the mid-1970s, South Africans and Israel were suddenly doing things in such a different way that it took us by surprise, an American official recalled .
 Any new process would be tested for years in pilot production before being adopted in the government's main weapons assembly line near Amarillo, Texas, which is capable of producing five thousand or more warheads a year .
 South Africa would need a low-yield nuclear artillery shell that could be used in case frontline defenses are breached and urban centers threatened . And, like Israel, it would also need a weapon that can be used against urban centers . The South African nation would need such a weapon .
 In August 1977, Soviet President Brezhnev privately warned the Carter administration that his nation's Cosmos satellite system had detected evidence of South African preparations for a nuclear test . The tests were determined to be an underground site in the Kalahari region .
 Nuclear Suppliers Group established voluntary guidelines for limiting technical and material aid to non-nuclear nations . Similar warnings were sent to Britain, France, and West Germany, all participants in 1975 conference .
 Carter and Brezhnev, working together, led an international campaign of protest . The South African government backed down by the end of August .
 The White House was jubilant over its first major foreign policy success . It arranged for a series of elaborate briefings to the news media about its success .
 The reporters were not told that Israeli military personnel, in civilian clothes, were all over the Kalahari test site, and being ""quite open about it,"" as a CIA officer recalled .
 The CIA concluded that the strong international protests over Kalahari had deflected South Africa from carrying out its planned test . The CIA would later conclude, in a formal assessment for the White House, that the protests had prevented the test from happening .
 Carter's heavily promoted diplomatic ""victory in the desert"" was far less significant than it appeared . A real triumph would have involved going a step further and taking on the Israeli nuclear program, and no one in the Carter White House had the stomach for that .
 An Israeli with inside information about Dimona arrived late in the year, seeking to trade that information for personal advancement . It was into this Washington .
 He contacted a senior official in the U.S. nuclear intelligence community with whom he had dealt professionally in the past, and immediately revealed the fact that Israel had assembled well over one hundred nuclear warheads . He contacted an American intelligence official, who revealed the information .
 There would be more than two hundred warheads, many of them low-yield devices, by the year 1980, the Israeli added .
 The fact that Israel had nuclear weapons, the American rationalized, was ""general knowledge throughout the United States government" The fact of Israel's nuclear weapons was "general knowledge" throughout the U.S. government, he said .
 He did not forward the information to his superiors and colleagues, although he had no doubt that the information was accurate . And so he did not send it to colleagues .
 The American said he knew of Israelis in other technical fields, apparently dismayed by the election of Begin . He said they had approached their American counterparts with offers to trade information and intelligence for a chance to emigrate to the United States .
 Some Israeli officials tried to get some strategic help for Israeli ambitions without high-level approval . Jimmy Carter and Menachem Begin became increasingly strained in the wake of Camp David .
 Office of Net Assessments provides independent flow of intelligence and analysis to secretaries of defense . Director Andrew W Marshall, a former Rand Corporation analyst, has been providing analysis for two decades . Their starting point was an appropriately obscure corner of the Pentagon known as the Office .
 In the last months of the Ford administration, Marshall won acceptance of a plan to begin a strategic dialogue with Israel . One goal was to investigate a possible cooperative defense treaty .
 Some of Israel's most sophisticated strategic thinkers were assigned by Prime Minister Rabin to the ad hoc group . They included Avraham Tamir, an Israeli Army general who would later serve as director general of the foreign ministry .
 Tamir sought to discuss nuclear issues after Sadat's visit to Jerusalem in November 1977, the first step toward the Camp David talks . It was Tamir, one member of the Marshall group recalled, who repeatedly sought to .
 Begin-Sadat sought assurances that Israel would pledge not to use nuclear weapons against Egypt if peace treaty between the two nations was signed . Sadat asked Israel to pledge against using nuclear weapons if a peace treaty was reached .
 America was still accepting Israeli assurances it had no nuclear arms . It referred in writing to Secretary of Defense Harold Brown for guidance, he says .
 Tamir Brown first dismissed it as another example of the need for military planners to make contingency plans . Brown, interviewed later about Tamir's initiative, said it was an example of a need for contingency plans.
 President Carter finally acknowledged that he had rejected the Israeli approach without discussing it with President Carter . President Carter said he rejected the approach without discussion .
 The Carter administration would not have wanted to get involved in an Israeli-Soviet conflict, Brown said . Carter administration, Brown asserted, ""would not have gotten involved in a conflict"
 The Israelis would say, "Let us help you," and then you end up being their tool. The Israeli government would say 'Let us . help you,' then you ended up being . used to be a tool, he says .
 The Israelis have their own security interests and we have our own interests . Israel has its own interests and the Israelis have our interests, the Israeli government says .
 Andrew Marshall and his colleagues in the Office of Net Assessments viewed Brown's position as — as one American put it — ""a foolish constraint,"" But followed his instructions and told no one else in the U.S. government about the Israeli request .
 Israelis and South Africans finally pulled off their test in fall of 1979 . Israel and South Africa tested their nuclear weapons in 1979 .
 The French didn't have a back-door relationship with the White House, as Israel did with the U.S. President Barack Obama . We all knew the French did not have a 'backdoor relationship' with Obama .
 The nuclear detection satellite, known as vela, had seen similar flashes of light on forty-one previous occasions . It was subsequently determined that a nuclear explosion had taken place .
 Most of the sightings were over Lap Nor, where the Chinese atmospheric nuclear tests took place, or in the South Pacific, site of the French tests .
 Israel and South Africa had finally conducted a nuclear test, a test that they had tried, and failed, to accomplish two years earlier . There were a few intelligence officials and nonproliferation experts in the Carter administration who immediately concluded .
 Former Israeli officials say the warhead tested that Saturday morning was a low-yield nuclear artillery shell . The shell was standardized for use by the Israeli Defense Force, they say .
 The event captured by the vela satellite was not the first but the third test of a nuclear device over the Indian Ocean, Israeli sources say . Israeli sources also said the event was not first but third nuclear test over Indian Ocean .
 At least two Israeli Navy ships had sailed to the site in advance . A contingent of Israeli military men and nuclear experts — along with the South African Navy — was observing the tests . One Israeli said: "We wouldn't send ships down there for one test"
 The vela satellite digitally relayed its sighting to the headquarters of the Air Force Technical Applications Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Cape Canaveral, Florida . It was Friday night, September 21, on the East Coast on the West Coast .
 The intelligence was routed via the Defense Intelligence Agency to the Pentagon's National Military Command Center . Once evaluated and confirmed, the intelligence was then relayed to America's top civilian and military leaders .
 The nuclear event was estimated to have taken place off the coast of Prince Edward Island, about fifteen hundred miles southeast of the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa, halfway to Antarctica . The event is believed to have occurred off the east coast of South Africa .
 The intelligence was at the top of the CIA's and DIA's Saturdaymorning briefing for President Carter and his national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski .
 Oplinger was familiar with the vela program and knew that its previous sightings of Chinese and French atmospheric tests had been unfailingly accurate . He had worked at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission before joining the nuclear team .
 Keeny realized, he said, that he and his colleagues ""needed to buy some time" Keeny said .
 Keeny also was troubled by the intelligence community's assurances that its assessment was 90 percent accurate . Keeny: Intelligence community assurances were 90 percent correct .
 In Keeny's account, it was his idea to set up an outside panel to study the vela data and ensure that the satellite had not made an error — one with enormous political consequences .
 He knew that the satellites were ancient by satellite standards — some having been launched in the early 1960s . Some satellites were constantly being updated and analyzed by scientists at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories .
 There had been, in fact, recent concern about false alarms that could trigger a phony intelligence report . There was concern that false alarms could trigger false alarms .
 The outside panel was a natural step, one that would indeed buy some time, and one would also add a patina of legitimacy to the delaying effort . The panel would buy time and buy time for the government to get back on track .
 Brzezinski, according to aides, was never particularly interested in proliferation or nuclear-fuel-cycle issues . Meanwhile, ex-President Obama was never interested in nuclear proliferation, aides say .
 President Carter triggered uproar by continuing President Ford's 1976 ban on commercial reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel for power reactors . President Carter had triggered an uproar . President Ford had continued to continue the ban .
 Carter's action was viewed by the American nuclear power industry as a foolish move that would stifle the sale of American reactors and equipment around the world . Carter's decision was based on environmental and proliferation concerns .
 His NSC aides weren't convinced that Brzezinski fully understood the issue . The president's aides were also not convinced that he fully understood it .
 Brzezinski agreed to a briefing by Jessica Tuchman, Oplinger's predecessor on the NSC staff . She stood by as she described the nuclear fuel cycle, beginning with insertion of nuclear fuel into a reactor and ending with reprocessing of the spent fuel .
 Officials at the top of the troubled Carter administration knew that public revelation of the vela sighting, with its strong inference of an illicit Israeli-South African test, would create a horrible dilemma for the President .
 Carter had draped himself in the flag of nonproliferation, and if he did not get tough with the two pariah nations, he would be criticized for hypocrisy . If he did seek sanctions, there would be political hell to pay, Carter would be under fire for his hypocrisy .
 The official said it was evident that the satellite had observed what could only be a nuclear event . The official had access to all of the available intelligence on the sighting .
 The ailing shah was in Mexico and pleading for admission to the U.S. The shah had been so warmly toasted two years earlier by Jimmy Carter . Jimmy Carter's administration in Iran was in chaos, with the shah dying in Mexico .
 During discussions before the shah's arrival, the ousted leader confided that he had been negotiating with the Israelis for the purchase of long-range missiles capable of firing a nuclear warhead . The shah told Veliotes, then serving as the assistant secretary of state for Near East
 The intelligence leaked, and the administration demanded that the Soviets remove their troops . The U.S. government demanded that they remove the troops, but the intelligence leaked .
 The administration was preparing for what was sure to be a bitter fight with Senate Republicans over the June 1979 SALT II agreements . Adding to the mortification was the fact that the administration was then preparing for . what was then . the . fight over the United States .
 The SALT agreement and Camp David were scheduled to be featured in Carter's reelection campaign . Carter's success at Camp David was featured in his reelection campaign in 2008 .
 An Israeli bomb threatened all this and made it imperative that the U.S. President, once again, not know what there was to know . President Obama should not have been briefed on the situation .
 The American bureaucracy had been in training for more than thirty years in looking the other way when it came to the Israeli nuclear program . Every part of the system instinctively sought to find a way to avoid calling the Israeli-South African test a test .
 Ari BenMenashe recalled seeing correspondence on the issue in his ministry of defense office shortly after Menachem Begin's election in 1977 . Ari Ben Menashe said he saw correspondence on issue in ministry's defense office .
 Shimon Peres' visit to South Africa in 1976 was widely thought to have been secret diplomacy . But just what commitments had been made were not widely known inside the Israeli government .
 Ben-Menashe: Peres was not going to tell Menachem Begin about it . It was also understood Peres did not tell Begin about the affair .
 Begin would not directly approach Peres, who — along with David Ben-Gurion — had treated him with contempt and ridicule throughout his career . And Begin, in turn, had not directly approached Peres . Peres had treated Begin with contempt, ridicule throughout the career .
 Begin's solution was to dispatch Ezer Weizman, the newly appointed minister of defense, to South Africa . The intelligence data about Israeli nuclear intentions was not made known to other U.S. officials .
 Ben-Menashe said he and others in External Relations understood that Begin responded by saying, "Yes. Yes" Begin responded to the question with a "Yes" Ben Menashe says Begin said: "Yes, yes" Begin was the president of the United States.
 Weizman signed an agreement before the 1979 tests calling for the sale to South Africa of technology and equipment needed for the manufacture of low-yield 175mm and 203mm nuclear artillery shells . Another Israeli, who also had direct access to defense ministry information about the test in South Africa
 Ruina was a longtime consultant to the Pentagon on military and scientific issues . Ruina held many of the most sensitive clearances in the U.S. military . He had served as director in the early 1960s of the Advanced Research Project Agency .
 Ruina was an honorable and cautious man who could be counted on to follow orders and not talk to reporters, especially after his hush-hush introduction to the White House crisis . Ruina is a cautious, cautious man, who can't talk to press, but he was a
 Clearance was not required, as in normal operations, from any officer at the regional headquarters, corps, division, or brigade level . Clearance is not required at any level of the military .
 Panofsky and Garwin had served often as government consultants and were known for their independence . They had served as consultants to the government .
 The panel's assignment was weighted, to no one's surprise, toward a thorough thorough investigation into the possibility that the vela sighting had been a false alarm .
 A simulated Soviet nuclear attack on the United States missed by America's early warning system . Despite its explosiveness, knowledge of the vela report remained a closely held secret for over a month .
 Scali, who had been the ambassador to the U.N. under Nixon, ran the story by another old friend in the Pentagon . Scali was an ambassador under Nixon .
 Its spokesmen immediately informed the news media that there was ""no confirmation"" of a test . The US government said there was "no confirmation" of the test .
 Secretary of State Vance, following the company line, also told journalists there was no conclusive evidence of a test, and South Africa issued a heated denial . South Africa also denied the allegations .
 Vance said he had discussed the matter with Brzezinski and Defense Secretary Harold Brown . Vance further told the press that within hours of the first vela signal, he had talked about the matter . Vance also said he has discussed the issue with the defense secretary .
 Harold Brown's Office of Net Assessments was approached two times by a senior Israeli official seeking to discuss joint U.S. strategic targeting of the Soviet Union . None of the reporters knew, of course, that Harold Brown had already been approached .
 Walters made public a statement suggesting that the flash could have been caused by an accident aboard a Soviet nuclear submarine . Walters said the flash was likely caused by a Soviet submarine .
 The admiral offered no factual basis for his Cold War assertion, which soon sank from sight . Victor Gilinsky, still serving in 1979 on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, recalled inquiring during an official briefing whether there were ships in the Indian Ocean and being told no . Gilinsky was still
 Botha had reason to believe that his nation and its Israeli partners had pulled it off . Botha believed the South African government had pulled off the feat .
 Ruina panel members would spend months effectively poking holes in and raising legitimate questions about the reliability and integrity of the vela satellite system . Panel members would poke holes in the credibility of the system, say Ruina .
 The panel chose to concentrate on what became known as the ""false alarm"" issue . Panel chose to focus on the 'false alarm' issue instead of focusing on the issue itself .
 Nuclear explosions produce two distinctly characteristic and separate flashes of light from the initial detonation and the subsequent fireball about one third of a second later . That is recorded as double humps on a graph by the vela satellite . The explosions produce a characteristic and distinctive light flash that are recorded as
 The panel also could find no collateral signs of a nuclear event . The panel could also find no signs of seismic signals, acoustic waves, ionospheric disturbances .
 No significant radioactive fallout or other debris was located; there was no ""smoking gun"" that made the panel's conclusion ineluctable . No significant radioactivity was found in the area .
 The lack of such findings was not unusual in itself, given the low yield of the test and its isolated location . Press and the panel members knew there were no such findings .
 The panel eventually reported in July 1980, ten months after the event, that the flash observed by the satellite u was probably not from a nuclear explosion . The flash was seen by a satellite, but it was later ruled out of being a nuclear bomb .
 The findings outraged the nuclear scientists and professional bomb makers of Los Alamos, who had designed the vela system . The vela was created in the 1960s and is now used in the United States .
 Many of these men were members of the Nuclear Intelligence Panel . It is the most highly classified nuclear intelligence group in the United States government .
 NIP had done its own investigation into the vela test, and had been ordered by the White House — citing national security — not to discuss it publicly . NIP was ordered to do its own own investigation, and has not been allowed to comment publicly .
 A low-yield nuclear weapon most certainly had been detonated on September 22, says NIP . NIP members openly discussed the finding, openly discussed in interviews with the author .
 They were dismayed by the extent of White House interference in the investigation . They say they are dismayed that the White House interfered in the probe .
 Panel member concluded that test had taken place on a barge or on one of the islands in the South Indian Ocean archipelago . Panel member Louis H Roddis, Jr., Jr., concluded that the South African-Israeli test took place on the barge .
 One mystery is why the Ruina panel scientists, all honorable men, would place themselves in a position where others could limit what information they could evaluate .
 The panel members had been assured that they would be given all of the relevant intelligence about the satellite . Yet one of the most important discoveries — uncovered by Ruina himself and known to the White House — was not made available to them .
 Ruina was a director of MIT's Defense and Arms Control Studies Program . He was involved in the preparation of a federally funded report in 1979 . The report assessed the foreign availability of critical components for the assembly of short-range ballistic missiles .
 One of Ruina's three colleagues in preparing the report was an Israeli postgraduate student . Ruina and her colleagues were Israeli postgraduates .
 Ruina's involvement on the vela sighting became known at MIT . An Israeli who said he had worked on the Israeli nuclear missile systems spoke to Ruina about Israel's nuclear capability .
 Keeny remained loyal to the Carter presidency and dismissed the report as nonsense . Keeny, confronted with the potentially explosive intelliation, remained loyal .
 His colleagues in the White House, Keeny said, shared his view that Ruina's postgraduate student was peddling Israeli disinformation .
 The information was not made known to the intelligence community or to Ruina's colleagues on the panel . Ruina was not aware of the information, which was made public .
 Frank Press and Spurgeon Kenny made the right choice in seeking to mitigate the impact of a South African-Israeli nuclear test . A few government experts on nonproliferation policy believe Press and Kenny were right .
 Look at the issues involved — apartheid, Camp David, NPT, human rights, dealing with the Indians, stopping reprocessing worldwide . Look at apartheid, camps David and Camp David . The issues involved include human rights and dealing with Indians .
 The U.S. intelligence community had done far better in its reporting on the South African test . CIA insisted in internal estimates throughout 1979 and 1980 that there had been a test . But it basically remained in the dark about the sophistication of Israeli nuclear program .
 In 1980, the Agency published another Special National Intelligence Estimate on Israeli capability . It came up with essentially the same numbers as Carl Duckett had produced in 1974 . The Agency published the 1980 estimate .
 CIA said Israel had made at least 20 and as many as 30 nuclear warheads . CIA said it had manufactured at least twenty and up to thirty warheads . Israel, the CIA said, had made as many warheads .
 The new estimate was much more comprehensive than previous studies . The estimate, however, was not comprehensive .
 The CIA was able to report that the Israelis had upgraded the reactor to increase its output . There were clear signs that a greater amount of plutonium for nuclear weapons was being generated .
 There is no longer any doubt, the estimate says, that Israel had completed construction of a chemical reprocessing plant . But just where and how was not known, it says .
 CIA report seriously underestimated the number of Israeli warheads and the sophistication of its nuclear operation . Even so, the CIA report was seriously underestimated . Even though, the report said, the Israeli nuclear operation was sophisticated .
 The KH-11 captured an Israeli nuclear missile storage site . Experts at the National Photographic Interpretation Center had been able to count ten items that were subsequently confirmed as nuclear warheads .
 No one had ever seen an Israeli warhead before . Intelligence community chose to take the fact that only ten warheads were seen, one official recalled, as confirmation .
 We thought the pictures were extraordinary, but decided that they didn't add anything new . We thought that they were extraordinary . We decided that the pictures weren't adding anything new.
 The 1980 CIA estimate had been ordered by Deputy Under Secretary of State Joseph S Nye, Jr., Jr. Nye emerged as the Carter administration's key adviser on nonproliferation policy .
 Nye acknowledged that coping with the Israeli bomb was a low priority under Jimmy Carter . Nye: "Climbing with the Israel bomb was not a priority under Carter"
 When arrested in November 1985, he claimed he had been turning over secret documents for only 14 months . Many of the documents, he maintained, should have been provided to Israel by the United States .
 The Israeli government apologized for its spying and insisted that the recruitment of Pollard was an aberration . Pollard's recruitment was an unauthorized ""rogue"" operation .
 Pollard indeed spied for Israel out of misguided loyalty — and for money — but none of the other widely held beliefs about the case is true . Pollard was found guilty of spying for Israel, but not for money .
 Pollard offered to supply Israel with intelligence as early as 1980, but was not recruited as an operative until the fall of 1981 . Pollard began working in 1979 as a civilian employee of U.S. Navy intelligence . Israel says Pollard was recruited three years earlier than he and the
 He was working as an intelligence specialist with the Navy's Field Operations Intelligence Office . He was then working as a specialist in the field operations intelligence .
 At the height of his activity, in 1984 and 1985, one of his main assignments was the gathering of American intelligence relevant to Israel's nuclear targeting of the oil fields and Soviet military installations in southern Russia . Israel hid the fact from investigators and prosecutors by Israeli officials .
 Pollard was one of the Israeli Air Force's leading nuclear bombing and targeting experts . He was assigned to serve as Pollard's handler . Sella was a leading nuclear bomb and targeting expert . Pollard died at the age of 50 .
 Pollard's nuclear targeting data supplied by Pollard included topsecret American intelligence on the location of Soviet military targets, as well as specific data on the Soviet means for protecting those targets .
 Pollard also gave the Israelis American intelligence on Soviet air defenses, especially the feared SA-5 surface-to-air missile system . Pollard was so effective against U.S. B-52S in the Vietnam War .
 Pollard also provided Israel with the codes for American diplomatic communications . Israel's signals intelligence agency intercepted cables and backchannel messages to and from the office of Samuel W Lewis .
 Pollard provided Israel with an estimated 500,000 pages of documents before his arrest, prosecutors say . Pollard is accused of providing Israel with 18 hundred documents before he was arrested . Prosecutors say Pollard helped Israel with the documents .
 The top political officials of Israel understood that there was a high-level source inside the United States. Shimon Peres, Yitzhak Rabin, and Yitzak Shamir, understood that .
 Some of the most important Pollard documents were retyped and sanitized by Israeli intelligence officials . They were then made available to the Soviet Union as a gesture of Israeli goodwill . Yitzhak Shamir was a longtime advocate of closer Israeli-Soviet ties .
 Pollard's arrest and plea bargain were successfully hidden by the Israeli government . Pollard was arrested in 2010 and pleaded guilty to a charge of espionage . He was sentenced to life in prison in prison for 15 years .
 Israel still continues to depict the Pollard affair as a rogue operation that was conducted without high-level involvement . Israel continues to portray the Pollards affair as an operation without high level involvement .
 Ariel Sharon presented a far-reaching agenda for U.S.-Israeli strategic cooperation . Sharon was newly named by Menachem Begin as minister of defense . Sharon had come to Washington with Begin to present an agenda .
 Israel would become America's military partner — and military arm — in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf . Israel would serve as a depository for pre-positioned arms and ammunition for American armed forces .
 The Israelis' most eagerly awaited meeting took place in the cabinet room with President Reagan and his top advisers, including Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and Secretary of State Alexander Haig .
 Sam Lewis, as the United States ambassador to Israel, also was at the meeting . Sam Lewis is the U.S. Ambassador to Israel .
 Sharon gave a half-hour outline about how the U.S. and Israeli strategic interest should be established . Sharon then gave an outline of how the two countries should look at each other's interests . Sharon: Israel and the United States should be united in Israel .
 Dick Allen and the rest of the White House staff were also turning green . The White House is turning green for the first time .
 Sharon's plan also called for joint use of airfields and Navy ports . Sharon wants to use airfields, ports and airfields as a military base .
 Israel sought formal Israeli access to KH-11 satellite, including formal access to the satellite . Most Americans at the cabinet-room meeting did not understand — for its nuclear targeting of Soviet Union .
 There would be no joint U.S.-Israeli bases in the Mid-Mideast . Israel would not get access to American satellite intelligence . There would not be joint bases .
 Sharon also was told that Israel would not be permitted a receiving station in Tel Aviv for the real-time KH-11 photography . Sharon was told by the U.N. to not be allowed to use real-world photography .
 Sharon was forced to accept the watered-down U.S. version, which he vehemently opposed . Sharon had to defend publicly before the Knesset . Sharon eventually agreed to the watered down American version .
 Sharon found a way to carry out his strategic goals without the help of Washington . Sharon: "Over the next few months, Sharon found out a way of carrying out his goals without help from Washington"
 He led Israel, with the support of Begin, into an invasion of Lebanon in an effort to destroy the Palestine Liberation Organization . Israel's military dominance to change the political structure of the Middle East .
 Sharon would carry the fight, under Sharon's plan, to the outskirts of Beirut . Israel would serve as an antiSyrian blocking force while its Lebanese allies, the Phalangists, cleaned out the city of PLO followers .
 Israeli Air Force was called upon to begin the bombing of Beirut . But the Phalangists failed to move, and the Israeli air force bombed the city . The Israeli air Force bombed Beirut in the aftermath .
 Five hundred Israeli soldiers were killed along with more than ten thousand Palestinians and Lebanese, some in the shocking massacre at the Palestinian refugee camps in Sabra and Shatila . Instead of victory, there was impasse, as five hundred Israeli .
 Sharon needed to control Israel's intelligence services and its ""Temple" weapons — the nuclear arsenal . Before carrying out this plan, Sharon needed control of Israel's intelligence services .
 Sharon crony and long-time clandestine operative named Rafael Eitan was the new head of LAKAM . Eitan also served as Begin's special assistant for counterterrorism for counterterrorism .
 He had been forced to resign, nonetheless, from Mossad years earlier . He was bitter about his stunted career and the failure of Mossad and Israel's other intelligence agencies to cooperate .
 Sharon did not hide his political agenda, but publicly spelled it out many times after leaving the Israeli Army in 1973 . Sharon's political agenda was not hidden, but he publicly spelled out it out on many occasions .
 His major goals included the overthrow of King Hussein of Jordan and the transformation of that country into a Palestinian state, to which Palestinian refugees would be ""transferred"" — or driven" - or driven .
 Sharon told the senior officer corps of the Israeli Defense Force he was going to invade Lebanon . Sharon told them for the first time about his specific plans to put his political agenda into effect . Sharon was the prime minister of Israel from 1981 to 1981 .
 'Americans treat us like an aircraft carrier — a floating base,' he said . He said Americans treat us as 'a floating base' He said the U.S. is treated like a 'floating base'
 The increased Soviet freedom of maneuver in the Middle East and Africa, he added, ""endangers the stability of the region and vital interest of the free world," he said .
 Israel's national security now depends on its ability to influence events in a huge area that stretches from Kenya to Turkey . The new minister of defense was telling his nation that Israel's security now depended on its influence .
 KH-11 satellite information and other intelligence from the United States. But that could not be accomplished without the U.S. intelligence from U.K. It could not have been achieved without the help of the United.
 Sharon was beginning to redesign Israel's strategic posture . Washington finally got some hard intelligence on the Israeli nuclear arsenal .
 An Israeli scientist or technician who had worked at Dimona had taken some photographs of the underground storage bunkers there . Mordecai Vanunu would do five years later, five years after he would do the same thing .
 The men handling the defector were experts in weapons production . They knew they were seeing the real thing — thermonuclear warheads . The defector was a nuclear weapons expert .
 Defector says Israel has more than one hundred weapons in storage . Defector told them that Israel had more than a hundred weapons stored in storage.
 We know twenty KTs will take out Cairo, says President Obama . "Clean bombs, better warheads," says Obama administration . Cairo was more advanced and better than any of our people had presumed it could be .
 Defector provided specific data about warhead size and delivery systems . The defector also provided detailed data about the size of the warheads and delivery system .
 The defector's data was not shared with the State Department's proliferation experts nor with any of the analysts of Z Division at Livermore, who were seen as liberals . There was the usual disconnect, as there had been with all Israeli nuclear information since the late 1950s .
 The defector's information was left dangling, and those Americans who should have known the extent and nature of Israel's nuclear capability did not . Americans should have been aware of the Israeli nuclear capability .
 He told an interviewer that the ""turning point"" of his life came as a result of the Six-Day War, when he was 13 . He said the war was the turning point in his life .
 Israel's vie292 THE SAMSON OPTION tory was ""emotionally intoxicating"" and triggered his lifelong obsession with Israeli security, and his fantasies of being part of it . Israel's victory over Israel in Tel Aviv was "emotional intoxicating"
 Pollard sought a job as a defense analyst with the American Israel Public Affairs Committee . Pollard worked for the committee, one of Washington's most effective lobbies, in 1981 .
 AIPAC officials found his bragging about access to top-secret information inappropriate and ""weird" Pollard's story sounded ""too incredible to be real" One of his bragging was described as 'too incredible' and 'weird'
 Pollard also had been offering his services to Israel in 1980 and 1981, but no serious Israeli intelligence official would consider the recruitment of an openly pro-Israel American Jew who worked for the U.S. intelligence community .
 There also was an unwritten law prohibiting the recruitment of any American Jew, pro-Israel or not .
 Pollard's repeated offers to spy for the State of Israel had unnerved the Israeli intelligence community . Pollard offered to spy on behalf of Israel in the 1980s .
 Rafi Eitan, the aggressive new director of LAKAM, decided to change the rules after the unproductive meetings with the President and his senior aides in Washington .
 He agreed with Sharon that the U.S. was holding back on intelligence that was essential to Israeli security . The KH-11 photography is essential to Israel's security, he said .
 Ari Ben-Menashe and his colleagues in the External Relations Department were also appalled when Eitan recruited Pollard in October 1981 . Pollard was recruited by Eitan from the University of New York .
 Eitan needed Pollard, Ben-Menashe explained, "to access papers he already had knowledge of" Ben Menashe said .
 By early 1982, Reuven ""Rudi"" Yerdor had been promoted to brigadier general . He was in charge of Unit 8200, the Israeli communications intelligence service .
 Yerdor was a senior analyst who worked closely with his counterparts in the U.S. National Security Agency . He traveled to Washington every three months for liaison meetings with the NSA .
 Yerdor's official title was deputy chief of staff for military intelligence in the Israeli Defense Force . His immediate superior was Major General Yehoshua Saguy, the head of Aman and a deputy to Sharon . Saguy was dismissed after the Sabra and Shatila massacre .
 Every senior officer understood that Saguy, as head of military intelligence, was directly responsible under military procedure for briefing the prime minister . Saguy is responsible for briefings the Prime Minister .
 Saguy was known throughout the upper echelon of the Israeli military for his reluctance to challenge Sharon . Saguy stepped aside and allowed Sharon to be the main conduit for military intelligence to Begin and the cabinet .
 The first set dealt with highly technical U.S. intelligence describing a Soviet military system in the hands of the Arabs . The second set was a set of highly technical American intelligence .
 The second documents, far less interesting to Yerdor, were copies of daily and weekly summaries of worldwide NSA intercepts . The second document was a copy of the Daily and Weekly summaries .
 In February, Israel learned that the Soviets had decided to upgrade the Syrian air defense command and supply it with three battalions of SA-5S, their most advanced high-altitude antiaircraft missile . Israel learned in February that the Soviet Union had agreed to upgrade Syria's air
 The missiles were assigned to protect Syria's short-range SS-21 missiles, which were capable of striking Israel . The missiles remained under Soviet control, but remained under the Soviet control .
 They also posed a threat to Israel's most advanced F-15 and F-16 fighter-bomber aircraft . The Israeli planes were also considered to be the most advanced in the world .
 An official request to the United States for intelligence on the capabilities of the SA-5 was made, but Yerdor was told there was very little intelligence available on the system; it was too sensitive . The request was made to the U.S. but it was turned down .
 As for the source of the report, as Yerdor told his colleague, ""this doesn't come"" through normal channels . Yerder told his colleagues, "this didn't come."" through normal . channels .
 In mid-May 1982, three weeks before the invasion of Lebanon, Yerdor's office was handed an astonishing assortment of invaluable U.S. technical data about the air defense systems in Syria .
 The Israeli Air Force, utilizing electronic countermeasures, would demolish the Syrian Air Force and destroy more than seventy Syrian missile launchers during the Lebanon war . Israel would destroy over seventy missile launchers .
 Lewis, a career diplomat, was widely known as a good friend of Israel but also was strongly opposed to Ariel Sharon . Lewis would serve as ambassador until 1985 . He was widely opposed to Sharon's policies .
 Yerdor had little respect for Eitan, and worried about the long-range implications of Israeli intelligence activities in the United States, its best ally . Yer Dor Dorfman was worried about Eitan's activities .
 Eitan was driven by his personal ambition and his need to settle old scores with Mossad and Avraham Shalom, Shin Beth's director . He was convinced he was driven to kill Mossad head Yitzhak Hofi, head of Mossad, and head of Shin Beth .
 Pollard, Yerdor learned later, had been cleared — despite his openly pro-Israel views — for access to the most sensitive intelligence in the U.S. government . Pollard was using his office in Navy intelligence to place orders with abandon to classified archives .
 Ben-Menashe, like Yerdor, remained convinced that Eitan had been working with more than one American . Pollard's arrest and guilty plea came after he was found guilty of multiple counts of espionage .
 Eitan's LAKAM operations in the United States produced a steady stream of routinely transferred scientific and technical documents . Similar highly classified United States material had been arriving since the late 1950s, when the agency was set up .
 A special code name, jumbo, was added to the security markings already on the documents . Now, illicitly obtained intelligence was flying so voluminously from LAKAM into Israeli intelligence that a code name was added . The code name jumbo was given a special security code name
 His dislike of Sharon manifested itself in unprecedented public criticism . Hofi, former chief of staff Mordecai Gur, and two other retired army generals accused Sharon of insubordination and cowardice under fire in the 1950s .
 Menachem Begin's wife died in the spring, and a guilt-ridden Begin, who was in Washington at the time of her death, fell into a severe depression . Israeli politics were in more disarray than usual over the next year .
 He resigned as prime minister in September 1983 . He was replaced by Yitzhak Shamir, a former Mossad operative and conservative member of Likud coalition .
 Neither Labor nor Likud achieved a majority in the national elections in May 1984 . Neither party won a majority at the polls .
 Peres would serve as prime minister and Shamir as foreign minister until September 1986, when they would trade jobs . Peres was the foreign minister of Israel until 1986 .
 Rafi Eitan stayed on the job throughout the turmoil, so did Jonathan Pollard . Eitan and Pollard have been married for more than a decade .
 Pollard's intelligence would be summarized by Eitan and presented, without analysis or assessment, in a memorandum to the prime minister and minister of defense . Pollard would then be able to make a statement to the Israeli government .
 Pollard's material included essential KH-11 imagery as well as reporting and assessments from U.S. embassies and intelligence operatives inside Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Egypt . Such material is known in the diplomatic community as ""thirdparty"" information, and never provided to outsiders .
 In a pleading filed before he was given his life sentence in March 1987, he argued that his Israeli handlers told him that Israel's dependence upon a 'special source' had been mentioned at Israeli cabinet meetings .
 He also said that he was routinely provided with lists of intelligence items wanted . List was coordinated and ""prioritized"" by the heads of all military intelligence services .
 Pollard's handlers in the U.S. arranged for the Israeli government to provide the most sophisticated photocopying machines for reproduction of top-secret documents, including KH-11 satellite photographs . Israel's embassy in Washington provided the machines to photocopy top secret documents . Pollard was
 The photocopying machines arrived with special metal shielding to prevent the interception of electronic emanations .
 Ben-Menashe, an Iraqi Jew, had close ties to Israel's prime minister . In 1987, two years before his arrest in the United States, he left the External Relations Department and went to work directly as an intelligence adviser for Israel .
 The Soviets recognized the overture, Ben-Menashe said . They invited Israel to an intelligence conference in India to discuss the Pakistani nuclear weapons facility at Kahuta .
 Shamir authorized the exchange of intelligence with the Soviets on U.S. weapons systems . In 1984, while still acting prime minister, Shamir was still acting Prime Minister .
 Raw American intelligence was not handed over directly to the Soviets, but was reworked in an attempt to minimize the damage to American methods and agents . Raw U.S. intelligence was handed over to Soviets in order to minimize damage .
 The exchange of intelligence paid an immediate dividend, Ben-Menashe says . It paid for the easing of diplomatic tensions and the increased flow of Soviet immigrants to Israel .
 In late 1984 the Polish government permitted him to travel to Warsaw and negotiate the sale of AK-47S and SA-7S, among other weapons, for shipment to Iran . The Polish government allowed him, as a representative of the State of Israel, to travel .
 The organization's leaders made a brief attempt in 1940 to broker an agreement with the Third Reich that would permit the illegal passage to Palestine of Jews from Germany and Europe to continue the fight against the British . The British war effort was supported by David Ben-Gurion and even the Irgun
 Stern group resisted pressure to fight with the Allies . Stern group sought direct negotiations at one point with Otto von Hentig, a representative of the German foreign ministry . Stern refused to join the war effort .
 In his memoirs, von Hentig wrote of meeting with a Jewish delegation that offered to cooperate with the Nazis and, in essence, go to war against their pro-Allied compatriots . If Hitler guaranteed the postwar independence of Jewish Palestine, the delegation would cooperate with him .
 Similar talks were held by Stern representatives with Benito Mussolini's Italy, calling on the Italians to provide transit camps and passage for Jewish refugees, as well as arms, in return for cooperation in expanding Italy's influence in the Middle East .
 Pollard material was sanitized and dictated to a secretary before being turned over to the Soviets . Israeli said material was dictated by a secretary and sanitized before being handed over to Soviets .
 Some material was provided to Yevgeni M Primakov, the Soviet foreign ministry specialist on the Middle East who met publicly and privately with Shamir while he was prime minister .
 Shamir's turning to the Soviets was consistent with his personal and political beliefs, the Israeli says . Shamir turned to the Soviet Union consistent with personal, political views, he says .
 While in Mossad in the 1950s and 1960s, Shamir was known for his efforts to improve relationships with his KGB counterparts . Shamir worked for Mossad during the 1960s and '60s .
 Shamir worked diligently to develop new ties with the Soviet Union . He envisioned as a means of balancing, or offsetting, Israel's traditional reliance on the United States .
 Shamir's unilateral decision to forward the material to the Soviets is now widely known in leading political circles in Israel, an Israeli source says . Shamir made the decision in a unilateral decision, the source said .
 Rabin, who was close to the United States, went into a virtual "state of shock" upon being told of the decision . Rabin kept his peace, saying he was shocked by the news .
 Shamir's action, if exposed, would mean the end of the increasingly shaky Likud coalition . Rabin and Peres understood that if exposed it would mean an end to the coalition, he said .
 Israel realized that the overall Israeli-U.S. relationship would be at risk, an Israeli source said . They also realized, the source said, that the . overall Israeli United States relationship ""would be at . risk"
 Some officials of Mapam, a left-wing labor party with close ties to the Soviet bloc, considered leaking that information to the press . Shamir's action was considered a breach of the law .
 Shamir argued that his goal was to end the long-standing enmity between Israel and the Soviet Union and initiate some kind of strategic cooperation . For his part, Shamir and his principals argued that their aim was to establish a strategic cooperation with the Soviets .
 Pollard's loss of intelligence collection ability has been attributed to Pollard, U.S. intelligence official says . Pollard has been credited with significant losses to Soviet Union intelligence collection, official adds .
 The Israeli officials most tarnished by the scandal were Rafi Eitan and Aviem Sella . Eitan did not suffer financially from the scandal .
 He was subsequently named to a high administrative position with the Israel Chemicals Company . The company is the largest state-owned enterprise in Israel .
 Ariel Sharon authorized the appointment by none other than Ariel Sharon . Sharon had been named minister of trade and industry in 1984 . Sharon's appointment was authorized by Sharon himself .
 Sella was promoted to brigadier general after his return from the U.S. He was assigned as commander of Tel Nof, the site of Israel's nuclearready air force squadron .
 Sella instead was named head of the Israeli Defense Force staff college . After U.S. protests, Sella was instead named chief of the Israel Defense Force .
 His prospects for further advancement in the air force were bleak, and Sella retired . His prospects were bleak and he was forced to leave the service .
 American conducted his own private inquiry into the Pollard affair shortly after it became known . He said Israeli leadership agreed on a cover-up from the beginning, despite political differences .
 He told an Israeli newspaper in early 1987, "All my actions, including the Pollard affair, were carried out with the knowledge of my superiors"
 The one aspect of the Pollard story that no one wanted revealed revolved around Aviem Sella . Pollard was murdered by the Nazis in 1968 . He was shot in the head with a machine gun .
 Earlier in his career he had served as an F-4 pilot at Tel Nof, assigned to one of Israel's ""black"" — nuclear-capable — squadrons .
 Ariel Sharon's broadened view of Israeli national security and the Soviet threat had led to a dramatic upsurge in nuclear planning and nuclear targeting . Ariel Sharon had broadened views of Israeli security and Soviet threat . Sharon's view of Israel's national security led to an increase in nuclear targeting
 The air force also was responsible for the advanced Jericho missile system, with its steadily increasing range .
 The new missile targets inside the Soviet Union required increased intelligence . Sella's mission was to help Pollard gather the essential information and then evaluate it .
 Israel would need the most advanced intelligence on weather patterns and communication protocols, as well as data on emergency and alert procedures . Israel would also need to be able to communicate with the United States .
 Any knowledge of electromagnetic fields that lie between Israel and its main targets in the Soviet Union also was essential to the targeting of the Jericho .
 Sella's superb skill and knowledge of nuclear targeting blinded Eitan and the Israeli intelligence community to the fact that Sella was a pilot who knew nothing about running a covert operation . Sella is a former Israeli spy chief who worked for the CIA .
 Jonathan Pollard had to understand what he was doing, say Israelis who know of the Sella mission . Pollard is believed to have been involved in the mission to Israel .
 Pollard refused to cooperate with the U.S. Attorney's Office in Washington for six months . He finally gave up Sella's name and described what he said was his involvement as part of a plea bargain . Pollard said Sella was involved in the crime .
 Sella's mission was linked to nuclear intelligence, prosecutors say . Pollard plea bargain was part of a plea deal with prosecutors . It's not known whether prosecutors in Washington realized at the time of the plea bargain that Sella was involved .
 Many of the government's submissions in the case, including an extensive presentation by Caspar Weinberger, were highly classified .
 The government acknowledges that few involved in the case told the truth . The government acknowledged that few of the people involved in it were honest .
 Sella will be extradited to the United States, authorities say . It was that awkward situation that led them to insist that Sella was extradited .
 Sella was indicted in absentia in March 1987, in the United States District Court in Washington . The Israeli government refused to extradite him, and he was indicted .
 Since his retirement, Sella has given friends and colleagues an account of his involvement that is more credible, but still far short of the whole story . Sella: "I'm not sure what happened to me. Since my retirement, I'm sure that I'm not going to be
 While in Israel, he was recruited, he has said, for the job of trying to control Pollard . Pollard was drowning the Israeli intelligence bureaucracy in documents, he said .
 Before taking the assignment, he checked with his superior, Major General Amos Lapidot, the air force chief of staff . He checked with him before taking the job, he said .
 Sella says Lapidot assured him, Sella has said, that Pollard was not a rogue . Sella: Clearance for his new assignment had been obtained from Yitzhak Rabin, the minister of defense .
 Israel did make one direct attempt to get the charges against the young colonel dismissed . Israel did not want the charges dismissed .
 In June 1986, shortly after Pollard gave up Sella's name, Israel hired Leonard Garment to represent the colonel . Israel hired Garment in June 1986 to represent Pollard .
 He also was a strong supporter of Israel, and under Nixon had occasionally become involved in high-level diplomacy .
 In late June, Garment flew to Tel Aviv to interview Sella and speak with Israeli officials . Garment also flew to Israel to speak with Sella .
 His goal was to try to find some common ground between Washington and the government of Israel . He said he wanted to settle the matter before it led to even more damaging press .
 A factual proffer should be offered to the U.S. Justice Department, the authors say . They say Sella's involvement in the case is not clear . Sella has been charged with murder and attempted murder .
 The document claimed that Sella had done nothing more than meet socially with Pollard . The document also claimed that Pollard had met Sella socially with him .
 The Israeli position, as outlined to Garment, was that the United States had no case against the colonel . There wasn't the slightest indication of spying on his part, Garment says .
 Garment saw many state leaders while in Israel and even had dinner at the home of Shimon Peres .
 Garment returned to Washington to try again to negotiate a diplomatic solution or find some way to come up with a document that could get his client off the hook without obstructing justice . Garment: "I'm not going to be able to get my client out of jail"
 A six-man Israeli delegation arrived in Washington in August 1986 for a meeting with the Justice and State departments to resolve the issue . After much communication back and forth, the Israeli delegation went to Washington to meet with the government .
 The necessity of protecting Sella reached to the top of the Israeli government, says Yossi Levin . It was no ordinary group, but clear evidence that Sella was protected, he says .
 Caspi, Shalom, and Bar-on were appointed by Peres immediately after Pollard's arrest to conduct an internal investigation . Pollard was arrested in May 2012 .
 The three men reported within a week that Pollard was part of a rogue intelligencegathering unit that operated without any government awareness . Pollard is believed to have been part of the rogue intelligence unit .
 Garment invited the six men to his home on the day before their meeting with Justice and State . The six men were invited to Garment's home by Garment, who invited them to his house .
 The meeting went on past midnight, with Garment's wife, Suzanne, then a well-known Washington columnist for the Wall Street Journal, put in charge of typing drafts of the disputed proffer .
 He retrieved his notes of the dinner conversation with Sella and read them to the group . He retrieved them from his notes from the dinner table .
 The Israelis listened quietly and then asked for a few moments of privacy . They asked for the privacy of the Israeli delegation . The Israeli delegation then left the room to speak to the Israelis .
 Garment withdraws from the case, but will do so quietly . Garment later agreed to withdraw from case quietly, but to do so quiet .
 Garment's instinct for self-preservation was at its most acute . Garment was a survivor of the Nixon White House . He says he was a "survivalist" at the time .
 He did not know that Aviem Sella was a leading nuclear targeter . Three of the men who negotiated with him over the Sella proffer had been involved in an internal investigation and cover-up of the Pollard scandal .
 Garment did not know whether his client was Aviem Sella or the Israeli government . Garment said he was leaving the case because he was not sure whether he was his client . Pollard was convicted of murder in 2008, but was acquitted in 2009 .
 With his withdrawal, the Israeli government ended its attempt to protect Sella . Sella's withdrawal was in effect, ending his career . The Israeli government has withdrawn from its bid to protect him .
 Sella, who retired from the air force in disillusionment and disappointment, remained in Israel, as of mid-1991 a fugitive from U.S. justice . Sella is still in Israel .
 The hunt for "Mr X,"" as the government called Pollard's alleged accomplice, had only begun . Pollard was found dead in 2009 .
 The Sunday Times of London had every reason to anticipate that its October 5, 1986, revelation about Dimona, based on interviews with Mordecai Vanunu, would be a sensation . It was the first time the Sunday Times had been able to reveal that Dimona had been involved
 It was the first inside account of the Israeli nuclear establishment, based on a publicly named source .
 Vanunu and Pollard were primarily driven not by financial gain, but by the conviction that they were doing the right thing . They were driven to do what they believed to be doing .
 The intelligence communities of the world were riveted by the Sunday Times account . The report was published in the New York Times .
 One key American nuclear intelligence official acknowledged that the Vanunu story and Pierre Pean's i982book on the early French involvement at Dimona ""together presented the evidence that filled in all the question marks," said a key American intelligence official .
 The Sunday Times's competitors on Fleet Street ignored the story, and so did much of the world's press . But the Sunday Times and the world press ignored the issue .
 "There was nothing in the Times, Post, and Wall Street Journal "" he said. There was nothing," he said .
 Peter Hounam, the primary reporter and writer of the Vanunu story, knew it was the most important of his career . Vanununu: "Vanunu" was the first time he'd heard a story like this in his career. Hounams: "
 There were not even any calls from the major newspapers in the United States. There were even no calls from major newspapers .
 It might have been different, Hounam knew, if Mordecai Vanunu had been available in person .
 The Sunday Times had worked out a careful public relations campaign to help promote the story .
 Vanunu had dropped out of sight the week before, and the Sunday Times was unable to produce him when he was most needed . The Sunday Times had been unable to find him at the time .
 Vanunu had been duped by Israeli intelligence into leaving London on September 30 . He was lured to Rome, where he was abducted by the Mossad . He is believed to have been killed in Rome .
 His decision to walk away from the London newspaper world had followed publication of Vanunu's photograph in the Sunday Mirror, Britain's secondlargest tabloid, on September 28 .
 The alleged con man in the headline was not Vanunu's agent, but an opportunistic journalist from Colombia in South America . Oscar E Guerrero befriended the hapless ex-Australian in June while he was still in exile in Australia .
 Guerrero convinced Vanunu that his story and spectacular photographs were worth as much as $i million . Guerrero's story and photographs are worth $a million .
 After failing to interest Newsweek magazine, Guerrero approached the London Times in late August . Peter Hounam was in Australia, interviewing Vanunu Vanununu .
 Guerrero approached the Sunday Mirror, known for its checkbook journalism, while Hounam and the Sunday Times's ""Insight Team"" were preparing their story . Guerrero, apparently fearful that he would be cut out of Vanunu's agreement with the paper, also approached the Mirror .
 Ari Ben-Menashe and the Israeli intelligence community have been involved in the investigation . Ari's approach was that approach that put Ari Ben Menashe into the picture . Ari is the son of a former Israeli intelligence chief .
 Hounam and the editors at the Sunday Times did not know that as they worked, Mordecai Vanunu had been compromised to the Israelis by a Fleet Street colleague named Nicholas Davies . Davies was the foreign editor of the Daily Mirror, sister newspaper of the Sunday Mirror . Davies
 Davies and Ben-Menashe had been partners in international arms sales firm Ora Limited . The firm had operated out of Davies's London home since 1983 . Davies was a former partner of Ben Menashe's Ora Ltd .
 Ora Limited, set up with the approval of the Israeli government, was designed to get arms flowing into Iran . Ben-Menashe says it was one of many such undercover operations around the world . Ora was set up in Israel with approval of Israeli government .
 Ben-Menashe was assigned in 1980 to a small working group inside the Israeli intelligence community that dealt with Iran . He had been assigned because of his ability to speak Farsi . Israel needed arms for its war against Iraq .
 Ben-Menashe's assignment was to find ways of getting around the arms embargo . Ben Menashe was tasked with finding ways to get around the weapons embargo .
 Davies accepted an invitation to visit Israel; it was just a few more steps before he became an Israeli asset . Davies accepts invitation to Israel, but it was only a few steps away from becoming an asset for Israel .
 As a Catholic from northern England, Davies was the perfect cutout, Ben-Menashe said . Davies was a well-dressed charmer with a strong taste for the good life . Davies is a Catholic who has been married for more than 30 years .
 Ben-Menashe's files include hundreds of telexes and other documents indicating that Ora Limited was actively involved in arms trafficking with Iran at the highest levels . Ben Menashe: 'Ora Ltd. was actively engaged in arms smuggling with Iran'
 One 1987 cable provided terms for sale to Iran of four thousand TOW missiles at a cost of $13,800 each . One cable, sent to Aybar Hashemi Rafsanjani, provided terms .
 Watters recalls many meetings with Ben-Menashe in Tucson and many telephone conversations with Davies in London . Watters: "Satellite voice communications" is an important part of the history of satellite communications .
 At one time, he said, he and Ben-Menashe had discussed collaborating on a book, but the prospective publisher was not interested .
 Ben-Menashe was now telling stories about him, Davies said, in revenge . Davies said he was being told stories by Ben Menashe in revenge for his loss of power .
 Watters sought to check out Ben-Menashe and his London firm before agreeing to set up the company on behalf of Ora .
 She said she knew that Davies was selling arms in partnership with Ben-Menashe at the same time he was serving as foreign editor of the Daily Mirror . Davies was foreign editor at the time, she said .
 Eventually, she said in a telephone interview, she became ""appalled"" by her then husband's activities .
 Fielding said she knew Ben-Menashe was an Israeli intelligence operative . Fielding: "It wasn't difficult to put two and two together. It wasn't easy to put together"
 Guerrero, eager for another sale, displayed some of Vanunu's color photographs at the meeting . Guerrero: "I'm looking forward to another sale" Guerrero says he's eager to sell his collection of color photographs .
 Ben-Menashe's problem was that he simply had no idea what they showed or whether they were significant . He recalled that he was simply having no idea of what showed or if it was significant .
 There had been discussions, Ben-Menashe said, about what to do . Some officials urged Vanunu's assassination and the intelligence community recommended that he be ignored, he said .
 It wasn't clear how much of Vanunu knew or how much damage could be caused by a lowlevel Moroccan-born technician .
 The land mines had been put in place in the early 1980s, when Vanunu was still working at Dimona . The land mine site was put there in the 1980s .
 Davies did his part at the Sunday Mirror, BenMenashe said, working directly with Robert Maxwell, publisher of the Mirror Group newspapers, the largest group of popular tabloids in Great Britain .
 Maxwell Davies provided the framework for the September 28 Vanunu story, Ben-Menashe recalled . Davies then provided the inspiration for the story . The story went to Maxwell. Davies .
 At one point, Davies set up a meeting for BenMenashe with Maxwell at his ninth-floor office, he says . Davies is accused of trying to set up the meeting at his 9th floor office .
 Maxwell made it clear at the brief session, Ben-Menashe recalled, that he understood what was to be done about the Vanunu story . Maxwell made the decision at the end of the session . He said: "I understand what I need to do to deal with the
 Maxwell, Rupert Murdoch's fellow press baron, was known for his closeness to Israel's top leadership . Maxwell was a major competitor of Murdoch's and Murdoch's rival .
 Sunday Mirror reporting and editing team had no contact with Nicholas Davies, whom they knew only as the foreign editor of the Daily Mirror .
 The editor of the Washington Post dictated the tone and content of the story, the paper's editor said . Reporters say they didn't know the story was dictated by the editor .
 There were heated debates with the Mirror's reporting team, led by Tony Frost . They insisted that the real story was not about Guerrero and his antics, as Malloy wanted to make it .
 The reporters recommended that the photographs be ""splashed"" across the front of the newspaper, with the accompanying story raising questions about their authenticity .
 Malloy wanted none of Vanunu's photographs published and insisted on holding them up to ridicule . Malloy insisted none of the photographs were published .
 The crunch came on the Thursday before publication, when Frost and a colleague named Mark Souster were ordered by Malloy to take the Vanunu photographs and data to the Israeli embassy . Frost and Souster took the photos and data from the embassy .
 John C Parker, then Malloy's senior deputy, understood that Maxwell himself had given the order . Parker understood that Malloy had given it to Maxwell himself . Parker: "It's not a secret"
 Parker and colleagues were extremely concerned about what going to the embassy meant for Vanunu . Parker and his colleagues were worried about what it meant .
 It could lead to his arrest and even put his life in danger from assassination . It could also put him at risk of assassination .
 Sunday Mirror's senior news editor, Peter J Miller, was fired by Maxwell in 1990 . Miller complained that the newspaper's treatment of the Vanunu story had been turned around because of pressure from above .
 Malloy acknowledged that he had discussed the handling of the Vanunu story with Maxwell, but said there was ""nothing sinister or strange" about Maxwell's involvement . Malloy was forced out in 1988 as editor of the Sunday Mirror .
 Malloy said he himself had misjudged the importance of the Vanunu photographs . Malloy was told of the complaints by Parker, Miller and Frost .
 Maxwell ordered staff to take photos to Israeli embassy, Malloy says . Malloy recalls Maxwell, however, who ordered the photos to be sent to Israel .
 Malloy said he invoked Maxwell's name in telling Miller, Parker, and Frost how to handle the story . Malloy also said he could not deny that he invoked the name of Maxwell in telling them how to deal with it .
 Malloy also acknowledged that it was possible that Maxwell was not keeping him fully informed of his independent contacts with the Israelis or others on the Mirror group .
 Miller was the publisher of a local London newspaper and magazine when interviewed . He contested the firing before Britain's Industrial Tribunal . Miller won his case against Maxwell and the Sunday Mirror .
 The Tribunal, as of August 1991, was considering how much compensation to award Miller . Miller was awarded compensation .
 Frost, now the deputy editor of the Sunday Sun in Newcastle, England, was also dismissed by Maxwell . Frost is now a deputy editor in Newcastle and is also a former Sunday Sun deputy editor . Maxwell also dismissed Frost as the editor of Sunday Sun .
 The Sunday Times was still known to be at work on the Vanunu story . The Israeli intelligence community had no clout at the top at the Times .
 The next step was to find Vanunu, still hiding out in London, and somehow manage to get him out of England . The pair managed to find him in the UK and get him to safety .
 The lonely Vanunu did not know about the land mines, Ben-Menashe said . He was entrapped by the Mossad's Cindy Hanin Bentov and en route to Rome .
 Ben-Menashe initially sought to keep secret Davies's role in arms sales, he says . He decided to talk after Davies made no move to come to his defense, he adds . He says he initially tried to keep Davies's secret role secret .
 Ben-Menashe claims Davies could have proven to prosecutors that the sale of the C-130S to Iran had been sanctioned by the Israeli government . Davies could've proven to the U.S. prosecutors that Iran had sanctioned the sale, he says .
 The first day of President Bush's Persian Gulf War couldn't have gone better . President George Bush's first day in the Gulf War was a success .
 U.S. cruise missiles and Air Force and Navy planes struck targets in downtown Baghdad and elsewhere in Iraq with precision . As America — and the world — watched on television, United States struck their targets .
 Iraqi army carried out Saddam Hussein's pre-war pledge and fired eight Scud missiles at Israel from launchers that had been destroyed in the first hours of the war . The euphoria disappeared on the second day, as the Iraqi army fired eight missiles .
 Two Scuds landed in Tel Aviv and another near Haifa . Initial reports that the warheads contained nerve gas were false .
 Frightened Israelis, wearing gas masks, huddled in specially sealed above-ground rooms, waiting out Iraqi bombardment . The streets below, as seen on television, were eerily quiet .
 Israel would send its air force and its specially trained units into western Iraq, where the Scuds were located . A senior U.S. defense official promised Israel a promise of future support .
 U.S. intelligence miscalculated in predictions that Iraq had limited number of Scud warheads and launchers . Some estimates before the war put that number at fewer than 20 .
 Saddam Hussein's troops convert a fleet of flatbed trucks into makeshift launching pads . It had been thought that Iraq could launch its Scuds only from fixed launcher sites or from mobile launchers .
 An American satellite detected by an American satellite making its ninety-six-minute orbit around the earth . There was another element involved in those first hours, not known to the public .
 Shamir ordered mobile missile launchers armed with nuclear weapons moved into the open and deployed facing Iraq . The satellite saw that Shamir had responded to the Scud barrage by ordering mobile missiles to be deployed .
 American intelligence picked up other signs indicating that Israel had gone on a full-scale nuclear alert . The alert would remain in effect for weeks, according to U.S. intelligence .
 No one in the Bush administration knew just what Israel would do if a Scud armed with nerve gas struck a crowded apartment building, killing thousands . The U.S. did not know just what Israeli forces would do in the case .
 All George Bush could offer Shamir was money and more Patriot missiles . All he could offer was assurance that the Iraqi Scud launcher sites would be a priority target of the air war .
 No Jews had been killed by poison gas since Treblinka and Auschwitz . Israel built its bomb so it would never have to depend on the goodwill of others when the lives of Jews were being threatened .
 The escalation didn't happen, however; the conventionally armed Scud warheads caused — amazingly — minimal casualties, and military and financial commitments from the Bush administration rolled in .
 Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's government received international plaudits for its restraint . The government of Israel received international praise for its actions .
 American officials were full of private assurances for months after the crisis that things were under control . Newsmen were told that Israel, recognizing the enormous consequence of a nuclear strike, would not have launched its missiles at Baghdad .
 No one in America could have dissuaded Shamir and his advisers from ordering any military action they deemed essential to the protection of their nation . The fact is, of course, that no one in U.S. could dissuade Shamir from ordering such action .
 By the mid-1980s, Dimona had manufactured hundreds of low-yield neutron warheads capable of destroying large numbers of enemy troops with minimal property damage .
 The size and sophistication of Israel's arsenal allows men such as Ariel Sharon to dream of redrawing the map of the Middle East . The implicit threat of nuclear force is the implicit threat to Israel's sovereignty .
 Israel also has been exporter of nuclear technology . Israel has collaborated on nuclear weapons research with other nations, including South Africa . South Africa has also worked with Israel on nuclear research .
 In September 1988, Israel launched its first satellite into orbit, bringing it a huge step closer to intercontinental missiles and satellite intelligence capability . Israel launched the first satellite in September 1988 .
 Scientists concluded that the rocket booster that launched the Israeli satellite produced enough thrust to deliver a small nuclear warhead to a target more than six thousand miles away . Scientists at Z Division concluded .
 Israeli physicists are still at the cutting edge in weapons technology . They are involved in intensive research into nuclear bomb-pumped X-ray lasers, hydrodynamics and radiation transport .
 None of this has ever been discussed in the open in Israel, or in the Knesset . Israel has never discussed the issue in the public, nor has ever discussed it openly .
 The basic target of Israel's nuclear arsenal has been and will continue to be its Arab neighbors . Israel has a nuclear arsenal of weapons aimed at Arab neighbors, Israel says .
 A nuclear escalation, once unthinkable except as a last resort, would now be a strong probability . The rise of nuclear weapons is now a strong possibility, writes Peter Bergen .
 The Samson Option is no longer the only nuclear option available to Israel . Israel is considering the possibility of using the Samson Option to develop a nuclear weapon .
 No author could have been blessed with a more intelligent, enthusiastic, or caring researcher, fact checker, editor, and colleague than Max Friedman of National Public Radio . Max Friedman is an Oberlin College graduate who worked closely with me on this book for the past three years .
 Benjamin Frankel is a political scientist and expert on national security . Frankel provides a seemingly unending tutelage on Israeli politics, history and sociology .
 Thomas B Cochran and Robert S Norris graciously gave me a series of ad hoc, but expert seminars on nuclear weapons and how they are made .
 Cochran is senior scientist and Norris is senior analyst with the Natural Resources Defense Council . Norris is a senior analyst for the council . Cochran and Cochran are senior scientists and senior analysts with the Council .
 The book was written by Robert Loomis, a longtime editor and friend of Random House . The book is published by Random House, published by Simon Cowell .
 Esther Newberg, my agent, knew when to crack the whip and when to share a joke, she says . Esther Newenberg, her agent, was a great source of inspiration for me . She says she is proud of her career .
 It is a delight to be represented by someone of her integrity and intelligence . It is also a delight that she has been represented by an intelligent woman .
 My thanks to Heather Shroder for her help in getting this book to foreign publishers .
 Few books have been written specifically on Israel's nuclear arsenal . Israel has a nuclear arsenal of more than 100 nuclear weapons .
 The best reference work on the status of world proliferation is compiled and written by Leonard Spector, of the Carnegie Endowment in Washington, who publishes periodic updates .
 There were many newspaper and magazine articles on the Geoffrey Prime spy scandal in Britain; see, "The Treason of Geoffrey Prime,"" Economist, November 13, 1982, page 63 .
 Richard Allen was first interviewed for this book on May 19, 1989, and many times thereafter . Allen was interviewed for the book in May 1989 . Allen has been interviewed since then for more than 20 years .
 For a good account of the internal feuding in Israel over the bombing of the Iraqi reactor at Osirak, see Israels Secret Wars, by Ian Black and Benny Morris, beginning at page 332 .
 Not surprisingly, very little has been written about Ernst Bergmann . Bergmann was a German scientist who died in 1953 .
 The article, because of Israeli censorship, only hints at Bergmann's important role . The article is published only because of the censorship of the article .
 The diaries of Moshe Sharett, Personal Diary, in Hebrew have been translated only in part . Sharett's diaries are published in Hebrew and English .
 Details of the early announcements of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission can be found in Jabber and Pry . The announcement was made in the early months of 2009 .
 Bar-Joseph's article is one of many excellent scholarly articles on the Suez Crisis . See also ""Israel's Relations with the Arabs" by Avi Shlaim, Middle East Journal, Spring 1983 .
 Aharon Katzir-Katchalsky's death was reported in the Jerusalem Post, June 1, 1972, ""Leading Scientist Killed,"" page 3. Aharon was a leading scientist .
 Herman Mark was interviewed December 14, 1990, in Austin, Texas, and by telephone many times thereafter . He was interviewed by phone many times after the interview .
 The announcement of the Canadian-Indian reactor can be found in ""Canada to Help Build Atom Research Reactor for India" by Grey Hamilton, Toronto Globe and Mail, April 30, 1956 .
 Arthur Lundahl was interviewed in Bethesda, Maryland, on June 19, 1989, and many times by telephone afterward . Lundahl died at the age of 92 at age 65 .
 Dino Brugioni was interviewed dozens of times by telephone at his home in Hartwood, Virginia, beginning on July 5, 1989 . Dino was interviewed by phone at home in Virginia, Virginia .
 Andrew Goodpaster was interviewed by telephone in Washington on January 11, 1991 . Andrew's interview was conducted by phone in Washington, D.C.
 See Jabber for the generally held and mistaken view of the early resignations of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, as well as Every Spy a Prince .
 Raviv and Melman mention Binyamin Blumberg's important and early role in the Israeli bomb on the same page . Raviv, Melman, and Raviv mention the important role of Binyam Blomberg's .
 Finney was interviewed in Washington, D.C. in April 1989 . Finney appeared in Washington on April 18, 1989 .
 Walter Elder was interviewed in his suburban Virginia home on August 28, 1989, and many times by telephone thereafter . Elder's interview was conducted in the home of Elder in suburban Virginia . Elder says he was interviewed by phone at his Virginia home . Elder: "Walter's life has been
 Philip Farley interviewed in Palo Alto, California, on October 30, 1989 . Farley was interviewed by CNN.com's John Sutter in October 1989 .
 Myron Kratzer was interviewed in Washington, D.C., in June 1989, and by telephone thereafter . He was interviewed by telephone in Washington and by phone thereafter .
 Christian Herter's testimony to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee can be found in Vol. 1 . Herter testified before the committee . He was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives, a Republican senator .
 Carl Kaysen was interviewed in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on November n, 1989, and thereafter by telephone by telephone . He was interviewed by telephone in November 1989 and thereafter thereafter by phone .
 William L Strauss was interviewed by telephone by telephone on April 3, 1991; Alice Strauss was interviewed by telephone in May 6, 1991 . Alice Strauss also interviewed by phone in 1991; William Strauss interviewed in 1991 .
 None of the accounts discusses Feinberg's relationship with the Israeli nuclear program . Feinberg worked for Feinberg for decades in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Ben Bradlee and Arthur Schlesinger discussed President Kennedy on April 9, 1991 . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 A good account of Kennedy's efforts on campaign financing can be found in Congressional Quarterly's ""Congress and the Nation 1965-1968,"" Vol. Vol. 1 . Kennedy was elected to the Senate in 1968 .
 Myer Feldman was interviewed in Washington, D.C. on June 13, 1989, and many times thereafter . Feldman is credited with saving the lives of Myer and others .
 Robert Komer was interviewed in Washington, D.C. on April 3, 1989, and two times thereafter . He was interviewed three times before and again in the 1990s .
 Israel's diversion of the Norwegian heavy water has been thoroughly researched and reported by Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control in Washington, D.C.
 Milhollin was the first to expose the issue, and has been more than generous in sharing his files and research .
 Robert McNamara's cryptic conversation with the author took place on January 11, 1991 . McNamara and McNamara had a cryptic conversation about the book .
 Yuval Neeman explains why the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission fell apart in the late 1950s . Neeman: The more logical account of why the agency fell apart was given by Yuval in 1991 .
 Neeman would not discuss any current issues relating to Israel's nuclear capabilities . Neeman: "Israel's nuclear capability is a priority"
 Floyd Culler interviewed on November 30, 1989, in Palo Alto, California, and later by telephone . Culler was interviewed by phone in 1989 and later in 1989 .
 Gazit book provides invaluable background on Israeli policy in Kennedy period . Gazit provides invaluable history of Israeli policy during Kennedy era .
 Much detail about Ben-Gurion's attitude and the history of that period comes from Michael Bar-Zohar's abridged biography .
 The most complete summary of Johnson's early ties to American Jews can be found in ""Prologue" by Louis S Gomolak, unpublished doctoral thesis .
 Shlomo Aronson is an advocate of the deterrent value of Israel's nuclear arsenal . The Samson Option is Israel's version of the Israel-sanctioned nuclear program .
 It was a lecture given on December 11, 1988, at a workshop on Verification of Nuclear and Conventional Arms Reductions .
 A number of books are useful on the background of international control of nuclear energy . Nuclear energy is a key part of the nuclear industry .
 For a discussion of the Sam328 NOTES son and Masada psychologies, see A Psycho-History of Zionism, by Jay Y Gonen , Chapter 13 . For discussion of Sam's son and his son's son's psychologies see A psycho-history of Zionism . For a
 Mangold shows that Angleton always had the support of Richard Helms in his paranoid treatment of defectors . Mangold says Angleton had the backing of Helms . Angleton was always paranoid about the defectors, but Helms was always supportive .
 Samuel Halpern was interviewed in his suburban Virginia home on April 29, 1991 . He was interviewed for the first time in 1991 .
 Ambassador Walworth Barbour is rarely mentioned in any of the contemporary books about Israel or Middle East policies . Barbour's role in Israel's Mideast policy has been largely ignored in recent books about the region .
 One of the few to single out Barbour was Abba Eban, in his Autobiography . Eban correctly described him as ""corpulent, good-natured and brilliantly incisive" Barbour .
 Edward Dale was interviewed first of many times at his home in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, on September 7, 1990 . Dale's interview was the first time he has been interviewed since 1990 .
 John Hadden was interviewed in Brunswick, Maine, on June 8, 1989, and many times thereafter by telephone . He was interviewed by phone in June 1989 and many other times thereafter . Hadden's interview was taped in June 1988 .
 Peter Jessup was interviewed in Washington, D.C., March 20, 1989, and later by telephone . He was interviewed by telephone and in Washington state .
 Robert Webber's widow Clytie Webber discussed her husband with the author on May 21, 1991 . Clytie discussed her late husband's death with the late Webber .
 Eugene Braderman of Washington was interviewed twice by telephone about his 1960s visit to Israel, on October 1, 1990, and again the following April, 1990 . Braderman was interviewed again by telephone in April 1990 .
 Arnold Kramish told of his meeting with Barbour in an interview on June 5, 1990 . The interview took place in June 1990 .
 Walter Rostow was interviewed at the LBJ Library in Austin, Texas, on October 14, 1990 . Rostow died at the age of 92 in 1968 at age 65 .
 Dan Rather' s question for the President came during a December 19, 1967, news conference . Dan Rather: "A Presidential Gift is a gift to the President" Dan Rather's question for Rather was asked by Rather at a news conference in 1967 .
 James Critchfield was interviewed April 13, 1989, and later by telephone . Critchfields was interviewed by telephone in 1989 and in 1989 . Critchesfield was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Carl Duckett was interviewed at his home in Hutchins, Virginia, on June 27, 1991 . Duckett passed away in June 1991 .
 There have been many published accounts of Richard Helms's aborted attempt to brief Johnson on the Israeli bomb; see ""LBJ Was Told in '68 That Israel Had Bomb,"" by John J Fialka, Washington Star, March 1, 1978, page 1 .
 The late Harry Schwartz was interviewed July 14, 1989, at his home near Easton, Maryland . The late actor was interviewed by the late comedian at his Maryland home .
 The Secrets of Israel's Nuclear Arsenal was revealed in 1986 . Israel's nuclear arsenal is the largest in the world's nuclear weapons arsenal .
 The story was written by the newspaper's ""Insight"" team, led by Peter Hounam .
 The use of robotics in the nuclear weapons production process is briefly described in ""Machining Hemispherical Shells,"" in the 1988 edition of Research Highlights .
 George Cowan was interviewed by telephone from New Mexico on September 9, 1990; Hans Bethe was interviewed at his office at the California Institute of Technology on January 21, 1991 . George Cevallos was interviewed in New Mexico by telephone in 1990 .
 Nixon's comments about the NPT were made September 8, 1968, in Pittsburg and September 9, 1968 in Charlotte, North Carolina . Nixon made the comments during a visit to Pittsburg .
 David Long was interviewed by telephone by telephone on January 18, 1991; Curtis Jones was interviewed in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, on September 6, 1990 . Curtis Jones interviewed David Long by telephone in North Carolina in 1990 .
 Norris, Cochran, and Arkin essay is "History of the Nuclear Stockpile,"" Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, August 1985 . Norris, . Cochran and Arkins, wrote the essay .
 There have been many published accounts of Gerald Bull; a good one is ""The Guns of Saddam,"" by William Scott Malone, David Halevy, and Sam Hemingway, Washington Post, 1991 .
 Nicholas Veliotes was first interviewed on June 20, 1989, in Washington, D.C. in Washington . He was interviewed in 1989 .
 There have been scores of analyses of the Yom Kippur War, besides the memoirs of the participants .
 Mohammed Heikal was interviewed by telephone from his office in Cairo on July 3, 1991 . Mohammed was interviewed from his Cairo office in 1991 . The interview was conducted by phone from the office of Mohammed Hekal .
 Kissinger would not be interviewed about the 1973 war . Despite many calls to his office and to his former colleagues in the U.S. government, Kissinger refused to talk about the war .
 Hermann Eilts was interviewed on July 10, 1991, by telephone from Boston . Hermann was interviewed by phone from Boston, Massachusetts, on July 11, 1991 .
 James Schlesinger was interviewed on April 25, 1989, in Washington . William Colby was interviewed in January 10, 1991, also in Washington, D.C. The interview took place in Washington and New York City .
 Orwin Talbott was interviewed by telephone from Annapolis, Maryland, in December 1990 and June 1991 . Talbott died at his retirement home on December 10, 1990, and again on June 20, 1991 .
 Duckett's problems with the 1974 estimate have been widely reported; see ""How Israel Got the Bomb" by John Fialka, Washington Monthly, January 1979 .
 Reporters raise questions about Shapiro's actions, but note he hasn't been formally accused of any wrongdoing . Shapiro was not formally charged with any wrongdoing; he was not charged with anything .
 Zalman Shapiro was interviewed repeatedly by telephone from Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, beginning on April 12, 1991 . Shapiro interviewed repeatedly from April 12 to April 15, 1991, for the first time .
 George Murphy was interviewed by telephone on May 30, 1989, and thereafter thereafter . Murphy's interview with Murphy was conducted by telephone . Murphy: "I was a good guy. I was a great guy"
 Victor Gilinsky was interviewed on June 12, 1989, in suburban Maryland, and thereafter by telephone by telephone . Gilinsky interviewed by telephone in June 1989 .
 Cynthia Virostek was interviewed by telephone on July 17, 1991; she has assembled extensive files on NUMEC . The author wishes to thank her for her generous help .
 "The Spread of Nuclear Weapons in the Middle East,"" an ABC News Closeup, April 27, 1981 . The spread of nuclear weapons in the Mideast was a major concern in 1981 .
 Henry Myers first discussed NUMEC and Shapiro with the author on November 17, 1980, and many times thereafter . Henry Myers: NUMEC, Shapiro and NUMEC were the subject of many discussions .
 Peter Stockton's first conversation with the author about Shapiro took place on January 26, 1988 . Stockton first spoke with Shapiro in 1988 about the author .
 The estimate of more than one hundred kilograms of recovered uranium was provided by a senior technical official of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission . Babcock & Wilcox inventory reports are available under the Freedom of Information Act .
 Ari Ben-Menashe initially contacted the author in August 1990 and was first interviewed in Cincinnati, Ohio, on April 11, 1991 . Ari Ben Menashe first interviewed the Carter Malaise Ari in Cincinnati in April 1991. Ari Ben
 He was subsequently interviewed in Washington and many more times by telephone . He was interviewed by Washington, Washington and New York .
 Malcolm Toon was interviewed by telephone on May 20, 1991; his cable to Washington about the senatorial visit was made available under the Freedom of Information Act . Toon's cable to D.C. was made public under FOI .
 The footnote about Vanunu and the senators' rebuff was reported in Triple Cross . The footnote was reported by Triple Cross.
 George Rathjens was interviewed by telephone by telephone on March 25, 1989, and thereafter thereafter . He was interviewed again by telephone in March 1989 .
 The best account of the Carter administration's diplomacy on the 1977 Kalahari test was written by Murrey Marder and Don Oberdorfer of the Washington Post . See their story as syndi.332 NOTES .
 The CIA's assessment of the attempted 1977 test was provided under the Freedom of Information Act to the Natural Resources Defense Council . The assessment was made available to the press in 1990 .
 Harold Brown discussed the Israeli joint targeting request by telephone on April 26, 1991; he was previously interviewed in Washington on October 20, 1989 . Harold Brown also discussed the request in Washington .
 Gerald Oplinger was interviewed at his suburban Virginia home on January 9, 1991 . He was interviewed in 1991 at his Virginia home .
 Spurgeon Keeny interviewed on March 24, 1989, in Washington and many times by telephone thereafter . Keeny was interviewed by phone in Washington, D.C., in March 1989 .
 Donald Kerr was interviewed in Washington on February 13, 1991 . Louis Roddis was interviewed on May 7, 1991, and Donald Kerr in Washington . Donald Kerr's interview was conducted in Washington in 1991 .
 The only book-length study of the Pollard affair is Territory of Lies, by Wolf Blitzer . The book summarizes all of the known and published information about the case .
 Blitzer accepts far too much of Pollard's account at face value . Blitzer says Pollard was wrong to suggest that Blitzer is wrong to say Pollard is wrong .
 Many of the essential details of Pollard's early life come from Blitzer and the press accounts at the time . Pollard is best known for his role in the television series "American Horror Horror Horror"
 Samuel Lewis was interviewed about the White House meeting on February 22, 1991 . Samuel Lewis met with President Richard Nixon on February 23, 1991.
 Sharon's December 15, 1981, speech is available in abridged form from the Israeli embassy in Washington . Sharon's speech initially was issued as a press bulletin from the embassy press .
 For more on the Stern Gang, see Wanted, by Mordechai Schreiber, beginning at page 142 .
 Peter Hounam was interviewed on July 30, 1991, by telephone from London, and thereafter thereafter . Peter was interviewed by phone from London and thereafter .
 Robert Watters was interviewed September 3, 1991, by telephone from Suva, Fiji, where he was on assignment as an electronics technician for the South Pacific Commission . Watters says he was working for the Commission when he was killed .
 Nicholas Davies (no relation to Nick Davies, a former reporter for the Independent) was interviewed by telephone from his home in London on July 26, 1991 .
 Janet Fielding was interviewed by telephone from London on August 5, 1991 . Fielding interviewed by phone from London from London in 1991 .
 Peter Miller was interviewed by telephone from London on August 21 and 22, 1991 . Miller interviewed by phone from London from London in 1991 .
 Tony Frost was interviewed by telephone from Newcastle, England, on August 6 and thereafter . Frost interviewed by phone from Newcastle from August 6 to August 6 . Frost: "Tony's life is going to be very interesting"
 Press Gazette for April 29, 1991, "Sacked Mirror Man Finds Place in Sun" by Jean Morgan .
 Michael Malloy was interviewed by telephone on September 2, 1991, from the Passford House Hotel in Lymington, Hampshire, England, where he was on vacation . Malloy had been on vacation in the UK .
 He began his newspaper career as a police reporter for the City News Bureau in Chicago .
 After Army service, he was hired by United Press International in Pierre, South Dakota . He worked for the company .
 In 1963 he joined the Associated Press in Chicago and in 1965 went to Washington for the AP . In 1965 he covered the Pentagon for the first time, covering the Pentagon .
 He served as press secretary and speechwriter for Senator Eugene H McCarthy in the 1968 New Hampshire Democratic primary campaign against Lyndon Johnson . He also worked for Senator McCarthy's campaign against LBJ in New Hampshire .
 In 1969, as a free-lance journalist, Mr Hersh distributed five newspaper stories on the atrocity through Dispatch News Service . He wrote the first account of the massacre in South Vietnam .
 In 1986, he rejoined the Times' s Washington bureau to write a series of critical articles about Panama's Manuel Noriega . In 1986 he wrote critical articles on Panama's Panama leader .
 He again joined the Times in Washington in September 1991, on a special assignment . He was back in Washington on special assignment in 1991 .
 For his account of the My Lai massacre he earned the 1970 Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting, the George Polk Award, the Sigma Delta Chi Distinguished Service Award, and the Worth Bingham Prize .
 For his reporting on the secret B-52 bombing of Cambodia, he was accorded the Roy M Howard Public Service Award and a second Polk Award in 1974 . In 1974, he won a second award for his reporting of the secret bombing .
 The next year he won the Drew Pearson Award, the John Peter Zenger Freedom of the Press Award, and the Sidney Hillman Foundation Award . He also won a third Polk Award for his stories on the CIA and Chile .
 After army service, he joined United Press International and then the Associated Press . He joined U.P.I. and then Associated Press.
 He served as press secretary and speech writer for Senator Eugene H McCarthy in the 1968 New Hampshire Democratic primary campaign . He also worked for Senator McCarthy in New Hampshire .
 In 1969, as a free-lance journalist, Mr Hersh wrote the first account of the My Lai massacre .
 Mr Hersh has won more than a dozen major journalism prizes . He has won the Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting .