 Gregory Douglas: Let us sit upon the ground and tell sad stories about the death of Kings . Regicide The Official Assassination of John F Kennedy by Gregory Douglas .
 The Warren Commission Report. Jack Rubenstein .59 Soviet Intelligence Study .59 The Warren Report.59 The Rubenstein Report .
 The assassination of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963, continues to generate an enormous amount of popular controversy, more so than any other historical happening in recorded memory .
 The killing took place in a major American city in full view of hundreds of people and in broad daylight, yet years after the event, a dispassionate overview of the incident is impossible to achieve . The killing was in full-view of thousands of people .
 The act and its consequences are as cluttered as the dense Indian jungle that so thoroughly hides the gaudy tiger from the sight of its prey . The tiger is believed to be the largest tiger in the world .
 The initial stunned confusion in Dallas has continued, with much official connivance, into succeeding decades, with an immense proliferation of books, magazine articles, motion picture productions, and television dramas, which are equally divided .
 There is no question in the minds of anyone that John F Kennedy was shot dead in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 .
 The overwhelming majority of the public, who are the final arbiters of whatever may pass for historical truth, has come to believe less in the determined certainty of officialdom and more in the questions raised .
 In a very strong sense, the Kennedy assassination marked an important watershed in the relationship between the American public and its elected and appointed officials . The assassination marked a watershed in America's relationship with its elected officials .
 Before that event, what the government said was almost universally accepted as the truth . Before that, what was accepted by the public was accepted as truth .
 There was unquestioning and simplistic belief, and more, there was trust in the pronouncements from the Beltway and its numerous and often very slavish servants in academia and the American media .
 It is true, people would say, because it is printed in my newspaper and supported by important and knowledgeable savants. It would be true, they would say. But it is true because it was printed in the newspaper and backed by important savants, they say .
 That the media and academia might be influenced by, if not actually commanded by, the government rarely occurred to anyone outside of a small handful of chronic malcontents . That the government might influence the media or academia rarely occurred before .
 The Warren Commission’s lengthy and thoroughly disorganized report was certainly in many cases very important . Kennedy 11: The questions that were raised by the Warren Commission were certainly very important. The questions raised were raised in many of the questions raised by Warren .
 There were many errors in this hasty attempt to allay national anxieties is clearly evident, but in retrospect, these are more errors of commission than omission . That there are many errors, but they are more of commission and omission than omission, says David Cameron .
 The Warren Report was prepared and released to the public not to encourage questioning, but to silence it as quickly as possible . Warren Report: "The Warren Report" was released to silence the public, not encourage questioning . Warren report: "Warren Report"
 There are many cogent reasons for silence and acceptance, not the least of which was the urgent desire for self-preservation and the maintenance of the integrity of the governmental system .
 In actuality, the American currency is not backed by gold or silver holdings but by the blind faith of the public . The American dollar is backed by the public, not by gold, silver holdings .
 If the concept of unquestioning belief in governmental currency stability is questioned, economic chaos can be the result . This applies equally to government probity, according to the economist .
 To quote from the title of the first and very important revisionist work on the Kennedy assassination, there was a great “rush to judgment” and a frantic desire on the part of the official establishment to completely bury not only the murdered President, but also any questions his killing might
 Those who question the official chronicle have been severely hampered by the fact that all the records, documents, interviews, and other evidentiary material are securely under governmental custody and control .
 Kennedy 12 is beyond the belief of any reasonable person to think that an official agency would release to the public any material that would bring the official judgment into question .
 This is not only institutional maintenance but also, all things in evidence now considered, a frantic effort at self-preservation . This is all things that are now considered now considered considered, an attempt to protect the country .
 Not all documents, however, lie under government control, and there exist reports that do not only question the Warren Report’s findings but are also of such a nature as to discredit it .
 Robert Trumbull Crowley was once Deputy Director for Operations for the Central Intelligence Agency . Crowley's personal files lay for years in the personal files of Robert . Crowley, a former CIA Director, were found in his personal files .
 Crowley, who had authored books on Soviet intelligence, died in October of 2000 after a long illness . Crowley had authored several books on the Soviet intelligence .
 When Crowley retired from the CIA in the 1980s, he took a significant quantity of important historical documents with him . Crowley gave a number of these documents to various historians with whom he occasionally cooperated .
 The Defense Intelligence Agency published a paper in 1978 as a commentary on Soviet intelligence evaluations of the Kennedy assassination . The paper was prepared as part of a report on the assassination .
 Defense Intelligence Agency specializes in analysis of foreign military technical intelligence . Agency is a branch of the Department of Defense .
 This document was considered highly sensitive, for reasons that shall shortly become very evident, and its distribution was limited to a handful of copies with severely restricted circulation . The distribution of this document was severely restricted .
 Crowley had a copy of this explosive document because he had personal knowledge of the factors and personalities behind the assassination . Crowley had prior professional knowledge of information contained in the DIA secret paper .
 This book uses the official DIA Report and the “Operation ZIPPER’s” document as its framework . This book is based on the DIA report and Operation ZIPPER document .
 Crowley in the years between 1993 and 1996, and has dug deeply into the great body of literature on the assassination of J F Kennedy to flesh out what has proven to be a very ugly skeleton . Crowley in his new book, The Assassination of Kennedy, is published by Harper Collins,
 It is generally the custom for beginning writers to thank anyone and everyone even remotely connected with his book . Acknowledgments are generally a thank you to anyone who has read the book .
 Colonel Robert T Crowley of Washington, D.C., and his co-worker, Colonel William Corson, USMC, of Potomac, Maryland, for all of the very important advice and assistance they have rendered to the grateful author . The author would like to offer the most
 Also their friend and co-worker, Joe Trento of Front Royal, Virginia, for his valuable commentary and excellent advice, especially concerning the activities of James Jesus Angleton . Also a good friend and friend of the Angleton family .
 Recognition should be given on the author’s part for research into U.S. intelligence matters .
 Kennedy 16 Question of Character is one of the best revisionist views of the life and political career of John F Kennedy . Thomas Dale Scott’s work, Deep Politics and the Death of JFK 3 4 is a sensible and studied work on the backgrounds of Kennedy adversaries . Seymour Hersh
 Almost every book on the subject, regardless of how bizarre it might appear to the average reader, contains small nuggets of value to be mined by the thorough researcher .
 Los Angeles-based Ted Landreth has done prodigies investigating certain highly sensitive CIA operations inside the U.S. Landreth is a former CBS news director and documentary producer .
 Gerald Posner’s Case Closed is an excellent overview and defense of the official establishment point of view . Also, an important work is Gerald . Posner's Case Closed .
 That the American media lavishly praised it when it appeared in 1993 is a commentary on the objectivity of the media . The U.S. media lavished praise on the book when it was first published in 1993 .
 Mr Crowley became assistant deputy director for operations, the second in command in the clandestine directorate of operations . Mr Crowley is now the assistant deputy .
 He served in the Army in the Pacific during World War II . He retired from the Army Reserve in 1986 as a lieutenant colonel . He served as a major general in the military in the Philippines during WWII .
 Kennedy had memory problems, slipped into a state of chronic dementia from which he never recovered . Kennedy suffered from chronic dementia and never recovered from his condition .
 Before entering the hospital, Crowley, known in the CIA as the “Crow,” sent off two packets of documents from his extensive files to the author of this book with instructions to return the papers if he survived .
 After the operation, Crowley’s family said he would do no more writing and I was told to keep the papers and not to return them . Crowley's family said they would not return the papers to his family .
 Crowley was one of the most powerful men in the Central Intelligence Agency . Crowley was involved in most of the important CIA operations during his tenure .
 The DIA Report was a 1978 in-depth analysis of a Soviet intelligence report on the assassination of President John Kennedy . Among these papers was the above mentioned report .
 At one time, the Russians were held suspect in this act, and in the intervening years, their intelligence organs had been compiling data in refutation of this thesis . At one point, Russia was held suspect .
 Lee Oswald, the purported assassin, defected to the Soviet Union and married the niece of an MVD intelligence officer . Lee Oswald had defected from Russia to live in the U.S. and married his niece .
 Kennedy's Communist utterances made him a handy weapon with which to attack the Russians . Kennedy's 19 Communist utterments made him very handy weapon of attack .
 The DIA Report appears to be the first official analysis of the Kennedy assassination that does not follow the official line . It was signed by Army Colonel Vedder B Driscoll, chief of the Soviet Intelligence division .
 Many authors will applaud Driscoll’s DIA Report, others will reject it . Theories, opinions and arguments abound concerning the Kennedy assassination .
 Rejection or acceptance depends entirely on what an author may have previously published on the subject . Rejection of this article is based on the content of an article published on this article .
 The other surviving official paper, the already mentioned “Operation ZIPPER” document, will most likely cause an even more heated controversy . It consists merely of a brief listing of persons and agencies involved, decisions made, and events that took place during and after the preparation of Kennedy�
 The reader is given a unique view of the events in Dallas and Washington post-November 22, 1963 . The reader gives a unique look at the events that took place in Washington and Dallas .
 Kennedy 20 organized and instigated the act are clearly and decisively exposed, as are the techniques of the actual shooting, the nature of the weapons used, and the means by which the shooters escaped, the authors say . Kennedy 20 will be released on Friday at 8pm ET .
 These documents do not challenge the famous Warren Report that has been ridiculed by many and supported by few; they merely supersede it . These documents don't challenge the Warren Report, but supersede that .
 The fate of the shooters is also revealed; only one of them lived more than a month after Kennedy died . Only one of the men who shot Kennedy was killed survived .
 In this work, rather than present the endlessly chewed arguments of others to dazzle or bore the reader, the reports are presented in excerpt or in full with appropriate commentary . This work is an attempt to show that the world is not interested in engaging in a debate on the merits of
 The assassination itself is covered by a translation of the Soviet intelligence report, followed by pertinent and parallel excerpts from the official Warren Commission Report and the Defense Intelligence Agency analysis . The assassination is also covered by an analysis of the Warren Commission report .
 The Warren Commission Report basically covered the actual assassination and the subsequent murder of the alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald . The report was basically the result of the Warren Commission's findings .
 Both the Soviet and Driscoll Reports contain additional material not covered in the Warren Commission Report . Both reports were published in the Soviet Report and the Report of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy 22 alienated by its actions a good part of the world which at one time had been neutral in its opinion of America if not sympathetic .
 This is either an example of gross incompetence at best or connivance at worst . This was either a gross incompetence, or incompetence at worst, says CNN.com .
 The following chapters will consist of facsimile reproductions of the DIA’s translation of the Soviet intelligence study, of its own analysis, and of quoted excerpts of the official Warren Commission Report, followed by commentary . The Assassination will be followed by the commentary .
 Soviet Intelligence Report on Assassination of President KEffi to: Director . The document has been obtained from a fully re source and duly authenticated .
 This report is an analysis of the Soviet document and is done on a paragraph-by-paragraph basis . It is based on the contents of the document .
 Material in this analysis has been taken from a number of sources in the Appendix and is to be considered classified at the highest level . Nothing contained in this report may be disseminated to any individual without prior written permission of the Director .
 On 22 November, 1963, American President John Kennedy was shot and killed during a motor trip through the Texas city of Dallas .
 President was riding at the head of the procession in his official state car . He was seated in the right rear with his wife on his left side .
 Seated in front of him was the Governor of Texas and his wife, also on his left side . Seated on the left side of the aisle was the governor of Texas .
 The vehicle was an open car without side or top protection of any kind . It was not a car with any protection from top protection or side protection .
 There was a pilot car in front, about a hundred feet, and the President’s car was flanked by motorcycle outriders . Motorcycle riders were located two to a side roughly parallel with the rear wheels of the State car .
 The President and his party were driving at a speed of about 20 kilometers per hour through the built-up area of Dallas . The President greeted the people lining the streets along his route .
 Security was supplied by the Secret Service supplemented by local police . The Secret Service was also involved in the shooting .
 Dallas police on motorbikes were on both sides of the Presidential car but at the rear of it . Other agents were in cars following the Presidential vehicle . Dallas police were also following the vehicle .
 There was a pilot car in front of the President’s car but it was at some distance away .
 The cars then turned sharply to the right and then again to the left to go to the motorway leading to a meeting hall where the President was to speak at a dinner .
 It is considered very bad security for such an official drive to decrease its speed or to make unnecessary turnings or stops .
 Kennedy 28 and published in the Dallas newspapers before the arrival of the President and his party .
 After the last turning to the left, the cars passed a tall building on the right side of the street that was used as a warehouse for the storage of school books . The cars passed the tall building, which was used to store school books, as well .
 This building was six stories tall and had a number of workers assigned to it . This building had a large number of people assigned to each other .
 There were no official security people in this building, either on the roof or at the windows . The building is located in an apartment complex in Washington, D.C.
 Security agents were riding either in the Presidential car or in the following vehicles . All security agents were on board .
 As the President’s state car passed this building, some shots were heard . President's state car passes this building as it passes .
 The exact source and number of these shots was never entirely determined . The exact number and location of the shots were never entirely known .
 Some observers thought that the shots came from above and behind while others said the shots were from the front and to the right of the car . Many more observers in the area stated that the car was hit by the shots .
 There was a small area with a decorative building and some trees and bushes there and many saw unidentified people in this area . Unidentified people were seen in the area .
 Many people standing in front of the cars stated that shots came from behind them . Many people stood in the area to watch the cars said that shots were fired .
 When the first shots were fired, the President was seen to lean forward and clutch at his throat with both hands . The President leaned forward and clutched his throat when the first shot was fired .
 The Secret Service driver of the President’s state car slowed down the vehicle until it was almost stopped . Immediately when this happened, the Secret Service .
 This was a direct breach of their training which stated that in such events where firing occurred, the driver of the President’s car would immediately drive away as quickly as possible . The training was a clear breach of the training .
 At the same time as the first shot, there was a second one, this one from behind and above . At the time of the first one, a second shot was taken from behind .
 The bullet struck the Governor, sitting in front of the President and slightly to his right, in the right upper shoulder . Governor was struck by the bullet in the upper shoulder of the Governor .
 The bullet went downwards into the chest cavity, breaking ribs, striking his wrist and lodged in his left upper thigh . The bullet broke ribs, struck his wrist, and lodged into his chest cavity .
 Kennedy 29 shot initiated the action and this one appears to have hit the President in the throat . The President was hit by the 29th shot in the head .
 If so, it must have been fired from in front of the car, not behind it . It must have come from behind the car .
 The shell struck the President on the upper rear of the right side of his head, throwing him back and to the left . The shell obviously struck the president on the back of the head .
 Blood, pieces of skull and brains could be seen flying to the left where the motorbike police guard was struck with this material on his right side and on the right side of his motorbike . Also, at this time, blood and brains were seen flying from the left .
 The driver then began to increase his speed and the cars all went at increasing speed under the tunnel . Immediately after this final shot, the driver then increased his speed .
 The fatally injured President and the seriously injured Governor were very quickly taken to a nearby hospital for treatment . President and Governor were taken to nearby hospital .
 The President was declared as dead and his body was removed, by force, to an aircraft and flown to Washington . The body of the President was removed by force from the President's body .
 The badly wounded Governor was treated at the hospital for his wounds and survived . The Governor survived and was taken to a local hospital .
 A motorcycle police officer ran into the book building and up to the second floor in the company of the manager of the establishment . Within moments of the shots fired at the President, the officer ran inside the building . The incident occurred in Dallas .
 Oswald was later positively identified as one Lee Harvey Oswald, an employee of the book storage company . Oswald was a book storage employee at the time of the September 4, 1917, attack .
 Oswald was drinking a Coca-Cola and appeared to be entirely calm and collected . Oswald was not drinking anything but a Coke at the time of the attack .
 The elevator which moved freight and personnel between the floors was halted at the sixth floor and turned off . The elevator was turned off so that it could not be recalled to persons below wishing to use it .
 At 11:40m., CST, on Friday, November 22, 1963, President John F Kennedy, Mrs. Kennedy, and her husband were killed . The Warren Commission Report: At 11.40m. CST, Nov. 22, Kennedy was assassinated .
 President, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, and Gov. John B Connally, Jr. traveled to Texas 5 months before planned trip . Behind them was the first day of a Texas trip .
 President dedicated new research facilities at the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine in San Antonio . Vice President Lyndon B Johnson joined the party at the ceremony .
 Following a testimonial dinner in Houston for U.S. Representative Albert Thomas, the President flew to Fort Worth where he spent the night and spoke at a large breakfast .
 Planned for later that day were motorcade through downtown Dallas, a luncheon speech at the Trade Mart, and a flight to Austin where the President would attend a reception and speak at a Democratic fundraising dinner .
 The Secret Service was told on November 8 that 45 minutes had been allotted to a motorcade procession from Love Field to the site of a luncheon planned by Dallas business and civic leaders in honor of the President . Dallas business leaders planned to honor President Obama at a Dallas luncheon .
 Trade Mart was chosen as the luncheon site . After considering the facilities and security problems of the several buildings, it was chosen to choose the Trade Mart .
 The route was approved by the local host committee and White House representatives on November 18 and publicized in the local papers starting on November 19 .
 The motorcade left Main Street and passed the intersection of Elm and Houston Streets as it proceeded to the Trade Mart by way of the Stemmons Freeway . This advance publicity made it clear that the motorcade would leave Main Street .
 By midmoming of November 22, clearing skies in Dallas dispelled the threat of rain . President greeted crowds from his open limousine without the “bubbletop,” which was at that time a plastic shield furnishing protection only against inclement weather .
 Governor Connally was in front of the President, and Mrs. Connally, in the jump seats . President was also in the jumps seat .
 Agent William R Greer of the Secret Service was driving, and Agent Roy H Kellerman was sitting to his right . Agent Greer was driving and Agent Kellerman sat in the passenger seat .
 At the extreme west end of Main Street, the motorcade turned right on Houston Street and proceeded north for one block in order to make a left turn on Elm Street . Elm Street is the most direct and convenient approach to the Stemmons Freeway .
 The President's car which had been going north made a sharp turn toward the southwest onto Elm Street . The President’s car had been traveling north .
 Kennedy 32 gradual descent towards a railroad overpass under which the motorcade would proceed before reaching the Stemmons Freeway . Kennedy's motorcade was under the overpass when he died .
 Dealey Plaza is an open, landscaped area marking the western end of downtown Dallas . The President sat in the middle of the square with President Richard Nixon .
 A Secret Service agent riding in the motorcade radioed the Trade Mart that the President would arrive in 5 minutes . The president is scheduled to arrive at the end of the day . The President's motorcade is expected to arrive in the next five minutes .
 He appeared to stiffen momentarily and lurch slightly forward in his seat . He then stiffened slightly and appeared to lurch forward in the seat .
 A bullet had entered the base of the back of the neck slightly to the right of the spine . A bullet was found to have entered the body of the man at the base .
 It traveled downward and exited from the front of the neck, causing a nick in the left lower portion of the knot in the necktie .
 He started to turn toward the left and suddenly felt a blow on his back . He was hit by the blow . He said he felt the blow and turned to the left .
 The Governor had been hit by a bullet which entered at the extreme right side of his back at a point below his right armpit . The Governor was hit by the bullet which struck him in the head .
 The bullet traveled through his chest in a downward and forward direction . It exited below his right nipple, passed through his right wrist, which had been in his lap, and then caused a wound to his left thigh . The bullet also exited his right arm, which was in the lap,
 The force of the bullet’s impact appeared to spin the Governor to his right, and Mrs. Michelle Obama was hit by the bullet .
 Another bullet then struck President Kennedy in the rear portion of his head, causing a massive and fatal wound . President Kennedy was struck by a bullet that struck him in the back of the head .
 Baker was riding a two-wheeled motorcycle behind the last press car of the motorcade . Baker rode behind a press car behind a motorcycle . Baker is a veteran journalist and photographer .
 Baker stated later that the man did not seem to seem to be out of breath; he seemed calm . Baker stated that he was calm and that he did not appear to be breath . Baker said the man seemed calm and seemed calm during the incident .
 Oswald descended by stairway from the sixth floor to the second-floor lunchroom . The movements of the two elevators would have provided the other possible means of descent . Oswald's movements are consistent with those of the other elevators .
 Truly, accompanied by Baker, ran to the rear of the first floor . Truly was certain that both elevators, which occupy the same shaft, were on the fifth floor . When Truly, he ran to rear of first floor, he was certain .
 In the few seconds which elapsed while Baker and Truly ran from the first to the second floor, neither of these slow elevators could have descended from the fifth to second floor . Neither of the two elevators that ran to the fifth floor of the building could have reached the fifth .
 No elevator was at the second floor when they arrived there . Furthermore, there was no elevator at the end of the trip .
 Texas was considered to be a key state in the upcoming 1964 Presidential elections . The state was considered a key part of the 1964 Presidential election .
 The disqualification of over 100,000 Texas votes, in conjunction with the known fraudulent voting in Chicago in 1960, gave President Kennedy and his associates a slim margin of victory .
 The actual route of Kennedy’s drive through downtown Dallas was made known to the local press on Tuesday, November 19 . Kennedy's official route was made public on Tuesday .
 The sharp right turn from Main St. onto Houston and then the equally sharp left turn onto Elm was the only way to get to the on ramp to the Stemmons Freeway . The sharp turn from Houston to Elm was only way of getting to the freeway .
 A traffic divider on Main St. precluded the motorcade from taking the direct route from Houston to the Stemmons Freeway exit . The motorcade was forced to take a different route from the main street .
 He was unable to move himself into any kind of a defensive posture because he was wearing a restrictive body brace . He was wearing the brace to prevent him from attacking himself .
 The second shot came from above and behind the Presidential car . The bullet struck Texas Governor Connally in the upper right shoulder, passing through his chest and exiting sharply downwards into his left thigh .
 The third, and fatal shot, was also fired at the President from the right front and from a position slightly above the car . The President was killed by a single shot fired from the President's car .
 The bullet struck the President above the right ear, passed through the right rear quadrant of his head and exited towards the left . This bullet was fired from a .223 weapon, fired from the .223 .
 Pieces of the President’s skull and a large quantity of brain matter were blasted out of the car . Pieces of skull and brain matter was blasted out and to the left of the vehicle .
 The Kennedy 35 motorcycle outrider was positioned to the left rear of the Presidential car . The motorcyclist was an outrider for the President .
 The driver, SA Greer, slowed down the vehicle when shots were heard, in direct contravention of standing Secret Service regulations . Photographic evidence indicates that the driver slowed down when shots heard . The driver's actions are contrary to Secret Service rules .
 Reports that the initial hit on the President came from above and behind are false and misleading . President Obama's administration has been accused of being dishonest about the President's actions .
 The sudden decrease in velocity causes the mercury to literally explode the shell . When such a projectile enters a body, the sudden decrease of velocity causes it to explode . The mercury explodes when it enters the body .
 This type of projectile is designed to practically guarantee the death of the target . It is a method in extensive use by European assassination teams . The projectile was designed to kill the target in order to guarantee its death .
 The disappearance of Kennedy’s brain and related post mortem material from the United States National Archives was motivated by an official desire not to permit further testing which would certainly show the presence of mercury in the brain matter .
 Official statements that the fatal shot was fired from above and behind are totally incorrect and intended to mislead, say police officials . The shooting was not from above or behind, police say .
 Such a shot would have blasted the brain and blood matter forward and not to the left rear . Such a hit would have hit the brain, not the brain . Such an attack on the brain would have been a fatal blow to the head .
 photographic evidence indicates that after the fatal shot, the President was hurled towards his left, against his wife who was seated to his immediate left . Also, photographic evidence shows that after . the . President was . hurled towards . his left and against his . wife who is seated to . his
 The so-called “magic bullet’s theory, i.e. a relatively pristine, fired, Western Cartridge 6.6, is the theory . The theory is that the 6.5-barrere cartridge is fired with a pristine, bullet-freezing
 Mannlicher-Carcano projectile produced in evidence, is obviously an official attempt to justify its own thesis . Mannlicer-carcano projectile is obviously a government attempt to defend its own claims .
 Kennedy 36 President in the upper back swung up, exited his throat, gained altitude and then angled downwards through the body of Governor Connally, striking bone and passing through muscle mass and emerging in almost undamaged condition is a complete impossibility . Kennedy 36 president in upper back, swung up
 The bullet in question was obtained by firing the alleged assassination weapon into a container of water . The bullet was obtained from a bullet fired into water .
 Three other similar projectiles were recovered in similar undamaged condition . Three other such projectiles were also recovered .
 One of these was produced for official inspection and was claimed to have been found on Governor Connally’s stretcher at Parkland Hospital . One of the photos of Connally's stretcher were produced for an official inspection .
 As a goodly portion of the projectile was still in the Governor’s body (where much of it remained until his death some years later), this piece of purported evidence should be considered as nothing more than an official “plant” note .
 The main purpose of the Warren Commission was to firmly establish that a lone individual who had no accomplices had shot President Kennedy . The main, and only, purpose for the existence of the commission was to establish that the shooting was a lone man who shot Kennedy .
 Any evidence in existence at the time of the commission sat that furthered this thesis was used; any evidence that would refute their thesis was ignored . Any evidence that disproves this was ignored was ignored by the commission .
 Oswald, the lone individual with no accomplices, had to have shot the President, and Governor Connally, with a surplus Italian Army 6.5-mm Mannlicher-Carcano rifle equipped with a cheap telescopic sight . Oswald shot the president and governor of Texas with a
 The turned-down bolt handle was difficult to manipulate and the field of vision of the scope was so small as to virtually render it useless against a moving target . The scope is so small that it can be virtually useless against moving targets .
 Tests by numerous firearms experts were never able to duplicate the rate of fire or the alleged accuracy of the weapon purported to have been the sniper’s only weapon .
 If it hit a human being within a reasonable distance, it could inflict a fatal shot . While the muzzle velocity of the 6.5-mm round tip bullet was very low, nevertheless, the bullet could be fatal .
 The “magic bullet” thesis is a piece of impossible nonsense that nevertheless was eagerly accepted and promulgated by the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission is still shrilly supported by those members of the media who have a vested interest in doing so .
 The bullet planted on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital could never have hit or passed into anything other than a container of water . The bullet was planted on the stretcher on a hospital stretcher and placed in a container .
 Oswald was repeatedly led up and down very crowded corridors of the police headquarters with no thought of security . Oswald was taken to police headquarters in a very crowded area, police say . Oswald's interrogations were held in a crowded area of police headquarters .
 This is an obvious breach of elementary security that was noted at the time by reporters . This is not the first time this has been reported to be a breach of security .
 Oswald’s killer was seen and photographed in the crowds in the building . Oswald's killer may have been in the crowd at the time of the assassination .
 The American Marine defector entered the Soviet Union in October of 1959 . Lee Harvey Oswald entered the USSR in October 1959 . Oswald was the only American to defect from the United States to the USSR .
 Oswald indicated he wanted to “defect” and reside in the Soviet Union . Initially, Oswald was the object of some suspicion by Soviet intelligence authorities . Oswald died in August 1945 at the age of 50 .
 He was at first denied entrance, attempted suicide attempt and only discovered when he was more extensively interrogated by competent agents . He was in possession of material that potentially had a great intelligence value .
 Oswald was a U.S. Marine stationed at the Atsugi airfield in Japan . He had been connected with the Central Intelligence Agency’s U-2 intelligencegathering aircraft program and was in possession of technical manuals .
 The subject proved to be most cooperative and was certainly being truthful with Soviet authorities . A technical analysis of his documentation indicated that he was being truthful . He was the subject of a technical analysis and was most cooperative .
 As a direct result of analysis of the Oswald material, it became possible to intercept and shoot down a U2 aircraft flown by CIA employee Gary Powers . Powers was a CIA employee .
 Oswald was granted asylum in the Soviet Union and permitted to settle in Minsk under the supervision of the Ministry of the Interior . Oswald was allowed to settle there under supervision by the Interior Ministry .
 This was partially to reward him for his cooperation and also to remove him from the possible influence of U.S. authorities at the Embassy in Moscow . This was part of the plan to remove Mr. Snowden from the Russian Embassy in Russia .
 Oswald worked in a radio factory, was given a subsidized apartment in Minsk and kept under constant surveillance . Oswald was kept in constant surveillance by the Soviet Union .
 He was very pro-Russian, learned to speak and read the language, albeit not with native fluency, and behaved himself well in his new surroundings .
 Oswald was a known homosexual, but expressed an interest in women as well . Oswald was known for his casual romantic affairs with both men and women .
 Oswald became involved with Marina Nikolaevna Prusakova, the niece of a Minsk-based intelligence official . Oswald was married to her niece, who was a member of an intelligence official in Minsk .
 He wished to marry this woman who was attractive but cold and ambitious, he said . But he said she was 'cold and ambitious'
 She wished to leave the Soviet Union and emigrate to the U.S. for purely economic reasons . She wanted to move to the United States for economic reasons.
 Oswald began to speak more and more confidentially with his intelligence contacts in Minsk . Since his marriage to a Soviet citizen under his circumstances was often most difficult, Oswald began speaking more confidently with his contacts .
 He finally revealed that he was an agent for the U.S. Office of Naval Intelligence . He had been recruited by them to act as a conduit between their office and Soviet intelligence .
 Oswald repeatedly stated that the CIA was completely unaware of the removal of sensitive documents from their offices . Oswald said that the documents were removed from the CIA's offices .
 Oswald was unaware of the reasons for this operation but had been repeatedly assured that the mission was considered of great national importance . Oswald was assured that if he proved to be successful, he would be afforded additional and profitable future employment . If he was successful, Oswald would be able to continue his
 Oswald was considered to be a one-time operative and was expendable . Oswald was thought to be expendable, according to sources . Oswald died in August 1945 .
 His purpose was to establish a reputation as a pro-Russian individual who would then “defect” to the Soviet Union and pass over the U2 material . He would then "defect" to Russia and pass the material over .
 He did not seem to realize at the time he “defected” that once he had been permitted to live in the Soviet Union, he would be very difficult to return to America .
 He was being pressured by Prusakova to marry and then take her with him back to the U.S. Now, with his romantic, and very impractical, attachment to her, he is being pressured to marry .
 He became very emotional and difficult to deal with but finally made the suggestion that if he were allowed to marry and return to the United States, he would agree to work in reality for the Soviet Union . He eventually agreed to work for the Soviets .
 Oswald was of no further use to Soviet intelligence and might well be of some service while living in America . After referring this matter to higher authority, it was decided to accede to Oswald’s requests .
 Oswald's return was expedited by the Soviet authorities and the Americans who were informed, via a letter from Oswald, that he was in possession of intelligence material of value to them . Marriage was permitted and his return was also expedited .
 Oswald was given prepared information of such a nature as to impress U.S. intelligence . Oswald was permitted to contact intelligence officials in the American Embassy in Moscow in Moscow .
 He was permitted by the Americans to return to the United States with his new wife . He was then permitted to return home with his wife .
 Oswald no longer worked with the ONI because he was not able to further assist them in America . Oswald worked with ONI in the U.S. until he was no longer able to assist them . Oswald was killed by a bomb blast in September 1945 .
 He was viewed as dangerous because he had knowledge of the ONI theft and use of CIA documents . Besides, he was also considered dangerous because of his knowledge of ONI .
 Oswald then worked as a paid informant for the Federal Bureau of Investigation . He was contacted when he returned and requested his assistance with domestic surveillance against pro-Soviet groups .
 The former is nominally in charge of domestic counterintelligence and the latter of foreign intelligence . The two are nominally responsible for domestic and foreign intelligence, respectively .
 CIA has been fighting for power ever since the CIA was formed in 1947 . They have been battling for power since then for decades .
 Oswald has stated that the FBI was aware of this ONI-sponsored defection with stolen CIA U2 documents but this is not a proven matter . Oswald has also stated that he believes the FBI knew about the defection .
 Oswald was transferred to Dallas, Texas, by the FBI . He then secured a position at a firm which dealt in very secret photographic matters . Oswald worked for a photographic firm in Dallas .
 He was able to supply both the FBI and Soviet intelligence with identical data . He supplied the FBI with identical information .
 Oswald was paid by the FBI as an informant, according to FBI reports . FBI reports, kept secret, show clearly that Oswald was a paid informant . Oswald was an informant for the FBI .
 Oswald worked for Guy Bannister, a former FBI agent, in New Orleans, New Orleans . Oswald was in direct contact with FBI officials and worked for a former Cuban insurgent .
 Oswald was part of FBI surveillance of Cuban insurgents in New Orleans area . Oswald was a part of the FBI's surveillance of the Cuban insurgents .
 Oswald made a number of public appearances passing out pro-Castro leaflets in order to ingratiate himself with the insurgents . Oswald made the public appearances to pass out the leaflets . Oswald died in the arms of the Cuban rebels in August 1968 .
 At the FBI request, a local television station filmed Oswald passing out leaflets and had this film shown on local stations in order to enhance Oswald’s image .
 Oswald was sent to Dallas to observe and penetrate the Russian colony there . Oswald was then sent to the Dallas area to observe the colony .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was openly committed to Marxist ideology . He defected to the Soviet Union in 1959, and resided there until June of 1962 . He eventually returned to the United States with a Russian wife .
 Oswald’s diary he attempted suicide when he learned his application for citizenship had been denied . According to his diary, Oswald tried to kill himself after learning his application was denied . Oswald's diary says he tried suicide after being denied citizenship .
 Oswald studied the Russian language while in Atsugi, Japan, during his time in Japan . Oswald was an officer in his unit who was interested in Russian and used to "talk about it" with Oswald occasionally .
 Oswald was not told that he had been accepted as a resident of the Soviet Union until about January 4, 1960 . According to Oswald’s “Historic Diary” and the documents furnished to the Commission by the Soviet Government, Oswald not told of his status until January 4
 Once accepted as a resident alien in the Soviet Union, Oswald was given considerable benefits which ordinary Soviet citizens in his position in society did not have . Oswald was accepted into society as an alien .
 The Commission assumed that it is customary for Soviet intelligence agencies to keep defectors under surveillance during their residence in the Soviet Union .
 Oswald mentioned that the Soviet police questioned his neighbors occasionally . Oswald once mentioned that he had been questioned by Soviet police . Oswald also mentioned that his neighbors were questioned occasionally .
 Oswald recognized that the “Red Cross” subsidy had nothing to do with the well-known International Red Cross . In the notes he made during the return trip to the United States, Oswald said the subsidy had no connection to the Red Cross.
 Marina Oswald said she thought he was from one of the Baltic areas of her country, because of his accent . Oswald said that by the time she met him in March 1961 he spoke the language well enough so that at first she thought him was from Baltic .
 She stated that his only defects were that his grammar was sometimes incorrect and that his writing was never good . She also stated that he never wrote good writing .
 A foreigner living in Russia cannot marry without the permission of the Soviet Government . A foreigner in Russia can marry without permission from the Soviet government .
 Oswald arrived at the Embassy in Moscow, he met Richard E Snyder, the same person with whom he had dealt with in October of 1959 . When Oswald arrived in Moscow he met Snyder again .
 The American Embassy concluded that Oswald had not expatriated himself . Oswald's interview with Snyder on July 10, 1961, was recorded by the American Embassy .
 Oswald was given back his American passport, which he had surrendered in 1959 . Oswald had surrendered his passport to the U.S. in 1959, but it has since been returned to him .
 The document was due to expire in September 1961, however, and Oswald was informed that its renewal would depend upon the ultimate decision by the Department of State on his expatriation . Oswald was told that the renewal of the document would depend on the decision of the State Department .
 Marina Oswald was interviewed at the U.S. Embassy on July 11 . The steps necessary for her to obtain an American visa were begun . Marina Oswald will be able to apply for a visa in the United States .
 Oswald’s passport was ultimately renewed and permission for his wife to enter the United States was granted . In May 1962, after 15 months of dealing with the Embassy, Oswald's passport was renewed . Oswald's wife was also granted permission for entry to the U.S.
 Kennedy was in charge of his case at the time of the assassination when he was assassinated . Kennedy's lawyers have testified before the Commission .
 Oswald was not an informant or agent of the FBI, the FBI said . Oswald did not act in any other capacity for the FBI . Oswald was never an FBI agent or informant, FBI said in a statement .
 Oswald worked for Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall from October 1962 to April 1963 . Oswald's prior job references included references from the firm he worked for . Oswald was a photographer at Jaggar-Chile Stovall .
 Soviet commentary on Oswald is basically verified from both KGB and CIA sources . The Soviet commentary was basically verified by both CIA and KGB sources .
 Oswald was recruited by ONI for possible penetration of the very pervasive Japanese communist intelligence organization . ONI recruited Oswald to infiltrate the Japanese communist organization . Oswald's personnel files indicate that Oswald was initially recruited by the ONI .
 The CIA found it was easier to exploit their U2 surveillance of the Soviet Union as a political rather than an intelligence operation . Because of a shift in their policy, the CIA decided to exploit the U2 as political .
 Kennedy 48 Soviet Government created a situation that might have proven disastrous to the CIA continued functions . The situation might have proved disastrous to CIA continued operations .
 CIA documents show that as their very existence was dependent on a continuation of the Cold War . Any diminution of East-West hostility could easily lead to their down-sizing and, more important, to their loss of influence over the office of the President and foreign policy .
 CIA proposed to use their own U2 flights to create an increase in tension that could lead to a frustration of any detente that might result from a lessening of international tensions . It was proposed, according to top level CIA reports .
 It was initially thought that certain compromising documents could be prepared, sent to the CIA base at Atsugi, Japan, and then somehow leaked to the aggressive Japanese communists .
 It was decided that there was a strong possibility that the documents might not be forwarded to Soviet Russia and kept in Japan for use in the anti-West/ antiwar domestic campaigns . However, it was subsequently decided that it was decided not to send the documents to Russia .
 CIA personnel stationed at Atsugi conceived a plan to then arrange for select documents to be given directly to the Soviets via an American defector . The plan was then arranged for the Soviets to hand over select documents .
 CIA evaluation of Oswald convinced them that he would be the perfect defector . Oswald was the perfect man to defect from the Soviet Union . Oswald's defection was a success story for the CIA .
 Psychological profiles of Oswald convinced them that he was clever, pro-Marxist, a person of low self-esteem as manifested in his chronic anti-social attitudes coupled with homosexual behavior . Oswald was known for his anti-society attitudes and anti-gay behavior .
 Oswald was told that he was performing a “special, vitally important” mission for the ONI . Oswald would be given a very good paying official position when he “successfully returned” from the Soviet Union .
 CIA and ONI reports indicate that he was never expected to return to the U.S. after fulfilling his function of passing the desired documentation to the Soviet intelligence community . He was not expected to come back to the United States .
 The subsequent interception and shooting down by the Soviets of a U2 piloted by CIA agent Gary F Powers using the leaked CIA material was sufficient to wreck the projected Eisenhower/Khrushchev meetings and harden the Soviet leader’s attitude towards the West .
 Powers U2 was equipped with a delayed action self-destruct device, designed to be activated by the pilot upon bailing out . It should be noted that the pilot of the U2 did not use the device on purpose .
 This device was intended to destroy any classified surveillance material on the aircraft . The device was used to destroy classified surveillance materials on the plane .
 In the Powers aircraft, the device was later disclosed to have been altered to explode the moment the pilot activated it . The pilot activated the device .
 This would have resulted in the destruction of both the pilot and his aircraft . The pilot was killed in the crash, but his aircraft was not damaged .
 Oswald was considered to be unstable, hostile, intelligent and very frustrated . He was a potential danger to the CIA, unredacted personnel reports indicate . Oswald was thought to be hostile and unstable .
 Oswald became acquainted with George S DeMohrenschildt, a CIA operative . While in Dallas, Oswald became friends with CIA operative George S. S. O'Shavel . Oswald was a member of the Dallas CIA .
 DeMohrenschildt, a Balt, had family connections both in Poland and Russia . He worked for the German Ausland Abwehr and the SD during the Second World War .
 He “befriended” Oswald and eventually an intimate physical relationship developed between the two men . Oswald and Oswald had a physical relationship with each other . Oswald died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 This infuriated Marina Oswald and their already strained relationship grew even worse . Marina Oswald was fired from her job at the beginning of the year .
 Kennedy Kennedy 50 found poverty, two children and a sexually cold husband . Kennedy 50 and instead of finding poverty, he found poverty . Kennedy was married to a man who was sexually cold and sexually abusive . Kennedy found poverty and children in poverty .
 It was DeMohrenschildt’s responsibility to watch Oswald, to establish a strong inter-personal relationship with him and to learn what information, if any, Oswald might possess that could damage the CIA if it became known .
 The public must be satisfied that Oswald was Oswald was the assassin . The evidence was such that he would have been convicted at trial . Oswald did not have confederates who are still at large, the public should be satisfied, he says .
 Speculation about Oswald’s motivation ought to be cut off . We should have some basis for rebutting thought that this was a Communist conspiracy or (as Iron Curtain press is saying) a right-wing conspiracy .
 The matter has been handled thus far with neither dignity nor conviction . The matter was handled with neither dignity nor conviction, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I think this objective may be satisfied by making public as soon as possible a complete and thorough FBI report on Oswald and the assassination . "I think this . may . be satisfied with making public a complete . complete and accurate FBI report"
 He indicated the only way to stop it is to appoint a highlevel committee to evaluate my report and tell the House and Senate not to go ahead with the investigation . He then indicated that the best way of stopping the investigation would be to appoint the committee .
 The FBI was in sole charge of assembling evidence for the Warren Commission . Director Hoover had been committing himself on paper to express his firm determination that Oswald, and Oswald alone, was responsible for the assassination .
 This determination was reflected in a flood of teletypes from FBI headquarters to the agency offices in Dallas, New Orleans, Miami, and Chicago . The FBI was determined to crack down on the crime .
 All of the information was given to the local agent-in-charge who then forwarded it to Washington . Regardless of what information was uncovered by local agents, all of it had to be given to Washington.
 Kennedy 53 photographic and other forensic evidence for presentation to the waiting commission . Kennedy will be presented to waiting commission members . Kennedy is the first member of the Kennedy family to attend the commission .
 Any witness statements that contradicted the official version of events were excluded from this presentation . Witness statements were excluded . Photographs that might have contradicted the lone-assassin theory were also excluded .
 The Soviet intelligence report mentions the discovery of Oswald in the second floor employee’s lounge by a Dallas police officer immediately after the shooting . Oswald was found by a police officer in the lounge by an employee of the Dallas office .
 Oswald 'appeared to be very calm and certainly not out of breath as he would have been from running down four flights of steps only moments before' Oswald's body was found in the wreckage .
 He could not have used the building’s elevators to go from his work area on the sixth floor to the lunchroom . Persons unknown stopped one elevator on sixth floor and the other was on another on another floor .
 There were no elevators stopped on the second floor near the employee lunchroom . No elevators were stopped near the lunchroom at the time .
 He initially identified the rifle as a German Mauser, 7.65-millimeter weapon . He initially, and positively, identified the weapon as a Mauser .
 This is the so-called Argentine Mauser, which was manufactured by the Germans for the Argentine army . It was made for the Argentinian army and sold to the German army .
 The top of the receiver is clearly marked with the coat of arms of Argentina . Unlike later models of the Mauser, it has a straight bolt handle and the top of it is marked .
 Kennedy 54 Mauser had been offered as military surplus to the public for some years . The well built and easy to use weapon was easily available to collectors, gun shops, and hunters .
 Deputy Weitzman uses the 7.65-mm Argentine Mauser surplus rifle and 6.5-mm Italian Mannlicher-Carcano surplus rifle . The physical differences between the two rifles are very evident . Deputy Witzman has a professional background and could not mistake one for
 The immediate visual differences between the two weapons are very clear and obvious . The two weapons can be seen in the U.S. National Geographic Geographic Geographic .
 Mauser has a straight bolt handle and the Carcano has a turned-down bolt handle . The Mauser and Carcano have straight bolt handles . The Carcano and Mauser have turned down bolt handle handles .
 Weitzman was a gun dealer and both surplus weapons were very common in the trade at the time of the 15 G Posner . Posner, op. cit. , 270n. , . .
 The supporting comments by Posner attributed to government experts are obviously selfserving, like the majority of such statements found in the Warren Commission Report, and have absolutely no probative value whatsoever . Posner: "Supporting comments by government experts" are selfserving and have nothing to do with
 After the Mauser was turned in to local authorities, it suddenly was transformed into a Carcano rifle . It was one that allegedly had been purchased by Oswald using an alias .
 The Mauser vanished from the sight of living men but the Carcano was presented to the world as the murder weapon . The Carcano became a symbol of murder in the wake of World War II .
 The so-called “magic bullet” was certainly fired from the suspected Carcano but by whom, and when, is certainly not known . It is not known at this remove .
 Because of the pristine condition of the bullet, it is clearly evident that it had never, under any remote circumstances, been fired into or passed through a human body .
 Kennedy 56 evidence had to be such as to secure a conviction was certainly quickly and officially implemented . Kennedy was convicted of shooting Kennedy 56 . Kennedy 56 was sentenced to life in prison for his role in Kennedy's assassination .
 Oswald was very shortly, and most conveniently, dead, dead . All manner of innuendo, deliberate error, and patently manufactured evidence was put together into a pastiche that never needed to be examined and crossexamined in a court of law .
 Oswald had been tried and found publicly guilty in absentia, and in the event that there existed other, even more provable suspects, they were entirely safe in the knowledge that they had escaped whatever manipulated creativity had passed for the process of justice and were certainly well protected . Oswald was found
 The few works that support the findings of the Warren Commission contain a number of errors, which strongly indicate that their authors have done little research and have no genuine understanding of their subjects .
 This author shows an appalling lack of knowledge of the Soviet intelligence structure in the 1950s and 1960s, he writes .
 Soviet defector Nosenko was sent by the Soviet government to the U.S. immediately after the assassination to allay American fears that the Soviets had been involved with the Kennedy assassination via Oswald . Posner is referring to the false defector who was sent to the United States to
 He very obviously had no knowledge of the intelligence agencies he purported to have served . He was clearly not aware of the agencies he claimed to be part of .
 MVD was, at that time, the name of the Soviet secret police controlled by the State Security Committee . The MVD is now the Russian version of the MVD, which was founded in 1953 .
 The Warren Report and its supporters have attached a considerable amount of importance to the comments and very supportive testimony of Oswald’s Russian wife, Marina, Marina . Oswald's Russian wife Marina gave a supportive testimony to the Warren Report . Marina was married to Oswald in 1961 .
 Oswald was shot to death in the basement of the Dallas Police Department while he was being transferred to another jail . Oswald was the alleged assassin of the American President in Dallas, Texas .
 FBI Chief Hoover notified the authorities in Dallas that Oswald should be given special security . Oswald was given a special security detail on the day of the assassination . Oswald died November 22, 1963 .
 This killing was done in the presence of many armed police officers by a known criminal and associate of the American Mafia named Jack Rubenstein, or ‘Ruby” as he was also known . Rubenstein was also a member of the Mafia .
 Oswald was often taken by Dallas police out into the unguarded hallways of the building and in the presence of many persons unknown to the police . It should be noted here that suspect Oswald was very often taken out of Dallas police . Dallas police often took suspect Oswald out into ungu
 This is viewed as either an attempt to have Oswald killed or a very incompetent and stupid breach of basic security . This is seen as either a attempt to kill Oswald or an incompetent attempt to do so .
 The timing by “Ruby’s” entrance into the guarded basement was far too convenient to be accidental . The timing of his entrance into a guarded basement is not accidental .
 The method of shooting Oswald showed a completely professional approach . Also, the method of his shooting of Oswald showed an entirely professional approach, says CNN's John Sutter .
 “Ruby” raised his right hand with the revolver and fired upwards into Oswald’s body . Oswald was shot in the head by "Ruby" Oswald . Oswald's body was found in a pool of blood .
 “Ruby” pretended to be mentally disturbed, but his actions showed professional calculation to a degree . ‘Ruby’ also pretended to pretend to be a mentally disturbed .
 He died in prison of cancer in January of 1967 after an appeal from his sentence had been granted by the court judge . He was sentenced to life in prison .
 He was a professional criminal, had excellent connections with the Dallas police, had been involved with activities in Cuba and gun running into that country . Some evidence has been produced to show that he and Oswald had knowledge of each other .
 Oswald had homosexual activities prior to the assassination . One public witness firmly placed Oswald in “Ruby’s” club prior to assassination . Like Oswald, "Ruby” too had homosexuality .
 The use of a Chicago killer with local Mafia connections to kill Oswald is not surprising . In view of later developments and disclosures, the use of the killer was not surprising, he says .
 Stories of “Ruby’s” eccentricity were highlighted by American media to make it appear that he, like Oswald, was an eccentric, single individual who acted out of orders .
 As in the case of Oswald, there was never a proven motive for “Ruby’s” acts . There was also no motive for "Ruby's" acts .
 Oswald had no reason whatsoever to shoot the President, had never committed any proven acts of violence . Oswald was never involved in any of the most violent acts in American history .
 Kennedy 61 have shot at a fascist General, it was badly presented and in all probability was a “red herring” to “prove’t Oswald’s desire to shoot people,” according to the author . Oswald shot at fascist General in all
 “Ruby’s” attempt to defend himself by claiming to be mad. This statement appears to be an obvious part of ‘Ruby”'s attempt to . defend himself . This statement is an obvious attempt to explain why he is mad .
 Since Oswald was not involved in the killing of the President, continued interrogation of him leading to a court trial would have exposed the weakness of the U.S. government’s attempt to blame him for the crime .
 Silencing Oswald promptly was a matter of serious importance for the actual killers . The actual killers were responsible for the deaths of Oswald, the author says .
 Oswald could not be convicted with the evidence at hand, his removal was vital . Oswald's removal from the country was vital to ensure his conviction . Oswald was not convicted of any crime, but the evidence was there .
 FBI Director J Edgar Hoover sent a message to Chief Curry on November 22, urging that Oswald be afforded the utmost security . Hoover was concerned that there might be an attempt on Oswald’s life .
 Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald at 11:21m., on Sunday, November 24, 1963, shortly after Ruby entered the basement of the Dallas Police Department . Ruby shot Oswald in the head at 11.21m.
 Ruby had acted on behalf of members of a conspiracy who had planned the killing of President Kennedy and wanted to silence Oswald . Almost immediately, speculation arose that Ruby was trying to protect Oswald from Oswald . Ruby was killed in November 1963 .
 Ruby is known to have made his way, by about 11:30m., to the third floor of the Dallas Police Department where reporters were congregated near the homicide bureau . Ruby is believed to have been in the Dallas police department for about two hours .
 Ruby leaves his apartment a few minutes before 11 a.m. leaving with his dachshund, Sheba, and a portable radio . Ruby's Sunday morning trip to police department was a surprise visit to the police department .
 The Kennedy 63 revolver was a revolver which he routinely carried in a bank moneybag in the trunk of his car . He routinely carried it in bank moneybags in the bank money bag in his car.
 Ruby parked his car in a lot directly across the street from the Western Union office . Ruby parked in the lot across the road from the office of Western Union . Ruby says he parked in lot in lot across a lot .
 He apparently placed his keys and billfold in the trunk of the car, then locked the trunk, which contained approximately $ 1,000 in cash, and placed the trunk key in the glove compartment . The trunk key was placed in the car's glove compartment, police say .
 Ruby fired one fatal shot into Oswald’s abdomen before being subdued by a rush of police officers . Ruby shot Oswald as Oswald emerged from a basement office at approximately 11:21m . Ruby moved quickly forward and, without speaking, fired a fatal shot at Oswald .
 The assembly of more than 70 police officers, some armed with tear gas, and the contemplated use of an armored truck, appear to have been designed primarily to repel an attempt of a mob to seize the prisoner .
 If Oswald had been tried for his murders of November 22, the effects of the news policy pursued by the Dallas authorities would have proven harmful to the prosecution and the defense . Oswald's trial would have proved harmful both to the defense and prosecution .
 The misinformation reported after the shootings might have been used by the defense to cast doubt on the reliability of the State’s entire case .
 Jack Ruby's use of Jack Ruby to kill Oswald has been explained by the official reports as an aberrant act on the part of an emotional man under the influence of drugs . The use of Ruby has been described as an 'abnormal act' by the authorities .
 The Warren Commission carefully overlooked Ruby’s wellknown ties to the Chicago mob as well as his connections with mob elements in Cuba . Ruby's connections to the Cuban mob were overlooked by the commission .
 Ruby’s early Chicago connections with the mob are certainly well documented in Chicago police files . Ruby's early ties to the mob in Chicago have been documented in police files.
 Ruby’s close connection with many members of the Dallas police infrastructure coupled with a very strong motivation to remove Oswald prior to any appointment of an attorney to represent him or any possible revelations Oswald might make about his probably knowledge of the actual assassins made Ruby an excellent agent of choice .
 If Oswald had gained the relative security of the County Jail and lawyers has been appointed for him, it would have proven much more difficult to remove him . Oswald would have been able to get a lawyer appointed to take him from jail .
 Ruby had been advised by his Chicago mob connections that his killing of Oswald would “make him a great hero” in the eyes of the American public . Ruby was advised by others involved in the assassination that he could never be tried or convicted in any American court of law .
 Kennedy 65 shocked to find that he was to be tried on a capital charge . Kennedy was shocked to discover that he had been charged with a capital offence .
 Ruby began to disintegrate while in custody and mixed fact and fiction in a way as to convince possible assassins that he was not only incompetent but would not reveal his small knowledge of the motives behind the removal of Oswald . Ruby was never very stable, and mixed facts and fiction as well as
 Chief Justice Warren abruptly declared that he was not interested in hearing any of Ruby's claims . Ruby strongly intimated that he had additional information to disclose and wanted to go to the safety of Washington .
 A polygraph given to Ruby concerning his denial of knowing Oswald and only attempting to kill him as a last minute impulse proved unsatisfactory and could not be used to support the Commission’s thesis . Ruby was found guilty of attempting to shoot Oswald in the head with a rifle .
 During his final illness, while in Parkland Hospital, Ruby was under heavy sedation and kept well supervised to prevent any death bed confessions or inopportune chance remarks to hospital attendants . Ruby's final illness was in a state of severe sedation .
 An unconfirmed report from a usually reliable source states that Ruby was given an injection of air with a syringe which produced an embolism that killed him . Ruby was reportedly killed by an air injection .
 Ruby had metastated cancer of the brain and lungs which somehow had escaped any detection during his incarceration in Dallas . Ruby was later found to have cancer in his lungs, brain and brain .
 It is alleged that this terminal cancer situation had existed for over a year without manifesting any serious symptoms to the Dallas medical authorities . It was further alleged that the terminal cancer had existed in the Dallas area for more than a year .
 Ruby’s fatal blood clot was the result of outside assistance . This is viewed by non-governmental oncologists as highly unbelievable . Ruby's blood clot appears to have been caused by a blood clot .
 Oswald's killing of Oswald two days later brought into question the official explanation of the assassination . Author’s comments were made in the wake of the November 22, 1963 assassination .
 The Katzenbach letter is an excellent indication of which way the official wind was blowing . It is a good indication that the government is trying to keep the public in the dark .
 Director Hoover wrote similar letters, one to President Johnson about cutting off debate and clearly defining Oswald as the sole assassin . Hoover also wrote a similar letter to the president about the assassination of Oswald . Hoover wrote another letter to President LBJ, one of which said Oswald was the only assassin .
 In point of fact, Lee Harvey Oswald had nothing whatsoever to do with the assassination of John Kennedy . Oswald was not involved in John Kennedy's assassination .
 Oswald was a convenient scapegoat for the murder and was set up for it by the real killers . Oswald was the real killer and the real culprits set him up for the real murder .
 If there had been a conspiracy, the FBI would certainly have discovered it, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . The FBI would have found it, he says .
 Hoover wrote several documents for President Johnson . Hoover was Hoover's secretary of the White House . Hoover died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 It was suicide for Hoover to acknowledge that an FBI paid informant had killed the President of the U.S. President .
 Hoover found his position very insecure during the Kennedy administration . Hoover had found his job very insecure . Hoover found himself in a very insecure position at the beginning of his presidency .
 The President’s brother, Robert Kennedy, had been Attorney General and detested Hoover, calling him “an old faggot” and trying to find some way to leverage him out of his office . Hoover was the Attorney General of the time .
 Hoover had files on all the important personalities in Washington, including the President and members of his family, that kept him in office . Hoover was only the fact that Hoover had enormous files on Washington's most important personalities .
 There was a story that the fellow had been in Rubenstein’s nightclub but it has not been confirmed . The fellow knew all of the police officers in the white light district; let them come in and get food and liquor, etc.; and that is how I think he got
 The bitter animosity between the Attorney General and the Director of the FBI has been well covered in a number of works . Rubenstein pressed the pistol against Oswald’s stomach; that neither officer on either side made any effort to grab Rubenstein .
 The answers are to be found in both the Soviet intelligence report and the DIA commentary . The answers to the question are found in the report and a commentary by the intelligence agency .
 Additional answers can be found in current FBI and CIA files, but as these are not available for public viewing, nor are ever likely to be .
 A very complex series of theories, postulations, and presentations may simply be reduced to a very common denominator . A complex set of theories can be reduced simply to a simple common denial deniability .
 By not multiplying entities beyond necessity, the truth quickly becomes evident to the investigator . The truth is quickly evident in the eyes of the investigator, the investigator says .
 Cutting away the concealing jungle growth brings the stalking tiger into full view . Cutting away from the hideaway jungle growth shows the tiger in full view of the beast .
 As the Warren Commission Report obviously has nothing to say about any reasonable suspects other than Lee Harvey Oswald and his friends, its comments are not included in the final chapters of the drama . The Warren Commission report has no comment on the suspects .
 Kennedy Report to learn how to conceal their mistakes in a matrix of literary and historical nonsense . Kennedy 69 Report: Learn how to hide their mistakes .
 The Brothers Grimm with their classic fairy tales were doubtlessly the first governmental spin doctors, but then, no one ever was expected to take them seriously .
 A very large number of published books about the assassination have appeared since the year 1963 . A number of books have been published since then .
 They represent the views of obsessed people and twist information only to suit the author’s beliefs . The views of these obsessed people are only to be revealed .
 American gangsters killed the President because his brother, the American Attorney General, was persecuting them . Cuban refugees felt that Mr Kennedy had deserted their cause of ousting Cuban chief of state Castro . Various American power groups such as the capitalist business owners, fascist political groups, racists, racists
 American officials have not only made no effort to silence these writers but in many cases have encouraged them . U.S. officials have also encouraged them to continue writing, despite efforts to silence them, the author says .
 The government feels, as numerous confidential reports indicate, that the more lunatic books appear, the better . Government feels, reports show, that it feels the more 'lunatic books' come out .
 Oswald’s “Communist/Marxist” appearance was used to suggest that the assassination was of a Soviet origin . It was initially of great concern to our government that individuals inside the U.S. government were using Oswald's appearance to suggest a Soviet origins .
 Oswald was not carrying out any Soviet designs, according to the Kennedy family . Kennedy family supplied material to Kennedy 72 and supplied material showing Oswald had not been carrying out Soviet designs . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 False defectors were used to convince the Americans that Oswald was considered a lunatic by the Soviet Union, and had not been connected with the Soviet intelligence apparatus in any way . Also, false defectors convinced the U.S. that Oswald had no connection to the intelligence apparatus .
 It was imperative to disassociate the Soviet Union with the theory that Oswald, an American intelligence operative, had been in collusion with them concerning the assassination . He was, of course, connected, but it was imperative that he was not .
 Nosenko, a provable member of Soviet intelligence, was given a scenario that matched so closely the personal attitudes of Mr Hoover of the FBI that this scenario was then officially supported by Mr Hoover and his bureau . The false defector was then presented to the FBI .
 Nosenko has been accepted as a legitimate defector with valuable information on Oswald . Angleton of the CIA at once suspected his real mission and subjected him to intense interrogation .
 Angleton was forced to resign his post as chief of counter intelligence . Because of this business, Angleton resigned from his post . Angleton is forced to step down from his job .
 "This has been considered a most fortunate byproduct of the controversy," says CNN's Mark Whitaker . Whitaker: "This is not the first time I've seen this kind of thing."
 FBI accepted legitimacy of Nosenko and his material precisely because it suited them to do so . FBI has accepted the legitimacy of his material because it suits them, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The FBI accepted his legitimacy because it was convenient for them .
 It was also later the official position of the CIA because the issue dealt specifically with the involvement of Oswald, a private party, and the organs of Soviet intelligence . The issue was later the issue because of the involvement between Oswald and the Soviets .
 The concern of Soviet intelligence and government agencies about any possible connection between defector Oswald and themselves is entirely understandable . The concern over any connection between Oswald and the defector was entirely understandable.
 It was never seriously believed by any competent agency in the United States that the Soviet Union had any part in the assassination of Kennedy . It was also known that Oswald was a government agent, working for various agencies in his lifetime .
 Because of the emotional attitudes in official Washington and indeed, throughout the entire nation immediately following the assassination, there was created a potentially dangerous international situation for the Soviets . The emotional attitudes created by the assassination created a potential dangerous situation .
 That both his Marxist attitudes and his sympathies and actions on behalf of the Cuban dictator were simulations was not known to the Warren Commission at the time of their activities .
 Nosenko was used to bolster efforts to convince the U.S. authorities that their government had nothing to do with the assassination of JFK .
 It is not known whether Nosenko was acting on orders or whether he was allowed access to created documentation . It is unclear if he was given information by the KGB and allowed to defect .
 A great deal of internal concern was expressed upon the Nosenko’s purported defection by Soviet officials but this is viewed at merely an attempt, and a successful one, to lend substance to his importance .
 James Angleton's attitude towards Nosenko is a commentary on the duality of his nature . Angleton’s attitude towards the Nosenkos is a . commentary on his duality .
 The death of President Kennedy was, on the surface at least, a straightforward act . The Soviet Union had nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination . President Kennedy’s death was a simple act .
 The shooting itself was photographed (and subsequently, the FBI seized a number of these pictures and none of them have ever been seen again) The famous Zapruder motion picture has been viewed by many people .
 Oswald's murder of Oswald two days later by a petty criminal in a heavily guarded police facility clearly sowed the seeds of the following cloud of controversy and doubt that has surrounded this act . Oswald was shot in the head by a police officer in the early hours of August 18, 1918 .
 The hastily cobbled together Warren Report was of such a nature as to raise far more questions than it answered . The attempts on the part of establishment supporters to validate it merely lend credence to the suspicions of growing legions of doubters .
 When the establishment formulates an official version of an important incident, this version is strongly supported by not only the establishment itself, but by sections of the media and academia that are beholden to them . This version of the events in the U.S. is strongly backed by the establishment
 Views that are in opposition to the establishment are either ignored or trivialized . Anyone who entertains, or even more important, presents for public consumption, is not entertained . Views that oppose establishment are ignored, trivialized.
 The implication is that anyone who questions the Warren Report is merely a gadfly amateur, protected under the First Amendment, but, of course, just another eccentric . Anyone who questions Warren Report should be protected under First Amendment law .
 The official version of this event is always given the most positive adjectives in media comment . Anything that would negate the official version is always termed ‘conspiracy theory’ and generally dismissed as being the product of a disordered mind and not having been proven .
 There have been, of course, no other documents available to the public other than the ones under governmental control . The absence of these documents has powerfully strengthened the establishment position .
 The formula for negating that position is already well in place . Should any documents appear that would seriously question that position, it's already well-established .
 Proof would be demanded, and if it were forthcoming, it would be rejected . Proof would not be forthcoming, and would be refused . Proof is demanded .
 The motives of the supporters of the government’s thesis and their methods will be discussed in a separate chapter . Kennedy 76 .
 There is no question that President John F Kennedy was murdered in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963 . The alternative theory is that he was killed in Dallas . The Alternative Theory is that Kennedy was killed by a sniper sniper .
 There is a question of whether the official government report is accurate . There is also a question about whether the government report was accurate .
 There is a further question as to whether this report is a deliberate attempt to confuse and hide what might actually have happened . There is also a question whether the report is an attempt to hide what actually happened .
 These are all questions that will hopefully be fully addressed in the following pages . But certainty is always illusion, and, contrary to the title of Posner's book, cases of such complexity are never closed .
 Most of the groups and individuals who disliked and hated John Kennedy did not have the means or ability to terminate his presidency . Most of them possessed neither the means nor the ability to do so . John Kennedy's presidency was a failure to end .
 Robert Kennedy, the President’s brother, was conducting a serious campaign against organized crime . At the time of the assassination, Robert Kennedy was conducting an anti-organized crime campaign .
 He was doing so at the request of his father, Joseph P Kennedy, the former Ambassador to Great Britain, Joseph Kennedy . Kennedy was the son of multimillionaire and former no. no no. ambassador to Great . Britain .
 The Mafia, most especially the Chicago branch of that confederation, was enraged at these attacks on them . The Mafia was enraged by these attacks . The Chicago branch was enraged .
 They felt that because the “Ambassador” (as he liked to be called) had openly solicited their active assistance for the candidacy of his son, John, during the presidential campaign of 1960, attacks by the Kennedy administration on them were not in order . They felt .
 Joseph Kennedy had agreed with Joseph Kennedy to work in conjunction with the Chicago political machine, under the capable hands of Mayor Richard Daley, to secure blocks of vital votes for John F Kennedy . They had agreed to work with Joseph to secure vital votes .
 In Chicago it is still said that in 1960, people voted early and often . In 1960, it was said in Chicago it was still said to be the time to vote early in 1960 .
 So great was the enthusiasm for Kennedy victory that even the dead were said to have voted, again, early and often . The enthusiasm for the Kennedy victory was said to be so great that the dead voted again and often, the dead .
 The presence of Texas Senator Lyndon Johnson on the ticket as Vice President somehow secured the negation of over 100,000 votes in Texas . This dubious act, coupled with the successes in Chicago, secured Kennedy’s election but by the slimmest of margins .
 The quid pro quo stated in the beginning, and fully expected to be operable by the Chicago group, was that the ongoing prosecution of Teamsters’ Union President James R Hoffa by the government be halted . The Chicago group wanted the prosecution of Hoffa halted .
 Organized crime had been making effective use of Teamsters’ Union’s enormous pension fund to build casinos in Las Vegas . Hoffa was considered to be more than friendly, and very useful, to their business projects .
 By accepting the aid of Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana in the election, it was generally, and not unreasonably, felt by this individual that his terms had been accepted .
 John Kennedy had been elected with the Chicago mob’s vital support, and the actions against Hoffa therefore would cease . John Kennedy was elected with John Kennedy's vital support . Hoffa's actions against him would cease, and therefore therefore cease .
 During Prohibition, the elder Kennedy had been involved in the importation and sale of liquor that had been banned in the U.S. During Prohibition he had been deeply involved in importing and selling liquor that was banned .
 Joe Kennedy had formed a partnership with gang leader A1 Capone during this period . This activity was the real basis for the large Kennedy fortune .
 There was an incident in which Kennedy attempted to cheat Capone over a large shipment of illegally imported liquor . Capone threatened to kill the future ambassador when Kennedy tried to cheat him .
 The senior Kennedy, it is known, was heavily involved with rumrunning during the Prohibition era . He had extensive mob connections and had extensive rumrunning connections .
 He was closely associated with Al Capone, mob boss in Chicago and had a falling out with him over an allegedly hijacked liquor shipment . He had fallen out with Capone over a shipment of liquor .
 Capone had threatened Kennedy’s life over this and Kennedy had to pay off the mob to nullify a murder contract . Capone, Chicago police records indicate, had threatened Capone's life over the threat .
 The “Ambassador” was a man who never forgot and never forgave, and when his son was safely in the White House, he demanded that the new President appoint his younger brother as the Attorney General of 30 . See footnote 25 .
 Robert Kennedy had been slated for a less important post in the new administration, but Joe Kennedy demanded it, and when he demanded, he was obeyed . Robert Kennedy was forced to take the post at the Pentagon .
 The children of Joseph Kennedy were completely under the influence and certainly the domination of their ferocious father . The children did as they were told, even if they occupied the Oval Office .
 Bobby Kennedy instituted a reign of terror against organized crime in general and specifically the Chicago branch . Bobby Kennedy became Attorney General, on his father’s instructions, in Chicago .
 The targets of this vengeance must have viewed these renewed and greatly intensified attacks on themselves as a gross breach of faith and a betrayal by a long-time business associate . They must have seen these renewed attacks as an attack on themselves .
 The Mafia certainly had the means of assassinating someone, although perhaps not the President of the U.S. The Mafia had the motivation to kill someone, perhaps not President . The Mafia's motivation was the motivation for the assassination of President John Kennedy .
 In fact, they did play a significant part in the plot but not as a prime mover, only as a very willing and able subcontractor . The project was a major success in the United States, but not a major project .
 Well organized, intelligent, and ruthless as they may be, this segment of the American business community did not achieve its position in American society because they were stupid . The U.S. business community is not stupid, it is well organized and ruthless, but well organized .
 Kennedy was not caught before or after the act, the reprisals would have been swift and deadly . Kennedy: "If you were caught before and after, you could have been killed"
 It is known now that the American gangsters had very close relations with the Central Intelligence Agency . It is also known that the U.S. gangsters were close allies with the CIA . Gangsters had a very close relationship with the Intelligence Agency.
 The relationship began during the war when the American OSS made connections with the Sicilian members of the American gangs in order to assist them against the fascists . This relationship was formed during the American Civil War .
 These gangster contacts were later utilized by the CIA for its own ends . The CIA used the contacts to gain access to gangsters in order to obtain information .
 The connections of Angleton, Chief of Counter Intelligence for the CIA with elements of the mob are well known in intelligence circles . Angleton's connections with the mob is well known .
 Angleton worked closely with the Sicilian and Naples mobs in 1944 onwards as part of his duties for the OSS 46 . Angleton was involved in the Italian and Sicilian mobs in the early years of the war .
 The American mob is one of the major pieces on the chessboard but there are others to consider . DIA analysis: The mob is a key piece in the U.S. national security .
 Kennedy 83 and professional class Cubans fled to the protection of the U.S. The United States has been a source of Cuban refugees since the 1960s .
 Castro soon made his Marxist leanings very clear and by doing this, became an immediate player in the ongoing Cold War . Castro soon became a prominent figure in the Cold War and became a key figure .
 Some elements of the CIA actively assisted him in achieving power . Others began a campaign against him, using every means to remove him, including plotting his assassination .
 Castro nationalized American business holdings, forced out Mafia owners of Cuba’s very lucrative casino industry . He also forced out the Mafia owners in the lucrative gambling industry .
 The landing was met by Cuban regular military units under Castro’s command and was decisively crushed . The landing landed in Cuba was met with Cuban regular forces under Castro's command .
 Kennedy did not back up the commando units with armed support by U.S. military units . The fury of the rebel Cubans was intense . The Cuban commando teams were not armed with armed forces .
 More promises to liberate their country were made by the CIA, and the units were increased in size and armament . More promises were made to liberate the country .
 Kennedy 84 against Cuba led directly to the Cuban IT missile crisis of October 1962 . Kennedy's actions in 1962 led to a series of missile tests against Cuba that led to the crisis .
 The CIA’s commando raids convinced Nikita Khrushchev that he could threaten the United States with possible military reprisals while shoring up relations with its Western Hemisphere ally . The raids were the result of Kennedy's perceived weakness coupled with the CIA's commando missions .
 The risk of war diminished quickly as the result of a significant rapprochement between the two leaders . Kennedy proved to be far stronger than the Soviet leader had bargained for, and the risk was great .
 As a result of this rapprochement, Kennedy agreed to halt the incursions . Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba . Kennedy agreed the withdrawal of Soviet missiles .
 This demarche infuriated the volatile Cubans who felt they had been betrayed twice by the Kennedy administration in general and specifically by the President himself .
 Anti-Castro Cuban militants viewed Kennedy’s abandonment of their cause with great anger . Many members of these CIA-trained and led groups made calls for revenge on the President for his abandonment of them .
 FBI raids occurred shortly before the November Dallas visit . Cuban rage provided another entity that added to the list of those who wanted revenge on Kennedy .
 The third group is one that is only mentioned by most revisionist writers almost in passing . Yet of all of the possible suspects brought before the bar of public and historical inquiry, it had the strongest motive to remove John F Kennedy as President .
 This group is the Central Intelligence Agency, an entity that had close connections to both organized crime and the militant Cubans . This group had close ties to organized crime, and militant Cuban militants .
 In retrospect, the CIA had the clearest, most logical, and immediate reason for removing John F Kennedy from the Presidency . The CIA should have removed anyone privy to their instigation .
 The CIA has, since its inception in 1947, been accused of an unending catalog of instigating rebellions, civil wars, religious upheavations, and numerous other acts of terrorism throughout the world .
 The CIA recruited, trained, and armed Osama bin Laden and his terrorists . The CIA then turned on its creator with terrible results. Kennedy 86 .
 By these actions, the CIA has built up a reservoir of suspicion and hatred throughout the world, and these perceptions have had serious consequences for the American people . The CIA has been accused of creating an atmosphere of hatred in the world .
 In many cases, the sins of the fathers have indeed been visited upon their children . In many of these cases, many of the father's sins were visited upon his children .
 CIA organized, funded and armed groups of young Muslims to conduct guerrilla warfare in Afghanistan . In order to discomfit and disrupt the Soviet Union when that country occupied Afghanistan, the CIA organized and armed young Muslims .
 Russian military units were so badly mauled by the rebels that they eventually withdrew from Afghanistan, leaving the rebels in command of the country . The rebels are now in charge of the Afghan government .
 The rebels were left in control of an impoverished country with an obliterated infrastructure and with no support from their erstwhile friends . The rebels are left in . control of the impoverished country .
 "A strong sense of betrayal turned into animosity, then into hatred and acceptance of the belief that the United States was an evil entity," the author says . "I believe that the U.S. is the most evil entity in the world," she says .
 The Central Intelligence Agency was instituted by the National Security Act in 1947 . The agency was instituted in 1947 under the law known as the CIA .
 Truman used the CIA to keep the White House informed of foreign activities that could have an impact on the U.S. President Harry S Truman kept the CIA in the dark about foreign activities .
 They were, in fact, a presidential intelligence and information agency and nothing more than that . They were the president's presidential intelligence agency . The agency is now a government agency .
 With the expansion of the Cold War, the CIA started on a campaign of empire building that grew to enormous proportions . The CIA helped formulate and encourage the expansion, which they helped formulate .
 The CIA convinced the President and key members of his administration as well as the American Congress that the Central Intelligence Agency alone was able to combat the machinations of the evil Soviet Union, to preserve democracy, to maintain American economic superiority throughout the world .
 Their annual budget grew to astronomical proportions, and none of it was accounted for . The budget was not accounted for, and it was never fully accounted for.
 Anyone who questioned the actions of the CIA was immediately singled out for attack in the U.S. media as a suspect and unreliable person . Anyone questioning the CIA's actions was immediately attacked in the American media .
 Questions by legislators about CIA operations, even very benign operations, are met with a stony refusal of cooperation .
 The favorite CIA defense was to cite the concept of what they loved to call ‘National Security” to silence their critics . The defense was often cited as National Security to silence critics .
 They were trusted by the White House and, in the minds of many in Washington, became the vital and trusted shield of the U.S. The White House says they are a "vital, trusted shield"
 It alone makes determinations as to which nations are to be favored and which is to be punished, says the U.S. President .
 No nation is permitted to be a neutral; all have to be either in the U.S. camp or are its enemies . All nations must be in the United States camp or be its enemies, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Most often, the wishes of American business are paramount in the determination as to which nation will receive U.S. support and which will not . not only be denied this support but attacked . The wishes of business is paramount in determining which nations will receive United States support .
 It is the American CIA, not the Soviet Union, that had divided the world into two warring camps, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It is the CIA and not the . Soviet Union," he says .
 Like historical events, government bureaucracies are complex, diverse, and beyond simple understanding . Russian Intelligence study was published by the U.S. Department of State .
 The entity that had the greatest reason to remove John Kennedy from his office was divided and subdivided into many sections and branches, many of which operated as semi-independent entities, answerable in theory to their superiors .
 In the compartmentalization of an agency with a fanatic fascination with secrecy, the opportunities for indulgence in private actions were immense and, in almost every instance, entirely secure . The opportunities were "enormous" and "entirely secure"
 The Directorate of Science and Technology is also known as Clandestine Services . It is the Directorate of Management and Services . The Directorate also includes Operations, which is known as Operations .
 It was in the Directorate of Operations that the initial disaffection with the actions of President Kennedy first surfaced .
 In light of their wider discoveries of certain of Kennedy’s activities, the dissatisfaction had hardened into a resolve to remove him, or, as was said at the time, to “neutralize” him .
 To fully understand the dynamics of the Kennedy assassination, it is necessary to study both the President's actions and the CIA's reactions to them . The CIA's reaction to the assassination of the President was to blame for the assassination .
 A historical incident, for example the sinking of the RMS Titanic in 1912, is an excellent example of changing perspectives . The Titanic sinking is an example of a historical incident that is changing perspectives.
 There was the immediacy, and inaccuracy, of the initial newspaper reports . There was an immediacy of the first newspaper reports, but there was also inaccuracy of the reports .
 The shattered remains of the White Star's luxury liner were actually at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean . The liner was safe and on its way to Halifax with all saved .
 Initial reports and observations have historical importance by showing often-erroneous primary impressions . But it takes the passage of time, shifting policies, and extensive and objective investigation to show a matter in the round and with far greater accuracy .
 As in so many other cases, it was the personality, actions, and family background of John Kennedy that led to his death . John Kennedy's family background was the reason for his death, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It has emerged in the decades since his death that Kennedy was a man who enjoyed living on the edge . Kennedy was known for his willingness to risk his life and his life .
 The senior Kennedy was a ruthless controlling man who let nothing and no one stand in his way . He was ruthless controlling and ruthless, the senior Kennedy said .
 Joe Kennedy believed that he should have been destined for political and social greatness, but his treacherous and savage lifestyle effectively blocked his advance in the public arena . Joe Kennedy was pathologically ambitious, but he was never destined for greatness .
 Kennedy thought he could manipulate Franklin Roosevelt, but he was, in turn, used by the President who was far more skilled in Byzantine plottings than the bootlegger and stock market manipulator . JFK thought he was able to manipulate FDR, but the President was more skilled .
 Kennedy had been head of the Securities and Exchange Commission and performed outstandingly . But his predatory approach to all things he desired was such as to keep Roosevelt from using his genuine talents .
 President Roosevelt visited St. James in London to perform in a manner that infuriated him . Roosevelt was angered by the performance in which he performed .
 Norton, 1980, contains an excellent accounting of the relationship between FDR and his Ambassador to England . Norton, published in 1980, is an excellent account of FDR's relationship with the ambassador to England.
 Kennedy 91 stock market manipulations, dealing in foreign holdings, and using his inside connections to add to his already impressive holdings . Kennedy 91 stocks, dealing with foreign holdings .
 Roosevelt did everything possible to sabotage the joint program Roosevelt and Churchill were putting forward to involve the United States in Britain's war with Germany . He did not want the U.S. to get involved in the war with Britain .
 British intelligence spied on Kennedy, bugging his telephone and intercepting his correspondence . British intelligence passed on their findings to Churchill and Roosevelt .
 Kennedy effectively destroyed any hope he might have entertained that Roosevelt would support any Kennedy for high political office . Without realizing it, Kennedy had effectively killed any hope of Roosevelt supporting any Kennedy .
 His eldest son, Joe Jr., was killed in the war under circumstances that are still unknown and highly suspect . Joe Jr.'s death was under investigation, but circumstances remain unknown .
 Kennedy was planning to put this son forward for the high political offices he himself could never achieve . He then turned his attentions to the next eldest son Jack . Jack was the first son to be put forward for a high political office .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy was not a likely candidate for high political office . He was not likely to be a likely presidential candidate . Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 He was plagued with ill health, had aspirations to become a professional athlete, and was thoroughly under his father’s thumb . He was under the influence of his father .
 He also possessed a good sense of humor, considerable intelligence, youthful good looks, and the ability to make people like him . He was a good man, a good guy, and a good person .
 Many of the people who liked him were women, and for them, Kennedy had an insatiable appetite . Unfortunately for his image, many of his fans were women .
 Kennedy's voracious nature as to verge on the pathological and posed a terrible public relations threat to the occupant of the White House . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in Washington, D.C.
 His frenzied pursuit of sexual gratification left him and his younger brother in a position to be blackmailed . As well as having the potential to destroy his public reputation, his pursuit of sex gratification left the pair in a vulnerable position .
 If it had not been for the vaulting ambition of his father, it is doubtful if John F Kennedy would have achieved much more than an elevated position in business world .
 Kennedy's father oversaw his actions to a remarkable degree during his presidency . Only when the senior Kennedy had a stroke did his son begin to show signs of being his own man .
 Underneath his considerable charm, John F Kennedy was a ruthless individual who could move with great effect against his enemies when it proved necessary .
 It was the ruthless pragmatism learned from his father that eventually set in motion the forces that led directly to his assassination . It was a ruthless pragmism that eventually led to the assassination .
 Kennedy was a totally pragmatic politician . His pragmatism made him far more dangerous enemies than organized crime or Cuban activists .
 The President, a firm supporter of Josef Stalin and a strong left wing politics, mandated the OSS to render as much logistical support to the Soviet Union as possible .
 The Roosevelt administration was packed with Soviet agents who dedicated their existence to the unqualified support of the Communist State . Roosevelt was filled with agents dedicated to supporting the Communist state .
 Top presidential aide Harry Hopkins has been identified as a paid Soviet agent . Harry Dexter White, top advisor to Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Alger Hiss, senior official of the Department of State, David K Niles, senior presidential advisor, and many others .
 The Vice President was in complete sympathy with the aims of Stalin, and while he was not a paid agent, he was an agent of influence . He worked closely with the head of Soviet intelligence throughout and after the war .
 With the death of Roosevelt in April of 1945 and the elevation of Vice President Harry Truman to the presidency, the eager cooperation between Stalin’s agents and the United States came to an end .
 A number of its ultra-left wing former agents were posted to the United States Department of State to await a dignified separation from government service .
 Truman mandated the formation of a new intelligence-gathering agency in 1947 . The agency was established in 1947 after the war .
 This was to be called the Central Intelligence Agency and its sole purpose was to keep the President and his top officials current with global political intelligence . This was the CIA .
 Truman wished to prevent another Pearl Harbor from being launched on the United States . Military intelligence was in the hands of the respective services, but Truman wanted to prevent it .
 One of the training films shown to CIA recruits has this anti-Pearl Harbor message as its main theme . The films are shown to recruits at the CIA .
 The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States on September 11 are overwhelming evidence that an astronomical amount of taxpayer’s money was completely wasted .
 The vast sums voted by Congress and not subject to accounting under any circumstances might have been far better spent on constructive national programs . Kennedy 95 .
 The CIA was filled with former OSS personnel who found their new role confusing . The agency started out as a small agency under the direction of Rear Admiral Roscoe Hillenkoetter .
 Instead of giving powerful assistance to the Soviet Union, their new agency rapidly grew into an anti-Soviet entity . The agency quickly grew into a powerful anti-Russian entity .
 When Allen Welch Dulles joined the CIA in 1950, the agency was under the control of General Walter Bedell Smith, once Eisenhower’s Chief of Staff and later United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union .
 Dulles had been the OSS Chief of Station in neutral Switzerland . His officially praised activities there were nothing more than an intelligence disaster of the highest magnitude .
 Dulles, who always entertained a very high opinion of himself, attempted to penetrate the defenses of the German Reich and actually believed that he had done so with brilliant success . Dulles believed he had achieved a brilliant success in Germany .
 In truth, German counterintelligence had easily penetrated his organization and filled the complaisant Dulles with an incredible amount of highly destructive disinformation . Dulles was easily penetrated by the Germans, according to the author .
 Muller in question had once been the head of the German Gestapo who was recruited by the CIA after the war . Muller worked in Washington from 1948 onwards under the control of Robert Crowley . Muller had once worked for the CIA .
 This report was a complete fiction and was prepared solely to create a situation wherein the American military could legitimately increase its size . American business, in a slump after the end of the boom years of World War II, would once again gear up for a highly profitable wartime economy .
 The so-called Gehlen Report was brilliantly successful once it had been leaked to key members of Congress and the President . The report was a success once it was leaked to the President and Congress .
 This was the starting gun of a Cold War that ran on for over forty years and lofted the CIA into a position of supreme power in the ruling circles cn of the American government . The CIA was the CIA's most powerful ally in the Cold War .
 CIA grew from an informational 56 Cf. because of what they convinced the U.S. leadership was a mortal danger to the security of the United States . Because of what the CIA convinced the American leadership, the CIA grew to be an informational agency .
 Kennedy is a government agency with tens of thousands of employees and annual budget running into the billions . The agency has an annual budget of more than $1 billion .
 The CIA and U.S. government approved the use of the CIA to carry out the assassination of Americans . The CIA was responsible for the deaths of Osama Bin Laden and other Americans in the past .
 From modest quarters in a disused Washington hospital, the CIA later expanded into an enormous office complex in Langley, Virginia . The CIA later grew into a sprawling office complex with offices in Virginia .
 It now owns hundreds of ‘proprietary’ businesses, including air and shipping lines, publishing and weapons companies, think tanks, import and export companies .
 It controls hundreds of voluntary sources scattered throughout key parts of the U.S. and European private sectors . It also controls hundreds, if not thousands, of voluntary source sources .
 An interesting work on the Bay of Pigs was prepared by some of its leading participants . It was under Eisenhower that the CIA launched its clandestine warfare against the Marxist Cuban regime .
 It was run out of Pullach, a Munich suburb, by Colonel James Critchfield, an Army officer who worked for the CIA at that time .
 Agency warmly believed would terminate in a successful invasion of the Caribbean . Castro was the leader of the Cuban Communist Party in Cuba . Agency hoped for success in the invasion .
 The CIA, like the Bourbons, obviously forgot nothing and learned nothing from their past errors . If history can be said to be instructive, the CIA should have learned from its mistakes . The Bourbons are not the only ones to blame .
 In 1956, a CIA-instigated revolt broke out in Hungary, fueled by repeated CIA promises of U.S. military assistance . The revolt was fueled by promises of immediate United States military assistance if the occupants of that nation rose up against their Soviet occupiers .
 President Eisenhower refused to support the revolt with American military aid and it died in a bloodbath of Soviet military repression . The revolt was an initial success, but President Eisenhower quite sensibly refused .
 Eisenhower reasoned, "a few thousand dead Hungarians than hundreds of thousands of dead Americans" Eisenhower: "Better, a few thousand Hungarians die than a few thousands of Americans"
 The identical scenario was to be repeated in the so-called Bay of Pigs invasion in April of 1961 . The identical situation was planned for the same time in April 1961 .
 Kennedy, Eisenhower’s successor, had only been partially briefed by the CIA . He had given his conditional approval to the projected invasion by Cuban nationals .
 CIA had thoughtfully dispatched a boatload of Cuban rebels disguised as members of the regular Cuban armed forces to launch an attack on the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba . In order to prevent another Hungarian fiasco, the CIA dispatched the rebels to attack the United States naval
 Boats full of Cuban refugees were to be sunk on the high seas, aircraft hijacked, bombs detonated in American cities, an American military ship was to be blown up, and passenger aircraft destroyed in the air .
 At that time, the FBI was involved, at the request of the Attorney General, Robert Kennedy, in watching the clandestine activities of the CIA and its Alpha and Omega special commando groups, some of whom were in training .
 The American President was greatly concerned that continued and fully unauthorized paramilitary action against Cuba might upset the balance he had achieved in seeking peace with the Soviet Union . He was concerned that it might upset his peace with Russia .
 These joint plans, which consisted of acts of extreme provocation by American units against American property and citizens, were unknown to Kennedy . Kennedy was unaware of the joint plans . The joint plans were known to Kennedy, who was not aware of the plans .
 President discovered that Cuban insurgents were under the control of the CIA and with the support of the highest military leadership, he at once ordered a halt . The insurgents were launching military action against American naval bases .
 The JCS anticipated that the U.S. forces at the base would naturally return fire and call for military assistance . Russian Intelligence study found that the United States would respond naturally .
 This assistance, they reasoned, would guarantee full, and official, American military support of their venture . They reasoned that this assistance would guarantee official U.S. military support . This assistance would also guarantee official military support, they said .
 President Kennedy refused to support the CIA-organized landings at the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy did not anticipate that some unhelpful individual in their ranks would have informed Kennedy of their scheme .
 Instead of the Cuban people rising in joyous revolt against Castro, as the CIA pundits fondly believed, the evil Marxist dictator easily crushed the invasion and captured or killed all of the CIA’s troops .
 This was one of the major building blocks of the conspiracy to remove John Kennedy from office . John Kennedy's assassination was a major part of the plot to remove him from office.
 President learned the full scope of the CIA’s duplicity, he fired the beloved head of the . CIA, Allen Welch Dulles, as well as General Charles P Cabell and Richard E Bissell, Jr. The President also fired the CIA's Director of Clandestine Services
 This was another of the building blocks in the CIA’s growing fear of the Kennedy presidency . The CIA's fear of Kennedy was part of the CIA's growing fear .
 After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, the CIA continued their commando raids against Cuba and its ruler . The CIA continued to raid Cuba in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The attempts of the CIA and the JCS to remove Castro by assassination are also part of the official record . The CIA and JCS attempted to kill Castro by assassinating him .
 RIFLE show the connections between the CIA and the Chicago branch of the Mafia . These assassination plots show the connection between the two organizations .
 CIA demands plausible deniability on its part should one of their often bizarre plots suddenly come to the public attention . CIA has always been the case, but it has never been able to come clean .
 The Soviet KGB learned of these plots and Nikita Khrushchev became convinced that the United States planned to kill off one of his more prominent satellite leaders and invade his bastion of Western Hemisphere Marxism . The KGB learned that the U.S. was planning to kill one of Khrush
 Khrushchev began to clandestinely move Soviet troops and missiles into the tropical paradise with an eye to balancing the scales . In order to frustrate the United States in its ambitions and to protect his client .
 American, and most especially the CIA, attempts to destabilize a Communist state, could not be permitted by the Soviet leadership . U.S. would not be allowed by the Soviets to destabilise Cuba, i.Cuba .
 Castro was a most valuable client in that he provided an excellent base of intelligence and political operations in the U.S. hemisphere . Castro was an excellent client for the CIA, CIA director says .
 The CIA had been setting up its own ring of hostile states surrounding the Soviet Union . Cuba was viewed officially as a completely legitimate area of political expansion .
 Threats of invasion and physical actions against Cuba were viewed by the Chairman as threats against the Soviet Union itself . Threats were seen as a threat against the USSR itself .
 Soviet attempts to gain a strategic foothold in close proximity to the United States were intolerable and had to be countered with equal force . U.S. President George H.W. Bush was assassinated in September 1968 .
 At that time, the threat of major war was not only imminent but anticipated but anticipated . The threat of war in the U.S. was never considered serious .
 All out nuclear warfare between the U.S. and the Soviet Union was only barely averted and only at the last minute . In retrospect, all out nuclear war between the United States and the . Soviet Union only narrowly averted by the last .
 Kennedy ordered overflights of Cuba to verify Soviet missile positions . Blockaded the country and threatened to prevent further Soviet shipments of weaponry by force if necessary .
 In the end, common sense prevailed and the crisis ended peacefully . "Common sense on both sides prevailed" in the end of the crisis .
 The Soviets agreed to withdraw their weapons and the U.S. agreed to pull missiles from Turkey . The United States agreed to withdrawal its Jupiter missiles from the country .
 Kennedy agreed to halt armed commando raids against Cuba and abandon any attempt to physically invade Khrushchev’s ally . Kennedy also agreed to stop armed commandos attacking Cuba . Kennedy agreed also to stop any attempt at physically invading Cuba .
 The training and supply of these militant units was an excellent source of money that, again, did not need to be accounted for . The money was used to train and supply militants, but it was never reported .
 The termination of funding for the Cuban adventurers meant a serious diminution of the flow of money that the CIA found so comforting and useful . CIA found the money so comforting that it was so useful and useful.
 Kennedy ordered all CIA incursions and commando activities against Cuba to cease . As a result of his rapprochement with his opposite number in the Kremlin, Kennedy ordered a cease-fire .
 The American President ordered the FBI to investigate these matters and ordered the Director, Hoover, to report directly to him on his findings . These actions merely confirmed to certain high elements in the CIA that Kennedy had to be silenced . The actions merely confirm to certain . elements in . CIA that JFK
 Leadership of the CIA did indeed have what could well be considered as a thoroughly legitimate reason for their actions . Injured feelings and lost revenue aside, the decision was made by the CIA .
 One of the top Soviet intelligence agents in Washington at the time of the Bay of Pigs was Georgi N Bolshakov . Bolshkov was a top Soviet agent in Washington .
 Bolshakov was approached by Robert Kennedy’s press secretary, Edwin Guthman, shortly after the disastrous Bay of Pigs . Bolshakakov was a reporter for the Soviet TASS news agency . He worked for the Kennedy administration .
 From April of 1961 onward, the President of the United States, through his brother, the Attorney General, was in direct contact with Soviet Premier Khruschev . The President was effectively bypassing not only his Department of State but the CIA as well .
 The Soviets bypassed their own ambassador in this, and the two leaders kept in constant contact . The two leaders were able to reach out to each other in the 1960s .
 The purpose of this unofficial contact was to insure that neither party suffered from the actions of the other . Both men could be of mutual assistance to each other’s political careers without the danger of serious confrontations and possible conflict .
 Berlin wall was built in 1961 to prevent the flight of valuable East German professionals to the West . Berlin was bisected by the Berlin wall in August 1961 to stop the flow of valuable professionals from the East .
 Kennedy-Khruschev contacts continued on a regular basis at the very least until January of 1963 . Kennedy and Khruschev were known to be the closest allies of the Cold War .
 In August of 1962, James Jesus Angleton, Chief of Counterintelligence for the CIA, was informed from a very reliable Soviet source that highly secret top-level American intelligence information was coming into the hands of the Soviet leadership .
 Angleton was given several specific items of an extraordinarily sensitive, and accurate, nature then circulating in Moscow . Angleton had been given several items of a . extraordinarily sensitive . nature .
 Angleton started an intense search for the disastrous leak . Angleton was always inclined to a paranoid view of his profession, Angleton .
 The CIA was so large and those possessing knowledge of the secret material were so diverse in number that he found himself frustrated in his efforts to pinpoint the mole in his agency . The CIA is so large that he was frustrated in trying to pinpoint a mole .
 Robert Crowley suggested a possible means by which the leak could be identified . Crowley also suggested a way to identify the source of the leak .
 He knew that the leaked information was all contained in the regular CIA reports that were circulated in official Washington .
 Crowley suggested that each report be prepared with a different additive . Crowley suggests that the additive should be added to each report . Crowley: Each report is prepared with different additive. Crowley: "It's a good idea to use the additive to make the report more effective"
 The basic reports, he said, should all be the same but each one should contain an entirely different subject . Each report should contain a different subject, he added .
 This inclusion should be of such a nature as to draw strong attention to itself but not detract from the thrust of the intelligence evaluations . This should be such a . nature of the inclusion should draw strong . attention to its . nature as well as drawing strong attention . But not detracting from
 Angleton followed Crowley’s shrewd and very practical advice . Angleton was desperate and frantic at his lack of success in tracking the leak and leakers .
 Subsequent top-level CIA briefing reports did indeed have the telltale additives included in them . Subsequent CIA briefings did indeed contain the additives . The additives were included in CIA briefings .
 In December of 1962, a report from the Soviet source contained an almost verbatim copy of a CIA report with an identifying marker included . The CIA report was published in December of that month .
 It was a well-known Washington secret that the President entertained a steady stream of Washington prostitutes, party girls, and other women of easy virtue .
 There were nude swimming parties in the White House pool with Kennedy and some of his aides cavorting with female visitors . Kennedy and aides cavorted with his female visitors in the pool .
 President Kennedy and his brother were especially active in a sexual sense, says historian . "Both the American President, Kennedy, and . his brother, the American Attorney General," he says .
 A number of sexually explicit pictures of the President engaging in sexual acts are in the official files . Several pictures of Attorney General, taken while on a visit to Moscow in 1961, were taken .
 The President was aware that a number of these pictures were in Soviet hands and acted accordingly . The President acted accordingly. He was aware of the fact that many of the pictures had been taken by the Soviets .
 In addition to a regular parade of whores into the White House, it was also reliably reported from several sources that the President was a heavy user of various kinds of illegal narcotics .
 It is also known from medical reports that the President suffered from a chronic venereal disease for which he was receiving medical treatment . The President was also known to have been receiving treatment for the disease .
 Angleton found it an extremely difficult prospect to investigate the White House personnel to determine the source of the serious leaks of the CIA’s top briefing papers . Angleton said it would be extremely difficult to find out the source .
 Kennedy gave explicit pictures to various women who had participated in his group sex acts . Kennedy gave these veiy explicit pictures of various women involved in the group sex act . Kennedy also gave these pictures to women who participated in the act .
 Angleton had the technical section of the CIA tap the telephones of the Attorney General, both those in his private office and the ones in his home in Virginia . Angleton also tapped the phones of the attorney general, both in his office and his Virginia home .
 CIA technicians intercepted a call between Bobby Kennedy and Bolshakov in February of 1963 . It was only a matter of time before the CIA intercepted the call . The call was intercepted by the CIA technicians .
 President Kennedy used to regularly keep in close, private communication with the Chairman of the Soviet Union . In order to better cooperate with Soviet Union, President Kennedy regularly kept in close communication with Chairman .
 The President said several times that he did not trust this agency who was bent on stirring up a war between the two nations . The President has said he does not trust the agency who has been trying to stir up war .
 Many matters that might have escalated due to the interference of others were peacefully settled . Through this personal contact, many matters were settled .
 The President’s highly unorthodox form of personal diplomacy vis . vis a vis the Soviets created far more problems that it ever solved . The President's highly unorthodox . form of . personal diplomacy created . more problems than it solved .
 DOS and CIA were extremely concerned that sensitive intelligence matters might have been inadvertently passed to the Soviets . The DOS and the CIA were concerned about the possibility of inadvertently passing intelligence to the Soviet Union .
 DIA analysis: The fact that the President’s brother, with his permission, was passing what the CIA considered highly secret material to their chief enemy had a terrible effect . The President's brother was passing the material to the CIA with permission, DIA said .
 Angleton, who knew the President and his family socially, was devastated . Angleton was devastated by the loss of his friend and family members .
 Angleton made a strong case against Kennedy in a series of private meetings held between himself and several of his trusted associates, including Robert Crowley . Angleton's case was made public in the wake of Kennedy's assassination .
 He claimed Kennedy himself had approved the Bay of Pigs action but dropped it at the last minute out of moral weakness . He claimed that Kennedy had approved of the action but later abandoned it .
 Angleton believed Kennedy deliberately attacked the leadership of the CIA, firing Allen Dulles among others and basically accusing the Agency of bad faith and duplicity . Angleton believes that Kennedy then deliberately attacked CIA leadership .
 Angleton was positive that Kennedy had fully approved all of the CIA’s actions in the Bay of Pigs mission but had blamed others to save his own reputation . Angleton blamed others for the mission in order to protect his reputation .
 His negotiations with the head of the Soviet Union smacked of treason . It undermined all of the intense work the CIA was doing to thwart Soviet imperialism in Europe and Latin .
 The gravest charge leveled against the President was his behavior in not striking militarily at the armed Soviet troops and their deadly missiles stationed only a few miles from U.S. soil .
 Kennedy allowed the Soviets to get away with their aggression, he said . Kennedy further removed American missiles from Turkey and materially weakened the American military position in Europe, he added .
 As far as the passing of highly sensitive material to the Soviets was concerned, Angleton claimed that this was high treason and the President should be removed from his high office . Angleton said this was a high treason .
 Kennedy was far too popular to institute 77 impeachment proceedings against him in the Congress . Kennedy was not impeached in 77 of the 77 attempts to oust him .
 Leaking the information about the CIA reports being given to Khruschev to the CIA’s many friendly press sources was also ruled out . Leaking of the information was ruled out as also ruled . Leaked the information from the CIA to the press was also banned .
 If made public, this information would damage Kennedy's reputation, it would also damage the reputation of the CIA and unduly alarm its many highly placed international sources .
 CIA had been responsible for a significant number of highlevel political assassinations in the past, albeit in other countries . CIA had not only the means but also the conditioning to assist their planning .
 Secret Service and U.S. Air Force security were far too comprehensive to permit the clandestine placing of an explosive device on Air Force One . The Secret Service says it was "far too comprehensive"
 Max Jacobson tried to convince the doctor, who supplied and injected the President with amphetamines, to put certain fatal additives in Kennedy’s drugs . Jacobson wanted to convince him to put the fatal additives into the drugs .
 The CIA had a small but effective laboratory that specialized in rare poisons . CIA had small, but effective lab that specialized on rare poisons. The CIA was able to get rare poisons from the lab .
 This plan was rejected because it was felt Jacobson was unstable and associated with too many questionable individuals . Jacobson is considered unstable and has a history of unstable individuals .
 Angleton was strongly against involving more untrustworthy people than necessary in his plot . Using his services would have necessitated removing the doctor as well . Using the doctor would have required removing him as well, and Angleton wanted to avoid using him .
 It was also suggested that since the President was known to sail in Massachusetts’ coastal waters, an assassin could either shoot him at a distance or attach an attach . President Diem of South Vietnam, President Lumumba, Rafael Trujillo, Salvatore Allende Goos
 Langley never pulled a trigger in its life but was very adept at getting its servitors to do this . Langley's leadership in Langley "never pulled a pull on its life"
 Angleton was generally rejected by everyone but Angleton . This was because the President’s wife and children might well be on board and this was found to be unacceptable . Angleton found this unacceptable .
 It was finally decided to shoot the President when he was in the open rather than in a building that could easily be sealed off and immediately searched . The President was shot in the head in the middle of the street .
 The political trip to Dallas had not yet been planned, and there was a great deal of practical work to do before any assassination could be successfully attempted .
 If the President was shot in public, the assassin stood a high risk of being captured . The assassin could not be captured if he was killed in public .
 CIA realized that it had to get the support of the entire governmental apparatus to implement such a radical solution . CIA considered it considered the most serious threat to U.S. security in decades .
 Early in March of 1963, the matter of the actual assassin became a pressing issue . President Kennedy's assassination was a major event in Kennedy's life .
 Crowley’s father had been an important Chicago politician, parks commissioner, in the Kelly-Nash machine . Crowley received the task of personally contacting members of the Chicago Mafia for advice and possible assistance .
 He said that since Kennedy could not keep his zipper shut, the CIA would do it for him . The CIA would have to do it, he said . He said .
 Originally wanted to call the plot ‘Operation JANUS’ after the two-faced Roman god (a reference to Kennedy’s perceived duplicity) but decided that his co-workers were far too ill-educated to understand it . Originally, he wanted to name the
 Giancana agreed to locate assassins who could be expected to perform in a professional manner . Crowley agreed to find assassins who were expected to be professional assassins .
 It was suggested that perhaps perhaps this recruitment might be better done outside of the United States .
 Giancana had one of his connections in that entity contact someone in Corsican Mafia, the so-called Unione Corse . It was from the ranks of this Marseille-based, well-knit, and very professional criminal organization that the assassins were found . Rather than involve
 The plotter’s reasoning was that if the killers were somehow caught before the CIA could kill them first, they could only identify the Chicago Mafia as their employers . The Mafia would never identify the CIA as the real moving force, the plotter said .
 If this question arose, the Mafia could much more easily be silenced than foreign killers could . The Mafia could be more easily silenced than the killers could be silenced, the author says .
 Corsicans were finally brought on board after a co-worker suggested shopping in Beirut, Lebanon, then a center of assassination professionals . The Corsicans are now working in the United States for President Obama .
 Corsicans would have no problems blending in the background in race conscious Dallas . The argument against this was that Corsicans should blend in with the background of Dallas .
 Cuban militants had been ruled out in the beginning as too volatile and inclined to emotional excesses . Cuban militants were ruled out of the original plan .
 Marseilles would be Marseilles, then, instead of Beirut, or that would supply the killers . Marseilles is a French city that has a history of violence, but not a French capital .
 Director of Central Intelligence, John McCone, began a series of delicate contacts outside his immediate circle in March 1963 . McCone was the CIA Director of the CIA .
 On March 13 and 15, the next delicate contacts were made to Walter Jenkins and Abe Fortas, top aides of Vice President Lyndon B Johnson . Jenkins and Fortas were top aides to Vice President Johnson .
 He had forced himself on the 1960 Democratic ticket against Kennedy’s wishes, and throughout the thousand days of the Kennedy presidency, Johnson was treated with contempt by Kennedy's people . Johnson was forced to run for president in 1960s against Kennedy's wishes, but was never elected .
 Their favorite epithet was ‘Uncle Compone,’ and it became common knowledge that Kennedy was planning to replace Johnson on the 1964 ticket . Kennedy planned to run for president in 1964 .
 Bobby Kennedy was preparing criminal charges against Bobby Baker, one of Johnson’s top aides . Baker was one of Kennedy's top aides. Baker was a key aide to Johnson .
 Johnson was aware that such charges would give the Kennedy faction the ability to force him off the ticket . Kennedy was aware of the possibility that charges would force him to resign .
 Vice President traditionally has run for the Presidency at the expiration of the mandatory two-term limit . Vice President Barack Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 Johnson, therefore, became a willing if very timid participant in the ZIPPER project .
 Both the Vice President and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation has been slated for replacement by the Kennedy faction . Their support for this project was practically guaranteed from the outset .
 The FBI Director has assured the President that he was not considered a target and that no shots were fired at him in Dallas . As the Vice President and the Director of the FBI were longtime neighbors and very friendly, the President and FBI Director have been longtime neighbors . The Director has repeatedly assured
 Colonel Bevin Cass, United States Marine Corps, was United States Military Attache to the Dominican Republic and had been involved with the logistics of the Trujillo assassination . Cass was involved in the logistics .
 Cass was Commanding Officer of the Marine Corps infantry training center at Quantico, Virginia . Cass was later Commanding . Officer . of the . Marine Corps . infantry training . center . Quantico .
 Cass obviously served as a liaison officer between the Joint Chief of Staffs and the CIA . Cass was recommended by the Chairman of the JCS, General Lyman Lemnitzer. Cass was a CIA liaison officer .
 The United States Armed Forces are the fourth big cornerstone of the assassination of John F Kennedy . The assassination was the overthrow of the democratically elected government of the United States of America .
 Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana advised Crowley that or the job was one hundred thousand dollars per man and there were four involved . In the middle of April, the job cost $100,000 per man .
 In the event of the President’s death, he fully expected to be called back to duty, he said . He was not in particularly good health .
 Angleton contacted Israeli intelligence for assistance . Angleton also contacted Israel for help .
 Angleton contacted Amos Manor, then head of Israeli counterintelligence, the Shin Beth, and an old friend of Angleton . Manor was Amos Manor's old friend and former head of Israel's Shin Beth . Manor contacted Angleton, a former CIA operative, and a close friend .
 Angleton had worked closely with Zionist organizations in Italy during and after World War II . In 1951 he was appointed to be CIA’s top liaison with both the Shin Beth and the Mossad .
 Angleton sought an Israeli agent who would oversee the entire operation . Angleton developed a close working relationship with both Israeli agencies . The CIA developed a relationship with the Israeli government .
 In actuality, the Israeli’s sole reason for existence was to make sure that the Corsican assassins were removed as soon as possible after their work was done . Angleton's sole purpose for existence, as far as possible, was to ensure the assassins' removal .
 The man sent to him was known as Binjamin Bauman and he came well recommended . The man was known to him as Bin Benjamin Bauman .
 He had been one of the Stern Gang members, a terrorist group controlled by Menachim Begin, later Israeli Prime Minister . He had assisted in blowing up the King David Hotel in Jerusalem in 1946 with heavy loss of life .
 Begin was still wanted for murder in England, but Bauman had merely changed his name . Bauman went to work for the new state in an official capacity . Begin is still wanted in England for murder .
 Corsicans were to be killed, their bodies dissected and put into crab pots . A safe house was set up in Maryland and there was to be set up . Corsican bodies would be dissected, put in crab pots, according to reports .
 The science of DNA had not yet been discovered, and what the famous soft-shelled crabs could not eat was to be dumped back into the water . What the crabs couldn't eat was dumped back in the water.
 In September of 1963, the visit by Kennedy to Dallas in November was announced . Angleton assassination plan now had a specific time frame and geographical location with which to work .
 The Corsicans would be flown to Canada at the end of October, met by members of the Mafia, and driven into the U.S. over the Windsor, Ontario, International Bridge . The Corsican would then be flown into the United States .
 They would remain in a Mafia safe house in the Detroit area and then be flown in a private aircraft to the Dallas-Ft. area . They would stay in a safe house before being flown in private aircraft .
 French intelligence sources have indicated that a recruitment was made among members of the Corsican Mafia in Marseilles in mid-1963 .
 French intelligence sources have also indicated that they informed U.S. authorities in the American Embassy on two occasions about the recruitment of French underworld operatives for a political assassination in the United States . French intelligence has also indicated they informed United States authorities about the recruit of operatives .
 It is not known if these reports were accepted at the Embassy or passed to Washington .
 Corsicans were sent to Canada where they blended in more easily with the French-speaking Quebec population . In the event, the Corsican population was more likely to blend in .
 Corsicans were under no circumstances to be told of the role of the CIA in their project . Corsicans had to be kept out of touch with the CIA . DIA analysis: Corsicans would not have been told of CIA involvement in project .
 "They always considered that they were working solely for the American Mafia and no one else," the Mafia boss says . "They were always considered to be working only for the Mafia," he says .
 Two silenced .38-caliber pistols, two 7.65-mm surplus Argentine army Mausers, and a specially constructed .223-caliber rifle were cut down and modified from NATO .
 Special bullets for the latter weapon, filled with mercury and designed to explode when entering a body, were manufactured and accompanied the weapon . Special bullets were made and accompanied by the weapon.
 A check of CIA records located the names of several persons of interest to the Agency in the Dallas area . The names of those of interest were found in the CIA records .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, the returned defector, and the CIA had extensive dealings with him . Oswald was a man with extensive and documented dealings with the CIA . Oswald, a former CIA operative, was a major CIA operative .
 Born into the lesser Russian nobility, De Mohrenschildt had served in a 99 See ZIPPER document, no..d.d. Born in Russia, he served in the 99th century .
 After the Russian revolution, he immigrated to the U.S. and acquired a degree in petroleum geology . After the revolution he moved to the United States .
 Oswald encountered Oswald quite by accident through his connection with the Russian community in Dallas . He became his mentor and according to a later CIA classified report, his lover . Oswald was a mentor and a lover .
 Oswald also was intimately connected with de Mohrenschildt who was certainly known to he a CIA operative . Oswald was also intimately connected to de Mohranschildt, who was also known to the CIA .
 Oswald's connections with this man were such as to guarantee that the CIA was aware of Oswald’s movements throughout his residence in the Dallas area . Oswald was connected to this man so much to guarantee the CIA knew of his movements . Oswald died in the September 4, 1918, Dallas
 Oswald became important to the furtherance of the plan to kill the American president . The pseudo-defector, Oswald, became then important . Oswald was important to furtherance the plot to kill President Kennedy .
 He had strong connections with the Soviet Union; he had married a Soviet citizen . He had been noticed in public advocating support of Fidel Castro .
 His position in a tall building overlooking the parade route was a stroke of great good fortune to the plotters . The plotters used his position to plot the parade .
 Corsican team leader initially felt that the shooting could be done as the cavalcade turned from Houston to Elm Streets . It had initially been felt by the team leader that the attack could be stopped as the parade turned .
 The presidential car would be moving very slowly as it negotiated the right angle turn and would present an excellent target . The president's car would also be moving slowly as he negotiated the turn .
 The railroad overpass was considered another excellent position but was ruled out because it was sure to be guarded . The overpass overpass is also considered an excellent place to hide .
 To its right, the heavy bushes and fences of the elevated “grassy knoll” proved to be irresistible . The heavy bushes, fences and fences on the elevated knoll were irresistible .
 The official car with the President would be moving slowly past the spot and would permit a slightly downhill shot at very close range . The official vehicle with the president would be driving slowly past .
 The extensive railroad yards behind this position gave ample room for an unobserved escape . Also, the extensive railroad yard yards behind the position gave .
 Oswald bought a rifle from Klein’s Sporting Goods through the mail in March of that year . De Mohrenschildt was aware that Oswald had bought the rifle . Oswald bought the gun from Klein's Sporting Goods in March .
 Both Oswald and his wife had mentioned this rifle to De Mohrenschildt . Both had mentioned the rifle to him and he also learned where the weapon was kept . Oswald's wife had also mentioned the weapon .
 The existence and location of Oswald’s mail order Mannlicher-Carcano rifle in the garage of his wife's friend, Ruth Paine, was also known to de Mohrenschildt at least one week before the assassination .
 DIA analysis: Oswald was a bad shot with a rifle, the Warren Commission Report to the contrary, and had never even test shot this surplus Mannlicher-Carcano weapon . Oswald was never a good shot, the DIA report says .
 Stories about him going to Dallas rifle ranges with others and firing the Carcano were fabrications . Stories of him firing a Carcano at rifle ranges were total fabrications as was accepted tale of him driving .
 Oswald had never shot the purported murder weapon, possessed no driver’s license, and did not know how to drive any kind of a car . Oswald had no driver's license and no knowledge of the alleged murder weapon .
 He was told that a visa to go to Soviet Russia would take four months to process . Cuba would not grant a visa for Cuba without a Soviet visa, he was told .
 The CIA sent out a number of reports to various American agencies containing their version of the Oswald visit to include physical descriptions and photographs . After the assassination, the CIA sent a series of reports .
 All of this material is totally incorrect, and the person depicted was very obviously not Lee Harvey Oswald . All of the material was totally incorrect . The person depicted in this image is not Lee Oswald .
 Oswald was reported by the CIA to have gone to Mexico City on 26 September, 1963 and while there, drew considerable attention to his presence in both the Soviet and Cuban embassies . Oswald was then reported to have been in Mexico City that day .
 Oswald might have done in the Cuban embassy is not known for certain . There is no record of his ever having visited the Soviet embassy in Mexico at that time . Oswald never visited the embassy at the time .
 CIA physical descriptions as well as photographs show that Oswald was not the man depicted . Oswald's physical description and photographs show he was not Oswald .
 This appears strongly to be a poor attempt on the part of the CIA to embroil both the Soviet Union and Cuba in their affairs . This appears to be an attempt to embroill both the . Soviet Union .
 Reports from the CIA concerning Oswald’s September/October visit to Mexico City are totally unreliable and were rejected by the FBI as being ‘in serious error’ The FBI rejected the CIA's reports as being in serious error .
 As the CIA had pictures of the real Oswald, their reasons for producing such an obvious falsity are not easy to ascertain at this remove . The CIA had photos of Oswald, but the reasons for their decision are not clear .
 The famous Mexican trip was a typical official red herring deliberately dragged across the investigative trail . DIA analysis: The DIA says the trip was an official red-herring dragging across the trail . The Mexican trip is typical of a typical red-hring dragged across an investigative trail
 Oswald's Mexico trip had no possible bearing on the allegations of assassination heaped onto a dead Oswald . In point of fact, it matters not what Oswald did while in Mexico . Oswald's trip matters not because it had no bearing on allegations of murder .
 The patently obvious disinformation put out by the CIA about Oswald’s visit either indicates a frantic desire to be current with intelligence matters or, in a more sinister interpretation, a crude attempt to somehow link the assassination to the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 Had this course been followed during the sittings of the Warren Commission, it might have forced the timid new President to make accusations against both Russia and Cuba that could quite conceivably lead to armed conflict .
 Kennedy was shot on Friday, November 22, 1963, and Oswald was killed on Sunday, November 24, 1963 . Chicago Mafia leader, Sam Giancana, was shot to death in the basement of his home in June of 1975, prior to when he was supposed to appear before a
 Arranging a murder is relatively simple, but arranging a suicide is much more difficult . Arranged a suicide by arranging a murder by suicide is difficult to do . Arrangement is more difficult to arrange than arrange a murder .
 The Warren Commission was instituted shortly after the Dallas murders . Evidence was gathered and presented to the Commission and a final report was duly released . The report was published by the Warren Commission .
 It named Lee Harvey Oswald as the sole assassin and carefully played down the strong connections his killer, Jack Rubenstein, had with the Chicago mob .
 Historians have discussed the number of witnesses who died in the following months and years . Historians also have discussed how many witnesses died after the event .
 So far, no hard evidence of a concerted effort to silence witnesses has been produced . The number tends to raise suspicions of foul play but, so far, there has been no evidence .
 Considering the vast extent of the conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy and overthrow his administration, the conclusions are more than obvious . The conclusions should be obvious .
 Warren Report included a number of issues intended to bolster their case against Oswald . The Warren Report was released in October 1963 .
 One attempt to shoot General Edwin Walker, a retired right wing professional Army officer resident in Dallas, on April 12, 1963 . Another attempt was an attempt to kill a retired retired right-wing general .
 Oswald had nothing to do with this incident, it is obvious from examining the published evidence and investigative reports . Oswald was not involved in the shooting . Oswald had no connection to the incident, according to the evidence .
 Eyewitnesses all agreed that two dark complexioned men were seen driving away from the scene . Police say two dark-complexioned men are believed to be responsible for the shooting .
 Oswald did not own such a gun, was not dark complexioned, and did not drive . Oswald was not a dark-complexioned, did not have a gun and was dark-skinned .
 Her story of the Walker incident has no value whatsoever and could never have been used in a court of law . Her story was never used in court, she says .
 Of the four Corsicans, three vanished from the face of the earth after being escorted to a private plane at a Dallas area airfield about 2:30 on the afternoon of November 22 .
 They were told they would be flown first to New Orleans, where the pilot, David Ferrie, was based, and then to a safe house .
 From the moment they climbed into the two-engined aircraft, they were never seen again . The two men were not seen again until the end of the flight .
 One of the assassins, the man who fired at Kennedy from point blank range and blew out the presidential brains, decided to work his way back to Marseilles on his own .
 For some unknown reason, he took a commercial bus to Mexico and from there he ended up in Barcelona, Spain . He took a bus from Mexico to Mexico, where he was taken to Spain .
 The hit team was flown away in an aircraft piloted by a CIA contract pilot named David Ferrie from New Orleans . Ferrie piloted the hit team in the aircraft . The CIA team was killed in the attack .
 There was one other murder that bears directly on the Kennedy assassination . Rumors of the survival of one of the team are persistent but not proven DIA analysis . There was also a murder of a team member in the assassination .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer, 44, former wife of Cord Meyer, Jr., a senior CIA official, was found shot to death in a wooded area near her Georgetown studio . She was found in 1964 .
 She had been shot once in head and once in the upper body, a professional technique of assassination . She was shot in the head and twice in upper body .
 A dazed black day-laborer was found in the vicinity by police and, although not matching the description of an eyewitness, was arrested and put on trial for murder . The victim was found dazed and not matching description of the eyewitness .
 The suspect, Ray Crump, had no coherent statement for the police at the time of his arrest, and an intensive search of the area failed to locate the handgun used in the killing . Crump was arrested on suspicion of murder .
 This, in spite of the fact that the suspect was apprehended in the immediate area of the killing, the suspect is still at large . The suspect was arrested in the area where the killing occurred, police say .
 Period press reports indicate that a large number of CIA personnel were present immediately after the discovery of the body . The body was found in a shallow grave near the site of the site .
 The prosecution depicted him as a rapist, but he had no record of such offenses . He was sentenced to life in prison without parole . The prosecution portrayed him as an alleged rapist .
 Her husband, Cord Meyer, Jr., was a bitter enemy of John Kennedy . Cord Meyer was a close personal friend of James Angleton and a bitter opponent of Kennedy .
 Meyer’s intense hatred of Kennedy was due to the attentions that Kennedy had once paid to his ex-wife . Meyer was angry about Kennedy's attentions to Meyer's ex-lover . Meyer's intense hatred was because of Kennedy's attention to his former wife .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer had been Kennedy’s long-term mistress subsequent to her divorce from her husband .
 Meyer had introduced LSD to the President during her many visits to the White House . Meyer introduced the drug to the president during her White House visits .
 Immediately after her murder, Crowley associate James Angleton was caught in her Georgetown studio going through her papers . Angleton had been working for Crowley for years .
 Robert Crowley, who saw it, stated that it contained a significant number of references to her connection with Kennedy, the use of drugs at White House sex parties, and some bitter comments about the role of her former husband’s agency in the death of her lover .
 Mary Meyer had made angry and indiscreet comments about her views on her suspicions of CIA involvement in the Kennedy killing . A significant number of her neighbors had husbands that were senior CIA officials . Mary Meyer made the comments to a number of neighbors who had husbands of CIA officials, a significant number
 This murder is still listed as unsolved, and the police records have disappeared . Police records have also disappeared from the scene .
 Shortly after her murder, her bitter former husband painted “Tough luck, Mary’s Mary” on the Key Bridge near the site of her death . Shortly after she was murdered, he painted a painting of "Tough Luck, Mary"
 Crowley, private communication to the author, and N Burleigh, op. cit. , 282 . Crowley, N. Burleigh and N. Crowley are quoted in the book .
 The President and his brother, the Attorney General of the United States, repeatedly betrayed their wives, their criminal associates, their loyal Cuban supporters, and many others with alacrity when it suited them to do so . President and brother repeatedly betrayed his wives, his criminal associates and their loyal
 CIA, FBI, Joint Chiefs of Staff say they betrayed secrets to Soviet Union for political gain . CIA and FBI also betrayed important intelligence secrets to the Soviet Union, they say .
 CIA believed Kennedy was not only circumventing their own mappedout destruction of Fidel Castro by assassination and invasion but actively engaged in contacts with the Soviet Union to betray the CIA . The CIA believed that Kennedy was circumventing the destruction of Castro .
 The American military leaders (known as the Joint Chiefs of Staff) were determined upon the same goals, hence both of them worked together to ensure the removal of a President who acted against their best interests and to have him replaced with a weaker man .
 President Johnson, Kennedy’s successor, was very much under the control of the military and CIA during his term in office . President Johnson permitted an enormous escalation in Southeast Asia .
 The Soviet analysis of the assassination of President John F Kennedy contains material gleaned from American sources such as media coverage, etc.
 Some of this material obviously stems from sources located inside various agencies . Some of the material obviously comes from sources inside agencies. Some of it is from inside agencies .
 A study of the Soviet report indicates very clearly that the Russians have significant and very high level sources within both the Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation .
 Their possession of material relating to certain highly classified American military papers has been referred to the CIC for investigation and action .
 The chapter “The Official Cover Up’s” already addresses briefly what happened after the actual assassination . DIA analysis Aftermath . The chapter addresses what happened next .
 Mr Angleton was in complete control of all evidence presented to this Committee and worked closely in conjunction with Mr Sullivan of the FBI to ensure that nothing was brought before the Committee that it did not wish to acknowledge .
 Representative Ford, R, of Michigan, is working closely with Director Hoover and reports all incoming information directly to him . Representative Ford is a member of the Commission .
 Oswald was the sole killer, police say . Oswald has been identified as the prime suspect in the case of the shooting . Oswald was shot dead in the head with a shotgun blast, police said .
 The Times is strongly supporting the Commission and its findings and we are assured that they will continue to do so .
 General DeGaulle stated that he was aware through French intelligence reports, that the assassins of the President were French citizens . Also, he said that he is aware through . intelligence reports that he . was aware . that he knew through . French intelligence . reports, he also stated that
 The knowledge of the French government at the highest level that some kind of high level political assassination was apparently passed on to the United States Embassy in Paris but there is no record of any of these warnings having been passed on by Washington .
 If, fact, these warnings were passed, there was obviously no heed paid to them . If, indeed, there were warnings passed, they were ignored .
 There were extensive French rubber plantations in Vietnam as well as significant off-shore oil deposits . There are also significant oil deposits in the country .
 The General was reassured repeatedly on these points and is now apparently in agreement with United States aims in South East Asia . He is apparently now apparently agreeing with U.S. aims in the region .
 Fie made several remarks about the trade in opium in that area being extremely lucrative . Fie said he had his own problems with narcotics traffic in the Mediterranean area .
 With increasing American involvement in Vietnam and Laos, the increase in opium smuggling was highly significant and has not stopped to this day . With increasing U.S. involvement in Laos and Vietnam, opium smuggling has never stopped .
 Much of the movement of raw opium from the Golden Triangle was effected by the CIA and its Air America private airforce .
 It is not believed that electronic surveillance of the President’s lines of communication while in the United States does not support, the possibility that he might have actual knowledge of any American involvement, or projected involvement, in this sensitive area .
 Both the Agency and the President feel that the French President has fired a shot across our bows’ - but that these issues have now become resolved . Both the agency and the president feel that they have now been resolved .
 The President feels that the French will have to be watched carefully in the future . If American interests become established in French Indo China, we had best consider our own interests at that time .
 The CIA’s statement about “American involvement in the ‘trade in opium” in Indochina, is a topic that will be dealt with in a subsequent book .