 On October 16, 1962, a U-2 spy plane over Cuba discovered that the Soviet Union was building missile-launching sites there .
 President John F Kennedy was informed that the Soviet Union was building launching sites in Cuba for nuclear missiles with a range of 1000 miles . President Kennedy was told that the Soviets were building launch sites for missiles .
 Kennedy announced to the world that the U.S. was setting up a naval blockade around the island of Cuba . The blockade was to prevent anymore shipments of missiles from the Soviet Union to reach Cuba . Kennedy announced the blockade on October 22 .
 He demanded that the Soviets pull out all of their offensive weapons from Cuba . He also demanded that all of the weapons be pulled out of Cuba . The Soviet Union had also pulled out its own weapons .
 During the next five days, tensions ran quite high, especially when a Soviet Union boat came to the point of crossing the blockade line .
 Nikita Khrushchev proposed that the Soviet Union would withdraw the missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . The Soviet Union responded to Kennedy's demands on October 26 with an angry letter .
 The next day he sent a second letter to Kennedy . He demanded that the U.S. also withdraw its nuclear missiles from Turkey . The move was rejected by Kennedy .
 A U.S. surveillance plane was shot down by a Soviet air missile that morning . That morning a United States surveillance plane had been shot down . The plane was downed by Soviet missile .
 Get the missiles out in 48 hours or the U.S. will attack Cuba, Cuban president says . Get the missile missiles out of Cuba or the United States will attack it, he says .
 Khrushchev also feared events were spiraling out of control . The world was on the brink of war in the 1950s .
 The United States was ready to invade with 180,000 troops stationed in Cuba on October 29th . In addition to nuclear missiles, the Soviets had “tactical” nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 If the U.S. invaded and was hit with tactical nuclear weapons, Kennedy was sure to retaliate with a nuclear strike . If the United States invaded, Kennedy would be sure to respond with a nuke strike .
 It was clear that the Soviet Union and the U.S. were headed toward nuclear war . The two countries were headed to nuclear war in the Cold War .
 They would withdraw its missiles from Turkey, but would not make this public . The missiles would be withdrawn from the country, but not made public .
 Khrushchev decided to remove the Cuban missiles to avoid a U.S. invasion . The announcement would be made to the United States people would be that Khrushchevs decided to . The decision was made to avoid an invasion of the U.K.
 From October 24 to November 20, 1962, historians say, the world came closer to the brink of nuclear war than at any other time in history . Historians say the world was closer to war than ever at any time before .