 The confrontation of the Cold War still affects the relationship between the U.S. and Russia to this day . The Cold War is a cautionary tale in a world where nuclear proliferation is rampant .
 In 1962, the Cold War rivals used their arsenal of weapons of mass destruction as a means of nuclear deterrence and a symbol of their awesome military power . The nuclear arms race began in 1962 .
 The Soviet Union was supporting the revolutionary Castro regime, for the first time projecting power into the Western Hemisphere . Imbued with communist ideology and encouraged by decolonization, the Soviet Union supported the Castro regime .
 Castro, seeking a nuclear umbrella, had encouraged the Kremlin to bring its nukes to Cuba and point them at the United States . Both parties were rapidly building up their stockpiles, believing that mutual assured destruction is the only way to deter the other party from using their nuclear weapons .
 Presidents John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev were the only thing that prevented a full-out war in October 1962 . The two countries found themselves on the brink in October .
 It was the secret diplomacy of the leaders that helped avoid the potential crisis . The secret diplomacy was the key to avoiding a crisis in Syria .
 The communists did not believe in martyrdom and afterlife, which distinguishes them from today's Iranian leadership . Importantly, communists didn't believe in martyredism and afterlife .
 After taking measure of the youthful American President, he viewed him as inexperienced and a weaker leader than former President Dwight D Eisenhower .
 Khrushchev placed the nuclear weapons in Cuba . This overconfidence prompted the government to place the weapons there . The Cuban government was overconfident about the situation .
 The crisis was resolved with the secret agreement of the Soviet Union to withdraw its weapons from Cuba . The Soviet Union and the United States promise not to invade Cuba .
 Kennedy also committed to withdraw United States nukes from Italy and Turkey . Kennedy committed to withdrawing U.S. nuclear weapons from Italy, Turkey and Italy .
 An emergency phone link between the Kremlin and the White House was installed to prevent the next Armageddon . Emergency phone link was also installed between Moscow and Washington .
 Other Soviet leaders viewed Khrushchev’s risk-taking and withdrawal from Cuba as a loss of face and recklessness . Other leaders viewed the risk-taken decision to withdraw from the country as a risk .
 This, together with erratic domestic policies, contributed to Khrushchev’s house arrest and removal the following year . The erratic policies contributed to his house arrest .
 The withdrawal of nuclear weapons was a clear sign of Soviet overreach and overconfidence . Yet the Russians always viewed nuclear weapons not just as a symbol of power but as a war-fighting tool .
 The fear of mutual annihilation begat détente, a Soviet policy of challenging the U.S. around the world, such in Vietnam and Africa, while avoiding the ultimate confrontation . Détente was a policy that avoided confrontation with the United States .
 Soviet Union cynically used popular fear to create a nuclear disarmament movement . The Soviet Union pushed for Nuclear Weapon Free Zones in the 1980s .
 Many, including President Obama, are talking about “global zero” a world without nuclear weapons . Despite rapid nuclear buildups by North Korea, Iran, Pakistan, and possibly China, nuclear weapons are building up .
 Diplomacy backed up by superior force may be crucial in thwarting a nuclear crisis . Diplomacy behind superior force will be crucial to thwarting nuclear crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian and U.S. arsenals have been reduced significantly . The mistrust remains between the two countries .
 Russian leaders’ lack of trust in America and their Cold War mindset are still there . Despite four decades of arms control, consistent communication, and intensive diplomatic exchanges between the two countries, Russia still distrusts the United States .
 There is also a lack of trust among many U.S. citizens of our own leadership after President Obama’s comment to . then-President Dmitry Medvedev about flexibility on missile defense .
 Ariel Cohen brings firsthand knowledge of the former Soviet Union and the Middle East through a wide range of studies . His studies include economic development and political reform in former Soviet republics, U.S. energy security, the War on Terrorism and the continuing conflict in the Mideast .
 The Morning Bell is an early morning edition of the most important political news, conservative commentary and original reporting from a team committed to following the truth no matter where it leads .
 The Morning Bell is a weekly Washington feature on CNN iReport . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Visit CNN Living at 9 p.m. ET for more information .