 DEFCON Defense Readiness Condition was effectively a countdown timer to nuclear war and the army’s readiness to retaliate . Withdraw of Soviet Missiles 3 Aftermath was effectively equivalent to a countdown of nuclear war .
 Exiled Cubans who opposed Fidel Castro’s revolution landed on the southwestern coast of the island nation . The island nation is home to a group of exiles who opposed the Castro regime .
 Territorial Militias loyal to Castro were able to defend the coast from the rebels . The invasion resulted in an embarrassing failure .
 American Lockheed Martin U-2 spy planes took several pictures of what looked like mobile Soviet-made missile launchers in Cuba . Lockheed Martin planes took pictures of the launchers .
 SS-4 mid-ranged ballistic missiles were presumably equipped with nuclear warheads . The missiles were likely equipped with warheads . They were SS-3 mid-range ballistic missiles .
 News of this revelation was quick to reach Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara . McNamara was hosting a Hickory Hill Seminar at the time .
 This would stop any new missiles from reaching Cuba, but it wouldn't remove the ones already there . This would also remove the missiles already there, but not remove them from Cuba .
 This was technically not an act of war, so Kennedy could claim that he wasn't escalating the conflict . Kennedy could have claimed that he didn't escalate the conflict.
 Kennedy announces the quarantine of Cuba on television on October 22, 1962 . Televised Quarantine Announcement: Cuba quarantines Cuba .
 The world was holding its breath, hoping it would blow over, but it was easily the longest and most stressful 13 days of the Cold War . The world held its breath hoping the world would let it blow over .
 The Organization of American States approves of the quarantine . The group of Latin American nations and the U.S. approve of the move .
 Soviet ships en route to Cuba began to slow down or change course the following day . Soviet ships were forced to pull out of Cuba . The ships began to change course or sail away from Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba as long as John F Kennedy and the rest of the USA respected the island nation’s territorial sovereignty .
 Kennedy secretly agreed to remove U.S. ballistic missiles from Turkey . Kennedy also agreed to pull ballistic missiles out of Turkey .
 The crisis had a lasting effect on America’s European allies, who were kept in the dark for much of it . The crisis was narrowly avoided, but the crisis had lasting effects on Europe .
 Castro had accused the USSR of abandoning the Cuban revolution and this was one reason as to why Khrushchev would later be kicked out of office . Castro had also accused the Soviet Union of abandoning Cuba .
 Two years later, Leonid Brezhnev and Aleksei Kosygin pushed him from power . They proceeded to lead the Soviet Union on a massive military buildup .
 The crisis also led to cooler heads in both nations who gained some control over using their nuclear weapons .
 Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted . Community content from this week's Real Life Events events are available under the use of these terms .