 American warships and Soviet submarines with nuclear-tipped torpedoes played out a tense high-seas standoff . American spy planes had spotted Soviet missiles – capable of being tipped with nuclear warheads and only a few minutes flight time from incinerating United States cities .
 Hawks in Congress and close to the president called for immediate air strikes . The world lurched closer and closer to nuclear war .
 Never before, or since, has the spectre of thousands of mushroom clouds rising cratered cities and spewing deadly plumes of radioactivity sufficient to send man back to the stone age – or perhaps extinction – been so terrifyingly close . Both President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Kh
 "In the historical record, U Thant has largely been written out of the crisis,"" says Walter Dorn, who heads the Security and International Affairs department at Canadian Forces College, in Toronto .
 Kennedy camp preferred to portray their man as a gutsy Cold Warrior, not a President so unnerved by hawks in his own camp that he sought mediation by the UN . Yet at one critical juncture, American diplomats woke U Thant at midnight and begged him to deliver a face
 Dorn contrasts the bombastic swaggering in the early American versions of the crisis, with the reality of quiet diplomacy . "U Thant was literally shuttling between the two rooms," he says .
 U Thant went to Havana, brought back the body of the downed American pilot, calmed Fidel Castro and – months later – was quietly thanked by both Mr Kennedy and Mr Khrushchev .
 Canadian military historians tend to portray the crisis as a military showdown . But there was also a little-known UN aspect to Canada's involvement . Ottawa offered to paint white some of Canada's Voodoo fighter-bombers with UN markings on them .
 There's still lots of nuclear weapons around and people need to be reminded that we could still have a catastrophe,"" says Prof. Prof. David Perry .
 Even seemingly minor confrontations, like the current one between China-Japan jockeying over tiny islets, can spiral out of control . It isn't the nature of the arsenals that poses the gravest risk, but rather the dangers of miscalculation .
 A secret deal in which Soviet missiles would be moved from Cuba while American ones would be taken out of Turkey was not a secret deal, Welch said . Welch: "Cold-eyed brinksmanship" averted war .
 Kennedy thought he had Castro and the Cubans under control, but he didn't . Kennedy had Castro under control but didn't have it under control in Cuba . Kennedy thought it was under control .
 Khrushchev thought he had Castro, under control, but, as he would learn to his horror, he didn't . He didn't learn the horror of Castro Castro .
 Castro's focus on Armageddon is not a nightmare, but a kind of dream . Given his belief in the inevitability of a U.S. invasion, Castro believes it is inevitable . Castro believes the United States is coming to the brink of an invasion .
 After centuries of irrelevance, Cuba. will matter fundamentally to the fate of the human race,"" the authors write . That sort of megalomania seems more dangerous than the nuclear weapons .
 Castro emerges as a nightmare for both the U.S. and Soviet leaders . For Mr Kennedy, dogged by the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion the previous year .
 Armageddon Letters reveals his darkest moments come when he realizes his Cuban client is out of control . As for the Soviet premier, The Armageddon Letters also reveals how he dealt with the Cuban dictator .
 President Kennedy meets with and advises Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrie Gromyko, that America will not tolerate Soviet missiles in Cuba . After learning of the missiles during breakfast, Kennedy convenes his Executive Committee to consider America's options .
 President Kennedy returns to Washington from Chicago after being told by Robert Kennedy of the discovery of additional Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy departs Washington for scheduled campaign speeches in the Midwest and West Coast .
 President Kennedy decides on a naval blockade of Cuba after learning that an air strike against the missile sites could result in 10,000 – 20,000 casualties . Another U-2 flight discovered bombers and cruise missile sites .
 Despite being urged by Senate leaders to call for air strikes, President Kennedy announces his decision to implement a naval blockade only . President Kennedy addresses the American public .
 Soviet ships reach blockade line, but receive radio orders from Moscow to hold their positions . Soviet ships arrive blockade line but receive orders to hold position .
 United States and Soviet warships are literally just a few hundred yards apart, each pointing their weapons at one another . The U.S. and the Soviet warships were just a handful hundred yards from each other .
 EX-COMM receives a letter from Khrushchev stating that the Soviets would remove their missiles if President Kennedy publicly guarantees the United States will not invade Cuba . Adlai Stevenson confronts the Soviets at a United Nations conference, but the Soviet representative refuses to answer .
 Khrushchev announces the dismantling of Soviet missiles in Cuba . In a speech aired on Radio Moscow, Khrushche announces the move . Khrushchchev made the announcement in an interview with Radio Moscow .
 Canadian military historians tend to portray the crisis as a military showdown and focus on efforts of Canadian warships in hunting Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic . There was also a little-known UN aspect to Canada's involvement .
 The dangers remain, even as the grim calculus of mutually assured destruction in a world dominated by two superpowers armed with thousands of nuclear-tipped missiles has been eclipsed .
 Even seemingly minor confrontations, like the current one between China-Japan jockeying over tiny islets, can spiral out of control, he said . Prof. David Perry: "It isn't the nature of the arsenals that poses the gravest risk"
 The full truth has slowly emerged about the October, 1962, crisis, Welch said . Welch said it wasn't cold-eyed brinksmanship that averted war .
 "Luck and fear played major roles over a chaotic – and dangerous – few weeks," Prof. Prof. John Sutter says .
 "Kennedy thought he had Castro and the Cubans under control, but he didn't . Castro was the most dangerous man in the world," says Kennedy .
 "After centuries of irrelevance, Cuba. will matter fundamentally to the fate of the human race,\"" the authors write . The authors write."
 "Mr Castro emerges as a nightmare, for both the United States and Soviet leaders," says Kennedy .
 As for the Soviet premier, The Armageddon Letters reveals his darkest moments come when he realizes his Cuban client is out of control .
 President Kennedy spends four minutes recording his personal recollections of discussions that day . Gromyko denies the presence of any Soviet weaponry on the island .
 President Kennedy decides on a naval blockade of Cuba . Ex-COMM strongly argue for an air strike and invasion of Cuba as a result .
 When confronted with questions regarding rumours of offensive weapons in Cuba, Kennedy asks the press not to report the story until after he addresses the American public . Kennedy announces his decision to implement a naval blockade only .
 "Stunning reconnaissance photos reveal that Soviet missiles are poised for launch" "Stunning reconnaissance photos"
 Kennedy writes Khrushchev a letter stating that he will make a statement that the U.S. would not invade Cuba if the missiles were removed from Cuba . In a speech aired on Radio Moscow on October 28, Khrushche announces the dismantling of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 He is also a winner of Amnesty International’s award for human-rights journalism . The Globe's Richard Doyle award for reporting was awarded to him .