 A trade may benefit both teams, but each also believes that holding out may lead to better terms . A trade could be beneficial to both sides, but neither believes it will lead to a better deal .
 Maybe a more parallel two-party negotiation is the Cuban missile crisis . Maybe a similar deal could happen in the U.S.
 Then, as now, two sides moved toward calamity over a relatively small issue . But the game theory has more than a bit of a bit in common with today's calamity .
 We shouldn't have a debt ceiling, and the differences between the current Republican and Democratic plans are slim, says Sen. Rand Paul . Paul: We shouldn’t have the debt ceiling .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba would not have vastly altered the strategic balance in the Cold War because the Soviets already had missiles that could hit us, author says . The U.S. already had a missile that could be hit by the Soviets, he says .
 Cuba shot down an American pilot; another American military plane got lost above Alaska and strayed over Russian territory . Another American plane was lost over Alaska; another got lost over Russia and got lost .
 Khrushchev was so rattled, he spent the last night sleeping in his clothes . Khrushchev spent the night in clothes . He was so shaken he spent his last night in the clothes .
 The Cuban missile crisis was ultimately resolved largely because of an asymmetry . But of course we didn’t fry .
 The Soviets would have to keep the agreement secret to protect the Kennedy political brand . They would pull missiles out of Cuba and we’d pull missiles from Turkey . The agreement would be secret .
 Trade worked because the United States cared more about something than the Soviets did, which meant that the Soviets could offer something which seemed small to them but big to us . That trade worked because they U.S. cared more than they . did, and that meant that they . cared more
 Asymmetries are why teams with little chance to win this year trade good old players for promising young players . In our current crisis, however, there are no obvious asymmetries, writes David Frum .
 Neither side wants default, but there’s nothing that the Democrats want that the Republicans don’t . Neither party wants default . Neither side want default .
 Obama wants to improve his 2012 election chances; Republicans want to weaken them . Obama: "I want to improve my election chances. I want to make sure I don't give up on this"
 Cuba should remind us that things can be worse than the worst-case scenario . The Red Sox never make a deal with the Yankees at the trade deadline because both teams want the same thing, and the other to lose .
 During the crisis, Americans planned out the battle meticulously, based on the best intelligence they could get on Soviet weaponry and the large nuclear weapons our spy satellites had spotted .
 At the time, the U.S. didn't know that the Soviets had hidden small nuclear weapons on the island . The United States didn’t know for 40 years that the Soviet Union had hidden nuclear weapons there .
 If we'd sent in an invading force, they’d have been hit with much more than machine-gun fire . If we’t sent in, they would have been attacked with machine gun fire, he says .
 Robert McNamara, the Defense Secretary in 1962, learned that in 2002, he said it “sent a chill down my spine.” Fortunately, whatever happens now won’t be remotely as bad as what could have happened .
 The debt-crisis talks are happening concurrently with baseball’s trading deadline . As every fan of the sport knows, there's … .
 There's always a flurry of transactions right at the 4 P.M. deadline on July 31st . The deadline is July 31 .
 When the Red Sox traded away Manny Ramirez, they filed the paperwork at 3:59 P.M. But perhaps baseball, which is essentially meaningless, is the wrong analogy for Washington .
 Then, as now, two sides moved toward calamity over a relatively small issue . But the game theory has more than a bit of a bit in common . Then and now, both sides are moving toward calamities .
 Maybe, maybe, Cuba should make us sanguine. John Boehner and Nikita Khrushchev should be sanguines. Maybe, perhaps, maybe it's a good thing for the country .
 The Cuban missile crisis was ultimately resolved largely because of an asymmetry . But of course we didn't fry. We didn’t fry .
 Cuba should remind us that things can be worse than the worst-case scenario . The Red Sox never make a deal with the Yankees at the trade deadline because both teams want the same thing, and the other wants to lose .
 Whatever happens now won't be remotely as bad as what could have happened before . Thankfully, whatever happens now will be remotely worse than what could've happened then .
 Facebook, Twitter and Instagram are the social media platforms to use for your ad choices . Infowindow.com will not sell my personal information to advertisers .
 It's interesting that the debt-crisis talks are happening concurrently with baseball’s trading deadline . As every fan of the sport knows, there's …. There's … a lot of baseball .
 Defense Department official Paul Nitze wrote in a meeting in the office of Under-Secretary of State George Ball’s office on Saturday, October 27 .