 In mid-October 1962, high-flying American reconnaissance planes photographed Soviets constructing nuclear missile sites in Cuba . U.S. reconnaissance planes captured Soviets constructing missile sites .
 President John F Kennedy met privately with the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm, several times over a crucial two-week period to deliberate and figure out how to respond to the photos .
 Kennedy surreptitiously taped most of the ExComm discussions . Historians have the opportunity to ""witness" the decision-making process and the making of history .
 Sheldon M Stern uses the tapes to provide the first narrative account of those meetings . Stern's book is published by Sheldon Stern . Stern is the author of the book .
 From 1977 to 1999, Stern was the John F Kennedy Presidential Library Historian . Stern was a historian for the Kennedy Library from 1977 until 1999 .
 Stern's knowledge of ExComm meetings, along with his admiration of President Kennedy, are evident throughout this extensively researched and detailed account of nuclear war avoided . Stern's admiration of Kennedy, as well as his knowledge of the meetings, is evident throughout the book .
 Stern presents a stunning number of corrections to May and Zelikow's transcripts . Stern also corrects a number of errors in the transcripts of the two speeches .
 May and Zelikow have re-transcribed the tapes for a three-volume collection of Kennedy transcripts . Stern, in an appendix, offers several pages of corrections to those new transcripts .
 May and Zelikow's errors consist of misidentifying or misquoting speakers, with results that sometimes alter the historical record . May misidentifies or quotes some of the speakers .
 Stern suggests digital filtering might have distorted the sound quality of the tapes . Stern says the expensive digital filtering used by May and Zelikow may have distorted their sound quality .
 Stern seeks to capture the flavor of the meetings, describing the tone, mood, emotion, and even dark humor among the ExComm participants . Stern: By presenting the tapes in narrative rather than transcript form, Stern .
 Stern often depicts ExComm participants as having ""murmured,"" ""whispered,"" or spoken their words ""in a particularly somber tone of voice,"" descriptions which give the reader a sense of either the intensity, exasperation, or light-hearted banter of various
 Stern avoids detailed commentary and lets the ExComm participants's words speak for themselves . Stern: "For the most part of the conversation, Stern avoided detailed commentary"
 Much of the book reads like a transcript in narrative form, with single, long paragraphs frequently consisting entirely of dialogue among as many as four participants . As a result of this, the book often reads as much as a transcript .
 Stern's commentary on disputes over the historical record, including errors made by ExComm participants in their previous accounts and oral interviews, are usually placed in the footnotes or the introduction or conclusion of the book . Stern's comment on disputes is usually placed on footnotes and the introduction .
 Stern prefaces each meeting with a short summary of ongoing domestic and worldwide events . Stern's narrative is devoted to presenting the details of the taped discussions . Stern, like Zelikow and May in their own volume, has a narrative .
 Despite the often dramatic conversations and Stern's efforts to include only the most important material, the book is sometimes tedious, dense, and repetitive . Stern's book is often tedious and dense .
 Stern's reliance on long excerpts from letters Kennedy wrote while fighting in World War II as well as admiring block quotes from the journalist Hugh Sidey will not sway skeptics . Stern's use of quotes from Sidey and long excerpts of letters from Kennedy's letters, while interesting, will not
 Robert Dallek, Kennedy's most recent biographer, offers a similar though more compelling defense . Stern does not even mention Southeast Asia, a rather large blind spot when dealing with Kennedy's alleged Cold War sins .
 Stern clearly hopes to bolster Kennedy's historical stature by showing him reluctant to plunge the nation into war . Stern hopes to show Kennedy's willingness to take part in war .
 Stern's overly enthusiastic brief for the president is difficult to quarrel with his assessment of Kennedy during the crisis itself . Despite Stern's enthusiasm for Kennedy, Stern's brief for Kennedy was not overly enthusiastic .
 Stern's narrative is that one can follow the contributions and viewpoints of ExComm members from one meeting to the next . Stern: "A strength of Stern's . narrative is to follow the . contributions of various ExComm . members from the . next meeting to one meeting .
 Kennedy distinguished himself as thoughtful and independent-minded, willing to challenge assertions made by both his military and civilian advisors . Kennedy was a thoughtful, independent thinker .
 Had decisions been made by majority vote, military action against Cuba would likely have resulted . Kennedy favored the mostly diplomatic gambit favored by Kennedy .
 The consequences of a U.S. attack on Cuba would have been horrifying . The island contained nuclear missiles and more than five times the number of Soviet personnel than had been thought to be .
 Unswayed by tough-talking hawks, he successfully proceeded with naval blockade, negotiations with Khrushchev's underlings, and attempts to get inspectors into Cuba to remove missiles .
 Kennedy emphasized that the ""Cuban"" missiles were more of a political than a military problem . Time and again, Kennedy said the missiles were a political problem .
 The tapes show Kennedy's ability to offer a critical analysis of his own mania over Cuba . Most impressively, the tapes demonstrate Kennedy's . ability to . offer a detached and critical analysis . of the Cuban crisis .
 Kennedy's insight was remarkable, especially since he and his brother were among those most fixated on Castro . It certainly contributed to his reluctance to intervene militarily .
 The tapes reveal the ExComm membership to have been predominantly hawkish . The tapes also reveal the membership of ExComm members of the US House of Representatives .
 Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon and Robert Kennedy voiced their support for military action . However, several, if not most participants, expressed skepticism over ending the crisis with a proposed trade whereby NATO missiles would be removed from Turkey .
 Some scholars suggest ExComm lacked ideological breadth . Historian Mark White says ExComm was not as wide-ranging as it should have been .
 Only authentic "dove" was Adlai Stevenson, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations . Stevenson favored a diplomatic solution to the situation .
 Oftentimes the only voices that halted the pro-war momentum were those of the president or Robert McNamara, the Secretary of Defense whose viewpoints sometimes clashed with those of Joint Chiefs .
 Were it not for the assertiveness of the president, things would have turned out much differently, the president says . The president's assertiveness is key to the success of his administration, he says .
 There is little doubt that President Kennedy deserves a bulk of the credit for resolving the crisis peacefully . President Kennedy, for all the blame he warrants for helping to incite the crisis, also deserves the credit, he says .
 Kennedy's independence does seem to undercut Stern's assurances about how much influence ExComm had on the president, however, however . Stern: Kennedy's independent does appear to undercut his assurances .
 Kennedy might have appreciated the give-and-take among his advisors, but he ultimately did not heed their advice at one of the most important points in the crisis . Kennedy may have appreciated his advisers' advice, but not heed them at crucial moments .
 Most ExComm members urged the president not to agree to the missile trade . They even urged him to consider military action against North Korea . The president agreed to a missile deal with Russia and Syria .
 Some historians suggest that Kennedy might have already made up his mind at this point . Stern acknowledges that historians may have been using these discussions as a last-ditch effort to gain a consensus .
 Stern instead concludes that Kennedy's inclination to pursue the Turkish option actually seems to have hardened in response to the dogged intractability of his advisers . Stern concludes that the president's "intractability" of his advisors is to blame for his decision to pursue Turkey .
 ExComm might not have had a ""major impact"" on the president's October 27 decision . One wonders what evidence would ever convince Stern that ExComm had a major impact" on the decision .
 Stern's narrative of the ExComm tapes is a welcome single-volume source of the American side of one of the most important and dangerous moments in recent world history . Nevertheless, Stern's narration of the tapes is still a welcome source of American side .
 He offers just enough of a guiding hand to make sense of conversations . He exercises enough restraint to let the evidence speak for itself, allowing room for divergent conclusions .
 Stern offers a portrait of Kennedy as an almost dovish hero instead of the macho cold warrior his detractors present . Stern offers an unmistakable portrait of JFK as a dovistic hero .
 Stern persuasively revises the anti-Kennedy accounts of the missile crisis . In the specific--and significant--case of the . missile crisis, Stern persuades . Stern .
 The book is about national security threats, both real and perceived, in an attempt to make national security more of the focus of national security .
 Kennedy was a curious individual interested in current events who did overrule the war hawks surrounding him in the fall of 1962 . We know that Kennedy was curious about current events . Kennedy was an avid supporter of the Vietnam War .
 Even when weapons of mass destruction were undoubtedly in Cuba, Kennedy successfully sought to remove the missiles without resorting to a unilateral war . Kennedy successfully removed the missiles from Cuba without resort to unilateral war.
 One wonders whether the current president of the United States has ever rejected the counsel of his closest, most hawkish advisors . The president prides himself on not reading newspapers, but he is a man who doesn't read newspapers .
 Parts of two tapes issued by the Kennedy Presidential Library confirm Stern's account of conversations that May and Zelikow either label """" or incorrectly transcribed . Stern says the tapes were either taped incorrectly or misquoted . Stern: The tapes were released by Kennedy Library .
 Stern does have a distracting tendency to overuse italics when quoting speakers . Stern does not always use italics to quote quotes from speakers .
 Only the word ""ample"" was given any emphasis, and it was minimal at that . The word "ample" was given only a minimal amount of emphasis .
 Dallek's recent biography of Kennedy presents the same evidence found in his article . The author's article was published in the New York Times .