 She turned onto Gumwood Street between a military vehicle and what she thought was a moving van . Not thinking anything of it, she thought it was a military van .
 Barb drove through the main gate into Malmstrom Air Force Base and guided her 1960 black-and-white Plymouth Fury to Cedar Street, where she lived . Barb's friend Exie lived in the Air Force base .
 Exie stopped in front of Exie's house, gathered her purse and coat, and reached for the car door . Exie was in the middle of the night when she was attacked by a car bomb .
 Barb jumped when she saw several Air Force Police Officers peering at her over the barrels of their guns . Barb jumped out of the crowd when she was approached by the officers .
 The officer on the driver's side motioned to her to roll down the car window, which she did with shaking hands . She did not comply with the officer's request .
 The officer demanded her identification and then asked her if she knew what she had done . The officer then demanded her ID and asked her to tell her what had happened .
 Barb nervously answered no. No. Barb was shot in the face with multiple guns pointed at her . Barb was shocked by the number of guns she had been pointed at .
 The officer informed her that she had interrupted a missile convoy on its way to the base . The officer told her that the convoy was a missile missile convoy . She was told she interrupted the convoy by the officer .
 Barb cooperated as the officer interrogated her as to her purpose . She cooperated with the officer . Barb was shocked to find out what happened .
 After the officer ascertained that she had not been trying to sabotage the missile, he and his fellow officers stayed their guns, climbed into their vehicle, and drove off . After ascertaining that she hadn't tried to sabotage a Minuteman missile that the convoy had been transporting, he
 Barb sat for a moment, then grabbed her purse and fled into Exie's house . Exie sat in the house, then sat in her chair until Barb sat down and left . Barb sat there for a few minutes, then fled .
 Normally, the grave manner in which the officer handled the situation would have seemed excessive . Normally, it would have been excessive, but the officer's handling of the situation was exceptional .
 I would also like to thank each of my interviewees for granting me time out of their busy schedules to answer my questions and further my research . I would like to also thank each interviewee for their time .
 Grandparents Joe and Barb Stroup gave me plenty of support and encouragement for my thesis . The Stroup family is proud to present their thesis to CNN iReport .
 Thanks also to Sunny Ray Mandeville, Lori Balcerzak, Mary Lamb and Mary Lamb, Tom and Kathy Miller, Dr. Tom Miller .
 Philip Pallister, Father William Greytak, Guido Bugni and Guido . William Thompson's mother Lynn Thompson, for all your help .
 Erik Pratt for allowing me to take pictures of his civil defense paraphernalia . Erik Pratt is a former member of the Civil Defense Department .
 Thank you to Pearl Pallister for her help in editing the illustrations . Also, thank you for helping with the illustrations.
 Thank you to all of the professors who have aided in the completion of this thesis . Finally, thank you to the teachers who have helped with the project .
 "Thank you for keeping me in line and helping me get this thesis done in time. Also, thank you for helping me keep me in check," she says .
 David Messenger and Nathalie Caulliez are two of the readers of this thesis . David Messenger is the author of the thesis and the author behind the book .
 Radiation Measuring Kit, 1962, was released in 1962 . It contains a radiation measuring kit, measuring radiation levels .
 President Kennedy announced to the unsuspecting public that Soviet missiles had been discovered in Cuba on October 22, 1962 . President Kennedy made the announcement to an unsuspecting public .
 Kennedy told his audience that an American blockade would be placed around Cuba to halt any further missiles from reaching the insular communist nation . After demanding a Soviet removal of the weapons, Kennedy ordered a blockade .
 Montanans, like millions of other American citizens, braced themselves for an unprecedented Cold War showdown . The U.S. government is preparing for a Cold War clash in Montanan, Montana .
 Montanans knew they could not escape the shadow of nuclear war . The island nation was thousands of miles from Cuba, but was not far from Cuba .
 Kennedy had known about the missiles six days prior to his address to the nation . Kennedy knew about the missile launch six days before his speech .
 The tension between the U.S., the Soviet Union, and Cuba had been brewing for several years . The tension was a major source of tension .
 Millions were spent on assassination attempts on Castro and economic warfare . Millions of dollars were spent trying to kill Castro and destroy Castro's wealth .
 Backers of Operation Mongoose wanted a reason for an American invasion of Cuba . When the day came, the CIA would be ready to invade Cuba . The CIA was ready for the invasion .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy actively supported and worked on Operation Mongoose . One of the active backers was Robert Kennedy, who actively supported the operation .
 It was likely his persistence and near obsession with the project that kept the operation active .
 China was challenging the Soviet Union for the dominant role in the Communist world . China was challenged by the Soviets in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Soviets needed an opportunity to show their toughness, and that opportunity presented itself in Cuba . The Soviet Union needed a chance to show its toughness, the president said .
 The small island nation had become communist under Castro in 1959 . It appeared to be an ideal spot for the Soviet Union to prove to Communists around the globe that it was not being too soft on the West .
 Called after a cobra-killing mammal found in Southeast Asia . Nikita Khrushchev began secretly sending missiles to Cuba in 1962 .
 Kennedy announced on September 13,1962, that the United States would do whatever it needed to do to protect itself and its allies . Kennedy was unaware of the Soviet transportation of missiles to Cuba .
 Kennedy said he was intolerant of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The statement would come back to haunt Kennedy in October when the missiles were discovered .
 The increasing friction between the three nations was evident to the American public . The increasing tension between the U.S. and China is evident in the public .
 Many Americans believed that the Soviet Union and Cuba were threatening the national security of the U.S. Many Americans thought that they were flagrantly challenging America's supremacy in the Western Hemisphere .
 Berlin was also a factor in leading up to the crisis in Cuba . Berlin was a city thousands of miles away from Cuba, Berlin .
 Berlin's welfare was of considerable concern to the Kennedy administration . Berlin was deep in Soviet-controlled East Germany . The Kennedy administration was concerned about the city's welfare .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy had been at odds with each other about Berlin since the Vienna Summit in June 1961 . Operation Anadyr closed East Berlin to the West on August 31, 1961 .
 The Anadyr region was a far cry from tropical Cuba . The name was meant to mislead, but the region was actually a tropical paradise .
 Kennedy's actions up to the crisis and handling of the crisis colored his actions . These tensions colored Kennedy's behavior in the aftermath of his presidency . Kennedy's handling of crisis itself was also colored by tensions surrounding the Kennedy administration .
 The American Jupiter missiles in Turkey were within quick striking distance of the Soviet Union . The missiles were built in Turkey in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Soviets had no missiles in the Western Hemisphere to offset the American threat . This gave the Americans an advantage, because the Soviets didn't have enough missiles to offset that threat .
 Constructing missiles off the coast of the United States would give the Soviets a foothold in the western hemisphere, and keep the Americans from invading Cuba or firing nuclear weapons .
 Castro believed that Cuba's national security was at risk and that the presence of the Soviet missiles would deter an invasion from other countries, -especially the U.S. - especially the United States .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion and Operation Mongoose were two of the main reasons why Castro decided to let the Soviets build the missiles . The missiles were intended to aid the Communist movement in the western hemisphere . Castro decided not to allow the missiles to be built in Cuba .
 Throughout the summer and into the fall of 1962, the Soviets secretly shipped missiles to Cuba . The missiles were secretly shipped to Cuba by the Soviets .
 American U-2 spy planes discovered and photographed the missiles . The missiles were discovered by U.S. spy planes on Sunday October 14 .
 The news reached Washington, D.C., and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy the next day . The news was reported to the White House .
 Bundy held the shocking evidence overnight and held it overnight . Bundy says the evidence was not immediately available to the president . Bundy: "I don't think it's a good thing to do"
 Bundy presented Kennedy and his advisors with the damning photographs . Bundy presented the president with the photos the following morning . Bundy says the photos will be released to the public .
 Kennedy and the majority of the ExComm1 realized what the photographs represented, even though they could not identify the individual missiles . Kennedy said he could identify the missiles as missiles, but could not do so .
 The photographs stunned Kennedy and the ExComm; they immediately began brainstorming to figure out how to respond to this threat . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do next, but I'm sure we're going to make sure we don't."
 Kennedy and his advisors hashed out several possible reactions to the Soviet buildup of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's advisors discussed possible responses to the buildup .
 The first option was considered because of the fact that missiles in Soviet territory could already hit the United States, therefore making the missiles in Cuba technically irrelevant . The other option was the first option because the missiles could already be hit by the U.S.
 The fate of Berlin also factored into this option . The Soviets would likely retaliate if the U.S. responded explosively to the missiles in Cuba .
 Public opinion and political pressure on Kennedy would not allow him to watch the Soviets construct missiles and not do anything to halt it . This option was never a high-ranking choice, however, because of public opinion .
 The second option, diplomatic pressure, both secret and public, is only slightly more viable than the previous option . Diplomatic pressure is not the only option, but it could be used in the future .
 The U.S. was not willing to trade both the Guantanamo Marine base in Cuba and the American missiles in Turkey for the missiles in Cuba, especially not publicly .
 Khrushchev might have forced an agreement on the U.S. rather than the other way around . Approach could have backfired, as he might've forced a deal on the United States .
 The sole voice of Adlai Stevenson, the American representative in the United Nations, called for the removal of American missiles in Turkey as a trade for the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Stevenson was the only voice of the U.N. representative in Turkey .
 Kennedy disagreed with Stevenson about the removal of the Jupiter missiles on the basis that if the United States tore down the missiles in Turkey it would appear that the U.S. government had given in to Soviet pressure .
 Kennedy had originally wanted the missiles removed from Turkey due to the fact they were obsolete, but with the discovery of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, there was no way Kennedy could remove the missiles without losing face . Ironically, Kennedy had initially wanted to remove them from Turkey .
 If the Soviets discovered the secret negotiations, the Americans might then be forced to accept an agreement with the Soviets, such as in the previous option, rather than delivering an ultimatum . Also, if the Soviets discover the secret talks, the U.S. might then accept a deal
 The fourth option, invading Cuba, was the most likely option to lead to nuclear war with the Soviets . The U.S. had four options: invade Cuba, invade Cuba and go to war .
 An invasion appealed to high-ranking American officials, due to the fact it could remove the man who had irritated the U.S. since his rise in the late 1950s, Fidel Castro . An invasion would also destroy the Soviet missiles assembled in Cuba, and it would also remove the
 If American bombers carried out a successful strike and took out the missiles, then both the Soviet and Cuban threats would be neutralized . The U.S. would be able to neutralize both Soviet and Cuba .
 He preferred a limited strike that would take out missiles and the surface-to-air missile sites . He said he wanted to take out the missiles, the sites and the missiles .
 Kennedy did not rule out a general strike, but he was more willing to move forward with a limited one . Kennedy: "I'm not going to rule out general strike. But I'm going to make it happen"
 The Soviets could retaliate with nuclear weapons or with an attack on the U.S. from Cuba . Soviet personnel could be killed in an air strike, the Soviets might take Berlin or fire on Turkey . The Soviets might simply choose to reconstruct the destroyed missiles .
 This option played heavily on Kennedy's mind the week before he announced the presence of the missiles to the nation . Kennedy's decision to launch the missiles played a role in the decision .
 If the American Navy placed an effective quarantine on Cuba, then the Soviets would be unable to continue to ship missile parts to the island . The U.S. Navy would be able to quarantine the island, which is home to Cuba .
 As with the previous options, the blockade could produce a negative Soviet reaction . The blockade could be a negative reaction to the Soviet reaction, according to experts .
 The Soviets could respond by refusing to yield to the blockade, which would likely result in a naval battle in the middle of the Caribbean Sea . The Soviet Union could also refuse to yield .
 The blockade would not be effective enough to bring about a removal of the -11missiles in Cuba . Another problem was whether or not the blockade would be effective .
 After the first day, this option, as well as the air strike and the invasion, appeared to be the most likely reaction to the missiles in Cuba . The air strike, invasion and invasion of Cuba were also seen as likely reactions .
 The next few days, President Kennedy and his ExComm advisors debated between the various options they had discussed . The next day, the president and his advisors decided on what they wanted to do .
 Joint Chiefs supported the full military invasion, rather than the blockade and the air strike . The Joint Chiefs backed the full invasion, not the blockade .
 McNamara explained to Kennedy that even a surgical strike would not necessarily take out all the missiles or the missile sites . An invasion had a better chance of succeeding, McNamara said .
 The president's brother, Robert Kennedy, did not initially support the blockade . Robert Kennedy's brother did initially support a blockade of Cuba .
 The argument against the blockade is that it's a very slow death, and it builds up, and goes over a period of months, he said . He stated that during that period of time, you've got all these people yelling and screaming about it .
 Almost every action the U.S. took could lead to a Soviet retaliation against the European city . The United States took many of the most likely risks of Soviet retaliation .
 Berlin played a prominent role throughout the Thursday, October 18, discussions . Berlin was a prominent part of the discussions .
 Kennedy and Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko discussed Cuba and Berlin . Later in the day, Kennedy discussed Cuba with Soviet foreign secretary Andrei Gromyko . Kennedy was in Berlin to discuss Cuba, Berlin .
 Gromyko evaded Kennedy when the latter prodded him about and warned him against offensive weapons on the small island . Kennedy had been warned that offensive weapons would be banned from the island .
 The next day, Kennedy and his advisors bickered about which action should be taken in response to the missiles . Kennedy: "The next day I'm sure I'm not going to be able to make a decision"
 Later that day, Kennedy left Washington, D.C., to attend a series of campaign rallies . The Joint Chiefs continually pressed Kennedy on the advantages of an invasion .
 After the first rally, the White House physician, Rear Admiral George Burkley, announced to the public that Kennedy had a cold . The president could return to Washington, D.C., to deal with the crisis without causing alarm .
 No one doubted Kennedy's illness; newspapers across Montana and the nation ran stories on Kennedy's cold . Kennedy was diagnosed with a cold; Montana newspapers ran stories .
 1962 congressional elections were less than three weeks away when Kennedy learned of the missiles . The elections might have influenced how he dealt with the crisis . The 1962 elections were just three weeks before the missile crisis .
 Kennedy chose to deal with the missiles in Cuba prior to elections . There was no way to predict how the public would react to the news or Kennedy's solution to the crisis .
 On October 20, the hawks and the doves presented their respective sides to the president . Politics and the election might have had some influence on Kennedy's decision, but they were not the primary cause .
 McNamara, who had wavered on his stance in the group, proclaimed his support for the blockade . McNamara: "I am proud to be a member of the group"
 Robert Kennedy vacillated between the blockade and air strikes, but in the end he came out a dove . Robert Kennedy came out as a dove, but he was not a fighter .
 The discussion between the two sides became extremely heated . The hawks pressed President Kennedy to side with them and go forward with an invasion, air strikes, or both .
 By the time the meeting had concluded, President Kennedy clearly supported a blockade . President Kennedy supported the blockade .
 This, however, did not satisfy the doves either, as Kennedy also had refused to negotiate . Kennedy also refused to discuss a deal with the president .
 Kennedy ordered Theodore Sorensen, Special Counsel to the President, to write a speech announcing a blockade of Cuba to the American public . At the end of the day, Kennedy ordered the blockade to be announced .
 He realized that there were too many nuclear risks involved with an invasion and air strikes . He had realized there was too many risks involved in an invasion .
 The rest of Sunday was used to discuss possible Soviet reactions to the blockade and justification of the quarantine to the world .
 Kennedy decided it was time to inform America's allies of the missiles in Cuba and of the American blockade around the island . Next, Kennedy decided to inform the U.S. of the missile threat .
 He then dispatched messengers to each North American Treaty Organization country . The messengers were dispatched to each country in North America .
 Kennedy managed to convince the two newspapers to hold their stories until after his Monday presidential address in the interest of national security . Kennedy said national security was at risk .
 The day ended on a relatively positive note for the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration was in full control of the White House .
 On Monday, October 22, was a flurry of activity for President Kennedy and his administration . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy's speech that night required some fine-tuning, and Adlai Stevenson and the American delegation to the UN needed a plan of attack for the approaching debate . Kennedy was speaking at the UN that night .
 Military issues around the world such as European defense and the Jupiter missiles in Turkey had to be sorted out . Also, military issues such as Europe's defense and Turkey's Jupiter missiles were dealt with .
 Kennedy did not want any rogue military personnel firing missiles on the Soviet Union . Kennedy wanted any rogue personnel to fire missiles on Soviet Union. Kennedy was concerned about rogue personnel firing missile missiles .
 Khrushchev had given similar orders to Soviet personnel . It was discovered later that Khrushche had also ordered similar orders . The orders were later discovered to have been given to Soviet troops .
 Joint Chiefs moved U.S. forces to DEFCON 32 on Monday afternoon . The military prepared itself for the blockade that was less than forty-eight hours away . The Joint Chiefs said Monday afternoon that the blockade was imminent .
 On late Monday afternoon, Kennedy briefed his cabinet and leaders of Congress in separate meetings . Kennedy briefed the cabinet and congressional leaders on Monday afternoon .
 He then revealed his plan to blockade Cuba, which although considered an act of war, it was unlikely to provide a militant, possibly nuclear response from the 2 DEFCON, which was short for Defensive Condition .
 DEFCON 1 was the most serious alert for war . DEFC ONDEFCON was the highest alert level in the U.S. military . The highest alert was for war, and the highest was for the nation .
 The DEFCON level was elevated when the President and his advisors believed American national security was at risk . DeFCON was elevated to the highest level of concern for national security .
 Kennedy defended his choice from interrogations by various senators, especially from Senator Richard Russell of Georgia . Kennedy then defended his decision from interrogators . Senator Russell attacked Kennedy's choice of president .
 After the meetings, the Soviets received a copy of the president's upcoming speech from Secretary of State Dean Rusk, as well as a letter to Kennedy from Khrushchev . The Soviets also received a letter from the president to Kennedy .
 In his speech, Kennedy briefed the nation about the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The speech was the first time President Kennedy had been briefed on Cuba .
 Kennedy made no attempt to cushion his words . Instead, he used stark phrases to describe the situation in Cuba .
 He revealed the extent of the missiles in Cuba and how far from the island the missiles could reach if fired . The missiles could be fired at Cuba if they were fired .
 Kennedy reminded the public that the Soviets had lied about their missile capabilities both inside and outside the Soviet Union . Kennedy said the Soviets lied about its missile capabilities inside and out of the USSR .
 Kennedy vividly illustrated the horrors of nuclear war and the fears of living in a world where nuclear war was always possible . He then outlined the American response to the threat of war .
 President Obama described the military buildup and military reinforcement of Gitmo . He also described the buildup of the Gitmo.
 Kennedy stated that a missile launch from Cuba would bring about a U.S. retaliation . Kennedy said it would be a retaliation for a Cuban missile launch .
 Kennedy warned the U.S. public about the treacherous road ahead . Kennedy concluded by calling for freedom and peace .
 The entire world was now aware that the U.S. and the Soviet Union were coming alarmingly close to nuclear war . The world now knew that the two countries were coming dangerously close to war .
 The next day, October 23,1692, newspapers across Montana reported on Kennedy's speech .
 Residents in Billings were some of the many Montanans who proclaimed their support for Kennedy and his actions . Kennedy was elected to Montana's highest seat in the Senate .
 The advent of the Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, combined with the newly acquired fear of a nuclear holocaust, frightened the American public . The American public was frightened by the growing fear of nuclear war and the threat of a holocaust .
 Many searched for a way to escape the potential Armageddon, and they thought a shelter provided that safe haven . The shelter provided a safe haven for those looking for an escape .
 Montana's Office of Civil Defense began asking the national government for assistance as early as 1955 . Montana's office of civil defense began asking for help in the 1950s .
 Hugh K Potter, Montana's Director of Civil Defense in 1955, wrote United States Senator Lee Metcalf to request aid for Montana . In 1955, Potter wrote a letter to the United States senator asking for help .
 Montana is not prepared for an emergency and would not fare well if such an emergency came, he said . He explained to Metcalf that Montana was not prepared to prepare for such a crisis .
 In March 1957, Potter asked Metcalf to support bills that would give more financial aid to Montana . Potter asked him to support a bill that would help Montana .
 One of the bills was the Holifield bill, named after its creator, Chet Holfield, a Democrat from California . It was named after the bill's creator, who died in 2010 .
 The bill called for the creation of several committees, including a Military Liaison committee, a Scientific Advisory Board, and a Civil Defense Advisory Council . The bill was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Potter supported it due to the fact that he believed it would aid Montana's civil defense . Potter supported the bill . Potter said it would help the state of Montana .
 Senator Lee Metcalf tried to keep Montanans informed about civil defense matters . Senator Lee met with the governor to discuss civil defense issues .
 In one radio address, Metcalf explained to Montanans about nuclear fallout . In one of one radio addresses, he explained about the dangers of the nuclear bomb .
 He described the effects of radiation on the human body, even through indirect exposure to atomic fallout . He said radiation can be traced back to the atomic bomb .
 The majority of the money was designated for Malmstrom Air Force Base and Glasgow AFB, to help build up the defense of the two areas .
 Metcalf did -23not attempt to cushion his words when he informed Montanans on this serious topic . He did not attempt to soften his words .
 Montanans sent many letters regarding civil defense to United States Representative Arnold Olsen . Olsen was elected to represent Montana in the U.S. Senate .
 Eslick of Bigfork wrote Olsen asking for instruction regarding the construction of a fallout shelter in a new school in Bigfork . Olsen: "A fallout shelter should be built in the school's new school"
 The language of such documents was often vague and difficult to discern when the documents could be applied . It was often difficult to interpret when a document could be used to apply .
 Olsen and Metcalf were asked by constituents to explain legislation and find out if it was applicable to each person's situation . Olsen and Metcalf were asked by many Montana constituents to answer questions .
 Both Senator Metcalf and Representative Olsen received numerous letters from Montanans, especially Butte citizens, petitioning then to have the Regional Office of Civil Defense established in Butte .
 The Young Democratic Club presented Olsen with four reasons why the new office should be created in Butte . Olsen was presented with the club's list of reasons for the office to be created . Olsen says the Butte Democrat's office is needed in the community .
 Butte had a stellar civil defense program already in place; the town's miles of tunnels would be excellent for storage and shelters . The town's people were in dire need of an economic boost .
 Carroll College in Helena, Montana, also tried to prepare its students and its campus for a nuclear attack . Mr. -24 is a 24-year-old man .
 Carroll had some civil defense plans, but they were far from extensive . Carroll had a civil defense plan, but it was not extensive .
 Helena High School, the Civic Center, and Helena Junior High School were among the spots . Some of these spots included Helena High and Helena's Civic Center .
 A typical set-up included walls covered with bunk-style beds, but instead of two levels of beds, there were at least three to four beds on top of one another on the wall . A typical wall-to-wall bed set up includes at least four beds each on top
 The food and water supply was kept in a different area, away from the sleeping quarters . Food and water supplies were kept away from sleeping quarters in a separate area .
 The barrel gave instructions on how to fill, dispense, and use as a commode .
 Individual Montanans also had their own plans for civil defense . Photographs of United States Aqua Can from private collection .
 Philip Pallister, M.D., built a fallout shelter in his house in the 1950s . Pallister built the shelter after the tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union began to escalate .
 His shelter included its own sewer system, water and food supply, air system, radiation detector, and solid eight-inch concrete walls encased with one inch lead .
 Pallister had a freezer to keep a stockpile of meats and tanks of water . Pallister also had tanks of food and water tanks to store water .
 Pallister began learning about radiation and its effects on certain types of plants and animals . Pallister learned about radiation in the early days of his career . He says radiation has caused the effects of radiation on animals, plants and plants .
 Goats, for example, were one of the best animals for surviving and recovering from a nuclear attack . Goats are best known for their ability to survive and recover after a nuclear strike .
 He also studied how to remove radiation from the soil, so crops would grow to feed the survivors of a nuclear holocaust .
 Montanans chose to fortify their homes and implement their own civil defense plans in the same manner as Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's civil defense plan includes fortifying homes and implementing civil defense .
 Mary Lamb, a senior at Helena High School during the crisis, stated that her family, which lived up in the mountains around Helena, had planned on evacuating .
 Mary recalled that she had friends whose parents were building bomb shelters . Several shelters were being built within the Helena city limits at the time . Mary recalled friends whose friends were building shelters .
 Mary participated in drills designed to prepare students for a nuclear attack . Her main concern was not being able to find shelter if she was in the city when a bomb hit .
 She attended a one-room country school, which had a wall made entirely of windows . She went to a country school with a wall of windows in her room .
 Students practiced moving desks against the wall opposite the windows and crawling behind them . They would be shielded from flying shards of glass if a bomb went off and shattered the wall of windows .
 Barb Stroup, who lived at Malmstrom AFB with her husband, Tech Sergeant Joseph Stroup and their eight-year-old daughter Lynn, stocked up her basement with bedding and food in case it needed to be used as a shelter .
 Malmstrom had no shelters to offer its servicemen and their families, so each family had to prepare on its own . The city had no shelter for servicemen or their families .
 Tom and Kathy Miller of Darby, Montana, had no shelter to flee to in the case of an emergency . On the other hand, the Miller's family was forced to live with no shelter in their home .
 They made no attempt to stock up on food and supplies, if the crisis turned nuclear . They did not attempt to store up food or supplies .
 The town of Clancy distributed maps to various places in the area that were to serve as fallout shelters . Lori Balcerzak, a junior in high school during the crisis, remembers that her town had distributed maps .
 Lori's family did not practice any other form of civil defense . Lori and her family didn't know where their shelter was, Lori says . Lori says she and her husband survived .
 Missoula couple wrote to Senator Metcalf asking him not to support an appropriations bill for civil defense and fallout shelters . The Minnerlys wrote to the senator in December 1961 .
 Montanans were not the only citizens who braced themselves for possible nuclear war . Montananans braced for possible war .
 Those who could afford it had veritable mansions underneath the earth's surface . The mansions were hidden beneath the surface of the world's largest city .
 Christopher Walken's character, Calvin Webber, built in the film Blast from the Past, was not as far from reality as one might think . Homes such as the one one he built in Blast From the Past were not as close to reality as possible .
 Webber's shelter mirrored his home on the surface and was complete with a dining room, kitchen, living room, bedrooms, fishery, grocery store, and garden . Webber lived in the shelter with his wife and children .
 Not all shelters may have been as fancy, but there is little doubt that some were . Not all of the shelters may be as fancy as some were.
 Webber also employed an extensive lock system to keep others out . It was very extravagant, but it failed to protect the French from the German invasion in World War II . -31 .
 Robert Kennedy's character explained to Kevin Costner's character, Kenneth O'Donnell, that identity cards were ""for morale. For morale, the identity cards are for morale"
 Less than half of Montana's counties had made decent civil defense preparations . Less than 50 percent of Montana counties had civil defense plans .
 Governor Tim Babcock ordered Montana's National Guard to go and help these counties step up civil defense work . Governor Babcock sent the National Guard out on October 25,1962 .
 The day before, Montana's air bases were placed on alert, which included sending jet fighter planes from Malmstrom AFB in Great Falls to the airport in Billings .
 Other airports and reserve bases, such as Missoula, readied themselves as well, even though they had not yet been put on alert . Air Force base in Montana was also readied .
 At Malmstrom AFB, servicemen were ordered to place the Minuteman Missiles on alert .
 In Great Falls, the local government instructed schools about what to do in case of a nuclear attack . Schools were instructed to prepare for a nuclear strike .
 Children who lived over ten minutes away from their school were supposed to stay in the structure, whereas children who lived under ten minutes from school were instructed to evacuate to their homes . Children under 10 minutes away were told to evacuate .
 Philip Pallister, interview by author, October 30,2005, Boulder, MT, tape recording. -3913 . -3914 . -3813 .
 Molly Holz, "The Minuteman Missiles in Montana" 6,15; and Joseph Stroup, "Molly Holz," "Joseph Stroup. 6, 15; and "Moomy Holz"
 Director Fives Rules for Action in Crisis,"" Carbon County News (Red Lodge), November 1,1962,1.2.3.4.5.6.
 For some the crisis created immense fear, while others reacted with no reaction . For others it wrought no reaction. For some, it was the worst of the worst, the worst .
 Some people fully supported the president in his reaction and implementation of the quarantine . Other people believed that Kennedy had not responded forcefully enough and that he should have acted more aggressively .
 Montana politicians at the national, state, and local levels all began proclaiming their support for Kennedy and his decisions regarding the crisis . Montana politicians have declared their support of Kennedy .
 One Billings Gazette headline -42$gaHa*4tn• >.jin®ig hfaoriseog made --you^wanfc&to ^DidAth® 4ax ^iU .ornvftJpdaYuOn^^oA1 J-
 Governor Tim Babcock proclaimed his support for President Kennedy and the quarantine . Governor Babcock said President Kennedy was responsible for the quarantine.
 James Battin was one of the two U.S. Representatives from Montana, the other being Arnold Olsen . Wayne Montgomery, the Republican who was challenging the incumbent Arnold Olsen, promised he would support him .
 The two U.S. Senators from Montana were Mike Mansfield and Lee Metalf . -44 Kennedy's policies regarding Cuba were more aggressive than his predecessors .
 Graybill said he appreciated the manner in which Kennedy handled the crisis, as it would hopefully allow the two super powers to avoid war, or even worse, nuclear war . Graybill: "Hopefully this would allow us to avoid nuclear war"
 Engles stated, ""Either he does not enjoy the confidence of the President and Montana's senior senator , the majority leader, or he doesn't recognize a serious national threat when he sees one," Engles said .
 Jim Battin ran advertisements in Montana newspapers for his reelection to Congress . Battin was elected to Congress in 1964 .
 Senator Mike Mansfield was away from Montana and Washington, D.C. when he learned about the missiles in Cuba . Originally, Senator Mansfield, who was a ranking member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was away .
 Mansfield's Florida vacation was cut short when Kennedy had him flown back for an emergency briefing . Mansfield was vacationing in Florida when he was flown back to Florida for a briefing .
 Mansfield said Kennedy had informed him and other members of Congress on the situation . Mansfield revealed that Kennedy informed him of the situation in a speech given the same day as Kennedy's presidential address . Kennedy told Mansfield that the situation was under investigation .
 Mansfield also reiterated that ""We can do nothing else now that the decision has been reached but give our full support to the President of the United States"
 Olsen believes it is essential to our national defense that we dominate the heavens with our satellites . Olsen says satellites are essential to the nation's national defense .
 Congressman Olsen has given un­ wavering . support to legislation for space satellites . Olsen: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do about space satellites" Olsen supports legislation for satellites .
 A move against Cuba, however, would only occur under the most dire circumstances . The U.S. government has been criticized by Cuba for its lack of transparency .
 Mansfield addressed the fact that Cuba was going to play a large role in the upcoming Congressional elections . Mansfield said that Cuba is going to be a major factor in the Congressional elections.
 Mansfield totally supported the president and his actions regarding Cuba . Mansfield: Cuba should not be used politically and Cuba shouldn't be used as a political tool . Cuba should be not used politically, Mansfield said .
 Mansfield was not the only member of the Montana delegation who worked to keep Montanans informed of the crisis .
 Senator Lee Metcalf attempted to assuage fears that the people might have about the missiles in Cuba . Senator Lee Metcalf attempted assuage fears that the missiles might have been launched in Cuba.
 On October 26, he stated that he thought the Cuban crisis would be over soon, because the Soviets would fold to the Americans . He said he thought it would soon be over .
 When asked by the Red Lodge Chamber of Commerce on his position on -49the crisis, Battin responded that he supported the blockade, but would support other options as well .
 Cuba already has intermediate range ballistic missiles that could reach places twenty-three hundred miles from Cuba, including Montana, he warned . He also warned Montanans that Cuba already had intermediate range missiles .
 At a rally in Billings, Battin asserted that he supported Kennedy's action . Battin said he just thought that the federal government should have acted on the Cuban threat months earlier .
 He reasserted these sentiments to a crowd in Glasgow a few days later . He added that a tough policy toward Russia was essential in the handling of the crisis .
 In Butte, Olsen informed the city's inhabitants that he supported the quarantine of Cuba . Olsen told the Butteans that he supports the quarantine .
 Babcock celebrated his forty-third birthday party at Babcock's birthday party . Babcock expressed his support for Kennedy and -50his stance in Cuba .
 Although Montanans appreciated the news their Montana and national government officials were giving them, it did not mean that Montananans waited placidly for information to come to them .
 Many people wrote their Senators both asking for information and giving it to the media .
 They wrote to commend and sometimes condemn the actions of the nation . They also wrote to condemn and condemn the nation's actions .
 Senator Lee Metcalf received several letters during and immediately after the crisis . Senator met with many letters from people concerned about the situation .
 John Ricks of Lima asked Metcalf why the U.S. had not dealt with Fidel Castro more forcefully before the crisis . Ricks asked why the United States hadn't dealt with Castro more strongly before the Castro crisis .
 James Eakland of Fortine praised -51Kennedy's action and asked Mansfield to not allow a retreat from this policy .
 Leonard Bashor, the State Representative of Toole County from Kevin, Montana, concurred with the Eaklands in his telegram to Mansfield, where he ""rge no retreat on present position"" in Cuba . State Representative Leonard Bashor conformed with
 During the crisis, Mansfield received numerous letters from Montanans informing him of their support of the government and its actions regarding Cuba . The American Legion of Harlowtown also expressed their full support .
 Martha and Frank Palssy of Rollins, Montana, expressed a mixture of feelings regarding the crisis . Martha Palssi: "I don't want to see what's going on for me. I don't think it's OK"
 Mervin Karr, on the other hand, was entirely negative about the U.S. Policy in Cuba . Karr was a critic of the Cuban policy .
 Ben Middleton of Anaconda wrote Mansfield a letter in which he stated his concerns with the Soviet offer to take the nuclear missiles out of Cuba .
 He told Mansfield that he had a nagging feeling that -52Khrushchev planned on replacing the missiles with nuclear submarines .
 He then called for the liberation of Cuba from the clutches of Castro and the Soviet Union . The Cuban leader called for Cuba to be liberated from Castro's clutches .
 Mansfield received numerous telegrams from Montanans who concurred with the Montana Council of Churches . Mansfield's decision was made in response to a letter from the Montananans .
 Robert Romanowski of Bozeman also urged Mansfield to agree to the UN proposal . Robert . Romanowski also urged the Mansfield community to support the proposal .
 Lori Balcerzak, then a junior in high school from Clancy, Montana, remembered being scared that we were in trouble . She was afraid the confrontation might lead to nuclear war . The confrontation was a confrontation between the U.S. and North Korea .
 Bugni totally agreed with the stance taken by Kennedy regarding Cuba . Bugni agreed with Kennedy's stance on Cuba .
 His wife, Barb, remembered feeling ""nervous"" and after the crisis was over she was relieved and she hoped that it would stay resolved . His wife said she felt relieved and hoped that the crisis would continue .
 The most frightening moment for her was when she interrupted the missile convoy and had several guns pointed at her head .
 After the crisis cooled down, Tom remembered that he was content with the path the U.S. had taken and he thought the quarantine was the most sensible choice . Tom was happy with the decision to quarantine the United States .
 She wished Kennedy had taken much more aggressive action and invaded Cuba . She wished that Kennedy had invaded Cuba more aggressively .
 Sunny Ray Mandeville, a sophomore at Helena High School during the crisis, expressed exactly the opposite sentiment . Sunny RayMandeville was a junior in Helena, California, during the time of the crisis . He said, "I don't think it's a good thing to say
 She stated that although the crisis was ""magnified"" by the loss of her father a year and a half earlier, it ""sounded almost like a declaration of war,"" which was ""very -55scary"" for her .
 Sunny Ray was very relieved when the crisis was over and was grateful it had not escalated into nuclear war . Sunny Ray said he was grateful that the crisis had not been a nuclear threat .
 Mary Lamb, a senior at Helena High School during the crisis, was also frightened when the world was made aware of the crisis . Mary Lamb was also very frightened .
 She stated that at the time she did not think the blockade was a strong enough reaction . She said she didn't think it was enough for a strong reaction .
 Other Montanans fell within this spectrum of being extremely frightened to barely registering the crisis as a cause for concern . Other Montans fell in between extremely frightened and barely registering a cause of concern .
 Many newspapers ran articles about Montanans and their reaction to the crisis . Many newspapers published articles about the crisis in Montananans .
 The Lewistown Daily News asked people what their reaction was to President Kennedy's decision to quarantine Cuba . President Kennedy made the decision to quarantine Cuba .
 Four of the men added they only wished Kennedy had done it earlier . Also, four of them said they wished Kennedy hadn't done it sooner .
 Local groups such as the 40 and 8 of Bozeman also announced their support for Kennedy and his decision . Local groups said they support the decision .
 Montanans went into Sunday, October 28,1962, unsure of what the day might bring . Montananans feared the worst of the day would bring .
 Newspapers ran several ads on Sunday that urged people to go to church . Newspapers run several ads urging people to attend Sunday's service .
 Father Greytak recalled that although people at Carroll College were concerned, there was no rush to attend religious sevices . He said people were concerned about whether they were going to be forced to attend .
 Many people still felt the pull to go to church when they saw church advertisements in the newspapers . Still many people felt the pulled to go church .
 Many church ads did not directly mention the Cuban situation, but the serious undertones of the ads alluded to the missile crisis . The ads were in response to the Cuban crisis .
 The large number of religious advertisements added to the fear felt by many Montanans . People rush to church to pray for the survival of humanity .
 The variety of reactions to the crisis was likely mirrored throughout the nation . Each day in the crisis triggered a new ripple of feelings in the American public .
 The emotions of the nation and Montana reached a fever pitch as the crisis unfolded in October 1962 . Montana was a state of Montana during that fateful week .
 People watched and waited as Kennedy and Khrushchev danced precariously around nuclear war . People watched the Kennedy-Khrrushchev dance around the brink of nuclear war.
 "Mansfield Hints at K, JFK Meet,"" Great Falls Tribune, October 26,1962, 4; ""Sen. Khrushchev Must Decide 'PeaceWar,'"" Great . Falls Tribune: "Sen. Kennedy Must decide 'Peace. War,'"
 Atomic Warheads Already in Cuba,""Billings Gazette, October 27, 1962, 1,5. Atomic Warheads already in Cuba."" Billings Gazette" Oct. 27: 1962 .
 Kennedy and his advisors gathered to see if the Soviet Union would challenge the blockade . The blockade was set to begin October 24,1962 .
 The Soviets and Cubans were unsure as to how they would react to Kennedy's Monday evening presidential address . They were unsure of how the Soviets or Cubans would react . Kennedy's address was the first to be made public in the United States .
 On Wednesday, October 24, Kennedy and his advisors anxiously awaited news from the quarantine . Kennedy's advisors were waiting for the quarantine to be confirmed .
 Kennedy and his advisors knew that several Soviet vessels were in proximity of the Q-line,* and they were due to cross the line at any moment . Kennedy: "Several Soviet vessels" were at risk of crossing the line .
 The rest of the day, Kennedy and his advisors waited for any other news from the Q-line . Kennedy and aides waited for a few hours to hear from the president .
 No Soviet ships threatened to break the blockade, but Kennedy refused to allow a false sense of relief and security . Kennedy refused the Soviet ships threaten to break .
 Khrushchev criticized Kennedy severely for the American quarantine . Kennedy received a message penned by the Soviet leader on Wednesday evening . He criticized Kennedy for the quarantine .
 He also accused Kennedy of forcing terms on Khrushchev that Kennedy would never accept if the situation were reversed . He also said Kennedy would not accept those terms if he reversed .
 Khrushchev concluded his letter stating, "We shall not be simply observers of piratical actions of American ships on the high seas"
 The comparison of the crisis to an old West gunfight was interesting as in these duels held at ""High Noon,"" only one party was left standing . The comparison was interesting to compare the situation to a gunfight .
 Kennedy and other ExComm members met to continue plotting the course of the United States . Thursday, October 25, came without event and Kennedy met to discuss the future of the U.S.
 Kennedy and his advisors also discussed American responses to the possibility of a Soviet ship challenging the Q-line . Kennedy also discussed the possible response to the threat .
 They also needed to decide whether or not to stop every Soviet ship that approached Cuba . The Cuban government also had to decide if they would stop all Soviet ships .
 One ship, the Bucharest, most likely did not have missile paraphernalia on board, so it would be wise for the Americans to let the ship pass . The Bucharest is one of the ships most likely not carrying missiles .
 Later on Thursday, Kennedy and his ExComm gathered in the Cabinet room to discuss the progress of Soviet ships nearing the blockade . Kennedy and the ExComm were discussing the situation of the Soviet ships .
 Bucharest had been momentarily stopped at the line, but had not been boarded and allowed to pass without incident . The president learned that the Bucharest . Bucharest was briefly stopped, but not boarded, and had passed without incident, he said .
 McNamara also announced that the Volkerfreundschaft, an East German passenger liner, was drawing closer to the Q-line . McNamara: "The Volker frekschaft is drawing closer and closer"
 Ex-Comm members bickered back and forth as to whether to make a stand and stop the ship, or let it pass into Cuban waters unmolested . The ship is now in Cuban waters, but it has yet to be stopped .
 President Kennedy dictated that the ship would be allowed to cross the line without interference for two reasons . The ship crossed the line in the early 1950s .
 Kennedy wanted to push forward U Thant's proposal for a decrease in -67tensions . Kennedy wanted the proposal to decrease tensions in the region .
 Kennedy: "If you try to disable it, you're apt to sink it. Two, according to Kennedy, if you're trying to disable the system, you'll sink it"
 Adlai Stevenson prepared to debate the Soviets on the issue of the missiles in Cuba in the UN meeting on the evening of October 25 . Stevenson was the American representative to the UN .
 Stevenson retaliated by announcing that the U.S. government had proof of weapons in Cuba . The Soviet representative to the UN Valerian Zorin continued to deny the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba and accused the United States of bringing the world .
 He interrogated Zorin as to whether he was denying the existence of missiles in Cuba . He then asked if he had denied the existence in Cuba, he said .
 Zorin attempted to sidestep the question by claiming he did not have to answer Stevenson, as they were not in an American courtroom . He said they were in the United States, not in a courtroom, as it was not in American court .
 Stevenson then proceeded with his presentation of the damning photographs of the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Stevenson presented the damning photos of the missiles in the Cuban territory .
 Kennedy and his advisors continued to work on contingency plans for Cuba . The evening ended on a high note for the Kennedy administration .
 The ExComm realized that sooner or later the American naval vessels that were enforcing the quarantine would have to stop a Soviet ship . But it was still not positive as to how the Soviets would react .
 The discussions shifted to various topics, including the UN inspection, UN and OAS support of American initiatives, and missile sites in Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration had a busy day on October 26, October 26 . It was the first day of the Kennedy administration .
 Khrushchev proposed a cessation to the hostilities that had sprung up between the two nations . A letter arrived from the leader of the Soviet Union that proposed a cease-fire . The war broke out between Russia and the United States .
 Khrushchev promised that if the U.S. agreed not to invade Cuba, the Soviet Union would stop shipping Castro weapons . The letter was sent to the United States in 1960s and '60s .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for the removal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The next day, however, Kennedy received a new letter from the Soviet leader . Kennedy received the new letter, but it was not clear what happened .
 Kennedy and his advisors tried to reason why Khruschev had hardened his position overnight . Confused, Kennedy tried to figure out what had happened to him . Kennedy's advisors later tried to find out what happened .
 They then immediately began to determine how to respond to these messages . They then began to discuss how they would respond to them .
 U-2 spy plane accidentally drifted out of American airspace and into Soviet airspace . Soviets might have thought the plane was gathering information for a -69preemptive strike on the Soviets .
 Cubans under Soviet command fired upon an American U-2 spy plane . On Saturday, October 27, Cuba fired upon the plane . The plane was shot down by Cuban commandeers .
 Major Rudolf Anderson was killed when a missile struck his plane and it crashed . The pilot was on a reconnaissance mission to learn more about the progress of the missiles .
 The loss of Major Anderson deeply saddened Kennedy and his advisors, but a deeper issue bubbled beneath the surface . Kennedy's advisors say the loss of Anderson was deeply saddened by the loss .
 There was the realization that the Soviet Union and Cuba apparently were preparing to do battle . The Cuban government was preparing to take on the Soviet-Russian forces .
 ExComm members met to discuss what action should be taken in response to the killing of Major Anderson . Major Anderson was shot dead by a helicopter at the scene of the shooting . The ExComm met in London to discuss the killing .
 The members had to determine if the Cubans had been acting alone or with Soviet help and if the plane had been a threat or if they did so under Khrushchev's command .
 No matter what, Kennedy had to tread carefully, as one wrong move could lead to nuclear war . One wrong move may lead to a nuclear war, Kennedy said . Kennedy was in the midst of a nuclear crisis at the time .
 In the end, Kennedy decided to negotiate directly with Khrushchev and the -70Soviet Union, leaving Cuba out of negotiations . In the 1970s, Cuba was left out of the negotiations .
 The Cubans had not been party to the negotiations since the crisis had first erupted . In fact, the Cubans hadn't been part of the negotiations .
 Later Saturday evening, during the midst of the U-2 controversies, Kennedy decided to make a move for peace . Kennedy made a peace move on Saturday evening .
 On October 27, Kennedy accepted the terms of the first letter sent the day before . Khrushchev's second letter called for a quid pro quo exchange of missiles .
 On October 28, Khrushchev responded to both Kennedy's letter and to the U-2 problems . On October 31, the Soviet Union responded to the letter and the problems .
 The Soviet Premier chastised the president for flying spy planes into both Soviet and Cuban airspace . Khrushchev called for caution and rational thought to keep the two nations from taking up arms .
 Tensions between the Soviet Union and the U.S. had decreased substantially after the two countries reached an agreement about the Cuban situation . Tensions had decreased significantly after the agreement .
 The agreement required the Soviet Union to dismantle and remove the missiles in Cuba and the American quid pro removal of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The agreement also required the United States to remove missiles from Cuba .
 It also included an American pledge not to invade Cuba, which pleased Castro . Castro was pleased with the pledge .
 On October 30, a miscommunication on the bridge of an American naval vessel almost led to a firefight with a Soviet submarine . The incident occurred on October 30 . The U.S. Navy vessel was attacked by the Soviet submarine in October .
 Not all people believed that the crisis would stay resolved or that the Soviets were really making a deal . Peter A Huchthausen, October Fury, 215. -73, was October Fury .
 It may have reflected what many Americans felt at the conclusion of the crisis . It warned of a Trojan-horse situation, which may reflect what they felt at conclusion of crisis .
 Cuba would remain a major concern for the U.S. government and American public for years to come . Cuba would be a major problem for the American government and U.K. public .
 Some Montanans wrote to members of Montana's Congressional delegation to ask questions or give advice to their senators and representatives . After the crisis cooled down, some Montanians wrote to their Senators and Representatives .
 Sen. Don Peterson of East Helena, Montana, wrote Senator Lee Metcalf, "Never before ... has an American President allowed a foreign nation to... flagrantly flaunt the United States in this hemisphere"
 Dean Wilcox of Missoula, Montana, supported Kennedy's action, but not Kennedy's . Kennedy was elected to the Montana House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 He simply wants the U.S. to keep firm on its policy with Cuba . He simply wanted the United States to keep a firm stance .
 Senator Mike Mansfield spoke to a crowd in Butte after the crisis had concluded . Senator Mansfield said he was proud of the way the state has dealt with the situation .
 He reassured Montanans about the situation . He reconfirmed his support of Kennedy's decisions during the crisis .
 He stated, ""It was a power decision by the President, approved unanimously by both Democrats and Republicans of the House and Senate. The decision was made by President Barack Obama .
 The comparison of the Khrushchev deal to the Trojan Horse was particularly revealing of the feelings of many people . The comparison was especially revealing of people's feelings about the deal .
 Battin served as the chairman of the Special Subcommittee on Cuba and Subversion in the Western Hemisphere . Battin was a member of the Committee on Subversion and Subversions in the West .
 The committee was created to study ""past errors and present dangers" in American-Cuban relations . The committee is studying the relationship between the United States and Cuba .
 In an interim report presented to the House on May 20,1963, Battin revealed that the number of Soviet officials still in Cuba had been drastically underestimated . Battin's report was presented to Congress in 1963 .
 On another day, June 24, 1963, Battin asserted that the U.S. government needed to enforce the Monroe Doctrine in regards to the Soviet Union and Cuba . Battin: "The American government needs to enforce that."
 Deer Lodge, Powell, Dawson, and Custer Counties all distributed similar booklets . Booklets included information about fallout, nuclear flashes, evacuation, public shelters, private shelters, and how to protect one's family .
 They also included a checklist of shelter supplies, diagrams for basement shelter building, family emergency plans, and a map of available shelter space in each county .
 Cascade County began issuing annual reports regarding the area's civil defense to assess the county's readiness for a nuclear attack . Cascade County issued the annual reports in response to the threat of an attack .
 The information included in the report were items such as available shelter spaces and plans for nuclear attacks . The report was compiled by the U.S. government .
 It renewed the shelter-building frenzy that had swept the U.S. in the 1950s . It helped to increase the number of civil defense programs in Montana .
 The crisis also helped unify Montana politicians behind Kennedy in a bipartisan display of support for the president's policy in Cuba . Montana politicians also united behind Kennedy's policy .
 This bipartisanship helped to reassure Montanans that the crisis would not become a nuclear exchange . The state of Montana has been hit by a nuclear crisis in the past .
 The missiles in Cuba were altogether too close in the minds of Montanans . The missiles were in Cuba too close to the people in the U.S.
 In actuality, the missiles in Cuba were too far away from the Northwest to strike Montana . But that didn't matter to the state's inhabitants .
 The Cold War had been building since the late 1940s and the arms race had dramatically escalated in the 1950s . The arms race was the largest arms race in the Cold War era .
 This resulted in a period of growing tension between the Soviet Union and the United States . People on both sides believed they were vulnerable to a nuclear attack . This led to tensions between the two countries .