 A new series of specials about the 1962 Cuban missile crisis reminds us that the threat remains . However, the threat still remains .
 Jennings says it was ''fascinating and frightening'' working on Missiles . Jennings: "It was fascinating and frightening" to work with Missiles. Jennings says Missiles are the first of its kind .
 Jennings notes that Cuban President Fidel Castro and his people were quite relaxed about the crisis . Jennings: Fidel Castro's people were 'quite relaxed' about it .
 Shriver set out to show the real people involved in her photo shoot . Shriver says it was all real .
 His job was to intercept secret messages sent by his Soviet counterpart about the Soviet’s military operations . He was sent to intercept messages from the Soviet counterpart .
 It was May 1962, the height of the Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The United States and Russia were at the top of the world's most powerful powers .
 The United States had recently placed ballistic missiles along the Russia-Turkey border . The U.S. recently placed missiles near the Russian-Turkish border .
 To retaliate, Khrushchev secretly slipped medium-range ballistic missiles into Cuba . The missiles were meant to counter the threat of Soviet Union invasion .
 On Oct. 2013, an American spy plane was sent to search the island for Soviet nuclear missiles . The island was searched by the U.S. for nuclear missiles by the Soviets .
 They were told to remove them or face the possibility of a nuclear war . They were also told they must remove them from their homes .
 For a few days in late October 1962, relations between the U.S. and Russia became unusually tense . Relations between the United States and Russia were unusually tense in October 1962 .
 Curtis LeMay, commander of the Strategic Air Command, recommended to President Kennedy that we “nuke” Cuba and send in the Marines . LeMay: "Nuke’s Cuba" was a good idea for President Kennedy .
 The incident was defused when Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy suggesting that he would pull the Soviet missiles out of Cuba if Kennedy would do the same thing with the American ballistic missiles along the Russia-Turkey border . Kennedy would also pull missiles from the Soviet-Turkish border .
 A bargain between the Americans and the Soviets was struck, and the crisis was over just as quickly as it began . A bargain was struck between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 A short time later, Hutchinson completed his four-year hitch in the Air Force . Hutchinson was in the U.S. military for four years .
 He went to East Tennessee State College for a couple years, where he studied business administration . He got out and went to the college for a few years .
 He dropped out of school while his wife, Francine, continued her college education . About this time he got married, he dropped out .
 Initially he went to work for Firestone for three years, but then he started his own carpet business . He now owns a carpet business in California .
 He sold the carpet business after eight years and went into real estate in Norfolk, Va., area with his wife . He sold his carpet business eight years ago .
 Hutchinson hung up his license in 1995 and moved to Burnt Store Marina . Hutchinson retired from marinas in 1995 .
 He and his wife own two homes, one here and the other on Virginia Beach near Norfolk . The couple owns two homes in Virginia Beach .
 The world stood at the brink of Armageddon for 13 days in October 1962 when President John F Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic and warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it .
 U-2 spy plane flying over Cuba snapped aerial photographs of Soviet missile sites . U.S. spy plane was flying 90 miles away from the United States . The U.2 was flying high over Cuba .
 It was the height of the Cold War, and many people feared nuclear war would annihilate human civilization . Many people feared it would be the worst thing to happen, but it was not .
 Soviet ships carrying nuclear equipment steamed toward Kennedy's ""quarantine"" zone around the island but turned around before reaching the line .
 In the five decades since the nuclear standoff, much of the long-held conventional wisdom about the missile crisis has been knocked down . The common belief that Kennedy's bold brinksmanship ruled the day is knocked down, including the common belief .
 Historians say it was behind-thescenes compromise rather than a high-stakes game of chicken that resolved the Cuban missile crisis . Both Washington and Moscow wound up winners and that the crisis lasted far longer than 13 days .
 Declassified documents, oral histories and accounts from decision-makers involved in the standoff have turned up new information . Scholars say new information provides lessons for leaders embroiled in contemporary crises such as the one in Syria .
 Another modern standoff is over Iran, which the West accuses of pursuing a nuclear weapons program . The West accuses Iran of trying to develop a nuclear program .
 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu drew a red line on a cartoon bomb to illustrate that a nuclear Tehran would not be tolerated . In a recent U.N. speech, Netanyahu drew the line on the cartoon bomb in a speech .
 Historians say the resolution of the standoff was really a triumph of backdoor diplomacy . Historians: The resolution was a triumph for backdoor diplomacy.
 Kennedy resisted pressure from aides advising that he cede nothing to Moscow and even consider a preemptive strike . Kennedy resisted advice from aides urging him to consider a strike on Moscow .
 He engaged in intense behind-the-scenes diplomacy with the Soviets, other countries and the U.N. secretary-general .
 Khrushchev would withdraw missiles from the island . Washington would publicly reject any invasion of Cuba . Khrushchev would withdraw the missiles .
 The real sweetener was that Kennedy would withdraw Jupiter nuclear missiles from U.S. installations in Turkey, near the Soviet border . "Jupiter nuclear missiles" would be withdrawn from Turkey .
 The pledge was a secret pledge known only to a handful of presidential advisers . It was known to only a few advisers that did not emerge until years later .
 President George W Bush in 2002 cited the missile crisis as a historical lesson in fortitude that justified a preemptive invasion of Iraq . Nevertheless, the brinkmanship myth persists, with President Bush citing the crisis as an example .
 Jupiter missiles are sometimes described as nearly obsolete, but they had come online just months earlier . The Jupiter missiles were fully capable of striking into the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev announced the imminent dismantling of offensive weapons in Cuba the following day . Their withdrawal, along with Kennedy's assurance he would not invade Cuba, gave him enough to feel he had saved face . The following day he announced the imminent decision to dismantle offensive weapons
 A U.S.-Soviet presidential hotline was established and the two nations initiated discussions that led to the Limited Test Ban treaty and ultimately the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . The treaty led to a limited test ban on nuclear weapons and a nuclear test ban .
 Pastor said he had many discussions about the missile crisis over the years with his late father-in-law, Robert McNamara, who was Kennedy's defense secretary . Pastor says he had discussions with McNamara about the crisis .
 Pastor said domestic politics made it tough for both Kennedy and successive presidents to heed that lesson . He said Kennedy's intense efforts to keep the deal secret were evident in Kennedy's efforts .
 President Barack Obama, for example, faces considerable pressure to maintain a tough line on Cuba . Obama has been criticized for his stance on the island nation .
 Among the issues are the United States embargo, demands for political change, an American government subcontractor imprisoned in Cuba as an alleged spy . Five Cuban intelligence agents serving long sentences in the U.S. are serving long prison terms in Cuba .
 On Oct. 13, a U.S. warship dropped depth charges over a nuclear-armed Soviet sub . The Soviets shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba . The U.K. dropped depth charge over a Soviet sub in October .
 Khrushchev recalled ships carrying nuclear equipment the following day . Kennedy announced a United States naval quarantine around the island to prevent more military equipment from arriving .
 Secretary of State Rusk made famous statement reacting to supposedly up-to-the-minute intelligence . That means that on Oct. 31, the vessels were already hundreds of miles away, steaming home .
 National Security Archive has spent decades working to get missile crisis documents declassified . "That confrontation never took place,"" says analyst .
 The CIA missed several key developments that would have helped Kennedy and his advisers navigate the crisis . The CIA was one day late on the turnaround by Soviet ships .
 The CIA learned late in the game about the ballistic missiles' presence in Cuba, and they were already operational by the time Kennedy was informed of their existence . The missiles were operational when Kennedy was told they existed .
 The agency was also unaware of other tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba that could have been deployed against a U.S. attack . The agency also was unaware of the other tactical weapons in Cuba .
 The Soviets had even positioned nuclear-tipped missiles on a ridge above the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay in preparation for an invasion . The Soviet Union had placed nuclear-armed missiles above the base .
 This myth has been perpetuated in part by the title of Robert F Kennedy's posthumous memoir, ""Thirteen Days,"" as well as the 2000 movie of the same name .
 It was 13 days from Oct. when Kennedy was first told about the missiles, to Oct. 13, when the Soviets announced their withdrawal . The Soviets withdrew their missiles from the U.S.
 Washington and Moscow haggled over details of what weapons would be removed . The "October Crisis,"" as it is known in Cuba, dragged on for another tense month or so .
 The Soviet Union also had problems dealing with Fidel Castro, according to a Soviet document . The document was made public this month by a Russia analyst for the National Security Archive .
 Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan spent 20 days in tense talks with Cuban leader . Cuban leader was angry the Soviets had reached a deal without consulting him . Soviet deputy premier Mikoyans traveled to Cuba in November .
 Castro lobbied hard but unsuccessfully to keep the tactical nuclear weapons that the Americans had not learned about . Castro lobbied for the weapons to keep .
 Ministers' Council Vice-President Jose Ramon Fernandez showed his satisfaction with the meeting, which in his opinion is a victory over the hostile actions against the United States government .
 Fernandez quoted Fidel's words when he said that a respectful environment should be created among the participants . Fernandez said that the truth about ""La crisis de octubre"" should be said with an entire freedom of speech .
 MacNamara thanked the Cuban government for the opportunity they are giving them through this meeting to search for the real truth in our own country . The meeting will teach the world a lesson and will allow them to clear up a few points that are still unascertained, he said .
 Cuban Parliament President Ricardo Alarcon, Chancellor Felipe Perez Roque and some of the leaders of the island's army and government are taking part in the conferences . Apart from a few Russian guests, a few of the guests are also taking part .
 Russia-U.S. relations have been strained by the crisis in the past and present . The crisis has left a lasting legacy for future generations . Russia and the United States have been at odds for years over the years .
 The event will finish next Saturday and on Sunday the participants will visit some of the places that had to do with the fact under question . The participants will also visit the places where the event took place .
 This brought up a conflict between the USA and the USSR, however the leaders of these two world potencies later decided to retire those weapons from the island without consulting its government . The leaders of both countries decided to do so without consulting their government .
 There were no steely glances or angry glances over geopolitical tensions . But in the camaraderie and openness glasnost has produced, there were no angry looks or angry nats .
 A quarter of a century after they edged to the brink of oblivion, Soviets and U.S. officials sat together and laughed, joked and tried to learn from their mistakes .
 McNamara, McGeorge Bundy and Theodore Sorensen of the New Frontier share memories of their two-week roller-coaster ride to the edge of disaster . With the help of new thawing in Soviet society, McNamara and Bundy could share memories .
 In the autumn ease and beauty of Harvard, the memories of the fall of 1962 seemed impossible . The memories of that year's fall seem impossible .
 Former Undersecretary of State George Ball, unable to make the conference, remembered the horror . McNamara, 71, Kennedy's secretary of Defense, recalls simply ''the horror'' McNamara . Ball was unable to attend the conference .
 Kennedy aide: In a sense, tension brought forth brave action . Kennedy aide and speech writer says tension brought out brave action in the wake of the tragedy .
 The fear the crisis' major players felt felt has been joined by open pride over the years . The fear has been felt in the wake of the 2008-11 crisis in Russia .
 The missiles were silent and the lessons of why are still important, they say . They say. The lessons were still important .
 Harvard-bound students came across the bonds that were formed on both sides of the debate .
 Kennedy advisers expressed relief that what they and the Soviets did kept the world from war . And they expressed, sometimes eloquently, the relief that the world kept war from war.
 Khrushchev and Kennedy emerged as statesmen trying to avoid war at all costs . Conferees agreed that the two men were statesmen who avoided war . The two men approached the crisis with mistrust .
 Fedor Burletsky, ex-speech writer for Khrushchev and conference participant, echoed his old boss' sentiments . The conference was held in New York City, New York .
 Former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and former special aide Arthur Schlesinger Jr. are among those expected at the conference that starts Friday . The conference is expected to be held in New York City .
 President Fidel Castro, who was in power at the time, also is expected to attend . Fidel Castro was in office during the time of the Castro administration .
 The crisis, marking one of the Cold War's tensest moments, was defused when Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from the Caribbean island . The crisis marked a tense moment in which the Soviet Union removed the missiles .
 Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez was an army commander when Castro put 400,000 soldiers in position to repel a possible invasion of the communist-run island . Fernandez was a Cuban army commander during the Cold War standoff .
 President John F Kennedy's words clicked onto the paper rolling off the teletype machine at military headquarters Oct. 1962 . Fernandez knew the Americans meant business . Fernandez: "I'm not going to let it slide down"
 2,500 relatives of U.S. forces stationed at Guantanamo Bay were evacuated to Norfolk, Va. Earlier in the day, some 2,000 relatives were given 15 minutes to pack a bag before being evacuated .
 Fernandez said he had only known about the missiles for a short time when the U.S. discovered them . Fernandez said that when the United States discovered the nuclear missiles on the island, he only knew about their existence . Fernandez: "I knew nothing about them for a very short time
 Most of the Americans invited to the conference will arrive today . McNamara, Schlesinger, Goodwin and Sorensen are among those invited . Ex-CIA analyst Dino Brugioni will also attend .
 Kennedy's brother was attorney general and key player in crisis . Kennedy was president's brother and attorney general during crisis .
 Cuba will release some formerly classified documents about the days known as the Crisis of October . In conjunction with the gathering, Cuba will also release some previously classified documents .
 George, in the Marine Corps about a year, watched sharks feed below . Garbage had just been thrown overboard as a hatless George watched sharks .
 George, 58, shakes his head at the recollection that the U.S. armada was dogged by the Russians . George: "The Russians were not interested in our armada. They were very interested"
 Until then, George was more concerned about his gunnery sergeant finding rust on his M-14 rifle than about actually getting shot at . George was a teen who was worried about rust in his rifle .
 George Horton's father, James Horton, was probably more worried as he sat in his Conesville, Iowa, home listening to his ham radio .
 James had been in the Army and hoped his son would follow his lead . James had hoped he would following his lead in the army . James was a father-of-one .
 George sailed through the Panama Canal when the missile crisis broke . Stationed in Southern California when the crisis broke, George sailed .
 Out of high school a little more than a year, he had been trained in demolitions . He was trained to demolitions and demolitions out of school . He had been training for a year .
 George checks and repairs rails for Union Pacific Railroad . These days, George checks out rails for the Union Pacific .
 He and his wife, Midge, married more than 26 years, have lived in Vining, about 40 miles west of Cedar Rapids, since 1973 . He and Midge have lived there since 1973 and married for more than 25 years .
 As a Marine, he learned more about demolitions, even working in the Mojave Desert to see how fast an airfield could be built . He learned more from demolitions as a Marine .
 George was discharged on time in June, 1964 . Having signed up for a special three-year hitch rather than the standard four, he was released on time .
 No way did he know that, just two months later, the rest of the division would sail off to a place called Vietnam . The division was sent to Vietnam two months earlier .
 Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez organized a similar conference last year on the Bay of Pigs invasion . Fernandez provided no details about the documents in announcing the conference .
 The Oct.-12 conference in Cuba is expected to include people from the U.S. and former Soviet Union . The conference will be held in Cuba .
 Most Russians associated with the 1962 crisis have died, Fernandez says . Several of the late President Kennedy's advisers are living, Fernandez said .
 Conference organizers are studying the possibility of taking participants to sites related to the crisis in the Havana area . He said conference organizers are also considering taking them to Havana .
 The Cuban missile crisis ''was the most dramatic episode of the Cold War,'' Fernandez said . Fernandez said the crisis was the 'most dramatic episode' of Cold War history .
 The crisis peaked when the U.S. learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba an island just 90 miles from the United States . The conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis .
 Moscow withdrew the weapons without consulting with Havana a move that enraged Fidel Castro's government . Following several tense days of negotiations with Washington, Moscow withdrew weapons . The move angered the Castro government .
 The opening session of a three-day conference on that Cold War drama underscored Cuban fears of a U.S. military attack at the time . The Cuban fears contributed to escalating tension before the crisis in October 1962 .
 Documents include documents from Cuban government, CIA, Pentagon, White House, Soviet Foreign Ministry and other governments . The documents are from the Cuban government and the Pentagon .
 The letter said President John F Kennedy told him in Washington in January that he had no plans to attack Cuba . The letter says President Kennedy said in Washington that he would not attack Cuba in Cuba .
 McNamara credited Castro, Kennedy and Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction . McNamara ultimately credited the world with saving it from destruction.
 Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the U.S. The crisis began in October 1962 when Kennedy learned of Cuba's nuclear missiles .
 The crisis was defused two weeks later when the Soviet Union agreed to remove the missiles . The incident was the first time Soviet Union had removed the missiles from the country .
 Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen all former aides to Kennedy also attend the conference . Dino Brugioni interpreted United States spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Documents show crisis did not end with Soviet Union's agreement to remove offensive weapons, as is widely believed . Documents made available to The Associated Press .
 Khru shchev worried that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tension with the United States perhaps even provoke war . Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev: Cuba wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions . Cuba "wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash," he said in a letter .
 At issue were U.S. surveillance flights over Cuba to monitor dismantling of the missiles that Moscow had installed on the island . At issue was United States surveillance flights to watch dismantling of missiles .
 Khrushchev was concerned that Castro would order his forces to shoot down the low-flying U.S. surveillance flights . The Cuban leader saw the flights as an intolerable intrusion on Cuban sovereignty . The flights were the first of its kind .
 Fernandez: Most studies of that period concentrated on the United States and the Soviet Union . Fernandez: Cuba's role was lesser known, with most studies focusing on the superpowers .
 Officials begin three-day conference on events of 40 years ago . St. Paul's 40th anniversary of his birth .
 PBS's popular ""History Detectives"" opens its fifth season Monday with a visit to Dayton . The popular series is set to return to the Dayton area .
 Series co-host Wes Cowan tracks a specialized 1950s screen used to project 3-D photographs to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base . The screen was used to show 3D photographs at the base .
 Ben Jakobowski was acting director of reconnaissance engineering at Wright-Patterson during the 1962 standoff with the Soviet Union . The standoff brought the world to the brink of nuclear war .
 Cowan traveled to Portland, Ore., and Washington D.C. to learn the truth about the unassuming silver screen . Cowan also traveled to the U.S. and Portland, Oregon, to learn about the silver screen culture .
 Cowan Cowan is the founder and owner of Cowan's Auctions, Inc., in Cincinnati, Ohio .
 Monday's episode marks the second time in two years that "History Detectives" has come to Dayton . The episode is the second episode of the show to appear in Dayton .
 Gwendolyn Wright visited the Library of Congress Motion Picture Conservation Center at WrightPatterson Air Force Base in 2006 to investigate a fragment of silent film dated to 1921 .
 History Detectives focuses on family artifacts and stories . Unlike college and high school history survey courses that cover the grand sweep of historical events, ""History Detectives"" focuses .
 For them, the crisis turned a temporary stay in the United States into a permanent residency . For many, it was a chance to see their future in the U.S. for the first time .
 Twenty-five years later, the images remain vivid and the disappointment is still keen. Twenty-year-olds are still keen on the experience .
 "Then it was like a cold bucket of water fell on our spirits,'' said Raymond Molina, a Miami developer . Molina: "We were in a state of denial, but we were in the middle of it"
 ''We lost one of the best chances to get away from communism,'' she said . "We lost a chance to escape communism," she said of the Soviet Union .
 The crisis ''really did seal what happened at the Bay of Pigs,'' Monsignor Bryan Walsh noted . The crisis really did seal the fate of the Bay, Walsh said .
 Jose Rasco, a retiree who lives in Miami, says he was 'betrayed twice' at the Bay of Pigs . Rasco: 'Betrayed first (at the Bay), then in Miami. abandoned us first'
 Republic National Bank chairman Botifoll: "We had an opportunity, then betrayed us" He says bank "betrayed us" by the government .
 Raymond Molina was in a Cuban prison when he first learned of the crisis . Molina says he was in prison at the time of his first learning of the Cuban crisis . He says the crisis is the first time he has heard from Cuba .
 Molina was jailed for his participation in the Bay of Pigs . Molina faced at least 30 years in prison for his role in the Cuban uprising .
 As the only pro-American military group in Cuba, the Bay of Pigs brigade would be valuable in case of an attack, Molina says . Molina: As the pro-U.S. military group, it would be useful in the case of a possible attack on Cuba .
 While Molina prepared for battle, his wife was in Miami, praying for his safety . Molina's wife was praying for her safety .
 Separated from her husband, she had two small children and was pregnant with a third . She had been separated from him and separated from his wife .
 Luis Botifoll was part of the Consejo Revolucionario, an exile government recognized by the U.S. At the time of the crisis, he was in exile . He was the leader of a government recognized as an ex-President of Spain . Botif
 The group was told to ''be alert in case the United States took action,'' recalled Botifoll . The group told to 'be alert' if the U.S. took action .
 Despite the threat of bloodshed, the Cuban exiles were ready to fight, Botifoll said . The Cuban ex-campsite was ready to take part in the fight, he said .
 As tension between Russia and U.S. grew, so did the exitement, Rasco said . Rasco: As the tension between the two countries grew, the Russian exitement also grew .
 The excitement rumbled through the Cuban refugee children under the care of Monsignor Walsh . The excitement of the children was palpable in the children's care .
 About 5,000 children had been placed in Dade County through the Archdiocese of Miami . The archdiocese has placed about 5,500 children in the county .
 Walsh was recruited by the U.S. government to investigate the state of the church in Cuba . Walsh investigated possible areas of support for American troops in Cuba during the Cuban crisis .
 Like Rasco, Walsh was struck by the number of troops stationed in Florida . Walsh: "I'm not surprised by the amount of troops in Florida"
 Rockets around the city and convoys of trucks along the coastline, Walsh said . Walsh: "Rockets around city and enormous convoys ... along the coast''
 Loaded with weapons and troops, the trains rumbled over the tracks near her house . The trains were loaded with weapons, troops, and loaded with ammunition . She says the trains are loaded with guns and troops .
 Diaz was afraid, not only for her family in the United States, but also for her relatives still in Cuba . Diaz says she was afraid of her relatives in the U.S. and for her Cuban relatives . Diaz: "I'm not afraid of anything. I'm afraid of
 The change of heart meant that the U.S.-Soviet understandings that resolved the 1962 crisis were never made permanent . The U.N. and the Soviet Union agreed to a resolution of the crisis in 1962 .
 Attempts to reach a formal agreement with the Soviet Union failed to reach an agreement . Both countries took some steps to carry out the agreement, including removing offensive missiles .
 The crisis was triggered by the discovery in the fall of 1962 that Moscow had sent missiles to Cuba . The U.S. discovered the Soviet Union had sent the missiles .
 The disclosure sent the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than at any other time in their 46-year Cold War . The disclosure of the secrets to the U.S. and Russia sent the world closer to war than ever before .
 An anxious world was uncertain whether Moscow and Washington would settle peacefully or reduce each other to ashes . Russia and the U.S. have been at odds for years .
 The trade-off that ensured peace involved a Soviet promise to remove missiles in exchange for an end to a U.S. quarantine of Cuba . The deal was made with a United States no-invasion pledge .
 In the decades after the missile crisis, successive U.S. administrations were vague about whether the agreement was legally binding . The Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement was not legally binding in the 1960s .
 Documents strongly suggest it wasn't because there was no formal settlement . The documents strongly suggest that there were no formal settlements .
 Kennedy said he was worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect the U.S. ability to respond if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked a pro-American country such as Guatemala .
 Ball says the U.S. has a right to act under the Rio Pact . Ball: The Rio Pact is the common defense treaty of the Western Hemisphere . Ball said the United States can act under that treaty .
 Kennedy agreed that a no-invasion pledge could not supersede U.S. rights under the Rio Pact . Kennedy: "No.I. pledge cannot supersede United States rights"
 The promise of a Soviet removal of ground forces from Cuba was not enough to sway Kennedy . Kennedy was not swayed by the promise of Soviet withdrawal .
 Shriver remembers getting in a line for drills on what we would have to do if in fact `it' happened . Now an NBC News correspondent, Shriver is now a correspondent for NBC News .
 On Oct. 13, Shriver narrates a two-hour NBC special on the crisis . Shriver talks to key members of the Kennedy administration and others about those dark days .
 At the Democratic convention, she hustled speakers from the podium onto NBC first . She got high marks for hustling speakers into NBC first at convention .
 Not great news for correspondents, who must line up like schoolchildren . CNN correspondent: "Not great news, but it's good news for us to be in schoolchildren"
 The Learning Channel has big plans for its commercialfree children's programming block, Ready, Set, Learn . The Learning channel has a commercial free kids' programming block on the network .
 Moyer says he hopes Learn will become its own channel so its hours could be increased beyond the planned 6m-to-noon daily program . Moyer: Learn could be its own network so it could be expanded beyond 6m to 12m-a-day program . Learn is
 The girls attended St. Francis Hospital School of Nursing in Peoria, Ill., for three years and became RNs . They attended school three years ago and three years later became nurses .
 An Air Force recruiter told me if we joined the Air Force we would not only be nurses, but we’d also get to see the world . An Air force recruiter said if we join we would be able to travel the world, we would also be nurses .
 "For a little Chicago girl who had never been out of the state of Illinois, it was like going to a foreign country, going down south in 1960s," she recalled .
 “All we did was get our uniforms and march in straight lines for hours,” Carr said . “We did all we could do was march straight lines and march for hours”
 We worked in the clinic for a while, then we worked in wards, then in the emergency room . We worked at the hospital, the wards and then in emergency room. So we worked for a little bit of time in the hospital. We were in the wards for a long time
 “That was the beauty of our job, we provided nursing for the whole base,” she said . “I was proud of my nursing career,’ she said. ‘I was very proud to be a nurse. That was the strength of my job,
 From the back door of my house, I could see a couple of B-52 bombers sitting on their concrete pads, loaded with nukes . From the way of the back of his house, you can see a pair of B.52 bombers . He says he could see the bombers
 Today it’s a Navy station, but in those days in was a refueling stop for planes flying in from Europe and elsewhere, Carr says . “In those days, in was refueling stops for planes ... flying in and out of Europe, elsewhere,” Carr
 We didn't have a clue what to do with our rifles, so we put them under our beds . We didn’t have a . clue what we would like to use them, so they hid them under their beds. We put the rifles under our . beds .
 The monkey that was part of the U.S. space program was supposed to come to our hospital after his capsule splashed into the sea . It never did . The monkey was supposed, but it never did.
 As a 1st lieutenant he was flying a C-131 ‘Super Constellation’ for the Military Air Transport Command . He was flying the plane for the MTC Command .
 His plane developed mechanical problems and they made an emergency landing at Kindley . Plane developed mechanical difficulties and they had to make emergency landing .
 Dick, my future husband, was playing the slot machines at the club and didn’t have time for me. Dick, Dick, was . Dick, a . future husband . Dick .
 Eventually, I was transferred to a C141 jet transport that could fly 40 mental patients and 40 ambulatory patients at one time . The C141 was a jet transport capable of flying 40 people at once .
 There was one young man who died on a flight home with me,” she recalled . “There were one young men who died ... with me," she said .
 “I got pregnant and was forced out of the Air Force nursing program at that point,” she said with a frown . “Then I got pregnant. Then I got ... forced out,’ she said, “and was forced to quit the nursing program .
 For almost three decades she served as a squadron momma, wing momma and eventually a general officer’s wife and mother . For almost the next three decades, she served in the Air Force .
 Dick retired as a major general from the Air Force in 1994 . He and his wife moved to Punta Gorda after he retired from the military .
 In 1971 the couple purchased a lot in Burnt Store Isles, where they built their retirement home . In 1971, the couple bought a lot and built a retirement home there . The couple's retirement home was built in 1971 .
 Co pyrig ht 20 12, Charlo tte Sun Cit at ion at ion DON MOORE .
 Thirty years ago today, President Kennedy went on TV to announce U.S. spies had spotted Soviet missiles in Cuba . The missiles were 90 miles from the United States coast . President Kennedy made the announcement on TV .
 Former defense secretary Robert McNamara says the situation was worse than even pessimists then imagined . McNamara was one of Kennedy's key advisers at the time . He says Kennedy's administration was in control of the White House .
 McNamara and Kennedy "believed the risk was somewhat greater than our associates," McNamara says . He and Kennedy, McNamara recalls in an interview, said they believed the risk would be greater than associates .
 Kennedy's revelation sent a chill across the nation and pitted him in a globe-circling showdown with Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro .
 Khrushchev blinked, but so did Kennedy . The nation waited, hoped and prayed, for weeks to see if the nation would survive . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Soviets agreed to withdraw the missiles, and the United States secretly agreed to remove warheads in Turkey . The U.S. secretly agreed that the missiles would be removed from Turkey .
 Since Kennedy showed the nation spy-plane photos of missile sites, the Cold War and much of the secrecy surrounding the crisis have melted . The Cold War has been over since Kennedy showed up photos .
 Former Soviet generals and officials disclosed that in addition to long-range nuclear missiles Moscow had sent to Cuba, Soviet troops there also had smaller ''battlefield'' nuclear arms .
 If Kennedy had ordered Marines to go ashore in Cuba, those weapons would have been their welcome .
 Kennedy's advisers were divided over whether to launch ''surgical'' air strikes to take out Soviet missile sites . Kennedy was divided on whether to use air strikes .
 His advisers warned that air strikes would fail without a parallel ground invasion . The Bay of Pigs was months after a U.S.-sponsored invasion force had come to grief at the Bay .
 Any military action, or mistake, was likely to lead to an armed response, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com .
 The Soviet missiles, and Soviet lies, were a slap at the U.S. The Soviet missile attacks were meant to be aimed at the United States . The United States has never been hit by the Soviet Union .
 Navy ships sailed toward Cuba to ''quarantine'' Cuba from further Soviet shipments . U.S. Navy ships were en route to Cuba to quarantine Soviet supplies .
 Central to crisis-management was knowledge that the situation, and the terrible dangers, were unprecedented . Central to days and nights of crisis management was the knowledge that . the situation was unprecedented. Central to dealing with crisis was knowledge of unprecedented dangers .
 Kennedy weighed the risks of tipping the world toward a mushroom cloud of horrors . The worry was evident in photos and TV footage showing Kennedy's haunted look and hunched shoulders . Kennedy: "The world is going to hell"
 The Soviets chose an unusual messenger, ABC News correspondent John Scali, to deliver their first signal . Scali was a correspondent for ABC News .
 Scali was told to tell the White House the Soviets might pull their weapons if the U.S. pulled its missiles out of Turkey . The White House was told by a KGB contact that the Soviets would pull weapons .
 Resolving the crisis required several days, and the exchange of cables was some hostile, some conciliatory . Kennedy and Khrushchev exchanged cables, some hostile or conciliating .
 Soviet ships bound for Cuba stopped on reaching the Navy picket line . The world breathed easier when Soviet ships stopped stopping on reaching Cuba .
 McNamara, who had been sleeping at the Pentagon, went home as the Soviet missiles were withdrawn, stacked on the decks of ships . McNamara went home to see the missiles were removed, stacked in ships .
 The opening session of a three-day conference on that Cold War drama underscored Cuban fears . Cuban fears at the time of a United States military attack feelings contributed to escalating tensions before the October 1962 crisis .
 Historic papers are being released publicly during the gathering . Documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House and other governments that played a role in the crisis will be released .
 Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen are also attending the conference . Former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Documents show that the crisis did not end with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove offensive weapons, as is widely believed . Documents were made available to The Associated Press .
 Khrushchev worried that an ""irrational" Castro would renew tensions with the United States perhaps even provoke war . Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev: Cuba wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions . Cuba "wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash," he wrote in a letter to diplomatic aides .
 At issue were U.S. surveillance flights over Cuba to monitor dismantling of the missiles Moscow had installed on the island . At issue was the United States surveillance flights .
 October 1962 confrontation brought the world to the brink of a nuclear war . No real surprises are expected regarding the 1962 confrontation . The 1962 confrontation was the first nuclear confrontation in the world .
 Experts are curious about why Cuban leader Fidel Castro decided to permit the forum . But experts are very curious why he allowed the event .
 Some say Castro hopes to show that the recent Soviet abandonment of his cause was similar to its 1962 """"betrayal'' of him . Castro hopes the recent abandonment of the Soviet Union is similar to that of him, some say . Castro says he wants to show the Soviet abandonment was
 The former Soviet Union announced in September it was pulling its troops from the island . Negotiations for the removal apparently have apparently been stalled by the collapse of the union and Cuban intransigence .
 The conference is occurring against a backdrop of unprecedented crisis in Cuba . Cuba is adrift without major trading partners in the wake of the collapse of European communism .
 Oil and most food is severely rationed and public utilities are on staggered schedules to offset huge losses in vital supplies . Oil, most food and most electricity are severely rationing .
 Garthoff is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who worked in the U.S. State Department at the time of the missile crisis . He worked for the United States State Department during the crisis .
 Cuba's role in the crisis was really minimal, CNN's John Sutter says . Cuba was the center of the drama geographically, but was not a major contributor to the crisis .
 It never controlled the missiles, and the Soviet decision to remove them was done without consulting Castro . The Soviet decision was made without consultation, Castro says .
 Castro seemed unhesitant in supporting a launch of the nuclear missiles if the U.S. attacked Cuba . In letters to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev published last year, Castro said he supported a launch .
 Cuban and Soviet support of revolutionaries in such countries as Bolivia, Colombia, El Salvador and Nicaragua heated up a Latin cold war from which the region is only now beginning to recover .
 Brenner: Castro may have "fascinating things to say about his subversive activities" in South and Central America . Brenner says Castro "may have some fascinating things" about his activities .
 Key players still debate whether any nuclear warheads were actually delivered to Cuba with the missiles . Key players on both sides still debate if any warheads were delivered to the island .
 Raymond Cline, deputy director for intelligence at the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency from 1961-66, says there weren't any . Cline: "There were never any. There were none" Cline says .
 The Havana forum will hear from Soviet technicians who insist they placed warheads on the missiles, Brenner says . Brenner: The Cuban forum will also hear from technicians who say they did it .
 President Kennedy made no written agreement with Khrushchev not to invade Cuba, it is claimed . President Kennedy did not make an agreement with the Soviet Union, it has been revealed . President John F Kennedy is expected to speak at the conference .
 By supplying arms against standing governments, Cuba didn't fulfill that agreement, conservative leaders like Sen. Rand Paul say . Sen. Paul says Cuba's arms deal with the U.S. didn't go far enough .
 Jesse Helms, R-N.C., and some Cuban exile leaders who have advocated invasion are likely to argue . Helms and others have said they want to invade Cuba .
 The issue has come up before, especially during the Persian Gulf war when some exiles called for an invasion of Cuba similar to the attack that pushed Iraq from Kuwait .
 The idea of a pledge not to attack Cuba was cemented by every administration since Kennedy's . It has now become the status quo along with the 32-year-old economic embargo of the island of Cuba .
 In the end, unraveling what exactly Castro the only surviving leader and one who is still in power really did during the crisis and afterward may have to await a Cuban glasnost .