 Cuba Pwosesis Ayiti A July 17, 2021 by Jay Manifold . No reward for resistance; no assistance, no applause .
 Follow-up to Dilèm Aksyon Kolektif nan Matisan. This follow-up will consider the implications of developments since late June . This will specifically respond to commenters on Dilème Kolekif nan matisan.
 Most of the structure of this post will follow the Deming process-workbench model . History is, to a great extent, a series of contingent events . I am a giant process nerd .
 Several years ago, I read Rockets and People, a fascinating memoir of Soviet rocket developer Boris Chertok . I reviewed the memoir here . I've also reviewed a memoir of ChertOK, which I reviewed here .
 The nosecone and warhead will be delivered here in 2 hours . Chertok was apparently viewing the Cuban affair as a flash in the pan that would be resolved short of war . He was concerned that moving the Mars rocket would cause them to miss October 29 launch date .
 A missile officer just like me, not a Kirillov, but some Jones or other, is standing at a periscope and waiting for the order to give the ‘Launch’ command against Moscow or our firing range . A . missile officer .
 I saw this one at the Tower Theater while drinking Cuban coffee on an empty stomach . "Cuban coffee is the best way to eat Cuban food," the author says .
 Documentary by Cuban emigre travels around Cuba and talks to people about food . Documentary shows emigres talking about food in Cuba and Cuba .
 The film is beautiful, the people charming, the settings picturesque, the food wonderful . The people are charming and the settings are picturesque and the food is wonderful .
 There are spectacular drone shots of colorful towns, lush forests and rural landscapes . Closeups of ceviche, grilled octopus, roast pork and other delicacies .
 This movie made me feel good about Cuba, which leads to another thought . This movie, "Cuba," is about Cuba's first movie ever made in Cuba .
 In addition to its good qualities, this movie is slick, well done propaganda . "Slickly done propaganda"
 Perhaps the film maker really is ambivalent about having emigrated, as he suggests . Perhaps he really emigrated to the UK .
 The film shows Cuba in the most favorable light, i.e., things were bad in the ’90s but today they are getting better, people are better off and happy, it’s a great place to visit, etc. Or perhaps he would not have been allowed
 The people in the film spend most of their time looking for food . As my movie viewing companion said afterwards, the film's main focus was to find food .
 "One notices their teeth, their overall look of having been through hard times. One notices the teeth, they look like having had a hard time," says the former president .
 I recommend this movie as long as you can enjoy the food and not be bothered by any political subtexts . The movie is a classic classic of classic American classics .
 This is a really bad movie. Four thumbs up, one thumb down. —Review 2: The Black Stallion Returns . This is one of the worst movies in the world .
 I enjoyed the original whose plot involves a special horse that falls off a boat and saves a little boy who rides the horse to victory in the big race . The original is based on a plot involving a horse falling from a boat .
 "This one was visually beautiful, apolitical and had a happy ending" "Beautiful and apolitical" "This is a great movie, but so are most movies," says Tom Charity .
 The newer movie revolves around a struggle between good and bad Arabs to repatriate the famous horse to the Sahara where they plan to run it in a hokey every-5-years race .
 You can tell the good from the bad Arabs because the main bad Arab is fat and has a Brooklyn accent . The good Arabs are thin and have Roman accents . You can't tell the bad from the good .
 The bad Arabs cheat rather than follow important movie rules of noble-savage fair play . Also we are made to understand that the bad Arabs cheated .
 The good Arabs take the horse and explain to the little boy that it’s really theirs, and who can blame them? The good Arab family takes the horse back to the Arab world .
 The little boy wins the big race for the good Arabs but then is too stupid to take the horse back home with him or sleep with the hot Arab chick who would do him in a second .
 I recommend this movie if you liked Mystery Science Theater, or if you have young daughters who are into horses as horse porn is probably more wholesome than vampire porn . I recommend it to you if you are a girl who loves horses .