 'Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro and the 1962 Crisis' Author: Mark J White .
 A volume in the Ivan R Dee American Way Series, it is intended for the general reader but will be of interest to all but the most knowledgeable missile crisis scholar . It is intended to be a volume of interest for all but all but most of the time .
 The result is a solid, carefully reasoned analysis of a complicated situation . The result of the analysis is an analysis of the situation .
 White criticized Eisenhower for allowing a ""missile gap"" to develop between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . He also criticized President Dwight D Eisenhower for permitting Fidel Castro to retain power in Cuba . White begins with Kennedy's 1960 presidential campaign .
 Kennedy's campaign pledges influenced him as president to adopt strong measures in an effort to topple the Cuban leader . There was no missile gap between Kennedy and Cuban leader, but there was a missile gap .
 These included mounting an invasion by Cuban emigres that resulted in the Bay of Pigs fiasco, authorizing operation Mongoose, and dabbling in assassination plots, as well as applying military, diplomatic, and economic pressures .
 Nikita Khrushchev had good reason to believe that Kennedy might in the end resort to an outright invasion . Nikita knew about most of these goings on .
 Khrushchev later claimed he decided to install nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962 . To forestall such an eventuality, he said, he decided in the spring of 1962 to install missiles .
 Some scholars have derided this claim as a self-serving excuse, but White believes it was a major factor in Khrushchev's thinking . White believes this was a 'major factor' in the Soviet Union's decision .
 The People's Republic of China had been accusing Khrushchev of being ""soft"" on capitalism . The People of China was challenging the Soviets for leadership of the Communist world at the time .
 To stand idly by while a client regime was overthrown would seem to substantiate that charge . The former CIA director says he stood by client clients in order to overthrow the regime .
 Khrushchev, against strong internal opposition, had been trying to cut Soviet conventional forces in order to make more resources available for consumer goods . He was trying to make the Soviet Union's conventional forces more available to consumers .
 Having nuclear missiles only ninety miles from American shores would enable him to argue that Soviet security had been enhanced that maintaining current force levels would be redundant . The U.S. would be able to claim that the security of the Soviet Union has been enhanced so far .
 Khrushchev thought the installation of missiles in Cuba would give him leverage in settling the prickly Berlin question on Soviet terms . He also thought it would provide him leverage to solve the Berlin question .
 The Soviets began sending conventional forces to Cuba during the summer of 1962 . The Soviets sent conventional forces into Cuba in the summer .
 This buildup enabled Republicans to criticize Kennedy not only for failing to carry out his campaign promises to oust Castro . But it also enabled the stationing of Soviet forces so close to the American mainland . The buildup enabled Kennedy to criticize him for not removing Castro .
 Some of this criticism was aimed at influencing the congressional elections in November . Some of the criticism was clearly aimed at trying to influence the November elections .
 President Kennedy was assured by the Soviets that the troops were for defensive purposes only . Kennedy defended his inaction on the grounds that conventional forces posed no threat to the United States .
 He thereby painted himself in a corner, for the implication was that nuclear weapons would constitute a threat and hence would require whatever steps necessary to remove them, he said . He said .
 Kennedy exploded in rage when informed that the Soviets were placing missiles in Cuba . Kennedy exploded into rage against Khrushchev's duplicity .
 "How to Respond"" covers from October sixteenth to Kennedy's preparations for his televised speech to the American people on the evening of the twenty-second .
 How to Defuse"" discusses the speech and takes us to the end of the crisis on the twenty-eighth . This is the first time the crisis has been resolved .
 White discusses both the official deliberations and the backchannel negotiations . White talks about the Obama administration's decision to meet with the president .
 There are no surprises here, and the brevity of his accounts of the day-to-day meetings fails to convey the texture of the arguments back and forth and how they changed .
 He faults Kennedy for failing to realize that his rhetoric and actions toward Cuba might prod Khrushchev and Castro towards taking countermeasures . He faults him for sending missiles when less provocative steps might have achieved his goals, he says .
 Both men took belligerent positions at the beginning of the crisis, but sought accommodation when the enormity of what might happen became clear . Both men sought accommodation at the start of this week's crisis .
 There is sufficient evidence available to present the broad picture as White has so ably done . New sources will be found that will enable us to fine tune our understanding of one or another aspect of the crisis .
 My only real complaint is that the reader often cannot identify from which documents material is presented . I have a complaint that the viewer can't identify the material from which material is shown .
 One can understand the lack of footnotes or endnotes in this volume, given the intended audience, given its intended audience . There are less intrusive means of identifying sources which the publisher chose not to use .
 This work may be copied for non-profit educational use if proper credit is given to the author and the list . Use of this article to help students understand today's featured images and videos .
 Reviews editorial staff at hbooks.com.org.uk . For any other proposed use of this article, contact the Reviews editorial team at hbookreview.com/report .
 This work is licensed under aCreative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 . Use this photo to help people around the world share their photos with us .