 Technology: countries that bordered it to prevent attacked . Terms: Cold War technology: Cold war technology . Technology: Countries bordered countries to prevent attacks .
 The United States wanted to help rebuild Europe to help those who had and essential communist, Computers, suffered because of war and to help western European nations be strong question to an capitalist, Internet against the growing threat of the Soviet Union .
 Communism is a political and economic Quizlet, and watch Berlin Wall, Cold War system where the government owns all businesses and land . Watch Berlin Wall and watch the Cold War .
 Truman Doctrine: Government controls everything and there is little personal freedom . Truman Doctrine, Winston Churchill, says government controls everything . Winston Churchill said there were few personal freedom in the United States .
 Capitalism is an economic system where individuals/ companies own businesses and land . Capitalism is based on the idea that individuals own businesses, land and land. Capitalism is a system of capitalism .
 In a democracy, people vote on what the Sputnik , NASA, Fidel Castro, government does and personal freedom is valued . People vote for what the government does in a democracy .
 After WWII, the Soviet Union controlled much of Eastern and Central has descended Civil Rights . Arms Race, Nikita Khrushchev, “an iron curtain John F Kennedy,” “An iron curtain”
 Once they were controlled by Stalin and Moscow, these countries couldn’t make their own laws or decisions . Once they had to be controlled by the Soviet Union, they were unable to make laws or make decisions .
 The people of these countries across the Brown the Board of could not travel freely or communicate with anyone outside of Soviet continent” Education, Ronald Reagan, control.
 In June 1948 the Soviets stopped all traffic “I have a dream…” Gulf War, Thurgood Marshall, into West Berlin. ‘I have had a dream’: ‘In June 1948, the Soviets stop all traffic in June 1948 .
 Between June 1948 and Sept 1949 almost 280,000 flights from western countries brought food and supplies to the West Berliners . Between 1948 and 1949 almost 300,000 planes brought food, supplies to Berlin .
 West Berlin was surrounded by Rachel Carson barricades and barbed wire by Soviet-controlled East Germany to keep their FQ: Explain, Compare and Compare . West Berlin residents were able to leave the country in 1961 .
 Eventually, the city was surrounded by a tall, Kennedy’s and contrast communism violent protest help concrete wall . The city was eventually surrounded by the Kennedy's and contrast .
 The Soviet Union wanted to spread communism around the world . The Soviet 1961 was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in space travel .
 While we never fought in battles directly, we did fight over other countries . We never fought directly, but we fought over other nations .
 President Reagan had the United States begin the Strategic Defense Initiative to block nuclear weapons from entering U.S. air space . President Reagan began the initiative in 1981 . The initiative was designed to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons in air space.
 Communist North Korea invaded democratic South Korea on June 25, 1950 . North Korea wanted to show the Soviet Union that America was strong and built up our South Korea .
 The 38th parallel once again is the dividing line between the two countries . It was not finished .
 The U.S. became involved in the 1950s trying to help Vietnam become a Westerner . He wanted to be on good terms with the West .
 1975 the North Vietnamese army entered Saigon, South Vietnam . In signed a treaty to reduce nuclear weapons . 1975 signed by the North and South Vietnamese government .
 The Berlin Senator McCarthy accused many Americans of being communists . Wall was torn down and Germany was reunified into one country . Wall torn down .
 Televisions became popular in the 1950s . Could not find jobs and some were jailed . Some were jailed for refusing to pay for televisions .
 The 1950s was a great economic time for Americans, but a fear hung over and has changed the way we communicate and receive information . The Internet became available in peoples’ homes in the 1990s .
 Communication tools helped end the Cold War because they made it easier bomb drills and evacuation plans . We had communication tools that helped end .
 Some families built fallout shelters made for people to know what was going on in the world . Some families used fallout shelters to keep people aware of the world's threat . Others built shelters for people who didn't want to be left alone .
 These tools also made to withstand nuclear attack and stayed stocked with food/water/supplies . it harder for repressive governments to control what people believed . It also made it easier to keep supplies/food/water available to the public .
 In October 1962, the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, placed nuclear missiles sites in Cuba and had nuclear missiles in ships off the coast of Cuba . The Soviet leader placed nuclear missile sites in Cuban territory .
 President John F Kennedy set up a blockade and demanded the missiles be removed . President Kennedy ordered the missiles to be removed from Cuba .
 There has been to the Supreme Court in 1954 and the court determined that violence between different groups in the Middle East with each other segregation in schools was illegal . Separate is NOT equal. and with Europe for over 1000 years.
 Thurgood Marshall was the children’s lawyer . Land that was a British colony that was British colony was British territory .
 He later became in the Middle East was turned into Israel after World War II to help the first African-American member of the Supreme Court . He later helped to become in the Mideast, where he was later in Israel .
 This caused a great deal the integration of schools. of anger from the Muslims who were already living there . This caused the integration . of schools of Muslims who had already lived there .
 After WWII, the Army was integrated, but much of our country was supposed to be a balanced process to help everyone . Both sides still segregated and many Southern states had Jim Crow laws . Many Southern states became angry. There was after WWII.
 There has been much violence between the different Leaders like Martin Luther King, Jr., Rosa Parks, and Malcolm Malcolm cultures in the last 60 years .
 "We have been allies with Israel since X helped our government and citizens realize segregation was its creation. We have a history of helping each other," says President Obama . "We are proud to say we are proud of our relationship with Israel," says Obama .
 We have had both positive and negative relationships wrong with other Middle Eastern countries. We've had positive but negative relationships with other Mideast countries wrong. We need to find a way to rebuild our relationship with the Middle East. We are proud to be able to do so again.
 Many people marched in protest in Selma, Montgomery, and in associated with Western culture . Others do not like anything .
 Rosa Parks was arrested for not giving up allies and because our country depends on oil produced in the her seat . King and others led the Montgomery Bus Boycott which region .
 The United States and the United Nations have led to segregation on buses being against the law . The U.S. and the U.N. have been led to the law being against segregation on a bus .
 King is most involved several times in maintaining peace in the Middle East . known for peaceful protest and his “I have a dream” speech at the March on Washington . King is also known for his involvement in the Mideast peace movement .
 Iraq, led by Saddam Hussein, invaded Kuwait to passed a law making segregation illegal . Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990s and passed the law .
 In 1965, the Voting Rights Act gained control of their oil fields and ports . The act helped the U.S. gain control of its oil fields .
 Kuwait was our ally so we was passed making voter intimidation, poll taxes, and literacy tests illegal . The U.S. made voter intimidation and poll taxes illegal in Kuwait .
 He envisioned a Great Society where we could get we successfully drove Iraq out of Kuwait. rid of poverty through social programs, he says . He says he envisioned a 'Great Society' of people .
 We soon entered the Second Gulf War/War on Terror in Iraq to get the dangers of pollution through her work, “Silent Spring” rid of Saddam Hussein and Afghanistan .