 In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the U.S. and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear conflict over the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The United States and the Soviets came to a nuclear standoff over the issue .
 In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the U.S. and the Soviet Union appeared to be sliding inexorably toward a nuclear conflict over the placement of missiles in Cuba . In October, the United States and the . Soviet Union appear to be on the verge
 Castro showed the messianic ambition of a man selected by history for a unique mission . He shows how these two leaders recognized the terrifying realities of the nuclear age . Castro never swayed by conventional political considerations .
 Dobbs brings us onto the decks of American ships patrolling Cuba; inside sweltering Soviet submarines and missile units as they ready their warheads . Also on the streets of Miami, where anti-Castro exiles plot the dictator’s overthrow, and in Miami .
 Michael Dobbs was born and educated in Britain, but is now a United States citizen . Read an excerpt from his book, "Michael Dobbs"
 Michael Dobbs was born and educated in Britain, but is now a U.S. citizen . He has taught at leading American universities, including Princeton, the University of Princeton .
 John F Kennedy would later remark that the site could be mistaken for a football field . The site was later described as 'a football field'
 If the warheads were present, one would expect to see some kind of secure storage facility at the missile sites, but nothing was visible . Nothing was visible at the sites .
 The Soviets could be in a position to fire their missiles &#8220;very quickly . The Soviets may be in position to launch their missiles .
 During the 1960 presidential election, Kennedy had used Cuba as a stick to beat the Republicans . Kennedy had accused the Eisenhower government of doing nothing to prevent Fidel Castro from transforming the island into a hostile and militant Communist satellite .
 He thought that the president had been overwhelmed by the ruthlessness and barbarity of the Russian Chairman. The president thought that he had been . completely overwhelmed .
 The news from Cuba reinforced Kennedy&#8217;s impression of Khrushchev as a &#8220;fucking liar . The news of the Cuban crisis reinforced Kennedy’s impression, he says .
 CIA put together the CIA in response to prodding from the Kennedy brothers to be much more aggressive . It had been put together by the CIA after being prodded by the brothers .
 President Obama spoke of the change in atmosphere in the U.S. government during the last twenty-four hours . But it was difficult for him to conceal his anger .
 No part of this excerpt may be reproduced or reprinted without permission in writing from the publisher of this article .