 Photographs taken by a high-altitude U-2 spy plane offered incontrovertible evidence that Soviet-made medium-range missiles in Cuba were now stationed 90 miles off the U.S. coastline . The missiles were capable of carrying nuclear warheads .
 During the next year, the number of Soviet advisors in Cuba rose to more than 20,000 . During the 1990s, the Soviet Union had more than 19,000 advisors in the country .
 Rumors began that Russia was also moving missiles and strategic bombers onto the island . Rumors that Russia is also moving missile and bomber bombers .
 Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev may have decided to so dramatically up the stakes in the Cold War for several reasons . The Russian leader may have had several reasons for his decision .
 He may have believed that the U.S. was going to invade Cuba and provided the weapons as a deterrent . The weapons may have been a deterrent to Cuba .
 Facing criticism at home from more hard-line members of the Soviet communist hierarchy, he may have thought a tough stand might win him support . He may also have thought that a tough stance might win support .
 Khrushchev had always resented that U.S. nuclear missiles were stationed near the Soviet Union . Putting missiles in Cuba might have been his way of redressing the imbalance, he says .
 Two days after the pictures were taken, they were presented to President Kennedy . The pictures were developed and analyzed by intelligence officers .
 “Wake Up Little Susie” becomes the Everly Brothers’ first #1 hit . Threeand four-part harmonies of doo-wop would never have given us Simon and Garfunkel, the Beatles or the Byrds .
 Presidential candidate Theodore Roosevelt was shot at close range by saloonkeeper John Schrank . The incident occurred in 1912 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin .
 Schrank’s .32-caliber bullet, aimed directly at the heart, failed to hit Roosevelt . Schrank's bullet was aimed at Roosevelt's heart . The Battle of Hastings took place in 1066 .
 At the end of the bloody, all-day battle, Harold was killed–shot in the eye with an arrow, according to the historian .
 Martin Luther King Jr. is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his nonviolent resistance to racial prejudice in America . King was awarded the Peace Prize in 1964 for his work on civil rights in the United States .
 At 35 years of age, the Georgia-born minister was the youngest person ever to receive the award . At 35, he was the first person to be awarded the award in the country .
 U.S. Air Force Captain Chuck Yeager becomes the first person to fly faster than the speed of sound in 1947 . Martin Luther King Jr. was the only person to break the sound barrier in the United States .
 Yeager flew 64 missions over Europe during World War II . Yeager was born in Myra, West Virginia, in 1923, and died in 1973 .
 On October 14, 1892, The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan Doyle, is published . Eisenhower was the supreme commander of Allied forces in Europe during World War II and the ...read more .
 Conan Doyle had been publishing Holmes stories in magazines since 1887 . The book was the first collection of Holmes stories, which Conan Doyle published in magazines . Conan Doyle's Holmes stories were first to be published in a book .
 The family’s house was later said to be haunted and served as the inspiration for the Amityville Horror book and movies . The house is said to have been haunted by the family .
 On October 14, 1944, German Gen. Erwin Rommel, aka “The Desert Fox, dies by suicide . On the evening of the night of the death, Rommel took his own life .
 Erwin Rommel, nicknamed “the Desert Fox,” is given the option of facing a public trial for treason, as a co-conspirator in the plot to assassinate Adolf Hitler, or taking cyanide . Rommel was given the choice of facing the public trial
 Corporal Adolf Hitler was temporarily blinded by a British gas shell in October 1918 . Rommel was born in 1891 in Wurttenberg, Germany . Hitler was wounded in the Ypres Salient in Belgium .