 "That solved so many things, because if you're drawing up a policy, it should consist of an objective and ways to get there," he said . "If you want to draw up an objective, there should be a way to get it," he added .
 More argument is expended on the first, they never get to the second, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I find in Washington, more argument is ... expended on ... the first."
 "We grouped ourselves around three possible alternatives. Once we got such information as was available, we would say we grouped ourselves," he says . "The information is never complete, or entirely satisfactory"
 The -chird was to shoot them out, which was a surprise attack on the missiles in Cuba at the outset, without any notification to Khrushchev . The attack was the first to shoot out without notification to the Soviet Union .
 "As an artilleryman, when I saw ■chose missiles, with their transporter vehicles along side of them, my immediate thought was they can pull them out and hide 'em any time they want to," he says .
 "We can never get 'em out unless we invade the island," he says . So if that's the case, Khrushchev will hide those missiles in the jungles of Cuba .
 'Invasion was the last thing I thought we should do, in our interest. Well, invading the island was ... not the best thing to do,' he said .
 We were having trouble in Europe; Berlin was being threatened by Khrushchev; in the Far East we had the Laotian problem . Vietnam problem was just burgeoning; and our forces were (relatively speaking) low, in numbers and readiness .
 "You could have the seed of guerrilla warfare against our occupying forces," he says . "It could again tie down a large part of our conventional strength," he adds .
 There's a possibility if you hit the missiles before the missiles got hidden, at least you'd have that many accounted for, in a positive sense . So there's a chance if you . hit the . missiles before they got . hidden, it would be a possibility .
 "You will have really shaken Khrushchev; he will know we're moving right in. But furthermore, you will have . He will know that he will be shaken, he will have shaken the world," she said .
 I felt there was a fair chance of him giving way on that point . He doesn't want us to invade, either; and I felt that he would give way . It's not clear whether he will give way on the issue of invasion .
 Bobby Kennedy argued that that would be our doing the act of the Japanese in attacking Pearl Harbor . "It was argued very eloquently by Bobby Kennedy," he said . "That would be a very powerful act of war," he added .
 The President, after listening to all the pros and cons of these three points, the first one dropped out very quickly. Now, having said that, we found the quarantine, as you know now, the world knows now — the world . The first one of the three points dropped out
 The military was told to get ready for an attack on missiles, and also ready for a invasion of Cuba . And then it was not to eliminate the ""shoot 'em out"", bait bait to use the lesser method first .
 General, you were loyal to the decision, but I take it you didn't think that the quarantine was going to work, he says . General: "You were loyal, but ... I didn't want to quarantine, I thought it would work"
 Khrushchev could simply bring his ships just short of the quarantine line and . stand there and scream to the world over the violation of international law we were indulging in, . Meanwhile, while his missiles completed their readiness in the island .
 Khrushchev could have done two things with the missiles: continue to build 'em up, or hide 'em' He says he thought that was the option which he thought most likely .
 "We analyzed very carefully the military 5 requirements of an air strike, and like most military requirements, the longer we studied, the more we needed," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com . "We need to know what we need to do to launch a strike
 The total number of aircraft which the Air Force wanted to use was around 500 . I believe that the total number . of aircraft . which the . Air Force . wanted to . use was about 500 aircraft .
 Cuba was prickly with SAM missiles — surfaceto-air — many of which we knew were operational . But then it was an honest estimate, because not only would you have to get the missiles on the ground, but meanwhile Cuba was bristling with missiles .
 Aircraft had to protect their aircraft from ground missiles the anti-air threat . So you had to . protect your aircraft attacking the ground missiles .
 President had a three-star general who would be responsible for the outcome, he says . So yes, that was thought about, and the President, very wisely, had General Sweeney, a three star general . He came up and he gave a very frank statement, he said .
 "Collateral use of aircraft" was a requirement for collateral use of the aircraft . "Yes, yes, that was the requirement. And these other requirements of collateral use was also a requirement," she said .
 Sweeney, at the last minute, by a straightforward statement — which the Joint Chiefs did not disagree with one minute — tilted the President, if he needed anyreal tilting, to the quarantine option .
 I was so sure we had 'em over a barrel, I never worried much ^bout the final outcome, but what things might happen in between . I was never worried about what things may happen in the next few days, he says .
 You have written in retrospect in the Washington Post on October 5, '82, as I remember — the 20th year — that you don't recall any concern about the strategic balance, or any fear of nuclear exchange in this whole period .
 Some of the civilians do recall worries about the tine of that second Saturday . "Worries that really run to two or three steps up the ladder of escalation. Now, some of the people do recall .
 "It's the nature of same people if they can't have a legitimate worry, they create them," he says . "They create them. They create them"
 "Because he was bound to lose with conventional forces right on our doorstep," he says . "He was bound for losing with . conventional forces," he adds . "Because . He was bound . to lose"
 The only explanation that I can find that has a certain appeal is that the meeting of Khrushchev with President Kennedy in Vienna in Vienna had so impressed him with the unreadiness of this young man to head a great country like the United States, he could shove this man around any
 President Kennedy was going to announce disarmment of missiles in Turkey, he says . Kennedy was trying to demonstrate that there was nothing there worth the Russians bombing, he adds .
 "Yes, it would have been a great mistake to do it right in the middle of this thing," he says . "Yes. Yes. Yes," he adds .
 I was not aware of the fact the President had discussed with State the desirability of getting the missiles out of Turkey until this time . I was also unaware of the President's decision to remove the missiles from Turkey .
 It would again show these uncertain Americans, they're not sure of themselves, they say . The U.S. needs to be sure of itself, they are uncertain of themselves .
 It's quite true, the missiles were outmoded, and I was very happy to get 'em out after very careful negotiations with Turkey and them by the presence of a nuclear submarine . The missiles were removed from the U.S. arsenal in 2010 .