 Castro turned to the soviets for balance of powers to weigh up the balance of communism ideologies . Castro was forced to turn to the Soviet Union for balance-of-powers . Castro's government was overthrown in 1953 .
 Castro signed a trade pact with the Soviets in February 1960, which eventually led to close diplomatic relations . Castro signed the trade pact, which led to the end of diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union .
 Cuban Exiles that were in the United States at the time were given aid . By authority of Eisenhower, Eisenhower gave aid to Cuban exiles in the U.S.
 When Kennedy was sworn into parliament in 1961 he took over the proceedings with hesitation for his states security . Kennedy took over proceedings for the sake of his state security .
 The Soviets were thinking of the opportunities that could arise from this strategy . Although this strategy was a dangerous one, the Soviets were aware of the risks .
 The West balance that the Soviets could start to infiltrate the Americas with their ideologies . West balance of the balance that could be a threat to the West balance .
 The second and most important advantage was the stationing of nuclear missiles close to the United States. The U.S. has a nuclear arsenal of nuclear weapons, experts say .
 Disturbing reports were received in July of 1962 by the United States that showed disturbing Soviet activities on the island . The U.S. sent the reports to the U.K. in July .
 A U-2 in August showed pictures of anti-aircraft facilities around Havana . In October Soviet aircraft capable of carrying nuclear weapons were spotted on the island .
 Kennedy was informed by his intelligence chiefs that there was no doubt about Soviet intentions . Days later Kennedy was told by intelligence chiefs he had been warned of Soviet plans .
 Kennedy decided to initiate a naval blockade against Soviet ships carrying missile equipment . The blockade was initiated by the President of the United States .
 Kennedy addressed the nation of what was to happen, which was to be a quarantine around Cuba . No ships carrying offensive military equipment were allowed to pass . The quarantine was imposed on Cuba in October .
 During the quarantine all American forces were to be placed on alert and that any missile attacks from Cuba would be taken as a deliberate Soviet attack and would be responded to accordingly .
 All eyes were fixed on Cuba and America aware that the slightest naval incident could trigger a nuclear holocaust . Cuba was aware of the threat of a naval incident .
 No offensive weapons were found on the Marcula and were allowed to proceed . No offensive weapon was found and the investigation was allowed to continue .
 The United States Navy received reports that the other Soviet ships had halted and that they had turned back . A the day progressed the United States .
 Khrushchev said he would only withdraw missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba . The day after the ultimatum was received from Khrushchevitch, he would withdraw his missiles . The United States refused to pull missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev sent another message stating that the Americans also had to dismantle their missile sites in Turkey and withdraw nuclear weapons from both Britain an Italy, all of which were causing anxiety to the Soviets . The United States was short relieved from this news .
 A U-2 was shot down over Cuba and another, on a routine flight over Alaska, somehow strayed into Soviet airspace . Kennedy refused and the crisis yet again seemed to flare up when a U.2 shot down .
 U.S. government was once again put on alert and had to devise a plan to avoid war . United States government had to come up with a plan of avoiding war in order to avoid it .
 The U.S. decided to ignore the second letter and reply to the first, promising not to invade Cuba . So they decided to assumeingly ignore the first letter, and reply .
 The Soviets withdrew their missiles from Cuba as soon as the United States agreed to demobilize the invasion forces gathered in Florida . A the end of the 13 day crisis, the U.S. agreed that the Soviet missiles would be withdrawn .
 Three decades later a conference was held in Havana, Cuba attended by former Kennedy Administration members, Soviet participants in the crisis, and a Cuban delegation .
 The Soviets, Cubans and Americans learned how close the world had come to a nuclear holocaust . It was there that the Soviets and Cubans, and Americans .
 General Anatoly Gribkov informed participants that, in addition to their intermediate-range ballistic missiles, the Soviets had deployed nine tactical missiles in Cuba to be used against any U.S. invasion force .
 General Gribkov: Soviet field commanders in Cuba had the authority to fire those tactical nuclear weapons without further direction from the Kremlin . Even more significantly, he said field commanders had the power to fire the weapons without the Kremlin's approval .