 Bundy says, ""Well, we have"" and JFK says, "But that was a long time ago" Bundy says: ""Well- we have."" JFK says: "Well-we have."" Bundy says ""Well - we have" JFK had no sense of responsibility for the actual
 Khrushchev knew that the Americans were well aware that they already had vast superiority and would retain it . Consider what this public move looked like to him after the Gilpatric speech, he says .
 Programs that were designed to counter a supposed Soviet superiority were committed to and pursued in the presence of great Soviet inferiority . Instead, programs were intended to counter Soviet superiority .
 For the first time, I can recall, I see that this applies to the IRBM deployment as well . For first time I can remember, this is also true for IRBM deployments in the US .
 The deployments were conceived as a response to the Soviet ICBM test and Sputnik of 1957 . The deployments actually took place under Kennedy, despite his doubts about their appropriate ness _as responses to a gap .
 Russia could only have appeared to be strengthening the basis of the public threats! ,OS . Of course, to have r econsider ed the deployment policy after the missile gap was demolished would have been to have ""weakened the NATO alliance""
 The real function of the IRBMs was in deterrence of fco nventional atta ck, a first-use function, as with the Pershings land neutron bombs . But to say this is to acknowledge that .
 JF|< _ , But not only could we not acknoweldge that his feelings might be similar to ours and on at least a comparably legitimate basis . JF: "We acknowledge that he might feel similar to us"
 Most analysts were not even aware, any more than our public, that ""we"—the President and CIA and the JCS—were confront ing Khrushchev with .this prospect, by Mongoose and invasion preparations . Most of our analysts weren't even aware of this, any
 Prior to Vietnam, no one would have easily imagined the lengths a President would go to avert that, the risks he would run. Nor, prior to that, would they imagine the risks they would face .
 The real problem with most ""mirror-image-analysis" is not that it is false to suppose that our adversary may react as we would to similar circumstances or understanding . Thus, the real problem is that it's false to think that our adversaries react as well as we do .
 They start by looking at themselves and what we are doing in a distorted, fun-house mirror . They start looking at ourselves and . what we . are doing, they say .
 A realistic mirror image analysis might not be right or adequate, but it would usually be wort h consid ering . The analysis is usually more accurate than an analysis of a mirror image .
 This approach could be valuable to someone who really did know what our leaders were doing and what they were really like: I.e., this approach . I.g. If he was selfaware, he could be useful to someone like the President himself .
 JFK succeeded in placing himself in Khrushchev's shoes, with results that dismayed his hawkish advisors . This seems to have been true for JFK; and he did succeed .
 The missiles were . photographed on the 14th and the photos were interpreted on the 15th . M Actually, the missiles were actually photographed .
 Rusk and Nitze had discussed the matter with one or more others the night before or Tuesday morning . It also meant that they had already discussed the issue with one of them the day before .
 Nitze was convinced by L DIA of the presence of the missiles before the photos were taken . Nitze had been considering options for a number of days, having been convinced by the L. DIA .
 There is inadequate understanding, even at top levels, as to what actions brought us close to the brink on this past occasion, thus how to recognize what s orts of actions we should avoid in future .
 This supported a mood of American righteousness which underpinned a violent response and a sense of perplexity, perplexity as to possible Soviet intentions which seemed almost incomprehensible .
 Perhaps all Powers present themselves as reacting to the illegitimate, aggressive actions of their rivals, especially when justifying their own violent, dangerous, and apparently lawbreaking actions, or "responses"
 The first Jupiter missile launch position in Turkey was turned over to Turkish command on October 2j^ .
 This fact, remarkably, has only recently been noted; it was not by the American leaders at the time . This fact has only been noted, but it was only recently noted by American leaders .
 McNamara and Kennedy probably felt no responsibility for loading Europe with tactical nuclear weapons, since the program had been set up earlier . Likewise, McNamara probably didn't feel responsible for loading the weapons .
 Trachtenberg supports Ulam s emphasis on Soviet fears of German nuclear weapons as a source of that .crisis . Moreover, the latter program was not unrelated to the Cuban Missile crisis either, to the extent that the latter was related to the Berlin Crisis .
 Khrushchev’s embarrassing backdown on Berlin was perhaps partly provoked by humiliating Gilpatric speech . I Then, there was Khrushvic's embarrassing back down on Berlin, perhaps partly prompted by . Perhaps partly provoked . by humiliating . speech. I Then-Krushchev
 It would be an amazing example of se 1 f—censorship at the time if they reall> j 1 r efrained from mentioning it in the larger group, when it came to explain the Soviet action .
 Of course/ missiles were not a plausible response to Mongoose per se, except as this pointed toward invasion . Of course, missiles were also a possible response to the attack .
 Only a few of ' those present knew of EGL ' s emphasis on the need for invasion, or of the pattern of exercises,’s pattern . EGL ’s emphasis was to prepare for possible invasion .
 Even Garthoff, at this late date, stresses the incorrectness of the Soviet expectations of American invasion of Cuba, l emphasizing , emphasizing , that there was n_o firm American / political decision or intention to invade Cuba before the crisis erupted in October 1962 .
 The mere absence of documentation on it, far from proving this, tells almost nothing, tells nothing, says the author of the book .
 The Soviets and Cubans assumed that the exercises in the spring of 1962 were testing a war plan for invasion . He points out that the Soviet-Cuban exercises were 'correctly assumed' that they were testing an invasion .
 They knew, from penetration of Mongoose, that that program was aimed at the ov ert h xxuy of Castro, and the> could calculate just, as well as Lansdale that that aim would require invasion .
 It was hardly a ""distorted impression"" to see the exercises as ""part of the preparation for further direct United States military action against Cuba,"" which is what G says later Soviet accounts ""charged"" , merely ""because the plans were contingency plans, not plans adopted in pursuance
 Bolshakov noted political pressures on the President, and said he believed the U.S. would attack . Bolshkov noted political pressure on President Vladimir Putin, and believed the United States would attack. Bolshavsky said he thought the United .
 Neither of these opinions implies certainty nor that Kennedy had yet made a definite committed decision . Kennedy has yet to make a committed decision on a presidential candidate .
 These assertionre never contradicted in the available documentation, nor are the aims modified . The aims of this article have never been changed or contradicted .
 All the diplomatic and military moves G describes are consistent with making full preparations for an October invasion which would as usual—only be ""decided"" at the last possible moment . G describes making preparations for the October invasion .
 They were all a good deal more than ""possible,"" from the spring of 1964, if not earlier, if they were from 1964 or earlier . "They were all more than 'possible,'" said the author .
 The belief that an American invasion of Cuba was much more than ""possible"" by the end of 1962 was better than ""not unreasonable"" in the spring of 1962 . Just as, looked at honestly and objectively, the belief that a U.S. invasion of Cuban territory was much
 Kennedy appeared, in public, more than prepared to do something about the mTssiles he had found . Either they had been found ""too ear ly ""--**whi chjwas almost sure to occur, reflecting a failure of Soviet camouflage and underestimate of American survei 1
 The President did not stress this judgment in front of the ExComm, still less to the JCS or the public, he says . They-especially the President-did not stress it out in public, the President said .
 McNamara implies that he had ""decided"" not to attack or invade, early in the crisis, so that preparations to do so were a b 1 u f f S • He believes the President agreed with him .
 Even if Mcbamara was right that the President had ""decided,""" the pressures described by Sorensen might have forced his hand, changed his decision . JH-trl even though if he was right, he might have changed his mind .
 It did help Kennedy, and hurt Khrushchev, that the discovery was made early enough that it could be claimed publicly that the missiles were not yet operational . gv^4
 The President’s bluff that he was willing to risk attacking was plausible, given his ability to reassure the public, and his willingness and political ability to take the risks of the b1ockade .
 If he thought it might be at the stage it happened, and that this would deter the President from attacking, (this was reasonable, even right, more so than generally believed) More so than that generally believed. If . he thought . that this . would deter . from attacking (
 Ito consider that the President would not be deterred from making [powerful and plausible threats], even though they might be (and 'probably were) bluffs . Yet it would still have been a miscalculation, because it failed to consider that it failed Ito .
 The account on 13 suggests Khrushchev did expect the missiles to be found later, when they were fully ready . The account suggests he did expect them to be discovered later, but not later .
 He expected to find them after the election, but he didn't expect them to be found at all . He said he expected to revere them to Kennedy, after Kennedy's election .
 Khrushchev felt certain that the missiles would be undetected till he revealed them, says historian . He says he is not fully convinced yet that Khrushchev felt certain .
 Either the missiles were found earlier than Khrushchev expected (the Soviets do believe there was a simple failure to camouflage them) and/or the Soviets believe the Soviets do not have been able to hide them from the public . The Soviets believe they failed to camouflage the missiles . Khrush
 Eisenhower kept secret of what a U-2 found over the Soviet Union in the late Fifties . Khrushchev may have been misled by Eisenhower’s ability to keep secret .
 He may have missed the point that a finding of n_o missiles would be kept very obediently by the Air Force, since publicity would have hurt their budget . A discovery of actual missiles, in the Soviet Union or in Cuba, was bound to be leaked very soon .
 Perhaps 10 days later, Kennedy might well have acted as — — I conjecture — Khrushchev . Perhaps he had hoped and perhaps wrongly counted on . Kennedy might have acted differently in the future .
 Kennedy was led to make his initial commitment at the first meeting of the ExComm that ""the missiles must go" The missiles were armed and operational .
 Far from inferring Soviet motives on mirror image of ourselves, there is first a failure to see ourselves realistically in a mirror, and then a . failure to imagine that Soviets might react ve ry simila rly. M .
 As the transcript shows, this worked pretty well with the President personally . The transcript shows that this worked .
 U.S. President Barack Obama saw the strategic situation as basically parity, despite the United States numerical superiority . He preferred even a trade to attacking the missiles, and saw the parallel with Turkey .
 To acknowledge diplomatic parity by either accepting the missiles in Cuba or trading the Turkish missiles /against them would have been ""premature, "" a radical shift, >v 4 I contradicting Kennedy’s earlier warnings and initial position in w 1 the crisis .
 Many members of the President s own ExComm would have disagreed with him on these judgments, and it would have been politically costly for him to express his views in this context .
 Khrushchev did think that 40—70 missiles wouldn't fully do this, but a few hundred would go far to equalize at least first-strike capabilities, he said in a speech at the end of the Soviet Union's first visit to Cuba .
 The Americans regarded Turkey as being in their sphere of influence and interest despite its proximity to the SU . The Americans by no means had reconciled themselves to Ithe ""loss"" of Cuba from their sphere .
 The majority of Americans did not acknowledge a strategic parity in 1962 . That was especially true for those Americans (the majority) who didn't acknowledge it in 1962.
 The risk of attacking the missile was not zero, 1 either, though McNamara is reluctant to acknowledge this . And' the risk of their attacking the . missile u ftTm at e T y-h owever reluctantly and nervously—was not zero , 1 either .
 'Bluff created pressures and a context in which their control might have been lost,' says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There was a lesson here for the Soviets to learn about what irrational risks pragmatic Americans might take . The U.S. might take irrational risks when it takes irrational risks, the author says .
 U.S. intelligence is amazed at the amazement of the ability to keep that process secret .
 This does suggest that the absence of SI about Soviet ICBMs in 1959-61 was a less reliable indicator of the non-existence of a missile gap than some supposed . —18.
 In his chapter on ""The Soviet Decision,"" 21, G. G. says. Khrushchev motives . T 18 4 4 Khrushvic motives .
 Khrushchev repeatedly cites as the principal, reason his desire to avert a Soviet invasion of Cuba . In his memoirs he mentions the reason stressed by American analysts, redressing the balance of power,"""" Redressing of power" is the principal reason he wanted to avoid a
 In his speech of December 1962, Khrushchev gave the defense of Cuba as the on 1y reason for the deployment . The defense of the Cuba was cited as the reason for deployment .
 Khrushchev’s ambitions in Europe and worldwide were behind the decision, analysts say . American analysts, on the other hand, mostly gave this reason no real role in the decision . The decision was attributed entirely to reasons relating to the strategic balance and strategic balance .
 Khrushchev eventually admitted that his main reason was ""a factor,"" after all . Garthoff is now acknowledging that what he said was "a factor" in the fall of the Cold War .
 On the evidence available, it is s imp1y not t ru e to say that no other explanation' than one which assigns principal importance to the strategic balance can satisfactorily account for the decision .
 No one has ever defended Khrushchev’s December 1962 claim that defending — tLx 12 Cuba was the only incentive . That is not really an issue. No one ever has defended that claim .
 There is no logical or evidential basis for dismissing all or any of these judgements or, from an American perspective, for choosing among them. The answer is, I would say, that there is no logic or evidentiary basis for doing so .
 Khrushchev’s concern about U.S. invasion cannot have played a major determining, causal role in Soviet decisionmaking, he says . The explanation for the continued insistence by Garthoff and other American analysts .
 Garthoff is, so far, almost uniquely candid in acknowledging in his new edition of his own underestimation of the realistic basis for Soviet expectations of invasion .
 New information on U.S. contingency planning for invasion is not allowed to modify the judgements on relative Soviet motives that he repeats from 1987 in the first chapter .
 This mirrors statements by McNamara and Bundy in the Cambridge conference, October 1987, responding to the Soviet perspective/ prior to the release of documents, described below, revealing the . character of the planning they themselves had directed .
 Garthoff, it seems to me, fails to relate the exercises and invasion planning, and in particular the circumstances postulated by McNamara that might trigger a decision to invade, to the aims and time-table of the Mongoose program .
 McNamara’s immediate reaction, in the transcripts, indicates that it was . He asserted that their presence, potentially operational, virtually precluded U.S. attack, hence invasion .
 To say this is not n cc eosar -i-1 y to justify Khrushchev s choice, it's from a perspective that is also critical of the United States first — use policy and deployments in Europe and Turkey .
 As a long-term defense approach, Khrushchev’s deployment was no less reckless than U.S. and NATO policy, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: As long as long as defense, it was no longer reckless and dangerous .
 If this consideration u»de-reudrs the legitimacy of Khrushchev’s action, it does the same, more sharply, for the U.S. response . The consideration u »de»de[de]reudars the legitimacy  of the . legitimacy
 Note G’s ignorance of this explanation at the time, as an advisor and analyst, as well as his continued ignorance 25 and more years later .
 See risks of operating with such ignorance among intelligence analysts, and of perpetuating it .
 G has shifted his opinion from saying that this has been thoroughly debunked to saying it is "" quest i onab 1 e . "" cites Burlatsky on Andropov. G has said that .
 Consider possibility that SU saw outcome, with no invasion pledge, as considerable victory as victory . But see comments in Blight book on alternative SU reading on JFK!
 While JCS saw it as a cause for ...coup, assassination... (along with Diem, next year...move to test ban] —reasons for, and effects of secrecy, reasons for secrecy . Reasons for secrecy include secrecy and desire for publicity .
 Garthoff is one of the very least ideologically constrained of official intelligence analysts and Sovietspecialists, the most open to non-ominous, non worst case interpretations of Soviet behavior . He is the author of the book, "The Cold War"
 "Some sacred beliefs,"" including false ones, he says . Yet to be a trusted intelligence analyst, he has had to share at least some Cold War assumptions, he adds .
 A good guess would be that these relate to his perception of U.S. intentions, aims and activities, he says .
 As an intelligence analyst, he might not have a clear picture of the scope—and secrecy—of covert operations and of secret military planning . He might not be able to understand the scope of covert operations .
 He might have put too much evidential weight on his own lack of knowledge of Mongoose or of invasion planning, along with official statements that we did not intend to at tack .
 Garthoff and apparently virtually all others in the intelligence community, ignored the reality of Soviet warnings about possible invasion of Cuba, failed even to consider that as a deterrent to such invasion the Soviets might be putting in vsizeable combat contingents .
 On October 22 , with invasion possibly a week away, the estimate was 8-10,000 . On Oct. 22, with invasion possible a week from the date of invasion, the estimated number of people was expected to be at least 10,000 people .
 The actual figure was 42,000 troops, with more coming, if the blockade had not interfered . The blockade would have prevented more troops being sent to Syria .
 Garthoff adds in 1989 the point that "Deterrence of an American attack on Cuba, and reassurance of the “Cubans” were the only reasons for deploying the * Soviet air defense and coastal defense forces .
 He does not mention in this connection the large Soviet troops commitment, nor the I l-28s, aimed at attacking an invasion force . Oddly, he does mention in . this connection, nor . nor the . large . Soviet troops .
 Khrushchev had consistently made this point earlier, in public statements and in letters to Kennedy . But in fact, he had repeatedly made it clear earlier, he did not .
 Rejecting this as a real perception of the Soviets also meant ignoring the impression created correctly--by American exercises in the spring, summer and fall of 1962, Garthoff says .
 0 G says missile facilities were to be completed and made operational by a date in November or December 1962 . How did their expectatons of invasion relate to the time-schedule of their deployment, to their secrecy, and to their planned time of revelation?
 The missiles looked at least possibly operational, which could not be till later . And even then, that might have seemed more a provocation than a deterrent . The missiles could have been a provocation rather a deterrent unless the missiles looked operational .
 If it were not for the fact that the coastal defenses and large numbers of Soviet troops were clearly for no other purpose than deterring or repelling invasion, this matter of timing and secrecy might almost seem to reject the new premise .
 September and early October should have been a time of intense apprehension in Moscow . But in that case, September and October should be a time for intense apprehension .
 The Soviets were increasingly assured, by Kennedy’s inaction and assurances to the public, that their missiles had not been detected, or else that they were being accepted . Whereas all the information from the Soviets so far is that the Soviets . So far, the Soviets have been assured,
 The absence of reaction to the actual presence of the missiles themselves should not have been so reassuring . But if they were really anticipating at least the possibility, let alone a high likelihood, if a surprise American invasionexecuted as a fait accompli — in the ab senc e of
 The former encounter would be a catastrophe for everyone, possibly everyone in the Northern Hemisphere . The latter discovery would be propaganda boon for the Americans apparently more than justifying their invasion .
 The real state of mind and motives that led to the urgent contingency planning for invasion on October 1, 1962, with a target date of October 20 . We still don’t know—especially since McNamara and McGeorge Bundy are still lying about these preparations .
 The Soviets were caught thoroughly by surprise on October 22 . Yet by all accounts, the Soviets were surprised by surprise .
 The Soviets were no longer as convinced of the immediate need for the missiles, as they were when the decision was made in May and June . That is perhaps by the time the missiles actually went in, perhaps the Soviets were less convinced of their need .
 They could have continued the deployment, for other motives and because of a longterm threat to Cuba, as well as because of inertia . But they could nevertheless have continued it for other reasons, including a long-term threat .
 I thought he applied this to Kennedy’s preference to conceal his awareness of the missiles, if he detected them before the election . I thought this would apply to Kennedy's preference to hide his knowledge of missiles .
 Rostow thought he might have missed, in 1962, the difference between a Presidential and a Congressional election, and in any case have exaggerated the passivity of the decision apparatus during such an event . Rostow may have missed the difference in 1962 .
 In any case, these speculations not only bear on possible unrealism or incoherence in Soviet decisionmaking on project, but on the very real possibility that it was heading toward a disaster that has scarcely been measured in past analysis .
 An American invasion was significantly more likely than past analysts have realized even in the absence or in ignorance of Soviet missiles . An invasion might not only have been undeterred by the actual, secret presence of the missiles and Soviet troops .
 The Soviets, I trying to deter such an invasion, had inserted missiles and forces but without yet revealing it . All this was because the Soviets were trying to . to . deter such a invasion .
 Aneri can strategic bomber acting with the' initiative and lack of feedback of whoever it was who ordered the firing of the Soviet SAM against Major Anderson’s U-2 on October 26—was about to trigger a Soviet Doomsday Machine that had been wired automatically to end all life
 A secret device could not deter, it could only do...what was about to happen . Strangelove points out that if this were meant, as it was, to deter American attack, why had not the Americans been told' 7 A Secret Device could not be deterred, it
 The term is surely meant to suggest an analogy to the U.S. forces in Europe, which serve as a tripwire to American nuclear response . The term "tripwire" is a reference to the United States forces serving in Europe .
 In this case it might also refer to assuring Soviet commitment and response elsewhere if necessary . In the case it may also mean commitment to Russia .
 Such responses would quickly encounter American tripwires to nuclear war . But such responses could quickly encounter U.S. trip wires .
 The troops alone, if inserted secretly and then revealed, would have been a major deterrent to U.S. invasion, though not quite certain . The troops were inserted in secret, but not then revealed .
 Combined with missiles, they do add force to the possibility that U.S. invasion would lead to a launch, authorised or not .
 At the Cambridge Conference in 1987, both some some Soviets (e.g., Burlatsky) and Americans found it inconceivable, on ""rational"" grounds, that the warheads could actually have been deployed, so far from Soviet territory .
 General Volkongonov’s detailed assurances finally persuaded Garthoff reluctantly to believe that twenty nuclear warheads had probably arrived . Yet in 1989, General Volksongonkov’ed assurances finally convinced him that twenty warheads probably had arrived .
 The ""rational actor" model, in the economist’s technical and limited sense of ""rational,"" is working better and better for the crisis . But the ""reasonable and prudent leader"" model, a part of the ideologies of both sides, not so well . The ""reasonable
 Volkogonov confirmed that there were no nuclear warheads with, or intended for, the dualcapable short-range FROG rockets which accompanied the Soviet troops .
 The presence of these rockets led the American JCS to plan ""prudently"" for the possibility that the Soviet troops did have tactical nuclear weapons . Except that the presence of such weapons led the U.S.
 TLke-r-r~idea of a prudent response to this possibility was to plan to have tactical nuclear weapons with the American troops that would be invading within a day or two .
 The U.S. belief that Castro was simply a tool of Moscow was wrong . It might have led to an air attack and everything that might have Ifolloweded .
 G. G. reports in the previous chapter the unanimous opinion—as he understood it--that deterrence of invasion was not a primary 24 motive, indeed, was not_ among the real motives of the deployment .
 G, and some of those on the ExComm, may not have realized this United States motive . "G" and "ExComm" may not realize this U.S. motive .
 U.S. secrecy and lies on 1 these precursors were critical to establishing a legal basis for the blockade and threats . Thus United States secrecy and lying on 1 were crucial to establishing the blockade .
 The Soviet secrecy and evasions on this cost them dearly, on and after October 22 . The Soviet state of affairs cost the Soviet Union dearly .
 The Soviet secrecy lent itself to being depicted as evidence of aggressive intentions . Assuming that the Soviet principal motives were defensive, to deter attack on Cuba, the Soviet secrecy was portrayed as evidence that it was to deter an attack .
 One guess would be that the Soviet Union had no experience, reflexes, procedures for deciding to reveal that secret quickly, prior to the time they had earlier planned . More recent examples would be their ""public information handling" of the KAL-007 shootdown and of the Chernobyl
 Prior to Gorbachev, the instinct for secrecy in the Soviet Union was not counterbalanced, as in the US, by any tendencies toward, or procedures for managing timely candor , when appropriate .
 If the other party discovers the project prematurely, the very fact that public attention has not been aroused may give it the option of keeping its own knowledge and initial planning and responses secret while it prepares its own fait, accompli as a counter . But this may be a general risk of
 Part of the counter may be to reveal, at a moment of its own choosing, the secret planning of the adversary, and to interpre interpre interpre . The opponent’s secrecy as indicating aggressive intent, and a guilty_conscience over an illegitimate activity .
 The adversary may well find it difficult to explain away this interpretation . The adversary will have to explain it away .
 JFK would have been able to say, over and over, "secret," "deceptive,"" and "clandestine" about the Soviet move, if JFK had not been able . JFK said the move was perfectly legal while the announced U.S. blockade was either illegal or an
 I was carrying' out covert raids against and penetrations into Cuba for purposes of sabotage, and attempting to assassinate Fidel Castro . The Soviet Union had no obligation to tell the U.S. in advance of what it was doing .
 The move mocked the U.S. charge that the Soviet effort at deterring a jUS invasion was an ""unjustified"" change in the status quo . All of which, had it been known, which it wasn’t, provided a precedent for the secrecy surrounding the
 That the Soviet move was ""provocative"" can hardly be questioned, given the U.S. response . The United States responded with a "provocative" response .
 The answer scarcely supports the selfrighteous tone of the U.S. complaint . The U.N. complaint was made by the United States .
 Cuba was regarded as being within ""our hemisphere, our immediate sphere of influence," U.S. said . Turkey was not to be regarded as within ""their” hemisphere; in fact, it, too, was within our sphere of . influence .
 It^ was [above all a change in the balance of ""superpower 'rights , a change . in the direction of asserted parity of status and rights . It was [ above all] a change of balance of power .
 It meant a new assertion by the Soviet Union of an equal right to treat a friendly government in the shadow of the other superpower as a sovereign state and an ally, to be protected .
 The United States had never come to recognize the parity of sovereign rights between the U.S. and Cuba . It meant the assertion by Cuba of a parity of sovereignty between the United States and Cuba was contradicting in its covert Mongoose program an its contingency planning .
 The judgment by the k heretofore hegemonic power that this assertion of autonomy is 27 ^""unjustified"" is not the last word. But the judgment by . the k is not a last word .
 The United States' unwillingness to accept an assertion of diplomatic or sovereign parity with either the Soviet Union or Cuba underlay the danger, recklessness and provocativeness of the Soviet-Cuban jproject . It was, primarily, the United States. unwillingness .
 The way the Soviet Union carried out the operation turned out to be provocative, though hardly ""deliberately"" so . It is also true that the_way in which the . way in which . the . Soviet . Union carried on the operation was provocative, but hardly "deliber
 The successful secrecy and deliberately misleading statements of intention inadvertently tempted Kennedy I to make public assurances and commitments that he would probably i not have made if he had been less certain and less mistaken about I Soviet intentions .
 The Soviets were either inattentive to or inconsiderate of the /effects of this on Kennedy’s domestic political embarrassment when his assurances and commitments were confronted with the reality of Soviet actions . Kennedy was not aware of the . effects of this .
 Khrushchev underestimated the likelihood that this prospect would ""provoke"" Kennedy to take aggressive action . Kennedy would have to take action to avert or avenge this embarrassment, says historian .
 He underrated the danger of relying on secrecy to produce a surprise, he said . Thus he underrated the danger he underdeveloped .
 Study of crises as " faits malaccomplis" shows pattern of inadvertent — an d—unforeseen pro vocation as a frequent generator of crises in relations of states .
 It is a threat of massive escalation meant to deter Soviet nuclear first-use . The threat is meant to be deterring Soviet first use in response to a U.S. invasion or air attack .
 Kennedy focussed attention, deceptively, on an aggressive threat posed by these missiles rather than any defensive, deterrent function . By not mentioning the latter contingencies, and by referring to ""any nation"" as though nations other than the United States were plausible targets for these MRBMs
 He also presented the United States action as protecting other Latin American countries, further I justification for his stance .
 This is not to say that the missiles deployed to Cuba posed no ""offensive"" Soviet threat . The missiles were deployed in Cuba in the 1960s .
 US/NATO 28 A/y ^ 3 arrangements relied on credible U.S. first-use nuclear threats to deter and defend against a Soviet challenge to the status of West Berlin, or West Europe in general .
 The Berlin issue was an aspect to the crisis which was certainly real in U.S. minds and probably in Khrushchev’s as well, as well . So far the Soviets have not acknowledged this, though so far .
 Cuban-based MRBMs did pose a th reat of S oviet esc alation to United States first-use of nuclear weapons in the context of NATO attempts to break a possible Soviet blockade of Berlin . U.S. first-used nuclear weapons during NATO's attempt to
 The deployment of MRBMs and IRBMs to Cuba neutralized the United States first-use threats on which NATO relied to defend Berlin and West Europe . The deployment served to neutralize the U.S. first use threats .
 If such an escalation was implemented, it would not be in the form of a single missile, or only a few missiles, being launched from Cuba, or the Soviet Union . It would go without saying that a sizeable launch from anywhere would lead to full retaliation against the USSR .
 Kennedy’s explicit threat was redundant in this context; it really applied much more I to the contingency of Soviet first-use in response to U.S. invasion or attack of Cuba . So Kennedy's explicit threat . was redundant .
 McNamara was far from fully confident that this massive deterrent threat would work, in the event of a U.S. attack on the missile or invasion .
 He estimated a small but highly 1 significant probability that such an attack would lead to an unauthorized launch of one or more missiles, outside Moscow s control .
 McNamara’s mind was enough to deter him from recommending such an attack or invasion, he says . McNamara: “This small probability was enough in McNamara's mind to deter . He recognized a real possibility that some missiles were operational, which was by October 17 or
 He and the President would almost certainly not have authorised a 'full' retaliatory response on the Soviet Union, he said in 1987 . He reported at the Cambridge Conference in 1987 that he and the . President, alert to the possibility of unauthorized launches of one or a few missiles, would
 Kennedy’s speech that such a full response would be M required, e., inevitable, was a conscious bluff . So the threat in Kennedy's speech was a deliberate bluff, he says .
 The threat was intended to strengthen the credibility of an offensive threat of non-nuclear action against the missiles and other Soviet forces in Cuba, as well as against Castro s forces . However, this deterrent threat of escalation of ""overreaction" was meant to weaken the credibility .
 This reassertion of U.S. first-strike superiority served to deter not only Soviet first-use from Cuba but Soviet ""horizontal escalation,"" by creating challenges elsewhere, as in Turkey or Berlin .
 The U.S. was prepared to act aggressively despite the possibility of counter-moves . Garthoff says the statement was a sign of American determination . The United States' nuclear superiority allowed it to wield such a threat of 'over-reaction'
 U.S. officials had felt certain that Soviet leaders had no intention of launching a deliberate attack, even against United States invasion . McNamara did feel confident of this, but this was not irrelevant to United States concerns about possible Soviet unautized launch .
 The United States threat of escalation did not eliminate the fear of unauthorized action in the minds of U.S. leaders . Even though the United States. threat of . escalation did . not eliminate . the fear that unauthorized action . in the . minds of Soviet leaders .
 Whenever they gave such instructions, precautions could always use strengthening . The precautions were always need strengthening .
 General Keegan said the SAC full-alert process was reported ' in the clear' rather than in normal encoded messages . Unauthorized actions during the Cuban Missile* Crisis were reported .
 Soviet communications interception personnel must have been shocked 6o C> 30 Jr. to hear the SAC commander-in-chief address all his senior commanders in an unprecedented message in the clear .
 Soviet political and military leaders must have been puzzled and alarmed at this flaunting of the American strategic superiority, so great that the United States could afford to ignore normal perational security in order to drive home the extent of its power . The U.S. was able to ignore perational
 The decision for this bold action was taken 6by General Thomas Power, commander in-chief of SAC, on his own initiative . The decision was made by Power, who is now the president of the United States .
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky did not inform higher authority after the fact . He did not even inform higher authorities . The Soviets arrested in Moscow the U.S. and UK spy .
 Earlier, he had tried to egg the Western powers on to more aggressive actions against the Soviet Union during the Berlin crisis in 1961 . So when he was about to go down, he evidently decided trcr-'pTay Samson' and bring the temple down on everyone else .
 Penkovsky’s final signal was suppressed by his Western TnTelTigence handlers, at the operational level, after weighing a dilemma of great responsibility, decided not to credit his final signal and suppressed it .
 It was not, after all, a miraculous coincidence that such a false warning should come exactly at the outset of a major crisis, when it was most likely to be believed and to be acted on preemptively . The warning was perhaps unprecedented in our 'human intelligence program'
 The adversary’s high-level alert, accompanying threats at the onset of an intense crisis, is likely to trigger a round-up of “suspected enemy agents”
 The warnings of imminent attack just before the Bay of Pigs invasion led Castro to roll up all the American networks the Cubans had had under surveillance up to that time . For example, the warnings of an imminent attack on the U.S. led to the Cuban government rolling up the American
 The U.S. strategic alert was meant to be visible, but Power’s unauthorized action made it even more blatant, immediately credible, and threatening . And the American strategic alert is not only visible but also visible, it was immediately credible .
 In particular, more planes were being put on continuous air alert than ever before . VA^ I . VA: More planes were put on constant air alert more than ever .
 The chance of an accident involving a nuclear weapon is higher than ‘’normal,” perhaps higher than ever before . The chances of a nuclear explosion are higher than normal, perhaps even higher than before .
 'The increased chance of this was such as to make the sending of such a strong ""signal"" very questionable in terms of its dangers of ' accident'
 Yet another ominous ""coincidence-waiting-to-happen” was a possible nuclear accident coming on this same day, or on subsequent days . Yet another 'coincident-waited-tohappening' was a nuclear accident .
 SAC’s DEFCON 2 was an unprecedented alert, meaning that throughout the world at SAC bases nuclear weapons were being loaded onto planes and deployed on an unprecedented scale, with unprecedented urgency . Nuclear weapons were loaded onto aircrafts and deployed in unprecedented scale .
 This was especially true of the decision to relocate B 4/s to 1 thirty-three civilian airports, such as Boston . I was especially pleased with the decision .
 The risk seemed far from justifiable in view of the vastly inferior Soviet first-strike forces (from one to several dozen operational missiles in the Soviet Union and less than two hundred intercontinental bombers) which made a Soviet first strike seem extremely unlikely .
 The same measures could have seemed to have been preparations for a preemptive attack . Yet these same measures may have appeared to the Soviets .
 NORAD and SAC would have been especially sensitive to indications of Soviet attack and hair-trigger prone to preempt it . Knowing that, NORAD would have had to be especially sensitive .
 The same day, a SAC U-2 flew ""mistakenly"" over the northern USSR, causing Soviet fighters to scramble in pursuit, in the same area where the KAL-007 was shot down in 1983 . It is just at the time of high tension and alert,
 This might or might not have been an accident unrelated to the high tension . This might not be the first time this has happened in a row .
 1 days into the crisis, a member of the ExCorom in his other duties by chance became aware of another routine IsicJ operation that should have been reconsidered under crisis conditions . X ** j H-—*■—~ — Severa .
 Garthoff cites this simply as an example of what could have happened—i.e-, a Cuban attack on the vessel — inadvertently, from operations be'Tow the attention of most high level decisionmakers, like the aggressive antisubmarine tactics .
 The de Soto patrol destroyer was attacked by North Vietnam on August 2, 1964 . The 34A missions were part of the 34A mission against North Vietnam .
 The other examples he mentions were probably not cases of deliberate U.S. provocation . Or, in this connection, to the exactly comparable Mongoose operations!
 The intelligence ship was probably emplaced near or in Cuban waters before October 15, the discovery of the missiles hence its description as ’’routine” — either, or probably both, as part of the Icon tin gency preparations for blockade or invasion launched on lOctober
 At least three meetings followed, including one on October 16 in between the two meetings in the White House that day on the missiles in Cuba that day .
 Admiral son himself has told James Hershberg that he/understood the''Mongoose operations to be aimed at provok ing; a iCuban military response that would justify and trigger a United States invasion . Admiral son has told him that he /understood his son's
 General Sam Wilson (later my colleague in pacification in Vietnam, still later head of Defense Intelligence Agency) told Hershberg the same . General Wilson was later working under Ed Lansdale in the Pentagon .
 This particular patrol was offshore just ' prior to the deadline for maximum readiness for an invasion, October 20 . It was almost certainly undertaking aggressive passes toward the shoreline to force the Cubans to turn on their coastal defense radars .
 The notion that events were moving toward a crisis before the discovery of the missiles and before the eTe~ction, has just taken a great leap forward in my mind . October 1, 1962-,—""tw^ ^eeks bef ore +&£ ^ .
 This means to him that virtually the only risk of nuclear operations reflected the possibility of accident or unauthorized action, which he rated as low . The only risk is that an unauthorized action or an accident could take place .
 The likelihood that one accident or unauthorized action would lead to others is not low, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The likelihood of an accident is "not low," says Sutter.
 President and Secretary of Defense did not seem to underrate the likelihood of accident, unauthorized action or more generally, loss of control of ') events . But they nevertheless accepted what they saw as significantly high probabilities of such events in deciding to undertake belligerent actions .
 The U.S. did not want to settle the crisis on terras they personally judged to be compatible with national security interests . Moreover, they did this in preference to settling the crisis in terms of what they deemed a suitable terras .
 Khrushchev was not fully aware of the risks of the course he was on . And the same was true for him, for at least some period after he became aware of risks .
 The net effect is less reassuring about the overall risks of nuclear war than Bundy makes it out, he says . Bundy says, "The net effect of the nuclear war is not reassuring"
 As it happens, I am inclined to judge that the leadership behavior in these cases i s subject to reproach by their citizens as irresponsible and reckless, as well as servile . And indeed, by the people of As it appears, the leadership .
 This is really the issue underlying the controversy about short-range nuclear forces, missiles and artillery in Europe today, this very summer . This is the issue of the controversy surrounding the controversy in Europe this summer .
 Actually, the missiles were photographed on the 14th and the photos interpreted on the 15th . The missiles were actually photographed on December 14th .
 It also meant that most of them had already discussed the matter with one or more others the night before or Tuesday morning: Rusk, Nitze, Rusk .
 Nitze was convinced by DIA of the presence of the missiles before photos were taken . Nitze had been considering options for a number of days, having been convinced by the DIA .
 This supported both a mood of American righteousness—which underpinned a violent response and a sense of perplexity, perplexity as to possible Soviet intentions which seemed almost incomprehensible, with a tendency to see them in the most ominous light . This supported the mood of U.S. righteousness—
 On October 22, the first Jupiter missile launch position in Turkey was turned over to Turkish command .
 Khrushchev had felt a timely thing to complain about to Ambassador Kohler on October 16 . It explains why he had felt it was appropriate to complain to Kohler .
 Khrushchev’s embarrassing backdown on Berlin was perhaps partly provoked by humiliating Gilpatric speech . Then, there was a humiliating back down on Berlin, perhaps provoked partly by humiliating speech .
 It would be an amazing example of self-censorship at the time if they really refrained from mentioning it in the larger group, when it came to trying to explain the Soviet action .
 They knew, from penetration of Mongoose, that that program was aimed at the overthrow of Castro; and they could calculate just as well as Lansdale that that aim would require invasion .
 G stresses that the program was, however, not accepted by the administration, which at that time approved only the intelligence infiltration stage of the plan . The plan was intended to bring about a ""popular revolt"" (or appearance of one) in Cuba .
 These assertions are never contradicted in the available documentation, nor are the aims modified . These assertionsT^are never contradicted .
 Kennedy appeared, in public, more than prepared to do something about the missiles he had found . Either they had been found ""too early" or they were found 'too early' or a 'failure of Soviet camouflage'
 McNamara implies that he had decided not to attack or invade, early in the crisis, so that preparations to do so were a bluff . Here is a case where he implies he had ""decided"" not to invade or invade early in crisis .
 It did help Kennedy, and hurt Khrushchev, that the discovery was made early enough that it could be claimed publicly that the missiles were not operational .
 The risks of action (which were properly high enough in the President’s mind to deter him) could be claimed to be low enough to permit action, without losing public support . Thus the risks of taking action were not enough to deter the President from taking action .
 The President’s bluff that he was willing to risk attacking was plausible, given his ability to reassure the public, and his willingness and political ability to take the risks of the blockade . The President's bluff was plausible given the public's confidence and willingness to take risks .
 It failed to consider that the President would not be deterred from making powerful threats, even though they might be (and probably were) bluffs . Yet it would still have been a miscalculation, because it failed to . consider that he would make powerful threats .
 Either the missiles were found earlier than Khrushchev expected (the Soviets do believe there was a simple failure to camouflage them) or/or the Soviets did not want to leak it to force Kennedy to act . The Soviets believe the missile was a result of a failure to conceal them .
 This commitment, made in front of the Republicans Dillon and McCone among others, was crucial in setting the terms of later ExComm discussion .
 Rusk might have wanted to leave the option of ""eating them,"" as Nitze had put it to Rusk the night before . Rusk had been on the run from Rusk's home .
 If the missiles had been clearly operational by the time they were found, likewise, likewise . Or, if the missiles were clearly operational, likewise. Or, perhaps, if they were still operational . The missiles were found in the U.S.
 Khrushchev's alleged motive for invasion of Cuba has been dismissed by U.S. analysts . Analysts seem to have never considered how he might have been expected to feel .
 This is still true, even now they know of the Soviet expectations 4a>^ Afe _ <*v K <V) V® — ^ I $ <dZX8 . The Soviet expectations are reflected in an unwillingness to take this motive as seriously as others .
 Far from inferring Soviet motives on the basis of a mirror image of ourselves, there is a failure to see ourselves realistically in a mirror, and then to imagine that Soviets might react very similarly to us .
 Khrushchev’s testimony would have worked quite well, says David Gergen . This is a case when that approach would have been used, he says . Gergen: "Krushchev's testimony was quite good"
 Kennedy’s earlier warnings and initial position in the crisis in Cuba contradicts his earlier warnings . To acknowledge diplomatic parity by either accepting the missiles in Cuba or trading the Turkish missiles against them would have been ""premature,"" a radical shift .
 Khruschev mused on whether the SU shouldn’t do the same thing in Cuba, just over the horizon from the United States. The Soviet Union should have done the same in Cuba . The U.S. went to Cuba in 1961, but the Soviet Union did not
 The Americans regarded Turkey as being in their sphere of influence and interest despite its proximity to the SU . The Americans by no means had reconciled themselves to the ""loss"" of Cuba from their sphere .
 Kennedy was wrong about McNamara's unwillingness to take the risk of attacking missiles, he says . Kennedy and McNamara didn't want to take risk of striking missiles .
 The risk of attacking the missile was not zero, though McNamara is reluctant to acknowledge this . McNamara says the risk is not zero . The risk was not the zero, he says .
 The U.S. intelligence community is amazed at the ability to keep the process secret . And they were not wrong—to the amazement of United States intel1igence .
 This does suggest that the absence of 1^1 about Soviet ICBMs in 1959-61 was a less reliable indicator of the non-existence of a missile gap than some supposed . —18.18.
 In his speech of December 1962, Khrushchev gave the defense of Cuba as the only reason for the deployment . The defense of the Cuban nation was the only answer to the decision .
 On the evidence available, it is s imply not tru e to say that no other explanation.""than one which assigns principal importance to the strategic balance can satisfactorily account for the decision .
 No one has ever defended Khrushchev’s December 1962 claim that defending Cuba was the only incentive . That is not really an issue, that is not the issue, says the author .
 To say this is not n eee^ ss ar iriy to justify Khrushchev’s choice, from a perspective that is also critical of the United States first-use policy and deployments in Europe and Turkey .
 If this consideration u43^l~eHF~etrtrs the legitimacy of Khrushchev’s action--by focussing on its dangers as a ""provocation"" of United States aggression — it does the same, more sharply, for the United States response .
 G has shifted his opinion from saying that this has been thoroughly debunked to saying it is ""questionable."" cites Burlatsky on Andropov. cites Burratsky's work as evidence . G has said it is "questionable"
 Garthoff may have been misled about invasion plans and Mongoose, he says . In the same way, I was misled about the U.S. role in Indonesia in 1965, in part by William Bundy; and about the United States role in Cuba in 1961-62 .
 Garthoff and apparently virtually all others in the intelligence community ignored the reality of Soviet warnings about possible invasion of Cuba . He failed to consider that as a deterrent to such invasion the Soviets might be putting in sizeable combat contingents .
 The role of ideology in warping intelligence analyses and interpretation of evidence could hardly be clearer . Ideology about the opponent and the purposes, openness and veracity of one’s own leaders are key factors in intelligence analysis .
 Even in 1989 Garthoff repeats his 1987 put-down of the Soviet statements . Even in the 1990s he repeats his put-downs .
 The missile facilities were to be completed and made operational by a date in November or December 1962 . G. G. says the missile facilities would be made operational in November 1962 .
 The best guess would seem to be that there was a major incoherence in the Soviet program . They were acting as if there was no real threat of an American invasion before the election, when their earlier, well-justified concerns had offered them no assurance .
 Another possibility was that they were taking a tense gamble which they saw as unavoidable; they were moving as fast as they could, taking a conscious chance that it would not be fast enough and that their efforts might be self-defeating by speeding the 20 American timetable . And they saw secrecy
 The former encounter would be a catastrophe for everyone, possibly everyone in the Northern Hemisphere . The latter discovery would be propaganda boon for the Americans apparently more than justifying their invasion^—while the former encounter .
 Khrushchev might have gotten it into his head that there was almost no chance of an invasion before the election . But the contingency planning actually went on, as well as what actually happened .
 An American invasion was significantly more likely than past analysts have realized even in the absence or in ignorance of Soviet missiles . The U.S. might have been undeterred by the actual, secret presence of the missiles and the Soviet troops, 4nd .
 U-2 bomber was about to trigger a Soviet Doomsday Machine that had been wired to end all life on earth with a cloud of radioactive cobalt when any nuclear explosions went off on the Soviet Union .
 A secret device could not deter, it could only do...what was about to happen . The device could only be used to do what was going on .
 Garthoff describes the intended function of the large Soviet troop contingent as being, in addition to security for the missile sites and other forces, as a "trip wire"
 Combined with missiles, they do add force to the possibility that an American invasion would lead to a ^launch, authorised or not . The possibility of a U.S. invasion would be possible .
 As with the above question of what the Soviet concerns were or should have been with respect to the effect of their secrecy, comparable issues are raised by their deployment of actual warheads to Cuba .
 McNamara’s assumption that the missiles were capable of being fired was not misplaced . The 'reasonable and prudent leader' model, a part of the ideologies of both sides, not so well . The ""rational actor"" model is working better and better for the crisis .
 American JCS planned for the possibility that Soviet troops did have tactical nuclear weapons . JCS' Th-e^r idea of a prudent response to this possibility was to plan to have tactical nukes with American troops that would be invading within a day or two .
 The U.S. belief that Castro was simply a tool of Moscow was wrong, and led to wrong inferences at the climax of the crisis . It might have led to an air attack and everything that might have followed .
 One guess would be that once the Soviet Union had decided to do something secretly, they had no experience, reflexes, procedures for deciding to reveal that quickly, prior to the time they had planned .
 If the other party discovers the project prematurely, the very fact that public attention has not been aroused may give it the option of keeping its own knowledge and initial planning and responses secret while it prepares its own fait accompli .
 Part of the counter may be to reveal, at a moment of its own choosing, the secret planning of the adversary, and to interpret the opponent’s secrecy as indicating aggressive intent, and a guilty conscience over an illegitimate activity . And part of its counter may have been to reveal
 If JFK had not been able to say, over and over, that the Soviet move was illegal or an act of war, would have been embarrassingly blatant . JFK, on October 22, said that the move was perfectly legal while the announced U.S. blockade was either illegal or
 Had it been known, which it wasn’t, it provided a precedent for the secrecy surrounding the legal Soviet move . The move mocked the United States charge that the Soviet effort at deterring a U.S. invasion was an ""unjustified"" change in the status quo
 The Soviets were doing what the U.S. had done in Turkey, and on the same basis of an ally’s ""request"" (actually, in both cases, the ally's compliance . The difference, from the United States point of view, was that Cuba was regarded
 "status quo M whose change we would not accept," says Obama . That was the asymmetric ""status quo M whose change was not accepted," he says .
 The United States had never come to recognize the parity of sovereign rights between the U.S. and Cuba . Cuba was secretly contradicting in its covert Mongoose program and its contingency planning for invasion .
 The judgment by the heretofore hegemonic power that this assertion of autonomy is 27 ""unjustified"" is not the last word . But the judgment by . heretotofore . hegemon power . that this . assertion of . autonomy is not a last word,
 It was, primarily, the US’ unwillingness to accept an assertion of diplomatic or sovereign parity with either the Soviet Union or Cuba that underlay the danger, recklessness and provocativeness of the Soviet-Cuban project .
 The successful secrecy and deliberately misleading statements of intention inadvertently tempted Kennedy to make public assurances and commitments that he would probably not have made if he had been less certain and less mistaken about Soviet intentions .
 U D for g s e en pro vocation as a frequent generator of crises in the relations of states . My general study of crises as "" faits malaccomplis "" — trh* result tfM —attempted faits accomplis that were miscalculated or
 He also presented the United States action as protecting other Latin American countries, further justification for his stance .
 US/NATO 28 arrangements relied on credible U.S. first-use nuclear threats to deter and defend against a Soviet challenge to the status of West Berlin, or West Europe in general . They did challenge US/ NATO 28 arrangements .
 Kennedy’s explicit threat was redundant in this context; it really applied much more to the contingency of Soviet first-use in response to U.S. invasion or attack of Cuba . So Kennedy's explicit threat .
 Kennedy’s speech that such a full response would be ""required,"" e., inevitable, was a conscious bluff . So the threat in Kennedy's speech was "required," e. e. inevitable, he says .
 Soviet communications interception personnel must have been shocked 30 2>o^ suddenly to hear the SAC commander-in-chief address all his senior commanders in an unprecedented message in the clear .
 The decision for this bold action was taken by General Thomas Power, commanderin-chief of SAC, on his own initiative .
 Earlier, he had tried to egg the Western powers on to more aggressive actions against the Soviet Union during the Berlin crisis in 1961 .
 He was about to go down, he evidently decided to play Samson and bring the temple down on everyone else as well as everyone else .
 Western intelligence handlers, at the operational level, decided not to credit Penkovsky’s final signal and suppressed it . Fortunately, Western intelligence .
 The adversary’s high-level alert, accompanying threats at the onset of an intense crisis, is 1ikely to trigger a round-up of suspected enemy agents . The alert is accompanied by threats that are accompanied by an alert .
 More planes are being put on continuous air alert than ever before . More planes were put on constant air alert in the U.S. than ever .
 This was especially true of the decision to relocate B-47s to thirty-three civilian airports, such as Boston .
 I felt at the time that this was a reckless policy (as was the airborne C NA4T TH<S 32 alert), risking nuclear accidents in the immediate vicinity of metropolitan areas . I felt it was reckless policy .
 The same measures could have seemed to have been preparations for a U.S. preemptive attack . Yet these same measures may have been pre-emptive attacks .
 The same day, a SAC U-2 flew ""mistakenly"" over the northern USSR, causing Soviet fighters to scramble in pursuit, in the same area where the KAL—007 was shot down in 1983 . It is just at the time of high tension and alert,
 Garthoff cites this simply as an example of what could have happened, from operations below the attention of most high-level decisionmakers, like the aggressive antisubmarine tactics of the Navy .
 A similar ship in a similar situation, the Liberty , was attacked by Israeli aircraft and ships, and in 1968 its sistei—ship, the Pueblo was captured by the North Koreans . Garthoff observes, ""There is a strong tendency to ignore lessons from near-
 The intelligence ship was probably emplaced near or in Cuban waters before October 15, the discovery of the missiles . It was probably part of the contingency preparations for blockade or invasion launched on October 1 .
 As in the Tonkin Gulf, the ""logical"" targets for ""reprisal"" would be targets ""related"" to the attack on the Navy ship . In 1964, these included the naval bases for North Vietnamese patrol boats, and petroleum depots .
 The notion that events were moving toward a crisis before the discovery of the missiles and before the election, has just taken a great leap forward in my mind . October 1, 1962-,—""twoweeks before fAtr —cL i rrn . ..< » ■«
 McGeorge Bundy bases his reassuring appraisal of the past, and future, risks of nuclear war on the record . Bundy: Leaders of both superpowers have been prudent, determined to maintain control of nuclear initiatives in their own hands .
 U.S. national security interests are at risk, says Obama administration . Obama administration did this in preference to settling the crisis on terms they personally judged to be compatible with national security, he says .
 Khrushchev was not fully aware of the risks of the course he was on . And the same was true for him, for at least some period after he became aware of risks .
 Leadership behavior in these cases is subject to reproach by citizens as irresponsible and reckless, as well as servile, as it happens . As it happens, I am inclined to judge that the leadership behavior in such cases is reproach .