 National Photographic Interpretation Center identified SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles deployed outside the town of San Cristobal . Analyzing these images the next day, photo interpreters identified the missiles . The missiles are believed to be deployed in the area .
 National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy of the deployments the following morning . President Kennedy was informed of the deployment by Bundy .
 The movie Thirteen Days, for example, opens with a montage of a U-2 flight and photo interpreters poring over black-and-white film reels and finding missiles .
 American intelligence collection was comprehensive, persistent, and effective, implying discovery of the missiles was inevitable . In such accounts, U.S. intelligence collection is comprehensive and persistent .
 The United States failed to detect the secret operation to install Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba for nearly six months . The U.S. failed to find out for six months that Soviet missiles had been installed in Cuba .
 The medium-range ballistic missiles were actually in Cuba five weeks before U.S. intelligence discovered them . The missiles were in Cuba before the United States discovered them, officials say .
 While the intelligence community counts the missile crisis among its historic successes, it might be considered more of a near-failure, as multiple scholars have noted . The missile crisis was one of the biggest failures of the Cold War .
 Many have mined the missile crisis for lessons regarding political decision-making, estimative intelligence, and critical thinking .
 Intelligence collection remains a relatively unexplored angle of the case . Yet intelligence collection remains an unexplored aspect .
 This essay considers just how the missiles were discovered and the enduring implications this holds for intelligence collection and its relationship with analysis and policy . It also considers the impact of this finding on intelligence collection .
 The operation, codenamed ANADYR, aims to improve the credibility of Russia’s nuclear deterrent . He hoped it would provide a rhetorical response to recent U.S. intermediate-range ballistic missile deployments in Turkey .
 ANADYR was known only to select Soviet political and military leadership . Conceived personally by Khrushchev and predicated upon secrecy, it was predicated on secrecy .
 Imagery and signals intelligence collection inside the USSR itself was limited and sporadic . The USSR was the only country in the world to collect intelligence .
 U-2 IMINT was no longer viable over the USSR after the May 1960 shoot-down of Francis Gary Powers . Powers was shot down by U.S. forces in May 1960 .
 Corona photoreconnaissance satellites provided valuable but infrequent coverage . Corona satellites lacked the frequency and resolution to identify missile regiments departing garrisons or ANADYR cargos .
 SIGINT largely involved radio-frequency intercepts from platforms outside the Soviet periphery . SIGINT was largely intercepted by Soviet-held countries .
 Fictional intelligence officers uncover such plans by taking the right photograph, decrypting the right communication, stealing the right document, or interrogating the right person .
 When you don't know you’re dealing with a secret plot, intelligence collection won’t be optimally postured to discover the threat, and limited resources will be dedicated to other priorities .
 In the spring and summer of 1962, there was no American embassy in Cuba and the few American HUMINT sources there were focused on regime stability, state security, and socioeconomic issues, as well as supporting covert efforts to topple Castro .
 Secret plots also allow adversaries to employ extensive denial and deception . Secret plots can also be used in the United States, experts say .
 Soviet personnel took steps to avoid American SIGINT, minimizing sensitive communications and writing them down or passing them verbally when necessary .
 Crews camouflaged sensitive equipment while underway and loaded and offloaded only at night, behind secure perimeters with high walls . Crews camouflage sensitive equipment as underway .
 Some crews were issued Arctic gear, and the very name of the mission was meant to convey some connection to the Anadyr region in the Soviet Far East . To throw the Americans off the trail with false indicators, some crews were given Arctic gear .
 The Soviets lied to their own ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, who served as an unwitting deceiver . The Soviets even lied to the U.S. ambassador to U.K.
 Rumors and speculation regarding possibly nefarious Soviet activity on the island further complicated U.S. collection .
 Such churn confused the intelligence community’s understanding of actual activity without adding any real information. Such churns confuse the intelligence . The intelligence community's understanding of what is happening without adding real information .
 Following the Bay of Pigs and Berlin blockade crises, Republican politicians and pundits pointed to acknowledged Soviet military activity in Cuba as evidence of Kennedy’s failure to prevent Soviet aggression on the U.S. doorstep .
 Kenneth Keating claimed there might be Soviet rocket installations in Cuba . Keating said there might have been Soviet installations in the country .
 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone refused to cooperate with Keating . Keating refused to give details of the CIA director's role in the case .
 Many in Kennedy’s cabinet questioned the notion of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba . Whatever the source of the claims, their partisan nature drove many in Kennedy's cabinet to question the notion .
 SNIE concluded there was no clear evidence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba and that the Soviets probably would not deploy such weapons . SNIE: No clear evidence that Soviet weapons were deployed in Cuba .
 IMINT and SIGINT were ambiguous about the broader nature of the Soviet buildup . Before mid-October, IMINT had been ambiguous .
 Soviet claims were conventional military shipments meant purely for Cuban self-defense or fears of nuclear weapons . Yet every data point — arrivals of aircraft, cruise missiles, surface-to-air missiles — was equally consistent with either Soviet claims .
 Cuban émigrés debriefed in Florida and clandestine sources inside Cuba offered reporting explicitly claiming the presence of offensive missiles . Unlike IMINT and SIGINT, some HUMINT reports explicitly claimed to have offensive missiles in Cuba .
 They came from sources with little vetting or reporting records, they came from little vetting . Additionally, they were from sources who had little reporting records .
 On Sept 10 Bundy and Secretary of State Dean Rusk directed future U-2 flights to avoid Cuban airspace to dodge the recently discovered SAMs . IMINT representatives said this would cripple collection over central Cuba .
 Administration officials were only pressured to resume flights over the Cuban interior on Oct. 31 . Concerns were raised by Defense Intelligence Agency leadership over mounting HUMINT reporting of missiles in western Cuba . Administration officials only resumed flights over Cuba in October .
 This resulted in the fateful Oct. 31 flight and NPIC’s discovery of the missiles . NPIC found the missiles in the course of the flight .
 As this case highlights, collection platforms and sources are themselves political devices and actors whose peculiarities, limitations, and risks shape how intelligence is produced . This case highlights the importance of collection platforms, sources and sources as political devices .
 The implications of this case are enduring because they reflect basic realities of human nature, political behavior, says CNN's John Sutter . The implications are enduring, he says .
 Successful collection requires complementary coverage of multiple disciplines . Successful collections require complementary coverage from multiple disciplines.
 This is the conclusion that the modern intelligence community has arguably taken most to heart . The conclusion is that the U.S. has taken most of its intelligence community to heart.
 Multiple sources are essential for production of accurate, comprehensive intelligence . Multiple sources of intelligence are needed to produce accurate and reliable information .
 The discovery of the missiles was only possible through cross-cued, multi-INT collection . Eventual discovery of missiles only possible after a series of cross-interactions .
 SIGINT failed to provide independent proof of an offensive buildup, but identified increased maritime shipments and unusual communications, drawing further attention . SIGINT did not provide independent evidence of a buildup .
 HUMINT justified overturning the “photo gap’s restrictions and cued the IMINT flight that ultimately revealed the missiles . The mission was launched by the U.S. Air Force in 2009 .
 Such collaborative, multi-INT collection is a hallmark of modern intelligence operations . Such collaborative collection is an important piece of intelligence intelligence .
 Collection, analysis, and policy are in a constant state of interaction and backflow . Despite being frequently depicted as sequential steps, collection, analysis and policy is in a state of constant interaction .
 As others have noted, the notion of a sequential “intelligence cycle is deeply flawed . The notion of an ‘intelligence cycle’ is also deeply flawed, as is the notion .
 The intelligence community published an analytic assessment that the Soviets wouldn't install such missiles even as it pushed for increased collection to look for said missiles .
 Policymakers hamstrung this collection request based on analysis that, in turn, suffered from insufficient collection . Policymakers say the collection request was based on an analysis that didn't have enough data .
 A politician, perhaps aware of classified reporting on the issue, shaped the debate over collection and analysis by publicly making it a partisan political issue . A politician made the issue a political issue by making it public .
 Satellites could overfly the USSR and Cuba with impunity . HUMINT sources were available inside Cuba, and SIGINT collected information from a variety of sources around the world .
 Corona satellite mission did image western Cuba on Oct. 31 . It lacked sufficient resolution to identify missile sites and poor weather conditions made matters worse . Poor weather conditions also made it worse .
 Though present in Cuba, clandestine HUMINT sources tackled a plethora of competing priorities and lacked sufficient vetting and collector confidence . The Cuban government failed to adequately vet the sources of intelligence .
 While SIGINT was collected both at sea and inside Cuba, effective Soviet communication security and encryption forestalled any reference to “missiles” or “nuclear” activity .
 Intelligence consumers receive data from non-intelligence sources that compete for attention and confidence . Intelligence consumers get data from data that compete with attention from other sources . The data is based on data from the Internet, not intelligence sources .
 Conversations with Dobrynin and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko shaped policymakers’ and intelligence professionals’ understanding of reality .
 Graham Greene’s 1958 novel Our Man in Havana and its movie adaptation revolved around false rumors of foreign weapons deployments in Cuba and spies’ gullibility in falling for them .
 It is no great leap to imagine that this is where CIA and DIA analysts’ thoughts might have turned when seeing HUMINT reporting of powerful weapons deployed on the island . It is not a great leap .
 Russia’s emphasis on information operations that eat away at the fabric of evidence-based analysis is well-established . Today, Russia's emphasis on . information operations is well established, according to the author .
 Russian media flood news outlets and social media with counter-narratives and anti-Western cynicism . As various outlets have noted with regard to regard to Crimea, MH17, Syria, and other issues, it is highly effective to simply flood news .
 Such efforts may overwhelm any evidence-based narrative drawn from intelligence collection, undermining our understanding of threats and attribution . Such efforts undermine our understanding and attribution, the author says .
 Collection is an inherently political act, with the potential to drive developments as well as inform them . Collection is inherently political, and it has potential to influence developments and inform them, says author .
 As the shoot-down of a U-2 at the peak of the crisis on Oct. 31. illustrated, intelligence collection is not a passive research function . Intelligence collection is a vital part of the U.S. mission in the world's most powerful state of power .
 In turn, policy realities either enable or inhibit effective collection . Policy realities are important to ensure collection is collected, and the data is collected .
 Eisenhower administration’s strong support for developing technical intelligence made possible the existence of the U-2 and the operations that allowed the U.S. intelligence to find the missiles . The Eisenhower administration's strong support was made possible by the U.-2 .
 Eisenhower also closed the embassy in Havana, which crippled HUMINT collection . The embassy also crippled the collection of intelligence on Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration’s reluctance to risk another international crisis essentially blinded U.S. collection to the presence of the missiles for five weeks . Kennedy administration's reluctance to . risk another . international crisis .
 Even before the “photo gap’s decision, the administration made clear the political sensitivity of potential Soviet offensive deployments . The ‘photo gap decision’ was made clear before .
 We see today decisions where sensitivity and risk aversion result in self-imposed collection constraints, which in turn risk the kind of collection blinders that nearly forestalled discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The risk of the blinders is that the U.S. will not be able to find
 Intelligence success during a crisis requires effective collection prior to the crisis . Intelligence success in a crisis can be achieved by collecting intelligence prior to a crisis .
 It is possible to increase or revise collection during a crisis, but agencies must constantly collect, catalog, and disseminate baseline information to prepare for these events . Agency must collect and catalog data to prepare to prepare .
 Details of Soviet equipment were acquired many months before the crisis via Penkovsky, attaché reporting, and technical collection by overhead imagery, radioactive sampling, seismographs, and ground-based radars .
 The intelligence community could not simply request and collect such knowledge ad hoc once nefarious activity was suspected . Intelligence officials say the intelligence community cannot simply request such information ad hoc .
 NPIC’s archives and knowledge of targets, built from years of U-2 and Corona coverage, were essential for analysts to quickly and accurately identify equipment in Cuba . NPIC: Analysts were able to quickly identify equipment that could be used in Cuba.
 SIGINT had previously gathered and cataloged communications frequencies and radar emissions, allowing analysts to locate and characterize activity . SIGINT previously gathered communications frequencies, radar emissions .
 Major crises will occur in the countries near the bottom of the collection priority list . Major crises are likely to occur in these countries, says CNN.com .
 Decisions to refocus collection efforts and operations carry real risk, officials say . Decisions on refocusing collection efforts carry real risks, they say .
 There are only so many aircraft, sensors, case officers, and antennas to go around . This will remain an enduring challenge for intelligence collection .
 There are insights we can take away from this seminal event 55 years ago . 2017 is a very different time for intelligence collection than was 1962, given today's multipolar world .
 Intelligence collection platforms and methods inevitably change with the passage of time . The interplay between collection, analysis, and policy described above will endure, says the author .
 We would be foolhardy to ignore the hard-won lessons of the discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles off our shores, writes Andrew Hammond .