 On the 50th anniversary of this key historical event during the Cold War, students will gain a better understanding of the causes, events, and outcomes of the “hottest days” in Cold War history .
 Students will view the same photos as President Kennedy and his executive committee . Students will decide whether or not the actions were necessary . The photos will be shown to students .
 Students will listen to Kennedy’s address to the U.S. public . Students will also read and evaluate Khrushchev's response to Kennedy's requests .
 Students will work both individually and in teams representing the three Navy branches . Students will then compile research on specific ships, planes, or submarines from the crisis .
 Students will end with a formative assessment of their choice through artistic or written impression . Students will also end with an assessment of the choice .
 Each student, beginning with volunteers, will write something on the board . Each student begins with a question: "What do you think about me?"
 Students can write comments, questions, etc. in response to original phrase or to fellow student comments . They can also write questions, questions or questions about the original phrase .
 After sufficient time, teacher reviews comments for further explanations . Teacher reviews comments with further explanation .
 Teacher will instruct students to define words using textbook or teacher supplied definition . Students will be taught how to define terms using textbook definitions .
 Students will then create a nonlinguistic representation of the word, such as a symbol or basic drawing . Next, students will then use a symbol and basic drawing to represent the word .
 Students will analyze photos, evaluate photos to determine if any threat is evident . Students will then evaluate the photos, and then evaluate them to determine what if there is a threat .
 Groups will have to weigh options of possible responses to Cuba and the Soviet Union . Groups will also have to decide if they want to respond to the situation .
 Each group representative will advise President Kennedy as to actions they feel necessary . President Kennedy will meet with representatives from each group to advise him .
 Students will assume the role of President Kennedy and write what actions they would take if the decision was theirs . Students will write what they would do if they were to take the decision .
 A link to an audio recording of President Kennedy reading his speech is listed under resources, if preferred . The audio recording is available for download on iTunes .
 Teacher will divide students into small groups and distribute poster sized copies of Khrushchev’s response letter . Different colored wet erase markers will be distributed .
 Teacher will model text annotating process, reminding students to read through the letter once without comments . Students will be able to annotate text once without comment .
 On second and subsequent readings, students should write questions, comments, underline and then define unfamiliar terms, etc. Students should also write questions and comments on unfamiliar terms .
 Following the text annotation, groups will then begin discussing what actions President Kennedy should take .
 Teacher will facilitate class discussion of group advice . Discussion will be followed by sharing what actions President Kennedy actually took . Teacher will lead discussion of President Kennedy .
 Naval branches will publish their research findings, highlighting their branches’ contribution in the crisis, with specific information from each individual student . Naval branches to publish their findings .
 JFK, Khrushchev, Castro, quarantine, missile, reconnaissance, Cuba, the U.S. and the Soviet Union. JFK, JFK and Castro. JFK. JFK . Castro. Castro . Castro . JFK . JFK.
 All choices should include appropriate use of at least 2 vocabulary words given at beginning of unit . Use of vocabulary words should be required at start of unit.
 For average to advanced learners, I would require students to write at least a phrase for each letter . For students, writing at least one phrase per letter is required .