 The opening of Robert F Kennedy’s personal papers on the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis will mark the opening of personal papers .
 This narrative has informed — and misinformed — many presidential decisions over the past five decades . What this obscures is the critical role that cunning, craft and willingness to compromise played in resolving this crisis .
 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu spoke to the United Nations in September . This same attitude was echoed by, Benjamin Netanyahu, in his address to the U.N.
 The U.S. was committed to defending Berlin, even if it meant using nuclear weapons . Khrushchev demanded that the United States withdraw missiles from Turkey . Kennedy was reluctant to back down, but it was possible to do so .
 Secret tapes made by JFK of the meetings reveal Kennedy was intrigued in the possibility of trading the obsolete U.S. missiles in Turkey for withdrawal of missiles in Cuba . From the transcript, it is clear that Kennedy was interested in the deal .
 Kennedy dismissed the group for dinner, asking them to come back for further discussion at 9:00 pm . But the overwhelming consensus in the room rejected that option, insisting it would undermine the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance .
 He retained six of his closest advisers, including his brother, to shape a further option . This imaginative combination included a public deal, a private ultimatum and a secret sweetener .
 Publicly, Washington would pledge not to invade Cuba if the Soviet Union withdrew the missiles . The U.S. would have to withdraw the missiles if it withdrew them .
 The U.S. would state as fact that unless Khrushchev announced withdrawal of the missiles within 24 hours, the United States would act to eliminate them . Privately, the U.K. would say as fact, that unless a withdrawal was announced, the missiles would be eliminated
 The U.S. would not make any deal if the missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, but within six months the missiles in Turkey would be gone . Robert Kennedy met Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin during the dinner break .
 His papers include a number of drafts in which he explores alternative language for conveying the essence of the president's message .
 Khrushchev accepted the deal publicly on Soviet radio so there could be no mistaking his response . Dobrynin got word of the deal to Khrushchen, who accepted it .
 President John F Kennedy meets with members of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council during the Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, and Deputy Defense Secretary Roswell .
 President Kennedy said in October of 1962…’We no longer live in a world…where only the actual firing of weapons represents a sufficient challenge to a nation’s security to constitute maximum peril’”’
 The question arose whether Kennedy could give Khrushchev a way out by accepting his demand that the United States withdraw missiles from Turkey . Washington was committed to defending Berlin, even if it meant using nuclear weapons .
 JFK was intrigued in the possibility of trading the obsolete U.S. missiles in Turkey for withdrawal of missiles in Cuba .
 The overwhelming consensus in the room rejected that option, insisting it would undermine the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance, a pillar of Washington’s Cold War strategy .
 "This imaginative combination included a public deal, a private ultimatum and a secret sweetener," says CNN.com .
 "Within six months the missiles in Turkey would be gone," says Kennedy . "Robert Kennedy met Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin during the dinner break .
 Withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey, he insisted, could “not be a quid pro quo,” but if missiles left Cuba, the United States would no longer keep missiles in Turkey . RFK flatly rejected the agreement in writing the day after
 Withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey, he insisted, could “not be a quid pro quo,” but if missiles left Cuba, the United States would no longer keep missiles in Turkey . RFK flatly rejected the piece of paper, saying he
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, is home to the Kennedy Museum .