 The small island of Cuba is 90-miles off the Florida coast . It is 90 miles off the coast of the Florida state .
 Fidel Castro had risen to power in a revolution which ousted dictator Fulgencio Batista who had ruled the island since the 1930s . In early 1959, Fidel Castro rose to power after the overthrow of the Batista .
 Castro denounced America as an imperialist nation, then took ownership of U.S. property on the island . Castro, once in power, quickly denounced America's imperialism . Castro then took over the island and took ownership .
 America soon cut-off the heavy imports of Cuban sugar into the United States . Losing patience with the new island dictator, the U.S. cut off the sugar imports .
 Castro took steps to appease the Soviets and make Cuba a "satellite nation" of the Soviet Union . In retaliation, Castro confiscated more property, as he took steps . Castro made Cuba a satellite nation of Soviet Union, making Cuba a 'satellite country'
 U.S. imposed a strict trade embargo on Cuba in 1961 . Cuba broke diplomatic relations completely with the Castro government . The embargo was imposed on the island .
 Kennedy inherited this tumultuous situation from the Eisenhower administration . Cuban insurgents during the Bay of Pigs invasion were insurgents .
 While in office, Eisenhower and his military advisors had created a plan to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba . The plan was created by Eisenhower and military advisors .
 Kennedy ordered the invasion of Cuba to begin on April 17, 1961 . After convincing from the Joint-Chiefs of Staff that the invasion would succeed without issue, Kennedy ordered it to begin .
 Nearly 1,200 American-trained Cuban exiles, with the backing of the CIA, returned to the island to depose Castro . They were backed by the CIA .
 The invasion force was bogged down in the Bay of Pigs and the operation ended in failure . The operation was a major success for the U.S. in Cuba .
 Kennedy was forced to negotiate the release of 1,189 survivors of the invasion, in exchange for $53 million dollars worth of food and medicine from the United States . Twenty months later, Kennedy negotiated a deal to release the survivors .
 In the end, Kennedy accepted full responsibility for the invasion’s failure, as it also pushed the Cuban government into an even closer relationship with the Soviet Union .
 The stage was set for an international show-down which would push the two nations – and the world – to the brink of nuclear war . Now, the stage has been set for a nuclear showdown between North and South Korea .
 In September 1962, the Soviet Union began building 9 medium-range ballistic missile sites on the island of Cuba . U2 Flights and the Discovery Map show how the distances the missiles can travel .
 A U-2 spy plane flew over the island, taking aerial photographs which revealed the construction of the missiles, and even greater concern that these missiles were nuclear . It was then that a spy plane took aerial photographs of the missile construction .
 According to U.S. intelligence, the Soviets intended to use these weapons to shield Castro from future American attacks . The weapons were intended to also blackmail the United States, according to intelligence .
 This committee consisted of 14 high-ranking administration officials . Bobby Kennedy’s Attorney General, closet-advisor, and brother, Bobby Kennedy, was on the committee .
 The mission was to determine what action – if any – should be taken to deal with the newly discovered missiles .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff advised that a full-scale attack and invasion of the island was the only feasible solution . Do nothing. Use diplomacy to remove the missiles. Use an air attack to destroy the missiles . Launch a full military invasion of Cuba to remove missiles . Implement a naval blockade of
 Kennedy believed attacking Cuba would signal to Soviets they could attack and conquer Berlin . Kennedy believed attack would signal Soviet forces could attack Berlin . The Cuban attack on Cuba in 1960s was the first to be carried out .
 Another military option was to conduct a “surgical” bombing strike against the missile sites in Cuba . Another option was a ‘surgical strike’ against missile sites .
 The problem, Kennedy believed, was that the air force needed to be completely successful in hitting their targets . Kennedy believed that the problem was that they needed to hit their targets to be successful .
 If even one missile site was left operational, and just one missile was launched, it would mean the deaths of millions of Americans and the start of the Third World War . Millions of Americans would die if the launch of a missile site were launched .
 Joint Chiefs believed the missiles would alter the military balance in the region . Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagreed with the Joint Chiefs .
 All parties agreed that the missiles would affect the political balance of power between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy understood – even after ruling out an invasion or air strike of the island – that some type of action needed to be taken . Kennedy understood that even if it was ruled out of an invasion, Kennedy understood .
 The problem was that a blockade was, technically, an act of war, and the Soviets could use this action as an excuse to launch missiles . The problem, however, was that the blockade was technically a war . The Soviet Union launched the missiles in response to a U.S.
 Instead of calling the U.S. naval actions taken by the United States a blockade, it was labeled a quarantine and said to be more selective than a blockade and focused only on offensive weapons going into Cuba . Therefore, instead of calling it a blockade it was called a quarantine, it
 Kennedy ordered a quarantine placed on Cuba on October 22, 1962, after obtaining approval from other nations in the area . Kennedy ordered the quarantine on Cuba in 1962 .
 Kennedy then demanded the immediate removal of all threatening weaponry on the island nation . Kennedy then warned that any attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack coming from the Soviet Union .
 Such an attack, Kennedy warned, would trigger nuclear retaliation against the Soviet Union – including Moscow itself . Such a strike would trigger retaliation against Russia, Kennedy said .
 For a week, Kennedy – and all Americans – waited as Soviet ships approached the quarantine line established by the American navy off the Cuban coast . The crisis deepens .
 Most Soviet ships stopped or turned back, but one Soviet vessel slipped through the quarantine line and continued his voyage . The ship continued its voyage through quarantine line .
 If the U.S. navy seized or sank that – or any – Soviet vessel it would be regarded by the Kremlin as an act of war – and, again, World War III would begin . If the American navy seized . or sank any . of the . Soviet vessels it would
 Officials were fairly certain the ship did not have military material on board . Luckily, calmer heads in the Kennedy administration prevailed . The ship was allowed to pass and war was averted .
 Kennedy learned missiles in Cuba were still actively being constructed by the Soviets . Kennedy learned the missiles were still being built by the Soviet Union .
 It was SACEUR that had the duty of carrying out the first air strikes on the Soviet Union should war begin .
 Kennedy now told EXCOMM and his brother that he believed only an invasion of Cuba would successfully get the Soviets to remove the missiles . Kennedy now said he believed an invasion would get the Soviet missiles removed .
 Kennedy was convinced to give the matter more time as other actors applied diplomatic pressure to the Soviets in an effort to resolve the nuclear crisis . Luckily, Kennedy was able to convince him to give it more time .
 During the show-down telegrams were being sent between the White House and Kremlin . The two sides strived to find a peaceful resolution to the crisis .
 At 6:00pm on October 26, 1962, a message was received from the Soviet Union that seemed to have been written personally by Khrushchev . Then, at 6:30pm on Oct. 27, a Soviet Union message was sent to the White House from Moscow .
 The telegram was filled with emotion and reiterated the terms presented in earlier telegrams about how the crisis could end . It was sent to the White House in Washington, DC .
 Khrushchev said the Soviets would declare all ships bound for Cuba had no arms, if America would declare/promise it would not invade Cuba . America would also promise not to invade Cuba if it was declared/promised not to do so .
 Khrushchev was just as stressed by the situation as Kennedy, and that neither nation wanted to descend into nuclear war . The telegram demonstrated that Khrushvic was just . as stressed as Kennedy .
 Moscow began broadcasting a new message ‘from Khrushchev’ – only this new message contained much harsher language than the first . It complained of American nuclear missiles which had been placed in Turkey .
 Kennedy had to respond to the telegrams . Regardless of why the change in language occurred, he had to act . Kennedy responded .
 Kennedy ignored the second harsher-worded telegram and responded only to the first, acting as if America never received the second message from the Soviets . The president responded to the telegram only with the first .
 Khrushchev finally flinched, agreeing to a compromise with Kennedy . The crisis ended on October 28, 1963, in the global show-down .
 Khrushchev would pull the missiles out of Cuba Kennedy, in return, would end the quarantine of Cuba . America would, quietly, and months later, remove the nuclear missiles from Turkey .
 To the global community it appeared the Soviets backed down in Cuba . All America had to do was promise they would never again try to invade the island and end the naval quarantine .
 Khrushchev was pushed out of the Kremlin in the aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis . Soviet hard-liners vowed they would never again be humiliated in a nuclear face-off with the United States .
 Soon, the Soviet Union launched an enormous program of military expansion, which led America to also intensify its own military spending .
 Kennedy had brought the nation back from the brink of nuclear war . The Cold War was now heating-up even further further .
 Kennedy advocated for a stronger nuclear test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union . In the aftermath of the crisis, Kennedy advocated more passionately for a strong nuclear test ban treaty .
 In late 1963, America engaged in negotiations in Moscow which resulted in a pact with the Soviet Union prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the atmosphere . The pact was made in late 1963 .
 In August 1963, Washington and Moscow installed the Moscow-Washington “hot line” which allowed immediate teletype communication in case of a future crisis . The line was installed in August 1963 and was used in the aftermath of a Soviet-Russian conflict .
 It was only in 1991 that the realities of how close the world came to nuclear war became public . In 1991, the world became aware of the threat of nuclear war .
 Soviet ground forces in Cuba had operational nuclear weapons at their disposal . They were authorized to launch them if the U.S. attacked if the United States attacked them .
 In the months after the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy began focusing more of his attention on his upcoming 1964 reelection bid . Kennedy was focused on his reelection bid in 1964 .