 U.S. unsuccessful efforts to overthrow Cuban regime prompted Soviet to furtively erect bases in Cuba to provide medium and intermediate range of airborne nuclear artilleries to prove to the world its military supremacy .
 The U.S. administration of the time believed that Moscow’s activities in Cuba were a threat to International security, hence; the ballistic missiles deployed in Cuba enhanced a major security blow to the leadership of the United States .
 The U.S. intelligence was convinced that Soviet would not succeed in installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . Perhaps, the United States intelligence believed that Soviet forces would not try to install nuclear missiles .
 The Soviet had installed the missiles without prior knowledge of U.S. security . However, this was not the case; the Soviet had gone ahead .
 Kennedy administration discussed various options to reduce the likelihood of a full blown crisis . Kennedy administration: To mitigate the risk, the Kennedy administration considered various options .
 The John Kennedy administration embraced using military to designate Missile sites in Cuba by using military prowess . Mitigation measures adopted included; military, quarantine and diplomacy .
 The Kennedy administration found it easy to order posting to strategic sites on the Atlantic Ocean . United States Military interventions were well developed thus the Kennedy administration .
 Concentrated air monitoring in Atlantic was instigated, tracking more than 2,000 foreign ships in the area . Concentrate air monitoring instigated by the U.S. Air Force .
 The government was determined in case the Soviet Union launched nuclear assault; the U.S. military was standby to answer . The government decided to prepare for a nuclear attack .
 Beginning 20th October, 1962, The United States’ Strategic Air Command began diffusing its aircraft, fully equipped on an upgraded alert . Get your 100% original paper done in as little as 3 hours .
 Heavy aircraft such as B-52 began a significant aerial vigilance that involved 24 hour flights and instant standby response for every aircraft that landed . According to White , heavy aircraft such a . heavy aircraft began a . significant aerial . vigilance .
 Intercontinental Ballistic Missile troops assumed analogous vigilant authority . Besides, Intercontinental . Ballistic Missile . troops assumed . vigilant authority.
 POLARIS submarines were deployed to reassigned locations in the sea bordering U.S. and Cuba . The Polaris submarines have been reassigned .
 Divine points out that United States air defense troops, under the operational control of North America Defense Command, were also organized . Divine says the U.S. air defense forces were organized in the early 1950s .
 Commander in Chief Atlantic was chosen to lead the team and provide a unified authority . When command organizations were officially constituted, the Commander In Chief Atlantic led the team .
 The John F Kennedy administration implemented all these plans through the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Chief of Naval Operations was later named to administer all necessary actions and execution .
 The John F Kennedy administration imposed a quarantine to exert more pressure on Soviet Union with a view of subverting possible war . The quarantine was imposed to exert pressure on the Soviet Union .
 This was one of the flexible methods unlike others that U.S. government embraced . This is one of many ways to get around the world's government .
 Quarantine is aimed at constraining buildup of offensive military weapons en-route to Cuba . Quarantine was intended to constrain buildup of military weapons on Cuba's way to the island .
 All kinds of ships en-route to Cuba from whichever country or port were scrutinized to confirm the presence of aggressive artilleries . To thoroughly execute the strategy, the strategy was carried out in Cuba .
 If toxic artillery was found, the ship was forced to unwind the voyage or risk being confiscated . Byrne explains that if toxic artillery were located, it would have to be unwinded .
 Quarantine provided more opportunity to Soviet Union to reconsider their position and destroy all offensive military apparatus in Cuba . Quarantine gave Soviet Union opportunity to reconsider its position . Soviet Union was determined to destroy all of its military apparatus .
 U.S. exerted pressure on Soviet Union thus yielding to United States demands . Though it started at a low pace, it exerted more pressure on Russia .
 Soviet Union sentiment was that U.S. was contravening international law . Soviet Union opinion was that United States was violating international law.
 It was hard for the Soviet to test the applicability of this strategy, but it was hard to test it out .
 They knew if they dare rise the situation at hand would become even worse . They knew that if they dared rise they would face even worse. They knew it would be even worse if they did .
 The Soviets acknowledged installing missiles in Cuba to secure it against the U.S. invasion . The Soviets admitted installing missiles to secure Cuba against the United States invasion .
 John Kennedy and ExComm team prodded every possible diplomatic system to truncate a nuclear holocaust . Ex-Commons: John Kennedy, John Reagan and John Kennedy tried to avert a nuclear war with the U.S. Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy embraced compulsion to gain a diplomatic success . According to Byrne, Kennedy was skillful and embraced compulsion . Kennedy himself was skill-driven by compulsion, says Byrne .
 Potency was used shrewdly by Kennedy administration as a powerful, discreet component to urge Soviets to cede the plan without embarrassment .
 United States and the Soviet Union exchanged letters and intensified communication both formal and informal . U.S. and Soviet exchanged letters between 1950s and 1960s .
 The Soviet through Khrushchev dispatched letters to Kennedy administration explaining the circumstances of Missiles in Cuba and peaceful intention of Soviet Union . The letters were sent by the then-Krushchev administration .
 Diplomatic efforts strengthened by more letters from Soviet Union explaining intent of dismantling the missile installations in Cuba and subsequent personnel relocation . Further, diplomatic efforts were strengthened by letters explaining intent to dismantle the installations .
 U.S. dismantled missile it had installed in Italy and Turkey . This was only after United States dismantled its missile . It had installed missiles in Italy, Turkey and Italy . The missile was dismantled after it was found in Turkey .
 Byrne alleges that, if Kennedy’s responses were altered, it would have led to another world war . He succeeded in convincing Soviet Union to dismantle its Missiles in Cuba under U.N. supervision .
 Measures undertaken such as; military intervention, quarantine and skillful diplomacy necessitated subversion of the crisis . Measures taken to subvert the crisis such as military intervention and quarantine .
 The plans facilitated the Kennedy administration to effectively prove to the world it was capable of handling similar magnitude of threats to enhance world peace and security . Besides, the plans also helped the government prove to be able to handle similar threats .
 You are free to use this for research and reference purposes in order to write your own paper . However, you must cite it accordingly . Use it for research purposes in the future .
 If you are the copyright owner of this paper and no longer wish to have your work published on IvyPanda. Please submit a removal request for your work to be removed from the site .
 We utilize security vendors that protect and ensure the integrity of our platform while keeping your private information safe . Security vendors are responsible for the integrity and security of the platform .
 It contains thousands of paper examples on a wide variety of topics, all donated by helpful students . The project was created by students at the University of Cambridge .
 You can use them for inspiration, an insight into a particular topic, a handy source of reference, or even just as a template of a certain type of paper .
 The database is updated daily, so anyone can easily find a relevant essay example . It's updated daily to update with the latest essay examples .
 Your browser is too old to work on this site . Please upgrade your browser to allow you to read this article .