 The Man Who Saved the World of the Soviet submarine B-59 . Hero refuses to give the captain permission to fire the nuclear missile .
 This year a number of milestones in military and political history are being commemorated in many ways . New television documentaries are being produced by Bedlam Productions . This year's commemorations are being celebrated with new television documentaries .
 It is the 150th anniversary of pivotal battles in the Civil War, as well as the birth of the Emancipation Proclamation . The Civil War was the first Civil War to begin in 1863 .
 It has been 70 years since events in faraway places such as Midway, Guadalcanal and Stalingrad shaped the future direction of World War II and the world .
 The policy was the result of the escalation of nuclear armament by the Soviet Union and the U.S. that spawned the Cold War . That policy was a result of escalating nuclear armaments by the two countries .
 Events in and around Cuba created the greatest test to date of that brinkmanship policy . And events in Cuba created a greatest test of that policy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Two new documentaries to air this month on PBS approach aspects of the subject with completely different emphasis and style . PBS documentaries will focus on the subject of American slavery .
 Immediately following this documentary is the second film, part of a long-running WNET series . The second film is part of the series .
 Documentary carefully traces the storyline that centered on the three men, John F Kennedy, Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev . Making use of the many audio and visual treasures from the time, the documentary makes use of audio and video .
 Without the efforts of at least two of them, we might not be here to enjoy these programs . They could not have been any more different as individuals as individuals but without their efforts, they might not have survived .
 Castro, the commanding and clever idealist, was all the hard-line Soviet communists could ask for . Castro was a commanding leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 "Located so close to their number-one antagonist, in full control of his people, and with a message that was easy to spread to the region, they wanted to support and use him," says the government .
 A thousand miles to the north in Washington sat a popular president who could win over most people easily with his charm and wit . President Barack Obama was a popular man who could easily win over people with charm . President Obama was assassinated in 1992 .
 Khrushchev was a dedicated party functionary with a flair for the dramatic . That would not work with Castro or Soviet Premiere Khrushchchev, a loyalist .
 The political detent that existed in the world after World War II began to unravel when the U. S. discovered Soviet missiles in Cuba, aimed at America . The U.S. found the missiles aimed at Cuba in 1950s .
 The United States military, through NATO, had already placed conventional missiles aimed at the U.S.R. in member countries . The U.N. military, though NATO, has already placed such missiles in the region .
 All of the tension of the situation and pressure on those involved is recounted in this film . The film includes video and audio clips, words of the participants and a group of on-camera personalities .
 These are wonderful opportunities to hear from so many who lived through the experience and were close to the situation or to these three powerful leaders . The event will be held in New York City .
 Military men on both sides of the conflict, including Soviet officers who were in Cuba at the missile sites, offer unique perspectives . Soviet officers in Cuba during the conflict were in the country at the sites .
 Fallout shelters, duck-and-cover exercises, U.N. speeches and President Kennedy on TV are all vivid reminders of life in that era . Fallout shelters and duck and cover exercises are a vivid reminder of the Kennedy era .
 The program also has a rapidly paced smorgasbord of realistic and abstract visuals to appeal, I suppose, to the MTV generation .
 Some of this visual and musical imagery is reminiscent of what many consider the best cinematic story of the Cold War, Stanley Kubrick’s movie, Dr. Dr. Kubrick . The film is based on a Cold War Cold War novel .
 The B-52 air fleet was constantly hovering outside the borders of the Soviet Union packing powerful nuclear bombs . It was the best portrayal of what it was like to be part of America’s nuclear threat .
 Khrushchev decided he was not going to oversee the end of the world . Whether or not the B-52s were on his mind was not on the mind, Khrushche decided .
 The Soviet premiere negotiated a settlement to the crisis privately while spitting venom publically . Lacking the help of a dedicated supporting cast, such as Kennedy had with his cabinet and military advisors, the Soviet premiere made the effort to negotiate a settlement .
 Kennedy stood tall as the lone person on the other side who could make that deal work . Kennedy was the only person in the world to make the deal work.
 Thanks to those who were vigilant in their military and political roles in the crisis, we’re still here . Thanks to them, and those who . were vigilant, we're still here, thanks to them .
 The Man Who Saved the World: Four other men had the power to settle the thing themselves . The four men were involved in averting nuclear annihilation .
 While critical events were taking place on the globe’s surface, beneath the seas another drama was unfolding . Underneath the surface of the world was a drama unfolding .
 Four Soviet conventional submarines were each carrying one very unconventional torpedo . Each submarine was equipped with a torpedo carrying a torpedo .
 The ""special weapon" as it was known to the crew, was a torpedo with a nuclear warhead . The 'special weapon' was known as a torpedo . The "special weapon"" was a bomb with a warhead.
 Each sub’s captain had the power to fire it without orders from central command . Subs captain was able to fire the subs without being ordered by the U.S. Navy .
 This ""doomsday"" backup to the missiles in Cuba was a force heading to the island nation as the crisis unfolded above . This "doomsday" backup was heading to Cuba as the situation unfolded .
 The documentary tells the story of the crew of the B-59, one of the four submarines in this mission . The documentary is based on the mission to find out what happened .
 On board B-59 was Vasili Arkhipov, the Brigade Chief of Staff of the four-sub mission . He was on board with the Russian Navy SEAL team .
 Of course there was some failsafe to the possibility of the captain of one of the subs starting a nuclear war .
 Given the reverence submarine crews had for their captains, that may not have been much of a deterrent . The reverence of their captains may have been a deterrent, but it was not much of an effective deterrent .
 Arkhipov’s widow remembers very well the character of her husband and his demeanor leading up to the event . Navy officers who were on the scene of the crisis and his widow remember very well .
 U.S. ships discovered B-59 not far from Cuba in the South Atlantic and closed in to coax the submarine to the surface . The captain wanted to launch the torpedo, lacking direction from Moscow and not even knowing whether or not a war was in progress .
 He saw what radiation could do to even a small group when he was a witness to the K-19 disaster . Perhaps, as his widow remembers, it was because of the radiation he saw . He was eventually killed prematurely .
 I recommend seeing both programs to remember, or discover for the first time, how great individuals guided the world into a much less dangerous place .
 Jay Wertz is the producer-director-writer of the award-winning 13-part documentary series Smithsonian’s Great Battles of the Civil War . The series is produced by The Learning Channel and Time-Life Video .
 He co-authored Smithsonian’s Great Battles and Battlefields of the Civil War with prominent historian Edwin C Bearss .
 Every issue brings you articles on military history, analysis of current military and political events, and stories of real heroes among us today .
 Our authors include leading historians and analysts who lend integrity and credibility to this fresh presentation of historical and contemporary events . We are proud to present this fresh version of events in the UK .