 Essential Questions and Answers… Cold War Crises and the end of the Cold War, 1958-1991 . Question: What do you know about Cold War? And what do you think?
 Khrushchev’s demands to the Western allies to leave West Berlin were ignored . The West Berliners were forced to leave the West Berlin . The East Berliners wanted to stay in West Berlin, but the West refused .
 David in the USSR did withdraw the Berlin Ultimatum . They could not agree on a way forward for Berlin but David withdrew the deal .
 It could fly at 70,000 feet and take photographs of Soviet bomber plane bases and missile sites . It could take photos of Soviet planes and missile bases .
 Khrushchev renewed the Berlin Vienna summit Ultimatum, demanding western forces leave West Berlin . Khrushchevren renewed the Vienna summit ultimatum .
 East wanted to stop people leaving communist East Germany . Why did the East want to keep people leaving the country? Why did they want to stop them leaving?
 Berliners built a 45 km concrete wall around West Berlin with watch towers, guards and guard dogs . They then build a 45km concrete wall, with watchtowers and guards . The wall was built in West Berlin .
 Fechter. people were shot in the first year of Peter Peter's life . People of the town were killed in the early years of Peter's first year .
 Stand-off between Soviet and U.S. tanks lasted 18 hours at Checkpoint Charlie in 1961 . The stand-off took place on 27 October 1961 .
 Berlin was a symbol of the struggle between freedom and communism, he said . Berlin was symbol of struggle between the two sides of the world, he added . Berlin is now a symbol for freedom and democracy, the former president said .
 In 1958, Fidel Castro took over Cuba after a revolution . What caused the Cuban revolution? Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution .
 The USSR provided Cuba with weapons and in 1962 American spy planes photographed Soviet missiles on Cuba . The missiles were photographed by the U.S. in 1962 .
 These had a range of 2500 miles and could destroy most American cities . Could destroy most of America's cities .
 On 20 October they put a naval blockade around Cuba to stop missiles reaching to stop the Soviet Cuba . What did America do? What did Cuba do?
 In letter 2, he said he’d take the missiles off Cuba if the USA took their missiles off Turkey . In letter 3, he also said he'd take missiles from Cuba if Turkey took missiles from Turkey .
 JFK ignored the 2nd letter and responded to the 1st; the crisis was over . Kennedy ignored the two letters and responded .
 Both countries realised how close they had come to nuclear war so they took of the Cuban Missile steps to improve relations . What were the results .
 Khrushchev said he was the peacemaker as he had turned the ships around and countries claim they tried to resolve the crisis . Why did both countries claim to have been involved in the crisis?
 Countries who signed it agreed not to develop nuclear weapons, limiting nuclear weapons to only those countries who had already developed them . The agreement was reached in 1998 .
 It was communist and had been under the influence of the USSR since 1948 . What was life like in the Soviet Union?
 Most protests by the Czech people was passive but Jan Palach set himself alight in protest . Most protests in Czech Republic were passive, but Palach was not passive .
 The Prague Spring reforms were removed and Husak replaced Dubcek as the leader of Czechoslovakia . Husak was replaced as the prime minister of the Czechoslovak Republic in 1968 . The reforms were later removed by Husak .
 Some communist countries criticised the USSR for attacking another communist Soviet invasion of country . What were the temporary worsening of relations between the West and the USSR . Some communist nations criticised the Soviet invasion .
 USA and the USSR had improved relations between the two countries in the 1970s .
 Both sides had realised how close they had come to war over Cuba . Why did the USA and Both sides realise how close it had been to war?
 The USSR need to cut back on the amount of money they spent on weapons . The USSR also need to get needed to stop spending on weapons. The USSR must also cut back .
 The U.S. limited the number of ICBMs each side could have with each side . It also limited the size of ICBM (ICBM) each side had to have one .
 They also agreed they could spy on each other to make sure they stuck to their agreement . The pair also agreed that they would be able to monitor each other for a year .
 An agreement signed by 35 countries, including the USA and the USSR, in 1975 . What was the Helsinki Helsinki agreement?
 USSR accepted the existence of West Berlin and accepted the frontiers in Europe . West Berlin was the first city to be declared West Berlin in 1961 .
 USSR fought Mujahideen rebels who used guerrilla tactics . What happened in the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 The Mujahideen was supplied by the USA, China and a rich Saudi called Osama Bin Laden . Osama bin Laden was a wealthy Saudi who funded the Mujahadeen .
 President Carter said the USSR was threatening world peace . The USA boycotted the Moscow Olympics of 1980 . The USSR invaded the USA in response to the invasion of the USSR .
 The USSR boycotted the Los Angeles Games in 1984 . This angered the USSR who then Afghanistan by boycot the games in 1984. This angered Russia and Afghanistan . The USSR then Afghanistan was then Afghanistan .
 This said the USA would support anticommunist rebel groups trying to overthrow communist governments . The USA would also support anti-communist rebels in the fight against communism .
 The USA would put satellites Strategic Defence in space with powerful lasers . The USA plans to use powerful lasers to protect the country's interests .
 Their missiles would now be no use but they did not have point in arms race the computer technology or the money to build their own SDI system . The U.S. had no point in the arms race .
 There was little industrial growth and standards of living there in the USSR were low . There was unrest in communist countries that was only kept in check by the Gorbachev became secret police .
 Gorbachev’s ‘new things had to change. The new leader of the USSR knew that there were many problems in the USSR . What was the USSR's problems? What was .
 Brezhnev Doctrine communist rule in all Eastern European countries between 1989-1990 . This led to the collapse of the Soviet-era Soviet Union regime in Eastern Europe .
 'Vaclav Havel' overthrew the countries in Eastern communist government and elected the anti-communist as president in November 1989 . In November 1989, the ‘Vasma Revolution’ overthrew Czechoslovakia, overthrew communist government .
 In October 1989, Gorbachev said he East Germany in would not help the East German government stop public demonstrations . The East German protests were first held in October 1989 in East Germany .
 November, 1 million East Germans demonstrated, demanding democracy and free elections . The demonstration was held in East Germany .
 The government announced the border crossing to West Germany would be opened . Government announced the decision to open the crossing in West Germany .
 Gorbachev officially announced the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991 and resigned . The Soviet Union was officially declared to be a republic in 1991 .