 The first is the realization of U.S. vulnerability to thousands of terrorists trained and willing to carry out attacks against Americans . The first was the realization since Sept. 9 that the United States is vulnerable to terrorists trained to attack Americans .
 Time is evaporating for Washington to act against another, old, longanticipated threat chemical, biological, and, most critically, nuclear weapons programs carried out by ""rogue" states such as Iraq, Iran, and North Korea .
 Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld advocated the expansion of the Bush anti-terror doctrine to include preemptive strikes . The Bush administration has been criticized for expanding the doctrine .
 When the issue of Iran enriching uranium in 2006 made it to the UN, Bush said that all options were on the table . Bush: "All options are on the . table"
 The mortars were set up to cover the most likely place a pontoon bridge could go in . They were registered so they could cover the likely place the bridge could be built .
 The Tejanos were sent across the river to scout out the Mexican Army . They were dressed in traditional Mexican clothing .
 They reported back that we were up against what they concluded was probably a couple of Companies . They said they were probably up against 'a couple of companies' They said it was probably two companies .
 Most conscripts into the Mexican Army drilled on weekends but never really had formal military training . Prior to 1987, most conscripted Mexicans had never been trained in the military .
 Our Tejanos said these people looked to be well trained soldiers and each Company had about 3 Platoons . Each Company had three Platoons.
 The sniper's round will impact above the point of aim . Whether shooting from an angle above or below the tar tar, the bullet will impact .
 They had Tank Companies at all bridge crossings and strung out along the New Mexican and Arizonan borders . Tank companies were strung along New Mexico and Arizona borders .
 Apache Longbows with newer generation Hellfire missiles were used to take out tanks the Mexican Army had acquired from the Nationalist Chinese . The Mexican Army acquired the tanks from the Chinese in order to use them .
 The remaining F-15E Strike Eagles and 2 Squadrons of F-22s from Tyndall AFB were moved to Texas, New Mexico and Arizona . The remaining aircraft will remain in Texas and New Mexico .
 It mattered little whether the F-22s or F-35s could carry B61s, we had Strike Eagles and F/A-18s . The F/22s and F35s were not the only ones to be able to carry the B61 .
 In the summer of 2021, the U.S. inventory of tactical nuclear weapons numbered 1,290 . The United States will have more than 1,300 tactical nukes .
 When Mexico invaded the US, they broke an agreement with Russia, forcing Russia to bow out or feel the full retaliatory effect of our Ohio class submarines . Russia broke the agreement with the U.S. when it invaded Mexico .
 The sun exploded about 30 miles south of us . The scouts hadn't been back more than an hour when the sun exploded .
 While the wind was out of the west, he instructed us to move out at the first sign of any radiation . He told us to stay at first .
 In either direction along the border, for as far as we could see, there was an occasional mushroom cloud . The mushroom cloud was seen over the border in either direction .
 It was late in the day to be moving, but the radiation couldn't tell time, leaving us little choice . The radiation was so intense that it was impossible to tell time .
 It took us the better part of 6 hours to make it up to the Park Headquarters at Panther Junction . The park is located in the middle of the country's largest city .
 The next morning we started early and made it 26 miles to Maverick Junction . The next day we made the 26 miles . It was the first time we had a road trip together .
 One more day and we'd be back to Ten Bits Ranch where Jason should be waiting . Jason should have been waiting for Jason at 10 Bits Ranch .
 The people were being held back by about 12 Rangers and 3 Deputies from the Brewster County Sheriff's office . About 12 Rangers were holding back the people .
 The injured were transferred by ambulance to Alpine, Alpine. When the Sheriff arrived, the sheriff arrived, they were transferred .
 Jason unloaded our pickups, trailers and horse trailers and loaded up the stock and equipment . Jason unloaded the trucks and trailers and equipment and loaded them up .
 Sheriff indicated there'd be an inquiry and we told him we'd be staying in Alpine until our injured could travel anyway . The Sheriff indicated he'd be looking into the incident and said he'd investigate .
 "The military equipment, with the exception of our personal weapons, was returned to Kansas along with our other things" The military equipment is returned to the U.S. along with other things .
 When we arrived at Alpine, we seemed to attract a lot of attention, perhaps because much of the population of the area was of Hispanic heritage . Alpine is a Spanish-speaking enclave, with a population of around 200,000 people .
 We decided we'd be well served to wear our weapons, open carry, of course . We decided to wear open carry and open carry .
 The inquiry ruled the deaths as justifiable homicide, seeming an unpleasant outcome for several members of the community . The inquiry found the deaths were justifiable homicides .
 As soon as the medical staff said the boys could travel, we rented an aircraft to fly them back home . They departed very late one evening one evening . The boys were flown back to their parents' home in London .
 Avoiding the major cities, we followed a meandering course back to Kansas . We arrived in Kansas 4 days later .
 Don was in the hospital in Garden City and the others had been released and sent home . Don was still in hospital with the others . The others were sent home.
 The day after we arrived, the Sheriff drove up and demanded all 8 of our reserve Deputy badges . The Sheriff demanded all of the 8 of their reserve badges from the Sheriff .
 We four old soldiers decided we'd limit our fishing to the local area from now on . We decided to limit our anglers to a local area instead of fishing .
 We did attract a bit of unneeded attention with this last thing, though, though. It was not the first time we've been in the U.S.
 "The only ones that can keep our Ml 6s are the one who are Reserve or actual Deputies. The only ones of us that can . keep our . Ml . 6s is the ones who can't keep their Ml. 6s .
 "I think the only reason they said no was because the problems aren't over. I think the problem isn't over," he says .
 The operation was successful and got out the bullet fragments . Other than a long healing process, he should be ok, doctors say .
 We broke camp and headed back to that dude ranch so Jason could pick us up and bring us home . Jason picked us up from the dude ranch .
 NOA activists were trying to gain entrance to the Park . NOA members of the NOA tried to gain entry to the park's west entrance .
 War horses offered to help if the Brewster County Sheriff would temporarily deputize us as a posse . Those old war horses offer to help, but the Sheriff won't deputify them .
 They didn't disperse when the Ranger's gave them that last warning and instead opened fire . The Ranger's say they fired at the group after they didn't comply with the warning .
 "After that, we were too busy returning fire to worry about whether or not what we were doing was morally justified," says the author of the book .
 Those Tejanos went through their ranks and made sure none of the NOA people survived . Those Tejans went through the ranks, made sure no one of them survived .
 We were followed by bad guys who turned out to be the good guys, saw a nuclear weapon up close and personal . We then had the firefight to end all firefights. We saw the nuclear weapons up close-and-personal .
 If you find him, tell him you were referred by Manny, Moe and Jack Smith . If you want to see him, please email him to Jack Smith and Moe .
 Find John Doe in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and buy an H&K gun from him and a suppressor . Buy John Doe and suppressor in Tulsa .
 I suppose I could put an ad in the paper asking John Doe to contact Manny, Moe and Jack Smith at the Holiday Inn . I suppose he could put it in the newspaper . Manny and Moe Smith are the real names of Jack Smith .
 There was only one authorized dealer in Oklahoma and the store was in Tulsa, Oklahoma . It wasn't that hard to find the store, there was one in Tulsa .
 He was to flash the badge and say that Manny, Moe and Jack Smith referred him to John Doe . He was also to flash his badge and tell the three men that they referred John Doe to him . Manny was to say that John Doe was referred to him by Manny and Moe .
 "I was embarrassed just being there and listening to Jeremy asking for John Doe. I was embarrassed," she said .
 I sold them H&K USP Tactical's in .45 ACP with Knight Armament suppressors . Knight Armaments suppressors were used to make suppressors for .
 $3,750 for 2 guns that cost maybe $2,100 retail and a suppressor that went for maybe $600 . I should hope he'd throw in some ammo, $3.750 for two guns .
 "I did have the revolver June wanted me to get. On the other hand, there wasn't any paperwork," he says . "I'm not going to get it, but I did get it," he adds .
 I can't say that I was totally pleased; I was retired from the Army and wanted my gun toting days to end . The ATF still frowned upon, especially if it wasn't registered .
 We had 10 of the M4FA fitted to Ml 6s or M4s and several Ml A had the 7.62mm version of the same suppressor . The suppressor can be fitted to the Mm6s and M4 A .
 "It made sense for a sniper to use a suppressor, but we were only farmers," says the farmer . "We're only farmers. We're only people who want to know what's going on," he says . "It's a good idea to use suppressors, but
 June said the feds probably wouldn't show up until the fall when we had the corn harvested and could be expected to be producing alcohol . June said she expects the feds to show up in the fall .
 With that, we stored the corn and used our existing supply of anhydrous to produce biodiesel .
 The NOA and the National Council of La Raza were keeping things stirred up . These were uneasy times, but the U.S. may have defeated Mexico .
 New employees help clean them up and expand the septic systems on the 3 farms . They hooked them to the big wind turbine. Our new employees help set them up .
 Most of them were ranch hands down in Texas, but there was a plumber and an electrician among the group . Most of the group was ranch hands in Texas .
 Ralph Barrows said he was too old to maintain the turbine any longer and Johnny and he were moving back to Leoti . Ralph Barrow said he and Johnny had to move back to his home in Leoti, Canada . The turbine was too small to maintain any longer .
 We sent 12 families to Gunny's and 12 to Hanks' home . The plumber had plenty of work to do and had plenty to do .
 Marilyn was ready to resume teaching but with the number of children we now had, the school district said it was cheaper to bus them to Lakin . Marilyn says she's ready to return to teaching but school district says it's cheaper to send children to school .
 Home schooling had been a good source of income . That was a kick in the teeth . Home schooling was a good form of income for the family .
 "We bottled the bourbon Jason said was ready and unloaded it quickly, if June said ATF was coming, they'd be here," Jason says .
 Aside from a partial bottle of the stuff, the only alcohol we have is a keg of beer and the anhydrous we use to make biodiesel . Go ahead and look, aside from the partial bottle, it's not alcohol but biodiesel.
 "I went down to the barn and told Dan the AFT was here and suggested he come with me to Marilyn's," she said . "I told him he was going to be with me," she added .
 I normally carry my Chief's Special in a holster in the pit of my back . I'm not afraid to carry it, but I'm glad to have it in the holster .
 "I strapped on that new Laredoan rig on the way out and got my Winchester, that raised a few eyebrows," he says . "That raised a lot of eyebrows. I strapped on my new rig," he adds .
 "They can't possibly find the entrance since I got a couple of the Tejanos to build that storage case in the basement," says the mayor . "I'm not going to let them find that entrance," he says .
 I told them about the unit that removes the ethanol from the biodiesel. "It's a good thing to see," says the owner of the company .
 I wonder what they thought they'd find in my underwear drawer, a Ma Deuce . "Ma Deuce" was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 'I'd managed to keep my figure and Dan liked the frilly stuff so I kept wearing it,' she says . 'Dan liked it so he kept it'
 "I could still wear some of the size 4 stuff, but mostly wore size 5 now," she says . "I'm a size 5. I could still . still fit some of my size 4 things, but most wore size . 5 now."
 I was careful what I cooked because Dan had a tendency to gain weight and wasn't getting quite as much outside exercise as when we first got married . Dan had to be careful what he cooked because he was getting less outside exercise .
 "I had to slowly nurse him back into chili, the stuff those gals made in Texas had nearly ruined his taste buds," he says . The chili was nearly ruined by the Texas chili .
 "I still dusted daily but she came in once a week and spent most of a day cleaning it back to the shine. ...another bombing in Houston," she says .
 No one claimed credit for this bombing of a predominately Anglo private school . The school was bombed by a bomb that targeted an Anglo-Saxe school in the 1970s .
 The assassination of Minutemen founder Jim Gilchrist last week led to a wave of anti-Hispanic unrest in Tucson . Tucson is the new headquarters for the Minuteman Organization .
 About the only countries that helped Mexico after this past spring were Russia and China . Mexico's economy has been hit hard by an economic downturn .
 Cantarell's crude oil production has consistently been > 1,000,000 b/d over the last decade . In 1999 Cantarella's production was 41.7% of Mexico's oil production . Cantarerell's production has been consistently over 1,200,000 a
 In the last few years, Cantarell's crude oil production level has been maintained by a massive nitrogen injection project that forces oil out of the field . In the past few years the field has been flooded with nitrogen injections .
 A production decline rate of 10%/year or greater is reasonable for Cantarell based upon the decline rates of other giant and supergiant fields around the world that are in decline . Cantarerell is expected to have a 10% decline rate or greater than other giant fields around
 Production from Cantarell would decline approximately 500,000 b/d by 2007 and approximately 800,000 by 2012 . Production would decline at a rate of 10%/year in 2002 . Production is likely to decline at 10% per year .
 Such a decline would have a significant impact on future Mexican oil production, experts say . The decline would be significant, they say .
 Ku and Abkatun oil fields provided another 13% of Mexico's crude oil production in 1999 . Other large fields in Mexico are in decline . Ku, Abkun and Abkata oil fields are also in decline.
 This has led to smaller than projected oil production increases in Mexico for the last few years . The country's oil production has been lower than projected increases in the past few years. This has been the case for years .
 Randy spent hours copying files from the internet and converting them to pdf files . Randy spent the time converting files from internet to a pdf . Randy says he spent hours converting files to a PDF .
 I think it was she who suggested I move to Garden City because the pay was better . She suggested she wanted to move because of the pay in Garden City . I think she was more interested in the job than I wanted to play for the Blues .
 "I had to consider the risk of marrying you and having you end up like Randy," she says . "I'm not going to marry you," she writes .
 "The only difference between me and Rachel is that she dwells on her loss. The only difference," she said .
 Marilyn, on the other hand, got over her grief quickly and began looking for a replacement . Marilyn got over grief quickly, but Marilyn continued to look for a new partner .
 Before the war, more than 10% of the U.S. population lived in California .
 It had to be devastating, two earthquakes and a tsunami and then the ash they must have gotten from Yellowstone . The ash must have been from Yellowstone, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It listed highway re-openings, but had scant news about the trouble in the southland .
 There were several articles about communities in northern California rebuilding, after digging out of the ash .
 The cities on the Peninsula, especially San Francisco, were all sealed off . San Francisco and San Francisco were sealed off on Sunday .
 Portland Oregon was not badly hit by the Tsunami . The earthquake did some damage to the city . The Oregonian was surprised to learn that Portland wasn't badly hit .
 Nothing is currently erupting in the Cascade Range . They had reports on the Cascade .
 There was nothing out of Seattle, but I didn't really expect to connect to any of their papers . Seattle is one of the most populous cities in the U.S. city .
 The trip was possible, depending on the roads and one other small problem, changing trailer partners . Conclusion was possible .
 Marilyn had confided that she couldn't take much more of Rachel's mood swings . Marilyn said she was tired of the mood swings, and that she was too tired to take it .
 I'd work on Dan and Marilyn would nudge Gunny into the change providing we went. Dan would be working on Dan, Marilyn and Marilyn to get Gunny in the direction of the change. Marilyn would be nudge him into the direction we went, Dan would say .
 Long sections of 1-80 were closed; 1-70 wasn't much better . 1-40 was in the southern tier of states . Long sections were closed .
 United States 84 out of Garden City and United States 54 in Liberal, New Mexico . The best route would be to get on 1-40 from Garden City to Tucumcari in New Mexico.
 Like those holsters, with the buckle in the back they were hard to get on and off . Like those belts, they are hard to take off and off, and they're hard to use .
 You had to remove the revolvers, buckle on the holsters and belt, reverse it and then add the guns . The guns had to be added to the holster belt and belt buckle .
 One long barreled Colt made more sense, I'm glad Dan could get them. Beside one long barresled and one short barrereled, it's more sense to get them .
 Dan just told me that Mom and he were thinking about taking another vacation, out west this time . Mom and Dan are looking at taking a vacation out west .
 I expressed my opinion that with the civil unrest related to the NOA and La Raza it wasn't the best place for a vacation . I expressed an opinion that . The civil unrest . related to . the NOa and La . Raza was the place for vacation .
 Dan explained that they wanted to borrow my pickup and the new 6 horse trailer because they'd be taking 6 of the Tejanos with them with them for security reasons . Dan explained he wanted them to borrow the trailer because of the security concerns .
 "I'd heard around about that Tom's wife Elle had a thing for one of those Tejanos and wondered if he would be making the trip," says Tom . "I'm not sure if Tom will make the trip."
 He also said that Gunny and Marilyn would be staying with them on this trip, probably one of Mom's ideas to get her away from her man .
 Photos of the most revealing photos on the internet were posted online . They were, shall we say, most revealing... but not shocking .
 If they weren't going until March, Julia and Julia had more than enough time to try and talk some sense into them, they had more to say some sense .
 "In the past, the gangster's tended to shoot each other but now they were going after the rest of us," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They were shooting each other and now they're going after us," he says .
 I'll wager that concealed carry permit or not, many of the folks were carrying these days . I'll bet that concealed . carry permits or not . Many of the people were carrying today .
 ATF came 3 times and found nothing, had to give up. On another subject, the ATF came three times and finding nothing . ATF came to find nothing and gave up .
 "We finally got the semi back home in October and unloaded it, hopefully for good," says the driver .
 We made the sour mash and filled up 36 more barrels after we charred them . The sour mash was made from 36 barrels of whiskey .
 Dan told me to plan on selling some of the horses, we weren't going to have enough feed next year, according to Hank and Gunny . Dan said he was going to sell some of his horses . Dan told him to sell the horses .
 "I have to look at the herds with Jason and pick out the likely candidates, probably some of the older mares," she says . "Some of the most likely candidates are older mare," she adds .
 It seemed to me that the geldings seemed to run a bit bigger than the stallions, but I have no idea why . The gelding seems to run bigger than stallions but I'm not sure why .
 Mom and Dan gave our kids and Jim's kids 12 silver Eagles each for Christmas plus clothing gifts . Jim and Dan were surprised when Mom gave them the silver Eagles for Christmas .
 She told me they planned to do that from now on, until they were both gone . Later she told me that she and her partner planned to continue to do it until both were gone .
 I stammered something about her being way too young to die and she said the kids would probably all have 20 years' worth of silver Eagles before then . She said she was probably all too old to die . She told me that she would probably have to die before then.
 'I tried to talk her out of the trip to the west coast but she said unless we had a blizzard, they were going. She said unless the blizzard had to stop them going, they would go'
 We got snow all right, but no blizzard; it was about normal and almost back to before Yellowstone erupted . Yellowstone erupted, but it was almost normal and back to normal before the eruption .
 Race relations had always been poor in America but now several minorities and the near majority Hispanic population were working to change things . Race relations in America have always been a problem .
 The really sad thing was that they had learned about how our Constitutional Republic worked and now had enough votes to divide the Congress into something that no longer represented what we'd always had, a 2-party system . "They had learned how our constitutional Republic worked," says Sen. Ted Cruz
 I guess I shouldn't have been surprised, they intentionally moved to areas creating large voting blocks and controlled about one-third of the House and soon would control onethird of the Senate . "I shouldn't be surprised," says Republican leader John Boehner .
 The marches in the streets represented various groups, sometimes Latinos, other groups were Muslims and somewhere in between were the militant blacks under the Nation of Islam . Sometimes Latinos, sometimes Muslims and sometimes Muslims, marched in streets .
 The white citizens were still a majority but the self-initiated Gerrymandering was changing things . The white population was still the majority of the country's population .
 Pack packing is to place as many voters of one type into a single district to reduce their influence in other districts . One form of gerrymandering, packing, involves packing of voters in a single districts . Pack packing can be used to reduce the influence of other districts by packing voters
 A second form, cracking, involves spreading out voters of a particular type among many districts in order to reduce their representation by denying them a sufficiently large voting bloc in any particular district . A third, cracking is spreading voters of particular type across many districts .
 The methods are typically combined, creating a few ""forfeit"" seats for packed voters of one type in order to secure even greater representation for voters of another type . The method is combined to create a few "forfeits" seats for each type of voter .
 Once elected, they formed a coalition and more often sided with the liberal Democrats .
 Many credited Jesse Jackson and his Rainbow Coalition for the practice, but in truth it was Farrakhan's idea . Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition is credited with the success of the practice .
 Jackson was old and although he still had a big mouth, few listened to him any longer . Jackson was an old man, but he was old enough to listen to him . Jackson's death was a suicide attempt, but it was not a suicide .
 The initial coalition was between the Nation of Islam and the newly elected Muslims, they had a common cause . The Nation of Muslims and Muslims were united in the fight for the nation .
 The government extended an olive branch to the outspoken new Latinos and we had a 3 party government . They then extended an 'armo arm' to the new Latino party .
 In nothing flat another immigration bill was introduced in the House for yet another amnesty program and it passed . The bill passed in nothing flat .
 The Senate not being fully packed thought they could defeat the measure, but they failed by a single vote . The Senate is not expected to vote on the measure .
 With that many new voters, you can imagine the outcome of the next elections, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 They replaced the small freezer with a bigger upright and had we ladies make suggestions this time around . The freezer was replaced with a larger upright .
 Although the freezer had a locking door, Dan added a strap for insurance . Dan added the strap to the freezer for insurance purposes .
 AAA didn't recommend travel to the west coast because of unavailability of food, housing and fuel . AAA said it was too busy to travel to west coast due to unavailability .
 Ml 6s now sport M203's and all of our magazines are new or refurbished . I noticed that our Ml. 6s . now sported M203s . All of the magazines we used are now refurbished or new .
 Gunny and Dan had new boy toys . I have no idea where they came up with a pair of Tac-50s fully equipped .
 Jim had relented and allowed his 6 security people to use his pickup and 6 horse trailer . Jim's truck and trailer were used by the security team .
 The old upright went into their trailer and they stocked it with whatever they wanted to take . The family was moved to a new home in New Jersey .
 I half figured Gunny and Dan would buy H-1 Alpha Hummers, there were several on the market in good shape with all of the options and low mileage . There were several of the Hummers in good condition .
 Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez was the President for life of Venezuela and he didn't like us. Since our set to with Mexico, that source dried up . Chavez was Chavez's President for Life of Venezuela, Chavez was a leader for life .
 The Trans-Alaskan pipeline had been extended and now came to the US . But that second Alaskan field wasn't as good a producer as projected and they were afraid to drill off the California coast .
 They weight about 9,000# empty and then you add 6 horses, the tack and the total weight gets you into the commercial class of vehicle . The horses weigh about 9.000# .
 A million dollars' worth of equipment, animals and extras, all for a 3-4 week vacation, in, of all places, in the dead zone . It was all but humorous, a million dollars of equipment and animals .
 We wouldn't be out of touch this time; Gunny bought an Iridium satellite phone . "Gunny bought a satellite phone," he says. "It's a good thing for us to get in touch with the world"
 Its financial failure was largely due to insufficient demand for the service . The financial failure of the service was due to a lack of demand for it .
 The increased coverage of terrestrial cellular networks and the rise of roaming agreements between cellular providers proved to be fierce competition . The increase in competition between cellular networks has led to increased competition .
 Iridium provides continuous world-wide coverage of the Iridium service . The cost of service was also prohibitive for many users, despite continuous coverage .
 In addition, the bulkiness and expense of the handheld devices when compared to terrestrial cellular mobile phones discouraged adoption .
 The Iridium satellites were, however, remained in orbit . Their services were re-established in 2001 by the newly founded Iridium Satellite LLC, owned by a group of private investors . Iridium is now owned by the private group of investors .
 The system is being used extensively by the United States DOD for its communication purposes through the DOD Gateway in Hawaii . The DOD Gateway is also being used by the U.S. DOD .
 The commercial Gateway in Tempe, Arizona provides voice, data and paging services for commercial customers on a global basis . The Gateway provides voice and data services for global customers .
 Typical customers include maritime, aviation, government, the petroleum industry, scientists, and frequent world travelers . Typical customers are government, maritime and government .
 "Because the military had a vested interest, they now make sure the system was always up," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Because of the military's vested interest," he says .
 Coverage wasn't available to North Korea and Sri Lanka . Originally envisioned as a system with 77 satellites, the system had 66 .
 After the war and into the recovery, the military and its contractors launched the other 11 satellites plus a few spares . The other 11 were launched by the U.S. after the war .
 Iridium Satellite has contracted with the Boeing Company to operate and maintain the satellite constellation . Celestica has agreed to provide subscriber equipment to subscribers .
 While the phones were expensive to purchase and expensive to operate, as long as you were outside with a clear view of the sky, you were in contact with the whole world . The phones are expensive to buy and difficult to operate .
 "No doubt they bought the Hummers the minute we left," says the author . "They bought them the moment we left and started cutting in machinegun mounts," he says .
 A person can drive from Los Angeles, California to Des Moines, Iowa in 24 hours flat, if you push a little, average 70mph .
 With that in mind, we could putt our way to California in a couple of days unless we stopped to sight see . With that, we would be in California in two days .
 According to the mapping software, the route we chose wasn't the shortest, but going through Colorado, wasn't a good idea because of Yellowstone . Going through Colorado through Colorado was a bad idea for travelers .
 The southern tier of states was not the best idea to go through the southern tier . But we were prepared for a little adventure, and were prepared to go on the road .
 Ricardo is driving our truck and Marilyn and I are passengers . Lakin, Kansas Departure Time: 0800 . Ricardo will be driving the truck . Marilyn and Ricardo are passengers.
 When we left Garden City, Jim and John stopped off to look at the used Hummers .
 We made it to Tucumcari and found a place to board the horses and then motel rooms . We found a way to board horses and stay in a motel room .
 Bobby Troup wrote the song and one of the other actors in the series . Martin Milner aka Officer Pete Malloy starred in the old TV series Route 66 .
 Boris Karloff, Lee Marvin, Robert Duvall, Warren Stevens, Lew Ayers, Michael Rennie, Martin Sheen, Ed Asner, Walter Matthau, Edward Andrews, Leslie Nielson, Anne Francis, Jack Lord, William Shatner and Dan Duryea
 There is almost nothing to see between Lakin and Tucumcari, so I thought I'd tell you about what I picked up at the motel . Route 66 is almost completely empty .
 A 60-year-old tunnel worker was trapped under a digging machine, police say . The incident occurred in a tunnel near the site of a mine collapse .
 Considering we were all in our 60s, I thought having the things I needed to treat a heart attack or a stroke were a very good idea .
 The E85 gensets had been replaced by diesel fueled mounted genset . Demand switches replaced by demand switches replacing the automatic transfer switches .
 When the freezer starts to warm up, the demand switch starts the genset and it runs until the temp is back at zero . I don't understand how they work .
 The switch is usually added to an existing circuit just after the circuit breaker . It switches the hot, or black wire, of that circuit . The hot wire is usually the hot wire of the black wire .
 The circuit will still be protected by the circuit breaker . Please note that the circuit is still being protected .
 The switch is by no means a circuit breaker replacement but an additional in-line device . It is not a replacement for the circuit breaker but a device that can be used in line .
 If a switch is installed on a lighting circuit in a bedroom, the switch will automatically sense when the last light on that circuit is turned off at night . For example, a switch can be installed in the bedroom of a bedroom .
 The demand switch senses a demand for electricity and automatically restores electricity to this circuit for normal operation . In the morning, when we awake and switch on the lights, the demand switch is automatically restored to normal use .
 In most cases, the demand switch is the most effective way to eliminate unwanted electric fields in the bedroom .
 Ours worked by initiating the genset's controller's start circuit . When the freezer shut off, it shut down the generator .
 We got a late start today because the diner was busy and we had to pick up the horses . Tucumcari, New Mexico Departure Time: 0830 .
 According to the desk clerk, most people took the advice of the various travel services and didn't come west often . The desk clerk said most people didn't travel west often and most didn't take the advice .
 A cop who saw the guns we were wearing explained the local rules to us . We were stopped by a cop who stopped us from carrying the guns .
 He said he didn't know if NM had reciprocity with Kansas, and we assured him that Kansas now has reciprocity . New Mexico now has reciprocal relations with everyone, he said .
 Some Kansas cities were having problems with their Latino population . That happened as a result of the problems they were having in some Kansas cities . That's why they're having problems in some cities .
 "Because we had all been reserves at once time, he filled them out and brought them to us without even being asked," he said . "He filled them up without even asking," she said .
 We were taking old route 66 as much as possible because we weren't in a hurry and wanted to see what was left of those old towns . We were going on route 66 to see the remnants of the old towns.
 Most of them were all but ghost towns, down to few stores serving the locals . Most of the towns in the area are now largely empty towns .
 There for a stretch near Santa Rosa, we got back on the freeway because the old road was in bad shape . The old road is now in bad condition .
 We did drive through Santa Rosa and had lunch at Joseph's Bar and Grill in Santa Rosa, California .
 We went through Clines Corners, Moriarty, Tijeras and on in to Albuquerque where we housed the horses and then ourselves . We went on to New Mexico, New Mexico and then New Mexico .
 There were all kinds of choices on the menu at the cafe, as long as you liked Mexican food . The cafe is located in downtown Los Angeles .
 The population, which before the war had been about 40% Hispanic, was closer to 66% Hispanic . Before the war, the population had been closer to 40% of Hispanic .
 This close to California, we could get some news, but we were told that it would be better to stay on 1-40 the remainder of the way west, banditos, you know. This close .
 Rather than spend the 2 days we had planned on, we left the next morning intent on making it to Holbrook, Arizona . Instead of spending 2 days in Arizona, we decided to spend the next day in Arizona .
 We made it as far as Pinta Road in Arizona where we exited . Albuquerque, New Mexico Departure Time: 0700 .
 Pinta Road is just a lonely exit out in the desert a few miles east of Petrified Forest National Park . It's just a small exit from the desert east of the national park .
 There are no services here and most Interstate travelers pass it by without giving it a second glance . Holbrook is just down the road .
 We drove north of the Pinta Road exit down a dirt road almost a mile where we came to the crumbling asphalt of a once major highway . The crumbling asphalt was once a major highway in the area .
 Route 66 cuts through the Painted Desert, a forgotten line of dark gray against the desert shrubbery . Route 66 is a ghost road winding its way to an even ghostlier destination .
 Once we found the remains of Route 66 we turned towards the west and the setting sun . Once we reached Route 66, we turned our attention to the west .
 I only hoped we would get to it before the sun set and left us in the blackness of desert night . We only hoped to get to the desert desert night before sunset .
 One of the loneliest ghosts I have encountered on Route 66 in all my travels . We continued on for about two and a half miles and came to a ghost .
 All alone surrounded by the vast desert stood the shell of the once great Painted Desert Trading Post . The once great trading post was located in the desert desert .
 As the shadows lengthened and the sky turned a brilliant red, I stood in the silence and pondered what once went on here .
 The fellas strung a picket rope for the horses and then when the horses were settled, we opened the tent trailers for the first time and made do with canned goods . The horses were finally settled in a tent trailer .
 At least we didn't have 16 cases of bourbon and 5 kegs of beer this time . Oh yeah, they brought a bunch, 4 cases, this was only a 3-4 week trip .
 'I didn't offer her the pill, it's just freeze dried alcohol anyway and she had a drink,' she said . 'I'm not giving her a pill. I'm not offering her a drink. She's having a drink anyway,' she added .
 I finished my drink a little quickly and encouraged everyone to do the same . I finished it quickly and encourage everyone to drink quickly .
 Once we had a couple of drinks in us the canned beef stew would taste better and hopefully she'd be chilled out . We hope she'll have a few more drinks before she gets into bed .
 The hands of the hands were heating a can of refried beans to make burritos, I think .
 "We didn't have any tequila, but Dan gave them a bottle of bourbon and they were doing quite well with the substitute," he says .
 Painted Desert, Arizona Departure Time: 0645 . Unless looking at a big coal fired power plant, there was nothing to see in Holbrook .
 There are a lot of Native Americans in Arizona and that sort of served to keep the Latino population in check . The state's Native American population was kept in check by the Native Americans, the governor says .
 Hispanics had taken over much of the non-reservation property, but that whole thing last year happened during the winter when Arizona was full of snowbirds that happened to enjoy Arizona's rather open gun laws .
 Old, yes, but they were also mostly conservative and had survived the H5N1, WW III, the Supervolcano and civil unrest at home . They were mostly conservative, but also had survived many of the world's most serious crises .
 Many of the new arrivals ended up staying in Tucson . They were, on the average, a bit narrow minded when it came to people taking over their town .
 "This movie begins with mysticism and keeps going. As with movies of moral implication do, this movie has moral implications . It's not just a movie of mysticism, but it's a good movie of moral meaning .
 The Seventh Sign or The Prophecy is not for the viewer who does not like it . But not for those who do not like the film, it's for them to watch .
 These movies are in a league of their own and can be viewed more than one time to see more than you saw the first time . These movies can be seen more than once and more than ever .
 Gunny was right; it was just a large hole in the ground but to think that it was caused by a rock only 150' across was scary . Gunny says the hole was only about 150' wide and it was only a few feet deep .
 Examples include the Silverpit crater in the UK, and the Boltysh crater in Ukraine, both much smaller than Chicxulub .
 This has led to the hypothesis that the Chicxulub impact may have been only one of several impacts that happened all at the same time . This has been led to a hypothesis that it may be only the first of several such impacts .
 Another crater thought to have been formed at the same time is the Shiva crater . The Shiva crater is thought to be the largest crater in the world .
 Shiva crater is a hypothesized impact crater located in the Indian Ocean west of India . The Shiva crater was a hypothesized crater . It is believed to have formed the Shiva crater .
 It has been suggested that it formed around 65 million years ago . It formed at the same time as a number of other impacts recorded in the K-T boundary .
 The Deccan Traps are located in the theorized center of the crater, lending support to the idea that the traps were created by the impact event . The traps are believed to have been created by an impact event on Earth .
 South Rim, Grand Canyon, Arizona Departure Time: 0730 . If you've seen one hole in the ground and later the same day a bigger hole, you're tired of looking at it .
 We looked, said wow a couple of times, and went to something rather nice, southern Utah . We looked at the pictures and said wow .
 The Latter Day Saints are God's chosen people in this country, but from the look of southern Utah, He gave them some nice digs . I don't know that . God gave them nice digs.
 We saw much of it, it took a week and quite honestly, I lost track, we'd seen so many natural wonders. We saw a lot of it. It took us a week to see much of the world's natural wonders, and we lost track .
 The best I could manage was to mark our route on a highway map with brief notes . The best thing I could do was mark the route with a map of the road .
 We were taking digital pictures and loading them into the laptop for later viewing . We were loading them up for later views .
 Somewhere in the middle of all that was a Sunday and Sunday was a day of rest . Sunday was also a Sunday for the Mets .
 We sat and looked at the Utah map, lining out our next stops and planning on being in St. Louis, St. Mary's .
 Gunny could try and find his friends on the afternoon of day 12. That way, we could get to Barstow and find them on the day 12 . Gunny is now in the UK on day 12 of the 12-day mission .
 Vincent van Gogh died in a car crash in Paris in the 1920s . Van Gogh's son says it's a shame he didn't live to see how it all turned out, but that would be cutting off his nose .
 The farm was now 4 times larger, totally paid for and had almost more livestock than the land could support . The farm now had 4 times more livestock, almost more than the farm could support.
 "We made money from bourbon, biodiesel, selling livestock and grain and had had been darned lucky," he says . "We had to be darned luck," he adds .
 Hard work is its own reward, and as someone said, God helps those that help themselves . Hard work will be rewarded, and God will help those that helped themselves .
 "I was enjoying myself this time and we even took a little time to fish," says Drexler . "We were enjoying ourselves this time," he says .
 "If we do run into trouble in California, we'll probably have to shoot our way out," he says . "We'll probably be shooting ourselves out of California," he adds .
 I heard something rather disturbing from a lady from California from California I was visiting with. She said it was rather disturbing to hear from her .
 You couldn't leave the state without a doctor's certification that you were disease free and they weren't letting many people in . The state was trying to keep people out of the state, but they were letting many in .
 Everyone was current on all of their shots including the standard influenza shots . "I ran through my records and everyone was current," she said .
 She also said something about the agricultural border station but I didn't understand what that was all about . She also talked about the border station .
 Maybe if that had been our only destination, it would have been different . Maybe if it had been that, maybe it would be different .
 "We camped out each night each night and I was looking forward to getting a motel room in St. Louis. We camped each night," she says .
 "You couldn't really get a good shower in that unit in the tent trailer," says the actor . "I'm glad that we're not going to have to live in that tent trailer"
 "I noticed that once we got to Utah, we didn't see quite as many Hispan606 ics. I had noticed that . Once we got there, we noticed that there were a lot of Hispanians in the area .
 "We left early and had to go through a border inspection station just to leave Utah. We left early," says CNN.com correspondent Rob Greene .
 It was a spectacular drive down the Virgin River Canyon and then we hit another inspection station when we hit Nevada .
 Seemed disappointed that we were just passing through, but really checked the papers for our Tejanos . Seemed disappointment that we weren't just passing though .
 After 3 hours or so of steady driving, we hit Vegas but didn't even slow down . After a long day of driving, Vegas didn't slow down even though it was Vegas .
 The streets appeared to be nearly deserted; I wondered what that was all about . The streets were nearly deserted when I went to visit the city .
 The parking lots of Whiskey Pete's and the other casinos were nearly empty .
 The men at the Inspection Station weren't agricultural inspectors, they were members of the California Defense Force and they were armed . The men were armed with guns .
 "We turned around and pulled over to the side of the road to talk this over," she said . "We're going to have a lot of time to think about it," she added .
 "We can take that to Kingman and pickup United States 40,"" Gunny suggested . Gunny suggests .
 I'm going to call my friends on the fancy phone and see what they can tell me. I'm not sure what I'll do next, but I'll call them up to tell me .
 There was general agreement that Gunny would place his calls on the way back to Vegas and we'd have lunch at a buffet where we could discuss what he'd learned . There was also an agreement that we would have lunch with Gunny .
 Two, it seems that they have an unidentified virus going around that's high contagious . The unidentified virus is high contagious, according to officials .
 John said it would take about a week to arrange it and we could pay the escort . The escort would be paid for by John, who said he would pay for it .
 'The main reason people have left us alone is probably because we have six bodyguards who happen to speak the language. Right, that's intelligent guys, that is intelligent guys,' he says . 'We're not going to be left alone,' he adds .
 Three hours later we were in Kingman and bade goodbye to our companions . Three hours after we left Kingman, we headed to Kingman .
 We weren't interested in the museum and got directions to the Hualapai Mountain Recreation area . We also got directions and information about the area's recreation .
 The Hualapai Mountains remain green year-around, being covered in Pinion Pine . Pinion Pines are the only pine trees in the area .
 A recent threat to the community was a mountain lion, a danger to pets and small children . A mountain lion was a recent danger to small children and pets .
 It had been drawn to civilized areas like Pinion Pines and Atherton Acres due to the large deer population . The deer population was drawn to the civilized areas due to large deer populations .
 People had been feeding the deer, causing them to rely on humans for food, instead of fending for themselves . The deer had been left to fend for themselves after people fed them .
 There are some animals only native to the Hualapai Mountain range, including a breed of ground squirrel, and a tarantula . Ground squirrel, ground squirrel and tarantulas are among the animals native to Arizona's mountains .
 At the top of the mountain, just past the park, is a community known as Pine Lake . The community is known for Pine Lake, which is located just past a park .
 Several amenities are located in Pine Lake, including the Hualapai Mountain Lodge and the Pine Lake General Store . Several individuals even rent out their homes for daily or weekend get-a-ways .
 The escort had Gunny's satellite phone number and was supposed to call when he arrived in Kingman . Gunny was taken to Kingman, Arizona, by a helicopter helicopter .
 Most ammo shipments out of Barstow go west to the Pacific Fleet Marines . It would probably take some special arrangements to ship it east to the Marines .
 We went riding most of the time; we are getting too old for a lot of hiking . Hualapai Mountain Recreation area is a popular hiking destination in Arizona .
 One thing I noticed was how much more comfortable the Laredoan cross draw rig was, especially when I was riding . I noticed how comfortable it was to ride with the cross-draw rig .
 Marilyn confided that as soon as they got home, she was making Gunny get them the same setup as Dan and I had . Marilyn said she was going to get the set-up as well as Gunny . Dan and Marilyn had a set up in the garage .
 In the meantime, she took off one of the holsters, exchanged them and wore the belt the right way around with the buckle in front .
 CNN's John Sutter talks about the border wall closing in California . He says it's a sign that the border will be closed to the U.S. border .
 "Some of my questions answered themselves, it had to be very contagious, and the prognosis couldn't be good. Some of the answers answered themselves," she says . The prognosis is not good, she adds .
 "It couldn't be good news if they were withholding it. I say that because, except for what I heard up in Utah and what the guard had said, we knew nothing about it," he says . "We knew nothing," he adds .
 This is a breaking news alert, please stay tuned for an important announcement about a widespread virus in California resulting in the closure of the state's borders 3 days ago . Stay tuned for the announcement .
 As of 3 days ago, the state of California, in concert with the CDC, implemented a statewide quarantine . The quarantine is a state of quarantine .
 Signs and symptoms of virus typically occur 1 -3 weeks after the patient comes into contact with the virus . Symptoms typically occur after 1-3 weeks .
 These include fever, retrosternal pain, sore throat, back pain, cough, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, conjunctivitis, facial swelling, proteinuria and proteinuria .
 Neurological problems have also been described, including hearing loss, tremors, and encephalitis . Hearing loss has been described .
 The symptoms of the disease are so varied and nonspecific, clinical diagnosis is often difficult . Because of the symptoms, it is difficult to diagnose the disease .
 The most common complication of the illness for those who survive is deafness . Most common complication for those with the disease is hearing loss .
 Various degrees of deafness occur in approximately one-third of cases, and many cases hearing loss is permanent . Hearing loss is possible in many cases, with some cases permanent .
 The disease is believed to be spread by rodents however until it is specifically identified, quarantines will remain in effect . Quarantines are still in place until the disease is identified .
 It has been shown to be most effective when given early in the course of the illness . It has also been shown that it is most effective in giving early treatment .
 Patients should also receive supportive care consisting of maintenance of appropriate fluid and electrolyte balance, oxygenation and blood pressure, as well .
 Initial cases of the disease appeared in the Long Beach area and have been tentatively tied to the arrival of a ship carrying goods from Africa . Initial cases were initially reported in Long Beach, California .
 Ebola, Marburg, Lassa and Crimean-Congo viruses are examples of hemorrhagic fever viruses . Ebola is one of the most contagious viruses in the world . Marburg is a virus that causes fever fever and can cause severe symptoms .
 The only case of Ebola in the United States was in Reston, Virginia, in 1989 . The only Ebola case in the U.S. was in Virginia in 1989.
 This specific strand of the Ebola virus caused a rather large panic, but after containment, eventually it was discovered that this specific strand proved fatal only to non-human primates . This strand of Ebola Zaire was found to be a rather small strain of the virus .
 Ebola Zaire, Ebola Sudan and Marburg are very deadly. Ebola Sudan is not all the same. Marburg is very deadly, says CNN's John Sutter . Ebola Sudan, Marburg and Ebola Sudan are also deadly, he says .
 "When I could get to a computer connection, I could confirm what I suspected," he says . "I'm not sure what I was doing," he adds .
 "We were fairly isolated and as soon as the ammo came in for the Tac-50s, we'd be gone in a heartbeat," he says . "In the meantime, we're fairly isolated," he adds .
 A rodent could have been aboard the ship from Africa and somehow spread the disease to our species of rodents . I told him that to his knowledge, there had never been a case outside of Africa, but a rodent may have been on the ship .
 A frequent side effect of Lassa fever was deafness . The side effect is deafness, according to the author of the book "Lassa"
 IIRC, the disease was spread through contract with rodent leaving and contact with infected human material, i.e., blood, stools, etc. The disease was also spread through contact with contaminated human material .
 Jim said he'd check it out and if what I told him didn't connect, someone would let us know . Someone would tell us if something didn't go wrong, he said .
 The CDC published hundreds of fact sheets on exotic diseases, like Ebola, and I nearly forgot that I had a fact sheet on the laptop . Ebola is an exotic disease that can only be found through the CDC .
 After reading the fact sheet on Lassa, I was pretty sure that was what was in California . After reading a fact sheet, I thought it was what I thought was the California .
 Signs and symptoms of Lassa fever typically occur 1 -3 weeks after the patient comes into contact with the virus . Symptoms typically occur after 1-3 weeks of contact .
 On the way back, June said she'd had enough traveling, everywhere we went we ran into trouble . June said, "I'm tired, I'm tired and tired"
 The cost of one of these 'vacations' ate through a whole year's worth of earnings in a very short time . Plus, when a person started to figure out the cost, they ate a lot of their earnings .
 This wasn't the Country of 30 years ago when everyone had 2 or 3 cars and gas was in the $2 range . Those National Parks were in a sorry state anyway, anyway . This isn't the same thing as 30 years before .
 'We would have been much better off if it weren't for the environmentalists. We would have had a better outcome if it were not for the environmentalists,' says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 They complained about the volume of hydrocarbons in the air and drove gas guzzlers . They complained that they were driving gas-guzzlers .
 Country tried to convert to wind power to eliminate carbon based fuel production of electricity . They worried about birds get killed by the wind turbines .
 Solar power was way overrated; consider the amount of energy it took to produce a solar panel . Solar power is a waste of energy; consider how much energy it takes to make solar panels .
 Many of the countries, like Japan, that produced them were not the industrial giants of the same time frame . Japan is one of the few countries that produced many of the world's largest aircraft .
 I half suspected that the planet Earth was in an overall population decline, the past 20 years had seen disease, war and hunger . The planet Earth had seen a population decline .
 It was only 5 years since the super eruption and scientist had warned it would take 6-10 years for the air to completely clear . Scientists had warned that it could take 6 to 10 years to clear the air from the volcano .
 The last 2 wars, WW III and the war with Mexico had been fought with nuclear weapons . The last two wars were fought using nuclear weapons, the last 2 were fought with nukes .
 In areas of Africa where the disease was endemic, Lassa fever was a significant cause of morbidity and mortality . The disease is endemic in many African countries, including Nigeria .
 Nothing could keep the Africanized honey bees from spreading north . It was like Africanized bees, nothing could keep them from spreading .
 Africanized Honey Bees also called ""Africanized bees" or ""killer bees" are descendants of southern African bees imported in 1956 by Brazilian scientists . They were created in Brazil to breed a honey bee better adapted to the South American tropics .
 The first swarm of Africanized bees was detected in the U.S. in October, 1990 . They were captured in a baited trap at the border town of Hidalgo, Texas .
 AHB colonies were first reported in Arizona and New Mexico in 1993 and in California in October, 1994 . AHB colony colonies first appeared in New Mexico and Arizona in 1994 .
 Within a year, more than 8,000 square miles of Imperial, Riverside and northeastern San Diego counties were declared officially colonized by Africanized Bees . The area has been colonized .
 Lino Lopez was the first person to die in the U.S. from Africanized honey bee stings . Lopez, 82, died July 15, 1993, of Africanized bees stings in the United States .
 He was trying to remove a colony from a wall in an abandoned building on his ranch near Harlingen, Texas . He was stung more than 40 times while removing the colony .
 Black Death ended, mostly, with the great fire of London in 1666 when most of the population of black rats was wiped out . The Black Death was mostly wiped out with the Great Fire of London .
 The brown rats weren't good hosts for the fleas that carried the bubonic plague . The plague was spread by brown rats, which carried the plague .
 The reservoir, or host, of Lassa virus is a rodent known as the ""multimammate rat"" of the genus Mastomys . The reservoir is a rat known as a "multimamate rat" of the species Mastomy .
 It is not certain which species of Mastomys are associated with Lassa . However, at least two species carry the virus in Sierra Leone . It's not known which species carry it .
 Mastomys rodents breed very frequently, produce large numbers of offspring, and are numerous in the savannas and forests of West, Central, and East Africa . The species breed very often and produce large offspring, breeding very frequently .
 All these factors contribute to the relatively efficient spread of Lassa virus from infected rodents to humans . The virus is spread by rodents infected with infected rodents .
 The Praomys/Mastomys species complex is a group of morphologically similar species that occur in very diverse habitats throughout subSaharan Africa . It is the largest species complex in the world, with a number of similar species .
 The taxonomy of this group has been clouded by a diversity of opinions . Many external and cranial similarities between species, and thus the systematics of the group remains poorly understood, with many species yet to be described .
 The genus Mastomys is well represented in southern Africa, especially by the ubiquitous multimammate mice . The genus is also well represented by the multi-mammate mouse, Mastomy coucha and Mastomymys natalensis .
 The distribution of both species is only provisional at this stage . The species are known to be sympatric in some areas, and allopatric .
 These common agricultural pests are also commensal with man, often sheltering in houses in order to safely rear their young . Pests often shelter in houses to protect themselves from predators .
 In African kraals they occur in very large numbers, living in the fabric and thatch of pole and mud huts . They are often found living in large numbers .
 Mastomys coucha acts as a reservoir for the Rickettsian Yersinia pestis, the organism causing plague . The organism is a reservoir of the organism responsible for plague .
 The three forms of plague are bubonic, primary pneumonic and primary septicaemic . Bubonic, pneumonic, bubonic or bubonic plague are the three forms .
 Bubonic plague, which is the most common type in epidemics, is fatal in about 25% to 50% of untreated cases . The plague is a form of disease that causes death rates of about 50% to 25% .
 Pneumonic plague, a highly contagious form, and septicaemic plague, are more rare forms, and usually fatal forms . The plague is a generalised blood infection, and is a contagious form .
 Plague still exists as a threat in southern Africa, with much current concern over the possibility of outbreaks in rat infested inner cities .
 We had already had a round of pneumonic plague, during the H5N1 pandemic, introduced by terrorists; or so was claimed by terrorists .
 M natalensis is a natural reservoir for the arenavirus causing Lassa fever . Both species are also carriers of the Banzi and Witwatersrand viruses .
 This infection, occurring predominantly in West Africa up until now, has a high mortality rate, especially amongst pregnant women and even in patients with modern health care . This infection has been predominantly in the West African region .
 The Mopeia virus is another similar virus carried by M natalensis, but the effect thereof on man is as yet unknown . The effect of the virus on man's life is unknown .
 Mastomys rodents linked to outbreak of encephalomyocarditis among African elephants in Kruger National Park in South Africa .
 It is uncertain as to whether only one or both of these species may carry the EMC virus . Both species occur within the boundaries of the park, but it is unknown if only one carries the virus .
 Residents blame Satan for the highway's dangers . Residents say they blame Satan .
 Governor Bill Richardson delivered his first State-of-the-State Address to the New Mexico Legislature on January 21, 2003 . Governor Richardson delivered the first State of the State Address in 2003 .
 We must coordinate the business interests of Native Americans and the state. We need to coordinate business interests and state interests . We must work together to protect Native Americans' interests .
 United States 93 did not have any branches; if AASHTO were to number branches in sequence, the first would be United States 193, not 393 . The first of 393 branches would be the first of 193 branches of the United States .
 The States agreed to renumber the route as a spur of United States 191, with ""491"" chosen to avoid duplicating State route numbers .
 AASHTO's Standing Committee on Highways approved the change . The change became official on Saturday, May 31 .
 EMT-1 class is being offered in Garden City, Garden City . The class is offered in the city .
 "I wasn't sure I wanted to spend a year become a Paramedic, I had Julia and our 3 kids to take care of. They had both EMT1 and EMT-2, but I didn't want to spend that year . I wasn't going to spend
 I went to Lakin and got myself clipped, 3 were enough kids and we only had a 3 bedroom house . We only had 3 bedrooms, 3 bedrooms and 3 bedrooms . We had to have 3 kids in the house, 3 kids were enough .
 The pastor keeps bring up the 4 Horsemen of the Apocalypse and the End of Times . The End of the Times is the end of Times, the pastor says .
 Some of those reruns on TV say this and that and any one of the disasters we've had seem to qualify as what they warn about . Some of the reruns are on TV. Some of them are on the verge of disaster .
 The first 4 seals were broken at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution . I believe that the first four seals were broke at the start of the industrial revolution .
 Bible says only God will know the minute and hour of the end . Bible also says that only God can know the end of the world .
 The movie that Time is on my side was in was Fallen starring Denzel Washington . The movie Time is On My Side is based on a novel written by Robert De Niro .
 Jim getting him thinking about Revelations slipped into me thinking about some of the implications of Revelations . Jim got him thinking of Revelations and the implications .
 We'd learned in school that results of a nationally representative study show that genital herpes infection is common in the U.S.
 Between the late 1970s and the early 1990s, the number of Americans with genital herpes infection increased 30 percent . The number of American genital herpes infections rose 30 percent.
 I hoped Jim became a Paramedic; I could retire completely once I showed him how to use the lab equipment . "I hope Jim becomes a paramedic," she said. "I hoped Jim would become a Parameric."
 "If I started that now, maybe he would become interested in going to school for a year," she says . "He would be interested in attending a year of school," she adds .
 He could work in Garden City for a year and return to the farm, like I had, he says . Then he could go back to Garden City, like he had . He says: "Then he could come back and get back on the farm"
 Of course, I'd brought back more to the farm than an education when I gave up my job . "Of course, I'd brought . back more than a farm than a college," she says .
 Twenty years ago international news was usually the first news the media brought to our attention, it was shortly after 9/11 . Today's first international news came after the terrorist attacks in the United States .
 We had gone in Afghanistan looking for Osama and ended up removing the Taliban from power, but Osama evaded us . We had been looking for him, but he evaded them, says the Taliban .
 We'd eventually heard that bin Laden was dead, but we'd found him and SEAL Team 6 killed him . We'd found bin Laden and found him, but he'd been killed by SEAL Team Six .
 Africa had been starving for years and the pandemic, the war and the Israeli attack on Muslim countries only worsened their conditions . The pandemic and the war only worsened the conditions in Africa .
 If anything helped them it was Yellowstone erupting, it ended the drought in Africa . Yellowstone erupted, ending the drought, helped end the drought .
 The United States had tried more than once to help starving countries in Africa but each attempt had ended badly . The U.S. had tried to help Africa but failed to find success .
 Clinton pulled us out of Somalia and Bush only made a halfhearted attempt to help those starving in '05-'06 . Bush only tried to help them in Somalia in 2005-'06, but did nothing to help the starving .
 The 4 Horsemen are the white horse the Antichrist, the red horse war, the black horse famine and the pale horse death, which would naturally follow the first 3 . The white horse would be the death of the first horse .
 An alternate interpretation, likely based on differing translations, holds the first Horseman to represent War or the Antichrist, the second to represent Pestilence . The third and fourth riders remain famine and death, respectively .
 Apache an important late comer to Texas . Akokisasa part of the Atakapans Atakapan coastal Indians of east Texas Alabama Coushatta Late comers from the east, still here in east Texas .
 The Pueblos of Texas Tonkawa central Texas hunter gathers . Patarabuay, another name for the Jumanos Pueblo, see the Tigua .
 Waco a band of the Wichita Wichita farmers and hunters of central Texas . The only way the end would come all at once would be if that rock came in from behind the sun .
 Every morning when you get up, there's 1 chance in 20,000 that it could happen. Statistically, every morning, there are 1% of the time that a person could die from a car crash .
 "I started reading the signs after I lost the baby and couldn't have more," says mother-of-one . She says she started reading signs after losing the baby .
 Revelations also says that there will be a great upsurge in knowledge just before the end . Revelations says there will also be an 'upsurge of knowledge' in the end of the world .
 The 1,000 years of tribulation comes after the battle of Har Megiddon, the author says . I don't think so, the 1,00 years of Tribulation comes AFTER the battle, he says .
 It was planting time, again, and I took take of baby Julia while Jim worked on the farm and Julia worked in the gardens and cannery .
 "One of these days, our vehicles would be worn out and we'd be walking or riding a horse," says the author . "We would walk or ride or ride a horse. One of our vehicles is worn out," she says .
 Jim did get the parts for the wind turbine from Big Jake, but was told there weren't any more . Jim says he got the parts from the turbine, but they were told there were no more . The wind turbine was built by Big Jake in 2008 .
 We were in that period after the disasters where you have technology but no means to replace it when it wears out. We have no means of replacing technology when it's worn out. You have to rely on technology to replace technology. We need to be able to find a way to replace
 Knowing this, we could plan ahead and locate parts before they were needed . Knowing this would help us find parts before we needed them, we were able to locate them .
 If properly cared for some things, like computers, have a very long life . Computers have a long way to live, but they can be taken seriously seriously seriously . Computer experts say computers should be given a proper home and family home .
 Technological advances had come to a screeching halt on July 4th, 2009 . Technology had been on the rise for years .
 We were coming up on July 4th, 2022, 13 years after the war and 5 years after Yellowstone . Yellowstone was the first Yellowstone National Park in the nation .
 We'd seen enough of the Country to know that we didn't want to travel anymore . We'd been in the UK for more than a decade .
 CDC says unidentified illness affecting California is Lassa fever . CDC says illness is an unidentified illness . CDC confirms illness is a form of Lass a fever .
 A vaccine was developed and is being produced to meet the needs of the population of that state and its neighbors, Arizona, Nevada and Oregon . A vaccine is being developed and being produced .
 The disease vector is rodents and it requires contract with the virus to become infected . The disease is spread by rodents and requires contract from rodents .
 In anticipation of the disease possibly spreading, sufficient doses of the vaccine will be prepared to immunize the entire remaining population of the U.S. The vaccine is expected to be immunized .
 It seems to be spread by human contact with an infected animal and amplified in health care settings . The virus is spread by contact with infected animals and amplified by health care .
 "My biggest concern is what I'm going to use when we can't get Zoloft any more," says mother-of-one .
 5-HTP supplements provide more raw materials that may be used in the body's natural serotonin production process . Instead of interrupting the recycling of serotonin as in the case of SSRIs, the supplements provide raw materials .
 Mom told me that Marilyn suggested that we grow turkeys because they contained some chemical that would help Rachel with depression . Mom said Marilyn suggested growing turkeys contain some chemical to help her depression .
 I finally gave in and told her that I'd enroll in Paramedic school this fall, provided we could find a new job . We're looking to find a paramedic in the fall .
 I should have known she wouldn't have pushed if there wasn't a school I could attend, she says . I should've known she would have pushed for me to go to school, she adds . She says she's not surprised that she wants to attend a school she can attend .
 "I've always been concerned because she was the only one on the 3 farms that had more than Combat Lifesaver training. I've always thought she was only one of the three farms with more than combat Lifesavers training. She was always concerned because of the lack of Combat
 See if you can take a course on homeopathic cures, we aren't always going to be able to get drugs . We aren't all going to always go to the hospital with drugs, we are going to have to get them .
 Your generation may well be the last one to have access to large amounts of technology . Your generation will be last to be able to use technology like Facebook and Twitter .
 That ammo that we picked up from Gunny's friend may be the last we can get . That ammo may not be the first we've seen .
 The only relationship I have to him is that he bought some of the reproduction First Blood knives . He bought some replicas of the knives he bought .
 "There are a couple of communities down there that the illegals are taking over," says President Obama . "I'm not surprised that they're taking over. There are a few communities that are being taken over," he says .
 It was good for him and I sent his completed application along with payment in full to Topeka, Kansas . "It's good for me," he said. "I sent it along with a completed application"
 Buying another freezer for FFP didn't make a whole lot of sense, yet, and I had all the equipment we needed . Buying a freezer for another freezer didn't seem to make sense, but it did make it seem that it did .
 We could haul 6 horses in one trailer and 4 in the other, leaving room for all the freezers and stuff we needed . We were able to pull 6 horses into one trailer .
 Of course that meant getting a second 6 horse trailer, but it was only money . Of course, that meant buying a second trailer . The trailer is only a trailer .
 "I could say that now, it wasn't like back when Randy and Randy and I first got into preparedness. I could say now, now, that now I could . Now, it's not like back in the days when Randy first preparedness," he says. "I
 The only problem I could see with 20 and 30-year men was that they never stopped being soldiers. "They never stop being soldiers," he said .
 Production was up a little this year this year and in another 4-5 years we'd be back to normal, provided the weather holds . "In another 4 to 5 years we would be back in normal," he says .
 "Back when I was an 18-year-old in the Army, I never thought I'd see the day where the end times became a reality," says the author .
 This trip, I think I'll wear the Chief's Special in my ankle holster and carry the FID .45 as my backup in the middle of my back . I think he'll wear it in his ankle holster .
 "That's regardless of what guns I'm carrying, the military arms or the cowboy guns," she says . "I'm always going to carry my guns. That's whether it's military or cowboy guns, I'm always carrying my guns."
 I end up carrying about 50% of my weight in gear when I'm all fitted out in the military gear . It's just a shame I'm not bigger in stature, he says. It's a shame he's not bigger than he is .
 A military truck pulled in and said he had a delivery for Tom . Tom says he was surprised to find out he had been waiting for a delivery . Tom: "It's a miracle"
 He said he came from Tennessee, but made a stop in Missouri on the way to pick up more goods . The man said he was from Tennessee .
 "It was a 5-ton truck and it was full, I wonder how much that stuff cost. It was a full truck," says the author .
 You seem to think you can never have too much toilet paper and I think that you can . never have . too much ammo . You seem like you can always have too many toilet paper or ammo, he says .
 Tom lined up production overruns from Milan Army Ammunition Plant in Tennessee and Lake City Army ammunition Plant in Missouri . He lined up the overruns as a result of overruns at the Milan, Tennessee, Lake City, Missouri plants . Tom's list of facilities includes Milan, Missouri and Lake
 You'll have to move the stuff from the 4 horse trailer to the new one, but only plan on using 4 of the stalls for horses .
 Scientists now have a much better understanding of the complex issues related to reactions to incompatible blood donor types .
 Even donors with Type O Rh negative blood may have antibodies in their blood that cause serious reactions . Donors with Rh-negative blood may also have antibodies .
 Small samples of the recipient's and donor's blood are mixed to check compatibility . Before a blood transfusion, small samples of recipient's blood were mixed to test compatibility .
 Dextrose solution may cause red cells to clump in the tubing . Red cells swell and hemolyze as dextrose and associated water diffuse from the medium into the cells .
 Lactated Ringer's solution contains enough ionized calcium to overcome chelating agents in anticoagulant-preservative or additive solutions and allow small clots develop .
 There have been complications reported with massive infusions of saline-containing solutions . There have also been complications with saline-infusions .
 Clinical complications include dilutional acidosis, edema, and hypokalemia . These clinical complications include edema and edema .
 Kansas and Texas acknowledged each other's. Not a problem this time this time . Kansas, Texas acknowledge each other. Texas and Kansas have a history of violence .
 Because I had so much room in the horse trailer, I changed my mind, and got a larger FFP freezer, capable of handling 72 units .
 "I didn't want to use it, just because I had it. I never the less insisted that we loan the Dragon Skin to our Tejano friends," she says .
 The corporation was clearing at least $300,000 or more a year now and it was akin to winning the lottery . It was clearing $300k a year and it's akin to "winning the lottery"
 Donating the 6-month-old FFP to Lakin Hospital was a nice tax write-off . The FFP was a 6-week-old baby born in December .
 $100,000 wasn't what it used to be, not with a pound of gold officially valued at $15,000 . That was very important, you know, $100K wasn't as important as it was before .
 I guess we finally managed to saturate Lakin with pint and quart mason jars; we got all we needed this season back . Lakin: "I guess we managed to . finally manage to . saturate" Lakin . The season is back on track .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of your favorite travel destinations to iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 Floyd 'Red Crow' Westerman plays a Cherokee in Walker, Texas Ranger, although he is a Lakota . Westerman is a Cherokee, but he is Lakota, not a Cherokee . He is also a Native American .
 The Trail of Tears refers to the Cheyenne being moved to Oklahoma . Having seen the movie "Cheyenne Autumn," I thought it was about moving the tribe to Oklahoma.
 The Trail of Tears refers to the forced movement of the Cherokee from north Georgia to Oklahoma . Cherokee people were forced to leave north Georgia for Oklahoma .
 Hollywood has left the impression that the great Indian wars came in the Old West during the late 1800's . Many think of this period as the cowboy and Indian days .
 By that time, the Indians were nearly finished, their subjugation complete, their numbers decimated .
 The killing, enslavement, and land theft had begun with the arrival of the Europeans . The killing and enslavement of the . Europeans had begun to kill, enslave, and steal land .
 Federal policy may have reached its nadir when it became federal policy under President Jackson .
 Davy Crockett's political career was destroyed because he supported the Cherokee, he left Washington DC and headed west to Texas . I would sooner be honestly damned than hypocritically immortalized Davy Cuckett .
 No better symbol exists of the pain and suffering of the Trail Where They Cried than the Cherokee Rose . The Cherokee Rose is a symbol of the suffering suffered by the Cherokee Indians .
 The mothers of the Cherokee grieved so much that the chiefs prayed for a sign to lift the mother's spirits and give them strength to care for their children . The chiefs prayed that a sign would lift the mothers spirits .
 "From that day forward, a beautiful new flower, a rose, grew wherever a mother's tear fell to the ground," says the author . From that day, a new rose rose was planted in the place of a tearful tear .
 It has a gold center, for the gold taken from the Cherokee lands, and seven leaves on each stem that represent the seven Cherokee clans that made the journey . The leaves on the stem represent the leaves from each stem represent seven different Cherokee clans .
 To this day, the Cherokee Rose prospers along the route of the Trail of Tears . The Cherokee Rose is still thriving along the trail of Tears.
 "Oh Canada, Oh Canada, I am sad for all the Indian people throughout the land. And today, when you celebrate your hundred years, OhCanada," she said .
 For I have known you when your forests were mine; when they gave me my meat and clothing . For I've known you . When they . gave me meat and . clothing, I knew you as my forests were my .
 I have known you in your streams and rivers where your fish flashed and danced in the sun, where the waters said come, come and eat of my abundance . "I've known you," he writes .
 In the long hundred years since the white man came, I have seen my freedom disappear like the salmon going mysteriously out to sea . But in the long 100 years since, I'm not afraid to say 'I have seen freedom disappear' in Britain .
 "The white man's strange customs which I could not understand pressed down upon me until I could no longer breathe," says the author of the novel .
 When I neither understood nor welcomed this way of life, I was called lazy . When I was neither understood or welcomed it, I called it lazy. When I . neither understood it or welcomed this . way of living, he was called ' lazy'
 My nation was ignored in your history textbooks they were little more important in the history of Canada than the buffalo that ranged the plains . The buffalo were the most important in Canada .
 "I was ridiculed in your plays and motion pictures, and when I drank your fire-water, I got drunk very, very drunk," he said . "When I drank [your fire water]," he said, "when I drank it, I was ridiculed"
 Let me humbly accept this new culture and through it rise up and go on. Let's accept it and rise up, go on, I say . Let's hope we can do this. Let me accept it, accept it .
 I shall grab the instruments of the white man's success his education, his skills, and with these new tools I shall build my race into the proudest segment of your society . Like the Thunderbird of old I shall rise again out of the sea; I shall .
 Oh Canada, I shall see these things come to pass. Before I follow the great Chiefs who have gone before us, Oh Canada . I shall follow them, I say .
 I shall see our young braves and our chiefs sitting in the houses of law and government, ruling and being ruled by the knowledge of the knowledge and freedoms of our great land . I will see our youth leaders and chiefs ruling and ruling, ruling, being ruled .
 He was also known as Chief Dan George Old Lodge Skins in Little Big Man . He was known for his role in the film adaptation of the novel .
 The thing about the Indians of North America was that they would have the last laugh . The Indians of N. America would have to have the first laugh .
 "We killed them with our diseases, stole their land and moved them to places they didn't want to go called Reservations," says President Obama . "We kill them with their diseases, steal their land," says Obama .
 They started to chuckle when we found oil and repaid the Cherokee for the Trail of Tears, they said . "They started to laugh when we . found oil," they said, "when we found . oil"
 I wasn't that long ago that Dan passed out bows and arrows for Christmas, he says . "I'm glad to see that people are still alive and well," he says of his son .
 Our technology doomed us and one day, we'll have used the last grain of gun powder and be hunting with bows and arrows, much as the Indians once did . One day we'll be hunting again with bows, arrows and bows, like the Indians did .
 There won't be cloth and we'll make our clothing out of skins, as the Indians once did . We'll use skins to make our clothes, like the Indians did, as they once did. We'll make clothing from skins .
 At the end of the day when work was done, we worked on getting ready for the trip to Texas . "We're going to Texas. We're getting ready to get ready for Texas. It's been a great day for the kids," says one of the kids .
 An F-15E dropped a bomb and stopped the Mexican Army dead in their tracks, literally . We'd been there and almost ended up fighting the Mexican army but for the fact that an F.15E bomb stopped them .
 Russia and China dropped a lot of bombs that day and luckily, neither Russia nor China reacted . The bombs were dropped by the U.S. military in Afghanistan .
 Mexicans were sold whatever they needed to rebuild their country . They just continued to sell the surviving Mexicans what they needed . They continued to continue to sell them whatever they could .
 It created a nearly perfect fence in a way, the overlapping fields of radioactivity made the best possible fence . It was created by the overlap of the radioactivity fields .
 Parts of the United States extended south of the line of radioactivity . Unfortunately, they planned poorly, the U.S. extended south .
 Airbursts occurred across Texas just north of Big Bend Country . They were airbursts reducing the fallout, but still there was this strip .
 The United States uses fairly 'clean' bombs and most, but not all, of the radiation is associated with a ground burst . Most, though, are associated with ground burst bombs .
 "Not that we knew what was coming, because it was a total surprise to us. Not that we . knew what . was coming," she said . "It was a totally surprise," she added .
 It takes a very high airburst for the widespread EMP effect to take place and we didn't lose much . The EMP effect takes place when an airburst hits the air .
 Manny told us that we'd be wise to take some kind of protective clothing although it had been 2 years since the incident . Manny said it was important to take a piece of clothing .
 We bought kits that included the Suit, 1 pair of protective gloves and boot covers and 1 roll of duct tape . We also bought a pair of gloves and boots .
 DEMRON RADIATION SHIELDING GARMENTS had been tested by the Department of Energy and confirmed to be effective in shielding for various forms of ionizing radiation . Demronradargarementshave been tested for various types of radiation .
 The specific molecular engineering of the compound provides significant protection against X-ray and low energy Gamma emissions, as well as high and . low energy Beta and Alpha particles .
 The DEMRON coverall is constructed with an integrated hood, heat sealed seams, and seam seal tape for added protection . The DEMron coveralls are constructed with integrated hood and heat sealing seams .
 It was only after the suits were delivered that Dan pointed out that we could have worn MOPP suits . The suits were only delivered after the suit was delivered .
 A MOPP suit is hot and heavy and just plain uncomfortable . The suit is not just comfortable .
 The lightweight suits I bought would offer the same protection as a MOPP suit and possibly more . I bought the lightweight suits for $100 .
 We were well into September before we were ready, but when the harvesting was done, we completed last minute preparations, like the FFP & PRBCs .
 They had a survey meter in the lead vehicle which was carrying munitions . The survey was carried out by a vehicle carrying munitions. They had to be fitted to the vehicle carrying the munitions .
 It wouldn't hurt the munitions to be exposed to radioactivity if there were any, the horses weren't all geldings . "It wouldn't be the first time that the munitions were exposed to the radioactivity of the horses," she said. "It's not a matter of
 Radiation suits cost $1,300 each and that didn't count the gas mask . Another thing, those radiation suits cost more than $2,000 each .
 This time I inventoried the bourbon and limited the total to 6 cases, a one year supply . This is the first time I've inventoried a case of six cases .
 I also made sure we didn't have more than 3 kegs of the liquid dynamite Ray called beer called beer . Ray says he made sure there were no more than three kegs left .
 'If we did find ourselves defending ourselves, we were going to be bright-eyed and bushy-tailed. Same rule, prepare for the worst and hope for the best and . If we were defending ourselves from the worst, we would be very happy to defend ourselves. We were
 This time we had reservations at Terlingua Ranch's campground, we made back in July . This time the campground was reserved for the first time since July .
 "When the subject of our boarding horses came up, they finally remembered us," she says . "They finally remembered them. When the subject was brought up, the horses were finally remembered"
 Manny and Juan told us they needed to gather information and would get back to us . Manny said they were gathering information about the incident . Juan said they would not comment on the situation .
 Lassa vaccine is a new form of vaccine for the elderly . All 44 members of the family were tested for the new vaccine . The mother-of-four had medical histories on all 44 of the children .
 We didn't tell him we also had 1 Ma Deuce, 2 M240s and 4 M249s, plus 2 60mm mortars . We also had 2 Ma Deuces, 2 .M240s, 4 .M249s plus 2 . 60mm . mortars
 For the first time in memory, we went looking for trouble albeit in the guise of helping our Tejano friends . The first time we've seen trouble in memory we went for trouble .
 MOAB was filled with 18,700 pounds of H6, an explosive that is a mixture of RDX and TNT, and aluminum . MOAB has been used in the U.S. since 2001 .
 Some initial reports had stated that this replacement for the BLU-82 bomb uses more of the slurry of ammonium nitrate and powdered aluminum used in the bomb . Initial reports had said that the bomb was made from a mixture of aluminum and powdered metal .
 Other reports indicated that the MOAB might use tritonal explosive as opposed to the gelled slurry explosive of the BLU-82 . Other reports indicate that the bomb could use trittonal explosive .
 Contrary to some reports, it is not capable of deep ground penetration . The U.S. Navy says it has no plans to use it as a carrier carrier .
 The reason being that they didn't have enough and our B61-10s were getting old and either had to be refurbished or used up . The reason for not having enough of the B61s was that they had to refurbish or use up .
 The MOAB was built to use in Iraq, but they didn't use them for whatever reason . They were built to be used in Iraq but were never used .
 We assumed it would be some of the cities along the Rio Grande, but life has its little surprises . Life has its own surprises, including surprises in Rio Grande cities .
 The residents may want to get even for the abuse they've suffered and we'll have captured weapons to arm them with,"" Gunny Gunny said .
 "We're going to need to infiltrate the communities and we'll need sniper fire to cover the infiltrators. We'll need snipers fire," says President Obama . "We will need snipers to cover infiltrators"
 Carlos Hathcock didn't use suppressors in 'Nam, but he was making one shot kills and moving on . Hathcock used suppressors to make one shot kill kills and move on. Hathcock: "I'm not going to be afraid to shoot again, but I'm
 Dan told me they planned to set up snipers -90 apart and they could use the Spearheads to coordinate the attacks of the infiltrators . Dan said he planned to use snipers to coordinate attacks .
 Spotters would have to identify individual targets that needed taking out . That would place a heavy burden on spotters to identify the individual targets .
 The infiltrators would try to do knife work, only use their suppressed handguns or rifles if that failed . If that failed, they would use suppressed guns or rifles to carry out the attack .
 Some of our Tejano friends had some wicked looking Bowie's sharpened to a razor-like edge . Bowie's is not the first time we've seen a Bowie's razor-sharpened version .
 Even if we started with the smallest towns first, the final decision, we would most likely be out numbered, if not by bodies, then by position . The final decision would be made by the smallest town in the country .
 "I immediately started tapering Rachel off the Xanax," she says . "We didn't need a repeat performance of her Dustin Hoffman skit," she adds .
 That's a knife not unlike the Fairbairn Sykes pattern and a double edged, 5Vi"" blade boot knife .
 We had spotting scopes to use plus a pair of binoculars for each sniper team . Each sniper team was given a set-up of spotting and binocular lenses .
 Initial appearances were deceiving; it appeared to just be a normal small town with a few people going about their business . Initial appearances appeared to be deceiving, but it was just a normal town .
 We'd tied our horses to some shrubs and had moved into position where we waited until the infiltrators signaled that they were ready to go . We waited for them to signal that they're ready to attack .
 It was close to sundown and Dan was using the binoculars and pointing out targets of interest to me and the others . It was a close-knit group of friends and family members . Dan says he hopes to see more of the world in the fall .
 If the operation came off as planned, we'd get through this with few, if any, shots being fired . The operation is expected to last for a few hours .
 Using information that came over the Spearheads, our people slowly moved into position, getting as close as they dared before dark . Using the information, we moved into positions, we were able to get as near as possible .
 I watched them creep in, intent on their targets with an occasional twinkle when light caught the edge of a knife blade . "They creep in," says author of the book, "but they creep in"
 Just as the tenth guard was falling, blood gushing; a man walked out of a building and saw him go down . The tenth guard went down, and a man saw him going down .
 "Gunny took out 4 men. They were far enough away, we didn't hear the Tac-50 fire, but I saw the results, Gunny said . Gunny says he took out four men, but they were too far away to hear the fire .
 I was doing my best to mark were our people had gone down; you don't get into an all-out battle without losing people on both sides . I was trying to mark where our people were going down, I said . You don't have to lose both sides in an all
 One building had a sign reading Clinic and I hoped it was a medical clinic with a full time doctor . Another building was a building with a sign saying Clinic . One of the buildings had a full-time doctor .
 More likely it was one of those remote clinics where a doctor visited town and saw patients one day a week . It was likely one of many remote clinics in the area .
 I'd take care of the opposition people only once I'd make sure our injured were out of danger, I said . I'd be happy to take pictures of our injured people, he said . He added that he'd take pictures only once he was sure they were safe .
 "The suppressors on our sniper rifles eliminated the flash and those illegals had no idea where the sniper fire was coming from," says the U.S. soldier . The suppressors eliminate the flash from sniper rifles .
 We had 3rd generation night vision, MUNS, but it wasn't required, the town was reasonably well lit up . We had MUNs, but they weren't required .
 What we thought would take 30 minutes tops ended up taking the better part of an hour . What was thought to be a quick fix was more than 30 minutes long .
 "Once we had their numbers down, it turned into a seek and destroy operation. Once we had them down, we turned it into a sought-and-destroy operation. It turned into an operation," says the officer .
 "There was almost no fire now. We saddled up and worked our way into town," says the rider .
 Juan started to point out people who were still alive and I could see most of them had Ringer's and ACS bandages . Most of the people still alive had bandages and bandages from the hospital .
 "Most would make it, but I'm only a Paramedic and a couple need surgery," says paramedic . "Most of the patients would survive, but most would need surgery"
 Gunny asked Gunny Gunny: "3 dead, 2 require surgery and 9 more with wounds we can handle" Gunny said: "9 more are wounded. 9 more are in need of surgery. Gunny?" Gunny replied .
 Our people were wearing Dragon Skin body armor and most of the wounds were in the extremities . Most of the wounded were in extremities, says CNN.com's John Defterios . "Most of the injuries were from extremities," he says .
 Men with minor wounds were cleaned up, wounds debrided and bandages applied . "I was able to direct some of the others exactly what to do," she says .
 "As soon as they brought in the supplies, I began establishing additional IVs, administering PRBCs and a plasma drip," she says . "I began establishing IVs," she adds .
 Gunny had used his Iridium to call the Sheriff and a chopper was only a few minutes out . I wasn't sure if they make it to Alpine, but Gunny was able to get to Alpine . Gunny's Iridium was used to communicate with the Sheriff .
 An extra Paramedic was aboard and he helped us finish up with the people who weren't being transported . An extra ambulance crew was on board to help with the patients .
 The 3 dead and 2 seriously wounded men weren't any of our 36 people, but some oth638 ers that had joined in to help . The 3 people who died and 2 were seriously wounded were some of the volunteers .
 Some of the less seriously wounded were; the Dragon Skin doesn't protect you from head to foot . The Dragon Skin does not protect anyone from head-to-toe .
 There are only 13 known pygmy owls left in Arizona, said Jenny Neeley of the Defenders .
 Neeley said the owl, which has been listed as endangered since 1997, will face imminent extinction if the protection is removed . The owl has been protected from extinction since 1997 under the protection of an endangered species of owl .
 Critical habitat designations for the owl covering more than a million acres in Arizona will be lifted if the owl comes off the list . The owl has been designated as an endangered species of owl in Arizona .
 Only 13 of the million acres could grow enough food to feed millions of people; we only have 13 of those owls left . Never mind that a million acres of land could feed millions, we have 13 left of owls .
 Two men transported to Alpine made it, barely, but they were out of the fight permanently . The two men were taken to Alpine hospital in Alpine, Alpine, but survived .
 "We picked up 75 people who were more than willing and all but dying to get revenge. It wasn't a bad trade off," says the team . "It was a great trade off. It was a good trade off"
 The guys passed out the weapons and gave them instruction, but only 55 of the people proved to be suitable for direct combat .
 55 veterans were veterans of one conflict or another . The fellas found 4 others who could work as spotters . of those 55 men were veterans .
 'We had a surplus of weapons, mostly G3s and machineguns backed by M4s' 'Our entire cadre of troops either had G-3s or machineguns or machine guns backed by the M4's,' he says . 'We were very fortunate to have
 I had to make a trip to Alpine to replace the PRBCs, FFP and solutions we'd used up in treatment . I had had to travel to Alpine in order to replace those used up .
 "I checked on my patients and they were both awake and wanted to thank me. I checked on them and they're both awake," says Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter: "They were all smiles and they thanked me."
 Any clash/crash you can walk away from could have been worse. I felt bad that I hadn't been able to do more, I thought I was lucky to walk away . Any clash or crash could've been worse, any clash could have had worse.
 I spent the next 4 days giving Rachel, Marilyn and Elle a quick first aid course in advanced first aid . I spent 4 days teaching them how to use first aid.
 It was akin to the CLS training but we didn't have the time to do any more. We didn't want to do more. It was like training but it wasn't the time we had to do so much more .
 I intended to use Marilyn and Elle for the next battle and have Rachel stand by and thaw plasma as needed . I wanted to have Rachel and Marilyn in the middle of the battle . Rachel was intended to be a backup for Marilyn . Rachel stood by and was able to thaw
 It turned out that the Sheriff saw to it that the event had NO media coverage . The Sheriff was responsible for the media coverage.
 Several of our targets had been eliminated before we were ready to move on, says Martin Jolie . That helped and by the time we were . We were able to get back to the top of the Premier League, Jolie says .
 "It was bigger than we could handle by ourselves. That left us only one community that we knew of and it was bigger," she said . "We were only one of those communities that left us alone," she added .
 Gunny called the Sheriff and told him where we were going and wanted to know what he could do to help us . The Sheriff was able to help Gunny and his wife .
 The Sheriff wanted to get specific, exactly what did we have in the way of weapons, people and munitions . He wanted to know exactly what we had in the area .
 Gunny laid it all out and later said he could hear the Sheriff had near panic in his voice . Gunny said he heard the Sheriff's voice and could hear him in a panic voice .
 "He sort of assumed we had a couple of old WW II machineguns, not 2 mortars, and 7 machineguns," he said . He said .
 "Our wives will supply medical support, 2 in the field and 2 in our medical facility such that it is. such a case such as it is," says President Obama .
 June went to Alpine and replaced what we used last time, replacing what we had last time . June replaced what she replaced last time with new medical supplies . June says she's not sure what supplies she needs to replace .
 We'd brought them and when we arrived at the park the next day, we set one up as a medical tent . The next day we set them up as an emergency tent .
 "Our Tejanos supplied folding cots and the gals and I moved our equipment into the tent," says the author . "We were able to sleep in the tent and put our equipment on the ground"
 We used 4 cots set on blocks as examination tables and had our supplies set up and ready to go . We used cots to sit on blocks on examination tables .
 I had one retired doctor and the same Paramedic to help me in our little MASH unit . "We had a retired doctor, the same paramedic, help me," he says . "MASH unit" was a "little MASH" unit .
 I didn't know the details of the plan and didn't care; this was the Battle of the Alamo, in reverse . "This was the battle of Alamo in reverse," says the author of the book .
 The closest I'd come to hearing something like that was in the Army during training. "We weren't that far away, we heard everything," he says . "The closest thing I'd ever heard was in training," he adds .
 Presidio doesn't have a hospital and has depended on the Big Bend Regional Hospital in Alpine for medical care . The hospital is located in Alpine, Colorado, and is a state-run version of the town .
 Many of our allies were Tejanos and I hadn't met them all. We couldn't really tell anyway, many of them were Tejans . "We couldn't tell anyway," he said .
 "We had 2 choppers available for evac, a Blackhawk and the Brewster County Sheriff's. Sheriff's's. We had 2 helicopters available, we were able to evacuate," says sheriff .
 The tags have 4 places to identify the condition of the patient if you have triage tags . Triage tags can be used to identify a patient's condition . The tags can also be used for triage purposes .
 Black no care needed; Red life threatening injuries; Yellow non-life threatening injuries . Green minor injury is considered serious and serious .
 The first responder can tear off the lower sections of the tag, leaving the bottom strip reflecting the patient's condition, provided they remembered to tag them in the first place .
 The next stage is transportation to a frontline care facility, like what we had set up . The next step is to transport to frontline care facilities, such as a frontline facility .
 Red were treated if a doctor was available, otherwise stabilized and transported to the hospital . Red were also treated if they were stable enough .
 'If a person should be Red and you tag them as Yellow, they may go from Yellow to Black' 'I cannot under emphasize the importance of getting the triage part right,' she says .
 "We began to run low on supplies. I'm sure you can speculate about what happened," she says . "We ran low supplies," she adds . "I'm not sure what happened to me," she said .
 When they brought Dan in, he was wearing a Yellow tag, I'm surprised he even let them bring him in . I let the Paramedic treat him, I couldn't although I sure wanted to . I'm not sure if I wanted to treat him .
 Phase one was to secure the border crossing and that went off without a hitch . Phase one went through with the secure border crossing, but phase one went off with a hitch, officials say .
 The Ma Deuce and both mortars were set up to prevent the many thousands of Mexicans from crossing the border from Ojinaga, Chihuahua, Mexico .
 In phase two, the attacks on the northwest and southeast sections of Presidio were launched simultaneously following the previous plan of infiltrating first . The attacks were carried out in the northwest, southeast and northwest sections .
 "That lasted nearly 24 hours, not the quick and decisive campaign of the last time," says Obama . Obama's victory in the White House would be the first time since 2008 .
 "Nobody's dead and none of you needed to be transported. All four of you made it to our tent, but nobody's dead," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 You shouldn't see many patients from the other side; I heard our Tejanos say the order was ningun cuarto, no quarter . You should be able to see many of your patients from other side, he says .
 Rachel lost it completely and Marilyn was the one who had to treat Gunny and Tom . Marilyn had to be the one to treat them .
 "We ran out of supplies and had to airlift in more plasma and IV solutions," says Dan . Dan, Dan, says he's been in the hospital for more than a week .
 Our antibiotics are gone although Big Bend Regional is trying to find us replacements sometime in the next 3-4 weeks . Big Bend regional is looking for replacements .
 We're in good condition as far as our supplies go, except for the meds and you said you have them by the time we're healed up . We're not sure if they'll be able to use them again, but they'll need them for the next few days .
 "I couldn't tell June that you could take the man out of the Army, but not the soldier out of a man," she said . "I'm not sure if you can't take the Army out of your own life," she added .
 Marines say, once a Marine, always, always a Marine . "I was sure Gunny and Hank would agree with me," he said . "Once a Marine ... Marines say," he added .
 "We were just waiting until we were off the meds. Come to think of it, I think we 4 old soldiers needed a few drinks too," she said .
 Juan had taken a bullet in his right leg, severing the femoral artery and shattering his femur . Juan had been hit by a bullet that severed the artery and shattered the femur in his leg .
 The doctor at the hospital said it would take weeks to heal and he'd need physical therapy . The doctor said he would need to undergo physical therapy for his injuries .
 According to Manny, out of our 36 men, we had 2 dead, Juan seriously wounded and several more that would be back in fighting trim is about 3-4 weeks . Juan seriously injured, according to Manny . Manny: "Several more would be returning to fighting trim"
 This trip we intended to see the Country because last time we were too busy dodging our Tejanos and getting ready to fight a war with Mexico . This trip is the first time we have seen the country since last year .
 "If there hadn't been those people trying to get into the Park, the only shots fired would have been on the practice range. We did, if there weren't, we did, we would have had shots fired on the range . We did .
 Gunny's wound was high and it didn't affect his ability to sit a saddle . A friend had talked about how nice the Park was and thankfully Gunny was able to ride again .
 Rather than have a Ranger try to seize our guns, we only carried concealed . Rather than having a Ranger tried to seize their guns, the only weapons carried were concealed .
 It was just a short ride from the ranch to the Park and the Country was both rugged and beautiful . The Park was just short of the ranch and a short drive to the park .
 We cooked steaks every night to improve our men's supply of red corpuscles and help them heal . We cook steaks in order to improve their men's health .
 When they couldn't ride anymore, they went fishing and the other girls went fishing . The other girls and I saddled up and returned to the Park. We saddled them up and rode together .
 There are lots of forged documents floating around and the government has lost most of its records . The government is losing control of most of the documents it has ever recorded .
 People of Hispanic origin may be of any race and should answer the question on race by marking one or more race categories shown on the questionnaire . White, Black or African American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander .
 Most Tejano are Mexican Indians in terms of ethnicity and originally spoke Spanish as a first language and learned English as a second language . Tejana is a Spanish-speaking group of Mexican Indians who speak Spanish and English .
 Some people with Hispanic surnames don't even speak Spanish . Over the years, that has changed to the point where some people don't speak Spanish. Some people have Spanish surnames .
 The population of Ochiltree County was about % Hispanic before all of the recent illegal immigration . The population was about . percent Hispanic before . the recent . illegal immigration.
 I called John and asked them to arm themselves and meet us in Perryton, West Yorkshire . I called him to arm himself and asked him to meet us, he said .
 He wanted to know how it went and I explained how everyone had managed to get shot or otherwise injured, like Dan . Dan. "I explained that everyone had got shot or injured," he said . Dan was injured in the shooting, but he was able to get back to the hospital
 They had ethanol produced for both the bourbon and E85 and were processing soybean oil into biodiesel . Most of the biodiesel was sold, most of which was sold .
 "I suggested they just bring submachine guns, the MP5K-PDWs," he says . "We weren't up against that many people and had enough heavy weapons," he adds .
 Remaining antibiotics finally came in about the time everyone was healed up enough to head home . The remaining antibiotics were finally coming in at the time .
 "We got ourselves around, settled our bill with the ranch and headed to Alpine to pick up Juan."
 We self-insured, if you know what that means, there wasn't such a thing as a healthcare policy anymore anymore . We self insured, it was self-insurance, it's not a health insurance policy anymore .
 "They told me I could get physical therapy in Garden City at the hospital there," she says . "I can't wait to see if you want to see you in the hospital," she adds .
 Once the cast is off it will take 4-6 weeks for my femur to regain its strength . They said once the cast was off it took four-six weeks to regain strength .
 Rachel was ok at the moment and there hadn't been any reemergence of her chronic lymphocytic leukemia . The doctor said she was still in stage 0. Rachel is still in the stage 0 .
 I think I was developing an ulcer and began to take Prevacid and or Nexium, whichever was handy, and took Pepcid AC when that didn't do the trick . I think that's how I started taking Prevacid .
 If we were going to hook up with the boys in Perryton on Black Friday, we didn't have much choice . It was a good time for the boys to go to Perryton, West Australia .
 A headline in the UK Guardian once said, Hope for the best, expect the worst. A headline from the same newspaper said, 'Expect the worst'
 "If you do that, it doesn't much matter what happens, you'll probably get through it," she says . "If I'm going through it, I'll probably be through it. If I'm not, I'm probably getting through it" she says.
 "Way back in the beginning, that was the philosophy my first husband, Randy, had," she says . She says. "That was a philosophy that was ... that was Randy, Randy," she recalls .
 It turned out to be a good thing, however, when we got the bird flu, the pneumonic plague and the war came . The bird flu was a good time for us, but the war was a bad thing, he says .
 He didn't live to see Yellowstone erupt and by that time there were too many people to shelter in the underground shelter . "By that time, there were so many people," he says .
 Kansas is about mid-Country so we didn't get the terribly heavy snowfall that Nebraska and the Dakotas did . We didn't see the same much snowfall as Nebraska .
 We were nearly back to normal but the growing seasons in North Dakota were still pretty short . The growing seasons are still short in the state of North Dakota .
 It was becoming a real challenge to farm and provide for our own security and farm at the same time . The farm is now a national network of farms across the world .
 We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves .
 A gun is a tool, the same as a hoe or a rake, it's just used for a different purpose, as in primarily for killing living animals be they human or other . It's the same thing as a rake or hoe, but not a gun .
 The bad guy is the human holding the gun and using it to do something he or she shouldn't . Very few guns pull their own triggers, the bad guy pulls the gun .
 England tried to keep their law enforcement officers, the Bobbies, disarmed for a very long time . The Bobbies were disarmed by the British government .
 By 2000, armed police on the beat have been introduced to the British mainland for the first time . Not any more .
 Nottinghamshire police to arm officers patrolling two inner-city housing estates . Decision breaks one of the longest standing traditions of unarmed Bobbies on the beat . Officers patrolling two housing estates will be armed with weapons .
 The world is changing and you folks on the other side of the pond best change with it. Dumb questions, the world is going to change .
 The Department oversees enforcement of criminal laws, serves civil process and operates the 32-bed county jail . The county jail is located in the county .
 Communications center dispatches officers from the Texas Department of Public Safety as well as Texas Parks . Texas Parks and Texas Parks officials are dispatched to the scene .
 Perryton has ten uniformed officers to enforce state and local laws around the clock throughout the city . The Perryton Police Department has 10 uniformed police officers .
 We'll come down from Perryton, Perryton a few at a time and spread out through the town and find the illegals. We'll go to Perryton to find them. We're going to search for them. They're looking for illegal immigrants in Perryton .
 It was unlawful for CCW permit holders to openly display firearms . It was also unlawful for those who have CCW permits to openly show firearms .
 8 of us showed up armed to the teeth with our Colt revolvers . There was some concern voiced. Needless to say when we showed up, there was no doubt .
 If the station attendant had been paying attention, he'd have noticed that our latigos were loose . The station attendant was paying attention to the fact that the station attendants were there .
 If the mere presence of the 'Colts' alarmed him, that would have made him pee his pants . The mere presence would have been enough for him to be alarmed .
 The counterman looked like he was going to rub a hole clean through the counter in the one spot he kept cleaning . He kept cleaning the counterman out of the one place he was cleaning .
 People came in, but nobody left, it reminded me of Hotel California, You can check out anytime you like, but you can never leave . People came into the building, but there were no people leaving .
 A sheriff's car from Ochiltree County Sheriffs Department pulled into town and who should get out but Dan and Jeremy, looking a whole lot like feds, got out of the car looking like feds . The couple was arrested and charged with federal crimes .
 Before they were even out of the patrol car, a black bread company type van pulled in looking just like a SWAT vehicle . The incident happened in the early hours of Monday morning .
 About 10 agents poured out of the back, most wearing Kearny County Deputy badges . Most of the agents were Kearny Deputy badges from Kearny .
 Jeremy yelled out INS and it appeared that some people in Farnsworth believed him . Jeremy yelled "I'm going crazy" at the scene .
 'Our guys looked impressive dressed as they were and carrying those MP5K-PDWs, if I hadn't known better, I've have been impressed too. Our guys looked . well-dressed, they looked impressive, and I've been impressed, says author .
 I'm sure the fellas holding the town hostage must have thought someone had tipped the Sheriff off and he'd brought in the feds, which wasn't all that far from from the impression Manny wanted to create .
 We finished our sandwiches, left money on the table and walked outside to watch . We finished their sandwiches and walked out of the room to watch the show .
 Farnsworth is located in Farnsworth, along with Farnsworth County roads . There are 3 roads out of Farnsworth . Route 15 and route 15 northeast and southwest .
 The sight of 10 feds in body armor suggested that if they resisted, they'd end up dead . I assume they realized this and the sight of them in body armour suggested they'd be dead .
 "We didn't need our cover any longer. Gunny and Manny began to question them," says Manny . "They began to look at them, and they began to be suspicious of each other again."
 I didn't see it but Gunny must have very persuasive or perhaps it was Manny . Manny Pacquiao was the star of the show in New York City .
 The feds rounded up the remaining men using the info provided by the prisoners they questioned . While we Kansas vacationers guarded the prisoners, the federal government rounded them up .
 The entire Sheriff's Department and some of the Perryton cops were cuffing the prisoners and herding them into the patrol cars and the SWAT van .
 The owner of the cafe came out and refunded our money, saying lunch was on the house . The owner also refunded us a refund of our money .
 It must have taken 40 minutes from the time we hit town and no shots were fired . "No shots fired. It must take 40 minutes to get to town," she says .
 Our 1 st and 3rd outings had lasted about 7 months and had involved Tejanos and us . Our 1st and 3st outings had . lasted about . 7 months . The 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th outings were in the same place .
 In the process we'd made quite an impression and more than a few friends . We'd made a lot of friends and made quite a few .
 Border Patrol has not made much of a dent in the problem, but then, neither had the Border Patrol . It had been very rewarding but hadn't made a dent . The border patrol has not been able to find the problem .
 "We were a private group and we had an advantage, no embedded reporters. We were ... not embedded reporters," she says .
 Thanksgiving was rescheduled for the following week and everyone on the farms came . Everyone on the farm came for the first time .
 Every morning a person gets out of bed, life begins all over and although you never know what life's going to bring you that day, we never felt more ready for whatever it was coming next .
 Local law enforcement authorities were consistent in saying no comment . When called upon to identify us, local law enforcement said no comment.
 Don't tell anyone who we are so they couldn't track us down and target us. That had had had been our only request, don't tell people who we were. That was the only request . Don't reveal who you are to anyone so they can't be tracked down and
 "The generosity of the American people had long been recognized, we weren't in it for the glory," he says . "We weren't just helping some friends. We were just helping our friends," he adds .
 Dan set the case on the kitchen table and the Sheriff responded by laying down 12 $20 gold certificates . The Sheriff laid down 12 gold certificates on Dan's kitchen table . Dan: "It's a good day for Dan to get his hands on the case"
 We weren't sure what to wear so we dressed up a bit and attended the next City Council meeting . We dressed up to attend the next meeting .
 The community has provided food and garden spaces for many years . They have steadfastly aided the Sheriff's Department in helping maintain law and order .
 In recognition of those accomplishments, Kearny County and the City of Lakin will reissue their reserve Deputy Sheriff's credentials and issue them the appropriate firearms . The firearms are courtesy of the Federal Emergency Management Agency .
 After being sworn, we were presented with Certificates of Appreciation, our same old badges and cases contain the MP5s and the H&K handguns .
 We expected the identification cards to be stamped 'Retired' but they weren't . We expected them to be marked 'retired' - but they were not . We were surprised to find they were actually retired .
 There had to be a hook, there always is; however, whatever it was, it wasn't apparent . There had been a hook there, but it was not apparent .
 The Sheriff explained that he'd gotten a call from the Sheriff of Ochiltree County to thank the Sheriff for sending the 2 Deputies and Reserve Deputies to deal with a problem that had slipped his notice . The Sheriff said he'd received a call to the Sheriff to thank him
 Our Sheriff got all of the details because he hadn't heard anything about the event .
 MP5K-PDWs collected from FEMA collecting dust collecting dust . Pride eventually replaced his initial anger and he had those captured from FEMA .
 He had gotten together with the County Commissioners and this was what they had worked out . The County Commissioners had to work out a deal with him .
 The Tejanos were now residents of Kansas, have them stop by the office and pick up Reserve Deputy badges and their special equipment .
 The military hardware we'd picked up had better keep a low profile and only appear if National Guard troops were around, unless we had proof of ownership . That would put us in violation of Kansas law .
 When Jim completed Paramedic training in the spring of 2023, they came home and he went to work in Garden City . Jim completed his training in 2023 and is now a paramedic .
 When he had time, I began to complete his training by teaching him use of our old equipment . He began to teach him how to use his old equipment, including some of the equipment .
 "From then on I'd cover the farms when he was working and he'd cover them the rest of the time. From then on, he would cover them again and again," he said .
 We'd had a few of the MP5K-PDWs, and now we had enough to allow us all to play fed . The MP5P-PDW was the first time we'd been able to play with a group of friends .
 Deputies had checked them out for target practice before they went down to Texas . Apparent Dan and Jeremy and our other Reserve Deputies were checking them out before they left Texas .
 Santa Anna made the rules at the Battle of the Alamo, we just followed them . The battle was fought in Texas, but Santa Anna ruled it out of the fight .
 Mexico and Venezuela still angry with us and would be until Chavez unelected himself . It wasn't going to happen, not with Russia and China supplying Mexico and China . Chavez was not going to be unelected .
 If you read any newspaper from 2006, most of what we've experienced could easily have been predicted . Most of what happened in 2006 could easily be predicted, say experts .
 Nostradamus' prediction was a prediction of a prophecy that could be looked back to see if it came true . Then, we could look back and pick which prediction came true, just like Nostradams did . We could then look back to pick which predictions came true.
 George's popularity was down to 31% and falling, which is 31% higher than is was in some homes in California . George was 31% high in California, according to some homes .
 The Air Force had limited its attacks to a small area just south of the border .
 The military was all deployed in the Southwest and from El Paso to Los Angeles they were forcing the Mexicans back across the border . The Mexican military was deployed to the Southwest .
 Anyone of Mexican heritage was carefully screened in a detention camp . Once citizenship was established, they were released with an apology . Anyone who had Mexican heritage were carefully screened .
 Some of the supporters of La Raza and NOA were American citizens . There was, nonetheless, a backlash . Some of those who supported the groups were American .
 Temporary Visas and Work Permits were cancelled and the holders were transported to the border and forced to return home . Temporary visas and work permits were cancelled . The holders were taken from the border to return to the country .
 The fence paid for by taxpayers didn't extend the full length of the border, hence people like us were covering the open areas . The fence was built in 2007, but it was never extended to the full border .
 The Minuteman Organization incensed over the death of Jim Gilchrest weren't taking prisoners . The group was incensed by the death, and the bodybuilder was found dead .
 This had been the reason for our second trip to Texas; illegal aliens were seizing towns . This was the second time we had traveled to Texas to see where illegal aliens had seized towns .
 The southern tier of states had very liberal gun laws . With few exceptions, southern states have very liberal laws . The South has a history of gun laws, including stricter laws .
 "During our free time during the summer of '23, we made plans concerning defense of our farms," says the author of the book, "Farms of Liberty"
 In the summer with the extra gardeners, we didn't believe that would be difficult, whereas during the winter with just the folks on the farms it was a different situation . In the winter, it's been difficult to find a way to get out of the garden .
 "Not one we hadn't dealt with in the past, but we weren't going the mere route again," he said . "We were going to deal with it," he added . "It's not the first time we've dealt with this kind of thing," he later said .
 "Why should we, with our hired hands and our Tejanos, our force was nearly the size of our previous security force. Why should we?" asks the Spanish president .
 By now everyone on the farms was battle seasoned with the exception of some of the wives . By now, everyone had been battle seasoned, including some of their wives .
 Tom determined the sizes and quantities we needed and reached for the phone . Tom decided the sizes of the quantities and quantities needed .
 By the time the harvest was in, we were ready for anything but an attack with tanks or nuclear weapons . We were ready to anything but a fight with tanks and nuclear weapons, says the author .
 The girls and the wives of the wives organized the wives into a force we call The Amazons, allowing us to overcome one problem that couldn't be addressed in any other way, the machismo of the Latin male . The girls, the wives and the girls and I had organized
 Rachel was out of the loop because, she was too unpredictable and she was put in charge of protecting the children . Rachel was not in the loop as she was 'too unpredictable'
 "She and the children would use our underground shelter, getting the kids and grandkids out of the way," she says . She and her family would use the underground shelter . "She would use it to get her kids out of harm's way. She and the grandkids would use
 The only difference between a Latin male and a non-Latin male is the label the used, with Latin's, it's machismo, with non's it's chauvinism . With Latin's Machismo, it means machismo . With non-Latino's it means chau
 Yellowstone had put out as much ash as it could have, according to the author . Yellowstone had not put out ash as much as possible, the author says . "I think that related directly to the fact that Yellowstone had . put out . out of the ash," he says .
 June, Marilyn and Elle got together and formed a group they called the Amazons . June and Marilyn formed the group together . Marilyn, Elle and Marilyn were the group they formed together . Elle was one of three sisters to raise the world's tallest women .
 Although the Amazons were largely myth, there was ample evidence of female soldiers throughout history . There was plenty of evidence of women soldiers throughout the world .
 The MP5K-PDWs and the Ml 6s were among the weapons chosen by the British government .
 They became proficient in both bows and arrows . They then started to use their own arrows and bows and bows .
 Juan, who was about 95% recovered and used a cane, said this went against tradition but with their wives now wearing the M9s, he and most of his comrades were reluctant to say much to the women .
 I told him to get used to it, women had been wearing the pants in Anglo families for years, she said . She said: "I told him he had to accept it. Women had been in the pants for years."
 He said he'd heard rumors that La Raza was trying to organize some of the Latinos in Garden City .
 Some of us thought that was why the Sheriff had created such a large body of Reserves . I explained that some of us . thought that . was why . the Sheriff . had created . such a body of . Reserves.
 In times gone by, the Sheriff's office typically had maybe 30 Reserve Deputies and only used them for special events, usually directing traffic . The Sheriff's Office typically used them to direct traffic .
 "Our fighting force was large, consisting of 36 Tejanos and 36 Tejano Amazons," says the queen . "We were able to defeat the enemy, but we were not able to destroy them"
 There were 8 of us, make that 7, and Rachel was going to watch the kids . Rachel was watching the kids. There were the 8 of them . Rachel and Rachel were going to be together again .
 There was Jason and Karen, Karen, plus 2 hired hands and their wives on each farm . There were also hired hands, and 2 wives, at each farm.
 The soybeans were converted to biodiesel and meal, some of the corn became alcohol for E85 and bourbon . "We had a total of 90 acres of gardens and canned a fair amount of produce," she says .
 We were all but energy independent, purchasing only propane, a little gas to blend E85 and coal when we could get it . We purchased propane for propane and blended E85 with coal when it could be blended .
 With our wells we could irrigate in dry years and don't forget the livestock . With our well we could . irrigate our livestock, we would be able to irrigate them .
 Horse sales were improving now that peoples' tractors began to wear out . Horse sales improved now that people's tractors are worn out, says owner .
 Yellowstone erupted before she got the purchase made . About the only thing we didn't have was June's fire engine, June's Fire Engine .
 June found a used pumper from the same place she found the engine 5 years before . June found the pumper in the same spot where she found a pumper 5 years ago .
 We'll run the truck through the diesel repair place in Garden City and get the fuel tanks cleaned so we can use biodiesel . The truck will be using biodiesel for the next few weeks .
 I suppose we could pull the metal posts and insert them in the top of the barrier and re-string the barbed wire . I suppose . We could pull metal posts  insert them into the top . The metal posts could be pulled into the barrier, re-stung .
 The Sheriff never had more than 30 reserves at any one time until recently . The Sheriff's office has 30 reserves of at least 30 reserves .
 "A lot of the folks in the area know how productive our 3 farms are and how we've built large herds of livestock," says owner of the farm . "We're going to build a lot of our own livestock," he says of his farm .
 "In a way, our farms are almost completely independent of the community as a whole," says the farmer . The farms are 'almost completely independent' from the community, he says .
 When Dan came to me with the idea about merging the three farms and three corporations into one, I smelled his breath to make sure he hadn't been drinking . Dan came up with idea of merging farms, three corporations and three companies .
 "I expected some resistance on their part, but Jim had spent a year in Topeka and he was surprisingly unopposed," he says . "Jim" had spent more than a year on the job in Kansas .
 I explained that it would only have a marginal effect on our income because the other 2 farms also had outside sources of income . The other farms also have outside income sources .
 Jason suggested that we give Jason a 10% share and he could manage all 3 farms . Jason has been in charge of all three farms since 2008 .
 "I called Marilyn and Rachel filled them in on the suggestion. When they agreed, I called Marilyn, Rachel and Rachel," she said . "When they agreed to the suggestion, they filled in on it," she wrote .
 They said they'd talk to their kids and if everyone agreed they'd let me know and we could have a meeting, I said . The parents said they would talk to each other if they agreed to do so .
 Perhaps if we merged, we could consolidate our operations, after all we didn't really need 3 separate cheese operations . Perhaps if you merged, you could consolidate your cheese operations, perhaps .
 I should also point out that we kept an eye on the bulletin boards in town and whenever we saw some something we could use, like another freezer, etc. we bought it if it worked ok . We kept a close eye on bulletin boards and when we saw something new, we bought
 Something like pinto beans will keep forever, but you have to soak longer because they dry out unless you seal them in plastic bags, which we didn't . Pinto beans can keep forever if you soak them longer than if you use plastic bags to seal them .
 We didn't have a lot of the rolls of seal-a-meal bags left and I hadn't seen them in the store for a long time . The rolls were left, and we didn't see them again for a time in the past .
 In fact I was surprised we could get toilet paper, but that was one of the first manufacturing plants reopened . In fact, I'm surprised we can still buy toilet paper from that plant .
 Randy rolled up the barbed and woven wire and stored it too . "I think there's probably enough to do that," he says of the wire .
 In the process, we'd gained about 10 acres of land, or would, by converting the 2 roads back to farm use . The two roads were converted to farm land . The road was converted to farmland .
 We'd gain plenty of extra steel posts and fence wire . And, by eliminating one the 2 fences at the end of 2 sections, we'd gain lots of extra posts .
 MPR Ranch Ranch would be its own little kingdom away from the daily strife besetting the Country . MPR ranch would be a "little kingdom" away from daily strife in the country .
 We decided that we'd have Tom contact everyone he knew in any branch of the service and see what he could do about getting some pedestal mounts and more of the machineguns . Tom contacted everyone he knows to see if he could get more of them .
 Rather than try to acquire Mk 19s, we'd buy LAW rockets, if we could get them . We'd buy them if we were able to get them, if possible .
 The project was dropped in 2007 . Only developmental models were available, anyway... .
 To handle the project, we'd get a construction loan from the bank and then pay it off once the barrier wall is completed . The project would be completed once the wall was completed .
 We figured to follow along behind behind the contractor by about a month and put up one roll of pig wire and 3 stands of barbed wire . We're going to follow behind behind by a month .
 A 7' high concrete and wire barrier sure would slow anyone down who decided they wanted on the farm . There really isn't anything such a . impenetrable barrier, but a 7' tall concrete and . wire barrier would slow down anyone .
 You can pull out fence a whole lot faster than you can put it in and we started our people on the project immediately . The project will be completed by the end of 2018 .
 They were pulling the steel fence posts and the wood posts and coiling the wire . The fence posts were pulled together by the team .
 We figured to cut up the wood posts for our furnaces; the creosote was well leeched out . We decided to cut the posts up to be used for furnaces .
 The weather was actually agreeable and they were making good progress . Generally concrete isn't something you pour during the winter, but the weather is actually agreeable .
 "They nearly caught up with our guys and they had to hurry. So much so that they almost caught up to our guys," she said . "So much so they nearly caught pace of our guys"
 While they wouldn't stop a tank or a bulldozer, they would stop a semi-tractor . They wouldn't be stopped by tanks or bulldozers, but they would be able to pull over a semi .
 Being married into this family had introduced me to what seemed to be an endless cycle . Being married to this family introduced me into what seemed like a cycle .
 Best must have taken a wrong turn in Albuquerque and got lost . We'd prepare for the worst and hope for the best, but best must have gotten lost .
 Tom said he'd try to get more of the medium and heavy machine guns, but he wasn't too sure he could pull it off . Most of the fellas he knew in the Army had retired; most of them had retired .
 Pedestals could be manufactured right here in town, we had one that the machine shop could use for a pattern . The machine shop was able to use the pattern to make the pedals . Pedestal could be made right in town .
 The military had intended to replace the Mark 19s with the M307 . While there weren't any of the 307s available, nor could we afford the ammo, the Mark19s were a different story .
 Only one type of ammo was available, the M430 cartridges . They cost us about 10 ounces of gold each and only one kind of ammo available .
 The HEDP M430 cartridge, joined with M16A2 links, is the standard round for the MK 19 . The MK 19 is the first round of its own .
 The impact-type round penetrates 2 inches of steel armor at 0-degree obliquity and inflicts personnel casualties in the target area . The impact type rounds penetrate two inches of . steel armor .
 It arms between 18 to 30 meters and has a casualty radius of 15 meters . It arms up to 18-30 meters and is armed between 18 and 30 meters long .
 Two of the Mark 19s were mounted on the two Hummers that already had the gun mounts cut out of the roofs . The gun mounts were cut out from the roofs of the Hummers .
 The Ma Deuces weren't hard to get, the military had never really fully replaced them with the M312s . The military has never fully replaced the Ma Deucels with the military's M312 .
 The M240 was still in inventory and we bought 6 more of those, the B models . The B models were still in stock and were still being held in inventory .
 We had about 8 too many of the M249s, they worked good until they jammed and then they were just exactly what Semper Fi said they were, a piece of chit . The M249's worked good but then they jammed .
 The M72 LAW was phased out in favor of the Ml 36, AT-4 during Iraqi Freedom . The new weapons were found to be too cumbersome in MOUT operations and re-introduced the LAW rocket .
 The standard issue was 2 rockets per person with extras being carried in the pickups . We had enough of those so we had to carry more than 2 rockets .
 We wouldn't be up against tanks if we were attacked and a LAW rocket could destroy the average vehicle. We would be able to fight tanks if they were attacked . We would have to be prepared to take on tanks, not tanks, if we attacked .
 "We just put in a median barrier all the way around the 3 farms and added the fence on top of it. We just put it in the median barrier ... and added it onto the top of the fence."
 "It won't stop a tank, but I don't believe we're going to have to go up against those," says the Welshman .
 "We upgraded a bit and now have 8 of them plus a total of 10 of the .30 caliber machine guns," he says .
 There are two ways to look at it, assume you can buy what you need when trouble comes or buy it before and hope you never have to use it . The best way to get ready for trouble is to buy it when it comes to trouble comes .
 An H-1 Alpha Hummer would maintain patrols around the farm 24/7, commencing the summer of '23 .
 AMC stopped building the H-1 after the 2006 model year and converted the production line to building the military vehicles . AMC stopped making the old models after 2006 . The production line was converted to building military vehicles instead .
 These 2 vehicles were special; they were transitional vehicles and had the military diesel engine and electrical system and therefore the correct voltage for regular SINCGARS radios . The vehicles had military diesel engines and electrical systems . They were special vehicles with military diesel .
 Used military vehicles were on the market, but they were nearly worn out . The vehicles were found in the U.S. National Guard .
 We bid on 12 of them at a government auction, brought them back to Garden City and had them completely rebuilt . The Ma Deuces have been installed in Garden City after they were bought by the government .
 Military HMMWVs aren't available to the public because they don't meet DOT standards for road vehicles, thus the complete rebuild to make them road legal . The military vehicles aren't currently available for the public .
 "Of course, you know who was driving the Hummers, our wives," he says . "We old war dogs were manning the machine guns," he adds . War dogs were also manning machine guns, he said .
 Even Rachel, it seemed unlikely we actually have to shoot the guns . Even Rachel .
 The United States may have stopped the Mexican Army dead in its tracks, but they didn't stop the Mexicans . The U.S. stopped the Mexicans, but not the Mexicans. The Mexican Army is still fighting in Mexico .
 Digitalized tiger stripe using four soft earth tones consisting of tan, grey, green, green and blue colors . The tiger stripe was created by a team of four men and women .
 Even the Navy went to a new BDU in 2008, but its colors were modified to reflect the water environment . The new colors reflect the changing environment of the water .
 In 2011, the military changed to MultiCam and none of its uniforms reflected the change . The military changed its uniforms in 2011, but none of the uniforms were changed .
 SFC Randy Shughart was armed with an Ml 4 rifle when he and MSGT Gary Gordon were dropped in to protect the crew of the 2nd Blackhawk Down . The two men were armed with a rifle when they were dropped into the area .
 He wasn't responsible for the M9, which was a Congressionally-directed NonDevelopmental Initiative to standardize DOD with NATO and field one handgun for all United States armed services .
 The matching pistol, the Px4 Storm, is 9mm and 40S&W only . Unfortunately, the matching pistol doesn't come with a matching pistol .
 The bad guys never come when you expect them, they almost always come when they aren't ready, hence the patrols . The bad guy never comes when you are ready, so patrols are necessary .
 Guard duty on holiday duty can get lonely . Guard duty can be lonely, but it's a good thing for the public .
 Patrols were roving on Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and even Christmas Day . Troops kept it up .
 It wasn't that long ago that we got back from Texas; and then I realized it had been over a year. God, where did the time go it wasn't a long ago?
 $1,478,400 at $35 per lineal foot of block not counting the foundation; and, that was only a 6' high wall . The cost of the wall was $1.478,000 at $350 per foot .
 The median only cost us about $500,000 in round numbers, but we did most of the work . The contractor only moved his slip form machine that he used to pour a continuous median . The median is a continuous, continuous median, with a median of about four feet wide .
 If the state had put it in, it probably would have cost $10 million a mile, he says . "You know how the government is, 4 workers with 3 leaning on shovels. You know how government is," he adds .
 "We patrolled inside the wall and kept the gates closed, except during the summer," says the former guard .
 We had 8 gates, a front and back gate for each of the old farms plus a north and south end gate . We had a total of 8 gates for each farm .
 Garden City, Lakin and MPR Ranch hadn't been attacked . Garden City was beginning to feel foolish, probably because Garden City and Lakin weren't being attacked .
 Every time someone comes up with a better solution, somebody else came up with an alternative, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Every time someone has a better idea, somebody has a new idea"
 'They've talked about taking back their Country since about 1966 when they formed the Brown Beret Movement. I don't really know, they've talked to take back their country since 1966,' he says . 'I'm not sure what I'm going to say, but I'm sure
 La Raza Mexicana is a term which Mexicans commonly use to denote mestizo (mixed European and Native Indian) ancestry . La raza means "mestizo" or "mixedEuropean and NativeIndian"
 The term La Raza has also been adopted by members of other countries to recognize Hispanic heritage as one single race . Outside of Mexico, the term has been used to recognize the Hispanic heritage of the United States .
 Santa Anna ceded Texas and Mexico ceded Arizona, California, Nevada, Utah and portions of New Mexico and Colorado in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo .
 We bought the remainder of New Mexico and Arizona with the Gadsden Purchase for $10 million . The remainder of Arizona and New Mexico were purchased for $20 million .
 "We didn't of course and now we were sporadically fighting with Hispanic guerillas," she says . "Now we didn't, of course ... We didn't ... of course"
 They hadn't hit Kansas because they hadn't defeated Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, Arizona and California . The team hadn't won in Kansas because it hadn't beaten Texas and New Mexico .
 If they ever did, we'd end up in a pitched battle trying to save our farms . "I told Gunny we'd probably be running patrols until we died," he says . "We'd probably run patrols until they died," Gunny says .
 New Mexico was the 47th state and Arizona the 48th . Arizona was admitted to the union in January and February of 1912 . New Mexico became New Mexico's 47st state in 1912 .
 We all took a week off while the fields were plowed and readied for them when they turned to farming with the Clydesdales again .
 The governments of Mexico and Venezuela were hatching a plot to take advantage of the U.S. Gulf of Mexico . Meanwhile, down Mexico way, and across the Gulf from Louisiana, the governments of Venezuela and Mexico were plotting a plot .
 They were shipping it to Russia and Nationalist China, in ex671 change for modern weapons and munitions . The weapons were being shipped to Russia, China and Russia .
 The United States was not far away from getting a dose of its own medicine . The U.S. is not far from getting the United States to get its own .
 Mexico had raised an Army of 2 million this time and Venezuela had turned its oil into a powerful navy . Mexico raised 2 million troops this time, but Venezuela had raised more than 2 million . Venezuela's oil industry has turned into an oil industry powerhouse .
 That hot fiery Latin tempter had been replaced by a coolly reasoned plan . That fiery Latin temter was replaced by coolly rational plan .
 Venezuela wasn't as populous as Mexico and couldn't raise a fighting force of near the size of Mexico's . Venezuela's military isn't as large as Mexico's, but it has a reputation for being a strong force force .
 Mexico supplied the FX-05 rifles, Russia the ships and China the electronics . Russia supplied the ships, China supplied the electronics and the rifles .
 The ships they bought included 6 newly constructed Kirov class cruisers, 18 new constructed Sovremenny class destroyers and 18 of the Gepard class frigates . The ships included 18 newly constructed ships and 18 new ships .
 Mexico replaced the downed fighter aircraft with more of the same and got the Chinese to teach them fighter tactics . Mexico replaced them with more than the same fighter aircraft .
 Russia also sold them a fleet of new AN-12 Cubs, their equivalent to our C-130s . Russia also also sold the C130s to the UK .
 Russian hadn't built any Cubs since the '70s . They were slightly improved; Russian had never built any since . The Cubs were slightly better .
 Russia's diesel electric subs were magnificent, especially using modern technology . Russia's submarines were built in the 1970s and 1980s .
 All of the construction was ongoing while the United States considered it appropriate to nuke Mexico . The U.S. considered the construction ongoing while it was considered appropriate .
 Satellite photos show Mexico building massive hangers and a new port facility for the military . Satellite photos showed Mexico building huge hangers, new port facilities for military .
 Mexico and Venezuela are making military preparations for the upcoming elections . Mexico's military preparations were not unnoticed by the two countries .
 Congress had continued to cut back on the acquisition of aircraft and slowed other programs like the conversion of the Ml A2 Abrams . The United States was in a very difficult position, the military had been cut, another peace dividend, and faced with massive devastation from first the war and later
 F-35s are only building enough to replace retiring aircraft and no more of the costly F-22 Raptor . The F35s will replace retiring planes and the F22 Raptors, the U.S. says .
 We only built 16 of the Virginia class submarines; the last one was started in 2009 . The last Virginia class submarine was built in 2007 .
 No new reactors had been licensed in several years and when licenses expired, they weren't renewed . No new reactor licenses have been renewed .
 Substantial portions of the U.S. supply of clean coal were buried by Yellowstone and we lacked the manufacturing capacity to build solar. Substantial amounts of solar power were buried in Yellowstone and the United States lacked manufacturing capacity .
 A significant portion of the U.S. electrical supply is now generated by wind turbines and natural gas supplied plants . Wind turbines are now a significant part of the United States electrical supply .
 The only supply of gasoline generally available was E85 and it was expensive . It was the only supply available in the U.S.
 Diesel fuel had generally been replaced by biodiesel but there weren't many cars on the roads these days . Diesel fuel was replaced in favour of biodiesel fuel, but there were fewer cars than usual .
 Anything that couldn't be converted to diesel or E85 probably didn't get driven unless the owner had money to burn . Gasoline remained in the $10 a gallon range .
 We weren't the breadbasket of the world any longer; we were doing good to feed ourselves. "We weren't going to be breadbaskets any longer," he said . "We're doing good, feed ourselves," he added .
 We had all those Nimitz class carriers, the Ford under construction, Guided Missile Cruisers and Destroyers . We had Guided missile Cruisers, Destroyers and submarines .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says the U.S. has the world's worst nuclear weapons . He says the country's nuclear weapons made people fear and hate us . Sutter: "It was the thing that really made people hate us, our nuclear weapons"
 We'd now used them 3 times, against Japan, against the People's Republic of China and against Mexico . We'd used them three times, including against Japan and against China, before Mexico .
 If anything good had come out of what had happened in the 21st Century, it could be said that we quit trying to export Democracy . The UK should not have tried to export democracy, says David Cameron .
 "We kept our Navy close to their home ports and didn't rush off every time someone else in the world had a problem," says President Obama . The U.S. Navy has been criticized for being too slow to respond to the crisis in recent years .
 "We had enough on our plate with La Raza and NOA picking away piece by piece. We had enough to do this. We're not going to let it happen," says activist Ruben Navarrette Jr.
 I have always been fond of the West African proverb Speak softly and carry a big stick; you will go far . I have also always been a fan of the idea of speaking softly and carrying a large stick .
 This is the first known use of this phrase, which became a signature motto of Roosevelt's after he used it in a speech as Vice-President at the Minnesota State Fair . Roosevelt used it as a speech at the state fair in Minnesota .
 There is a homely adage which runs: Speak softly and carry a big stick; you will go far . There is an adage that runs: "Speak softly, carry a stick"
 If the U.S. will speak softly and yet build and keep at a pitch of highest training a thoroughly efficient Navy, it will go far .
 Any Country whose people conduct themselves well can count upon our hearty friendship . Any country that conducts its people well will be able to count upon friendship .
 If a nation shows that it knows how to act with reasonable efficiency and decency in social and political matters, the U.S. needs no interference from the United States. If it keeps order and pays its obligations, it need fear no interference, he says .
 The Monroe Doctrine may force the United States, however reluctantly, to the exercise of an international police power .
 In the first place we should insist that if an immigrant who comes here in good faith becomes an American and assimilates himself to us, he shall be treated on an exact equality with everyone else . It is an outrage to discriminate against any such man because of creed, or birthplace, or
 Any man who says he is an American, but something else also, isn't an American at all, says Obama . Obama: "Any man who claims to be an American but also something else is not an American"
 "We have room for but one language here, and that is the English language," says President Obama . "It's a loyalty to the American people," he says .
 No man is above the law and no man is below it, nor do we ask any man's permission when we require him to obey it . No man can be below the law, nor can be above it, says the author of the book .
 If Lincoln had lived in a time of peace, no one would have known his name . If there is not a war, you don't get the great general, you get a great statesman . Lincoln's name would not have been known if he lived in peace, he says .
 The military had been in constant flux, Reagan built it up and Clinton tore it down . The military is now in a state of flux, and the U.S. military is in the midst of a crisis .
 The Defense Department had this concept they called the Objective Force Warrior . The concept was created by the Department of Defense .
 The bottom line was they wanted to turn every soldier into a computer console running the Windows operating system . "The bottom line is that they wanted every soldier to be part of a computer system," said the Pentagon .
 He'd have a gun to shoot around corners, a TV screen to watch movies when there wasn't much fighting and about 10 rounds of ammo . He'd also have a TV, gun and ammo .
 "With all the junk he'd be carrying, he couldn't carry much more than that," says the author of the book . "It's a good thing for him to be able to carry," he says .
 That $85 ACU would be replaced by a fancy suit that had microclimate controls . The suit would cost $85 and would have microclimate control .
 A 25mm cannon and a 5.56mm kinetic force weapon were wanted by the U.S. Army to give the commander a weapon that could be used in combat . They wanted to give him the weapon that was a cannon .
 "The government got it into it into its head that combat casualties were unacceptable," says the government . The government got into it in the head that it was unacceptable, he says .
 During WW II, the total was about 61 million fatalities and didn't take into account the 3 million Indians who died due to famine in 1943 . The total of 61 million people died in WW II was 61 million . During WW I, the death toll was about 60 million .
 During 8 years of Vietnam, the U.S. lost about 58,000 soldiers, sailors, Marines and airmen . During the war, the United States lost more than 60,000 troops .
 "We were fighting the same enemy, insurgents, freedom fighters or whatever they called themselves," he says . "I think that was an improvement over Vietnam," he adds. "I was in many cases fighting ... insurgents"
 "Our fatalities may have been lower if our weapons killed with one shot," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Our weapons may have killed with just one shot. Our fatalities may be lower," he says .
 They could make them in their United States plant along with USP Tactical's . They could also be made in the United States .
 H&K still made a 7.62x51 mm rifle that with lightening could make a respectable main battle rifle . With lightening, the rifle could be a respectable weapon for the army .
 Roller locked accuracy reaches its full potential in the MSG90A1 sniper rifle . In the tradition of the G3 automatic rifle, roller locked accuracy can be achieved with the G1 sniper .
 MSG90A1 is capable of minute of angle accuracy, combined with the best features found on the PSG1, only with less weight, a removable scope platform, and open sights for field expediency .
 At only 14 lbs, the MSG90A1 is also a lower cost alternative to the PSG1, with no compromise on accuracy or reliability . At only only 14lbs, the only 14lb version is a lower-cost alternative .
 Springfield Armory couldn't keep up with demand as it was. And, bless their hearts, it was . Springfield Armory can't keep pace with demand .
 On the morning of August 6, 2024, Tom and Elle were on patrol and we were baling hay . Tom was on patrol with Elle in the spring of 2024 .
 I told Julia I'd appreciate it if she could bring us a cold drink around 10am. Julia asked Julia to bring it to us for a drink at 10am .
 "We shut down the engine on the baler and I could see her riding this way, about a quarter mile off," she says . "She rode this way," she said .
 The weapon fires about one round a second and we generally used short bursts of 4-6 rounds . The weapon fired about one shot a second .
 There was no mistaking the sound of Tom firing the machinegun or the return fire from the AK-47s . Tom fired machinegun and returned fire from return fire . Tom was killed by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 John and John began to un-harness the horses from the south gate . I yelled Red Alert south gate into my radio into my . radio and John and . John and I began to . unharness horses . The horses were unharmed by John's crew .
 In the time it took us to get to the gate, people had piled into to the surplus Hummers and made it there ahead of us . People piled into the Hummers to make it to the gates .
 Dragon Skin doesn't protect your face and you couldn't recognize them if you hadn't known who they were . The Dragon Skin is available for $99.99 .
 John and I loaded the bodies in the back of a pickup and we took them back to Mom's house . The bodies were loaded into the back seat of the pickup and taken to the house .
 3 Hummer's, one going west on the road, one east and a second east and the third straight ahead . They roared out the gate with 3 Hummers . One of the Hummers was going west .
 We left the bloody Hummer sit, the Sheriff would probably want to examine it . We left it sitting in the Hummer, it was bloody and bloody .
 We'll run tire tracks but they might not mean a lot unless we know what kind of vehicle they were on . The tire tracks will be used to test tire sizes of vehicles in the future .
 Gunny, Dan and Hank might have been warriors once, but that was going on 20 years ago . Gunny and Dan were warriors once . Dan, Dan, Hank were warriors .
 Juan was younger, but crippled, and more often he drove and let Satina man the gun . Satina was Juan's wife, Juan was also crippled, but he was able to drive with Satina . Juan and Satina were married at the time .
 All were in their 60s excluding Juan and Salina, Salina and Hank . Hank wasn't much good to anyone because of Rachel. "Rachel" was Rachel's friend .
 We decided to have a dinner in the large Quonset hut that doubled as a school and a shelter . It was the first time we had been able to give them all the bad news .
 These were top ranking NCOs and we hoped they'd understand our decision . We hoped they would understand their decision, but they didn't .
 "They bought the Hummers in the name of the corporation and collectively, collectively, we held a majority of the voting stock. If they didn't, that was just too bad, they bought Hummers," she said . "We held a . majority of voting stock," she added
 "We've talked it over and all of you are in your 60s, and a bit slower than when you were in your prime," says Bob Greene . "We're talking about it. We've talked about it over. We're in our 60s and we're in your
 I think what happened to Tom and Elle should make that clear . I think it should be clear, and I'm not happy with it . I'm very sorry for what happened. I think that's not the case. I'm sure it's the case of Elle and Tom
 The Sheriff recommended doubling our patrols until this business is over . The Sheriff said doubling patrols will be necessary until the business ends .
 If fighting does break out, it's for young men and women while the more experienced among the group handling staff duties . None of us want to seem ungrateful .
 "They put their own spin on what we told them and there was nothing we could say to change their attitudes," says police chief . "There were no words to change our attitudes," he says .
 Tom was dead too and to tell the truth, Hank might as well be, he spent all of his time with Rachel . Tom was also dead too . Hank spent most of his life with Rachel.
 Every day, they got their fishing tackle around a left early in the morning . The fishing community was inspired by a group of young men in their youth .
 We harvested the soybeans and corn and the ladies put up the potatoes . We harvested soybeans, corn and soybeans . The potatoes were put up .
 "I can't once remember them bringing home any fish they caught. Sometimes they took Mom and Marilyn and I can't remember them catching fish," she says .
 Dan's answer was ambiguous at best; a sucker could be a fish or a gullible person . Dan's answers to the question were ambiguous, but it's not clear what a sucker is .
 It would make more sense for them to have a machinegun if they were fishing for men, he says . It would be more common to use a machine gun than a gun, he adds .
 The compromise satisfied no one, though it was a sharp embarrassment for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because the withdrawal of American missiles was not made public . The withdrawal of U.S. missiles was never made public.
 This was considered by John F Kennedy but cooler heads prevailed . He used his patience to his advantage and ran a successful quarantine on Cuba .
 Massive Mexican buildup, La Raza and NOA raising hell and Russia backing the whole thing with a threat to use nuclear weapons . Massive Mexican buildup, Russian threat of use of nukes .
 I wonder who wrote the script, Robert A Heinlein, Isaac Asimov or Arthur C Clarke . I wonder if the script was written by Asimov and Clarke .
 "No one knew for sure, all we could do was fight the fight that came our way. Because no one knew . No one knew what was going to happen, all they could do is fight it . All we knew was that we would have to fight it, and that we
 You didn't know your grandfather when he was your age, but he knew you and remembered you . He knew your grandfather's age, and he remembered your age . He remembered you and your grandmother's age .
 People never really change as a whole and what our father's did we'll end up doing, eventually. What our father did, eventually, is what we'll do, eventually . People never change, people say, and people never change their behavior .
 Our once proud nation was a shambles what with the pandemic, the war, Yellowstone and yet another war . Our nation was once a proud nation, but now it's a mess .
 Apocalypse, you saw the Country disassemble itself, but that was Mother Nature taking her revenge, or something. Apocalypse . Apocalypse . Or something. Mother Nature took her revenge .
 We maintained a 2 vehicle patrol, one carrying an Mk 19 and the other a Ma Deuce, one of the vehicles . We also maintained a two-vehicle patrol .
 Gunny and I weren't having much luck, there were too many vehicles to check . We started to write down license numbers of the vehicles we eliminated . Gunny says he and Gunny were trying to find the vehicles they eliminated .
 June set up a spreadsheet that sorted the license numbers to help us out . It was quite a job and June set it up to help .
 I meant sucker as in gullible human being, but maybe that wasn't the right word . "I'm a sucker as a gullible person," she says .
 "Stupid, would be more correct, but I didn't know any fish by that name," he says . "I'm not sure what fish I'm calling it, but it's a fish," he adds .
 The only reason whoever did this thing got away with it was because the Sheriff didn't have time to check the tires on 3,000 motor vehicles . "The only reason" got away was because of the Sheriff's lack of time, he says . The Sheriff's office says it was
 We were guessing, we didn't know how many vehicles were actually running or if the perps were actually from Kearny County . We were hoping to find out how many cars were running or not running .
 We eventually exhausted our search of Kearny County . We flipped a coin to see if we'd go to Hamilton or Finney County . Hamilton County is Hamilton County .
 We've checked all of Kearny County and nearly done with Hamilton County . We've also checked out Kearny and Hamilton counties in New Jersey .
 He said he would have joined us sooner, had he not had to switch houses with Ray . Ray said he wanted to join him sooner, but he had to change houses .
 Ray immediately set out to put in a bomb shelter next to the big house that was the same as the shelter Randy and June built . Ray set out in the same shelter that was built by the couple .
 The United States would try to call Russia's bluff, which made one wonder if Russia was really bluffing . I can only guess what he was thinking, maybe that the U.S. would call it bluff .
 "Our forces were at DEFCON 2, which was only a heartbeat away from launch," says NASA. "We were only seconds from launch. Our forces were in the right place to launch"
 JFK wasn't bluffing and neither were the Russians now. JFK was not bluffing. It was better to die free than live in slavery, JFK said .
 Add the license numbers of all vehicles you eliminate to it and June will update it tonight . Add your license numbers to the list .
 When we found the second vehicle, the Sheriff said, could be but, keep looking . The Sheriff said it could be a second vehicle but keep looking.
 CSI is able to find tracks where a vehicle turned and compute the wheelbase of a vehicle . Sometimes, a CSI finds tracks where the vehicle turned .
 We kept looking and only found one more vehicle with the same tires, another Yukon . The Yukon was found in a different Yukon with the tires .
 We felt vindicated until the Sheriff told us that the owners of the vehicles had iron tight alibis . The Sheriff said they had iron-tight alibas. We felt .
 The vehicle owners, all 3 of them, had alibis, but indicated that their SUVs had been parked and could have been used by someone else .
 The Kansas Bureau of Investigation was brought in and took impressions of the tires on all 3 vehicles . They got a match to the car belonging to the wife of the GCPD officer .
 The evidence was a small cut in the right rear tire and they had the vehicle but not the perpetrator . Police say they had a vehicle but did not know the driver or suspect .
 KBI couldn't find fingerprints, cigarette butts or even a gum wrapper . All of the vehicles had been cleaned several times by the carwash to wash them off and clean the interior .
 We got the bourbon bottled and distributed and the new batch in the barrels . The bourbon is now being bottled, distributed and a new batch is in barrels .
 All of the biodiesel tanks are full up and we're keeping 10,000 gallons of virgin oil in reserve . "We're not going to run out of our biodiesel tankers, we're going to use our virgin oil," says the owner .
 When the Sheriff shows up for another case of bourbon, only charge him $25 . Oh, by the way, when the Sheriff showed up for a case of whiskey, only $25. The Sheriff is charged with $25 per case .
 'Rachel wouldn't allow it, but the same couldn't be said for our other Marine. He hadn't cussed a lot, Rachel wouldn't be allowed it, she wouldn't say it,' she said . 'Rachel won't let him cuss a lot. He hasn't
 The older he got, the more Gunny cussed, almost as if the cussing made up for his advancing age . The older Gunny got older, he said, 'almost as if he was making up for age'
 "Some of the muscle had turned to flab and his eyes lost their flexibility," he said . Some of the muscles had turned into flab, and some of the eyes had lost flexibility .
 A $25,000 reward is being offered for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the people responsible to killing Tom and Elle . The couple was found dead in their home in October .
 Ray need an air filter and blast valves but the internet address he had for Utah Shelter Systems didn't work . Ray needs to buy a new air filter, blast valves, but an internet address for the company is not working .
 Their waiting period for a complete shelter was now over a year but they'd ship parts right away . The waiting period was now more than a year for the shelter to be complete .
 Gunny and Marilyn finally had a shelter, they'd move all the supplies out of the shelter Paul had built and they only thing they lacked was the air filter . The only thing the couple lacked is the filter .
 At this point we didn't know if the U.S. would succumb to Russia's threat and it was better to be prepared than to wish you were . At this time, we were better to prepare than wish we were .
 The Japanese hadn't attacked and the United States wasn't at war with anyone . The U.S. wasn't in war with Japan at the time of the attack .
 In 1941, no one had nuclear weapons or airplanes that could reach the U.S. mainland . They must have realized that it was just a matter of time, but in 1941, they had no nuclear weapons .
 Intercontinental missiles existed only in the mind of Wernher von Braun . The first intercontinental missile was launched in the 1950s in the early 1950s .
 Germany never succeeded in developing nuclear weapons although some claim the Japanese did . They didn't begin the A-4 rocket program until 1942 and didn't develop nuclear weapons until 1942 .
 Wolfgang Hirschfeld was radioman on U-109 under Korvettenkapitan Hans-Georg Fischer and then under Kapitanleutnant Heinrich Bleichrodt . Operation Paukenschlag, or Drumbeat, was part of the late phases of the operation .
 At the end of the war, he was Oberfunkmeister aboard U-234, the converted Type X-B mine-layer on her way to Tokyo . In her belly was a vast array of highly secret people and materiel . The U.234 was a converted Type
 Personnel aboard included a General der Luftwaffe who was to take over LuftWaffe liaison duties in Tokyo . A Naval Fleet Judge Advocate to try cases of German traitors in Japan was also aboard .
 Japan test fired their first nuclear device a week before the U.S. did . Unknown to most, Japan test fire their first nuke device . The Americans test fired theirs .
 Japan merely lacked the fissionable material to make the bomb and U-234 was bringing it to the Empire . The bomb was brought in by the U.E. Japan .
 The Zippe-Type centrifuge is now the easiest way to make fuel for reactors as well as weapons of terrifying power .
 In his first ever broadcast interview he tells BBC how he was kidnapped soon after the end of WWII and held prisoner in the Soviet Union . He was ordered to find an easy way of producing uranium's rare U-235 isotope .
 He was freed by the Soviets only for the Americans to order him to repeat the process for their benefit . Having done as he was asked he was freed from the Soviets, he was ordered to repeat his actions .
 Pakistani government sold secrets of Zippe-Type on to North Korea and Iran allowing them to develop their nuclear industry .
 Another German scientist sold his plans to Saddam Hussein who used them as the basis for his attempt to acquire the bomb . Saddam Hussein used them to try and get a bomb .
 Zippe remained philosophical about the chaos his invention had caused around the globe . He was philosophical about his invention .
 "I overheard Jim and some of the others talking and they seem to think we have some of kind of manifest destiny," says Bob Greene . Greene . "We have a kind of Manifest destiny," he says .
 Manifest Destiny is the belief that the U.S. had a mission to expand, spreading its form of democracy and freedom . Now, technically, that's Manifest Destiny . The U.N. had to expand to spread democracy, freedom .
 Manifest Destiny was a political catch phrase of the 19th century . It was often used as a synonym for the territorial expansion of the United States across North America .
 "That understanding of the term probably got us to the position we're in," says President Obama . "We're in a position that's very difficult to define," says Obama .
 When I joined the Army, even before the turn of the century, it was the fulfillment of all of my boyish hopes and dreams . When I join the Army I was a boyish boyish dreamer, I wanted to be a soldier .
 "I now close my military career and just fade away, an old soldier who tried to do his duty as God gave him the light to see that duty," he says .
 "No human being could fail to be deeply moved by such a tribute as this," he says . "It is coming from a profession I have served so long and a people I have loved so well"
 "This award is not intended primarily for a personality, but to symbolize a great moral code" "The code of conduct and chivalry of those who guard this beloved land of culture and ancient descent"
 "For all eyes and for all time, it is an expression of the ethics of the American soldier," says President Obama . For all eyes, for all . time, the soldier's actions should be seen as an example of American values .
 That I should be integrated in this way with so noble an ideal arouses a sense of pride and yet of humility which will be with me always . That . I should . be integrated, I will always be proud of my achievements, I said .
 They are your rallying point to build courage when courage seems to fail, to regain faith when there seems to be little cause for faith, to create hope when hope becomes forlorn . They are also a rallying point for courage, courage and hope .
 I possess neither that eloquence of diction, that poetry of imagination, nor that brilliance of metaphor to tell you all that they mean. Unhappily, I possess none that eloquency of diction or imagination to tell .
 The unbelievers will say they are but words, but a slogan, but also a flamboyant phrase . The unbeliever will say that they are not but words but words .
 Every pedant, every demagogue, every cynic, every hypocrite, every troublemaker, and, I am sorry to say, some others of an entirely different character, will try to downgrade them even to the extent of mockery and ridicule .
 "They mold you for your future roles as the custodians of the nation's defense," says President Obama . They mold you into a nation's custodians, says Obama .
 They make you strong enough to know when you are weak, and brave enough to face yourself when you're afraid . They also give you strength to be brave and strong .
 They give you a temperate will, a quality of imagination, a vigor of the emotions, a freshness of the deep springs of life . They also give you courage over timidity, an appetite for adventure over love of ease .
 "They create in your heart the sense of wonder, the unfailing hope of what next, and the joy and inspiration of life," says author .
 "My estimate of him was formed on the battlefields many, many years ago, and has never changed," he said . "I'm not sure what I think of him, but he's a great fighter," he added .
 I regarded him then, as I regard him now, as one of the world's noblest figures, as well as the most stainless . He regarded him as 'one of the finest military characters, but also as the stainlessest stainless character'
 In his youth and strength, his love and loyalty, he gave all that mortality can give . He gave all he could give, including his love, loyalty .
 "He has written his own history and written it in red on his enemy's breast," says President Obama .
 When I think of his patience under adversity, of his courage under fire, and of his modesty in victory, I am filled with an emotion of admiration I cannot put into words . But when . I am . filled with . admiration I can't put into . words. But when I
 "He belongs to history as furnishing one of the greatest examples of successful patriotism," he said .
 "He belongs to posterity as the instructor of future generations in the principles of liberty and freedom," says President Obama .
 "He belongs to the present, to us, by his virtues and by his achievements," he said . He said. He belongs to us by virtue and achievements .
 In twenty campaigns, on a hundred battlefields, around a thousand campfires, I have witnessed that enduring fortitude, that patriotic self-abnegation, and that invincible determination which have carved his statue in the hearts of his people . In 20 campaigns, I have witnessed
 "From one end of the world to the other, he has drained deep the chalice of courage," he said . "He has drained the chchalice," he added .
 As I listened to those songs of the glee club, I could see those staggering columns of the First World War, bending under soggy packs on many a weary march, from dripping dusk to drizzling dawn .
 "I do not know the dignity of their birth, but I do know the glory of their death," says the author of the book .
 They died unquestioning, uncomplaining, with faith in their hearts, and on their lips, the hope that we would go on to victory . The soldiers died unquestionably unquestionable and uncomplained .
 "Always their blood, and sweat, and tears, as they saw the way and the light," she said .
 Twenty years after, against the filth of dirty foxholes, the stench of ghostly trenches, the slime of dripping dugouts, those boiling suns of the relentless heat, those torrential rains of devastating storms, the loneliness and utter desolation of jungle trails, the bitterness
 The code which those words perpetuate embraces the highest moral laws and will stand the test of any ethics or philosophies ever promulgated for the uplift of mankind . The code will stand by any ethics .
 Its requirements are for the things that are right, and its restraints are from the wrong . Its restraints are not from the people that are wrong, it's from people who are wrong .
 "The soldier, above all other men, is required to practice the greatest act of religious training sacrifice," says the author of the book .
 "In battle and in the face of danger and death, he discloses those divine attributes which his Maker gave when he created man in his own image," he says .
 "No physical courage and no brute instinct can take the place of the Divine help which alone can sustain him," says President Obama . "The Divine help alone can sustained him," he says .
 The soldier who is called upon to offer and to give his life for his country is the noblest development of mankind . However horrible the incidents of war may be, the soldier who offers and gives his life is the most noble .
 The thrust into outer space of the satellite, spheres and missiles marked the beginning of another epoch in the long story of mankind, the chapter of the space age .
 In the three or more billion years of development of the human race, there has never been a greater, a more abrupt or staggering evolution . In the five or more billions of years the scientists tell us it has taken to form the earth, the scientists say us .
 "We deal now not with things of this world alone, but with the illimitable distances and as yet unfathomed mysteries of the universe," says the author of the book . We deal now with things that are beyond this world and beyond .
 "Your mission remains fixed, determined, inviolable. And through all this welter of change, development, development your mission is fixed" "The mission of the U.S. remains fixed and determined," says the author .
 "Everything else in your professional career is but corollary to this vital dedication. Everything else else is . Everything else in . your professional . career is . corollory to this . dedication. The dedication to your profession is a vital part of your life .
 All other public purpose, all other public projects, will find others for their accomplishments, but you are the ones who are trained to fight . "All other public needs, great or small," says President Obama, "will find other accomplishments"
 Yours is the profession of arms, the will to win, the sure knowledge that in war there is no substitute for victory . If you lose, the Nation will be destroyed, the very obsession of your public service must be Duty, Honor, Country .
 Others will debate the controversial issues, national and international, which divide men's minds . The debate will be held in New York City, New York .
 "For a century and a half you have defended, guarded and protected its hallowed traditions of liberty and freedom, of right and justice," says President Obama . For a century-and-a-half you have protected your country from harm .
 Let civilian voices argue the merits or demerits of our processes of government . Let civilians debate the merits of our government processes, let civilian voices debate it .
 Whether our strength is being sapped by deficit financing indulging too long, by federal paternalism grown too mighty, by power groups grown too arrogant, by politics grown too corrupt, by crime grown too rampant, by morals grown too low, by taxes grown too high, by extremists grown
 "These great national problems are not for your professional participation or military solution," says President Obama . President Obama has been criticized for his handling of the country's national security crisis .
 "You are the leaven which binds together the entire fabric of our national system of defense," says President Obama . You are the 'leaven' of the nation's national security, Obama says .
 From your ranks come the great captains who hold the Nation's destiny in their hands the moment the war tocsin sounds . The nation's destiny is in the hands of those who hold it at the moment of war .
 The soldier above all other people prays for peace, for he must suffer and bear the deepest wounds and scars of war . On the contrary, the soldier, above all others, prays .
 Their memory is one of wondrous beauty, watered by tears and coaxed and caressed by the smiles of yesterday . Their memory will be remembered as one of the most beautiful in the world .
 I listen then, but with thirsty ear, for the witching melody of faint bugles blowing reveille, of far drums beating the long roll . I listen to it with a thirsty ear .
 "In my dreams I hear again the crash of guns, the rattle of musketry, the strange, mournful mutter of the battlefield. In my dreams, I hear ... the crash, rattle and the rumble of guns."
 "I want you to know that when I cross the river, my last conscious thoughts will be of the Corps, and the Corps," he says . "I'm not sure if I'm going to leave the Army, but I'm sure I'll stay in the Army forever," he
 Patton cultivated a flashy, distinctive image in the belief that this would motivate his troops . Patton deliberately cultivated a distinctive image to motivate his soldiers . Patton's image was a big success for the American Army in the early 1900s .
 He was usually seen wearing a highly polished helmet, riding pants, revolver (a Colt .45 and later the addition of .357 Smith and Wesson), and high cavalry boots .
 American soldiers respected Patton as a general and as a soldier because he inspired patriotic feeling . His image and character appeared well-suited to the conditions of battle, he said .
 His theatrics were admired by many, so much so that upon his death upwards of 20,000 soldiers volunteered to be pall bearers at his funeral . Upon his death over 20,00 soldiers volunteered for his funeral.
 It didn't come to blows, for all of MacArthur's medals . Gunny was a Chesty Puller fan and I liked Patton Patton, he says .
 The only thing wrong with the list is it omits names, like Leonidas I . We can't include any heroes from the Trojan War, because it could just be a Myth . The only problem is that the list omits any names .
 Oh foreigner, give a message to the Lacedaemonians that here lie we, their words obeying. Oh foreigner .
 I'm sure a few cases of some kind of 7.62x51 mm ammo and some .45ACP that fell from the truck fell off the truck . I'm not sure how much of the ammo fell off .
 The TOW 2 weapon system is composed of a reusable launcher, missile guidance set, and sight system . The weapon system has been deployed in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 The base hosts a variety of fighter/attack and airlift units from the reserve components of the Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force . The base is under the oversight of the Commander Naval Air Reserve Forces .
 Airfield operating procedures and equipment reflect a combination of service requirements . Don imposes Navy procedures as the operations standard for the base base .
 Careful monitoring of all patients regardless of the condition being treated is needed, they say . Careful monitors are needed for all patients including the patients being treated .
 We were waiting at the Lakin airport with a semi when the C-130J-30 landed . The plane landed in Lakin, Texas, on a mission to the U.S.
 Top said they had a lot of pallets for what Top described they had with them . Top described the pallets as "pallets" for what they said they were carrying .
 The moment Top cleared the ramp, it was being folded up into the tail of the plane . They began to restart the outboard engines on the Hercules . The Hercules was folded up in the tail .
 The weapons came from the Army, including a pair of Mk-19's, several Ma Deuces and M240s . The weapons were supplied by a friend who had contacts in supply in supply .
 "We returned to the farm and Hank and Marilyn were there and introductions were made all around . Hank, Marilyn and Hank were there for the first time .
 Cynthia, 'call me Cindy', was anxious to see their new home and lunch was a hurried affair . Cynthia and Cindy's new home was the first time they had been together together . Cynthia was eager to see her new home .
 Marilyn and June had apparently cleaned out Tom and Elle's personal things from the house . Someone had restocked everything from Tom and June's personal items from the home . Marilyn said someone had also cleaned out everything .
 The girls started putting things away and we took Top on a tour of the farm . The girls were putting away and Top was putting away his belongings .
 He was generally impressed with our state of preparations, but pointed out that the fence wouldn't stop a determined opponent . He was impressed with the state-of-the-art preparation, but said the fence won't stop him .
 There is 7.62mm, 5.56mm, .45ACP, 9mm, and belted ammo for your machineguns in all 4 calibers .
 They were supposed to go to Hawthorne to be dismantled but there was nothing wrong with them and I diverted a few of them . "There were nothing wrong" with them," says the mayor of Hawthorne .
 There aren't enough Claymores to protect your entire perimeter, but there are a few of those . There are a lot of Claymore fans .
 Our electricity is provided by that big wind turbine, it has a 2mw capacity . The wind turbine has a capacity of around 2mmw .
 "I was going to object when Dan and Gunny presented the Corporation with a bill for $2 million for additional arms until I found out what we got for the money," says President Obama .
 TOW missiles cost the military about $8. million alone, not counting the 6 tripods . TOW missile cost the U.S. military about .
 Top explained how over a period of years things came up short in shipments, but strangely, never over . Top explained that it was never over. Top said that over a series of years the shipments were coming up short .
 He had a private storage bin in Barstow practically crammed to the roof with things he'd gathered . He had private storage bins in his home in the town of Barstowe .
 He explained that when a friend would call him up and want something you could only get from the military, he could draw on his 'personal inventory' He said that when he would call up a friend he could use his personal inventory .
 Around 1925, cumshaw became a navy term for a tip or gift used to obtain illegal imports and exports by unofficial or devious means .
 In the military, cumshaw is still a slang term for materials that are misappropriated . In the U.S. military, it is still slang for misappropriating materials .
 A "cumshaw artist" is a person who is adept at getting unauthorized projects done by bartering surplus items to obtain services or goods in short supply . A person who barters surplus items by getting services from surplus items .
 $10 million worth of government only goods for $2 million . "I was satisfied that we got our money's worth," she says . "We got our . money's . worth"
 "It might be wrong to do this, but I didn't much care for the government and its employees anyway," he says . It might be illegal, but he says he doesn't like the government anyway .
 If the Mexican Army made it to Kansas, it probably meant the government wasn't doing its job of providing for the common defense . Besides, it means the government isn't doing their job, the government .
 The TOW missiles were the latest design but had been manufactured before the war . The missiles had been made before the conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 "What am I saying if the ATF showed up now, we'd just plant them and see what they grew," says President Obama . "We're not going to have to wait and wait to see what the ATF would do," he says .
 We had enough weapons we could even arm the horses, but that would require some sort of trigger adapter . We had . enough weapons to even arm . But that's not enough, we could arm horses .
 Our whiz bang technical devices weren't any better than what the Chinese built for the Mexicans, probably using American technology . The U.S. was reduced to fighting a conventional war against an enemy that was numerically superior .
 Just when we thought we'd fought them to a draw, the Venezuelan Navy showed up . The Venezuelan Navy came to the rescue .
 Russia built the ships, but the Chinese equipped them, and they were nearly equal to our Ticonderoga and Arleigh Burke classes . The Chinese equipped the ships .
 When we brought in a CSG, a Kilo class submarine silently rose from the bottom and launched 6 torpedoes at the flattop . The Kilo-class submarine was the first to launch six torpedoes .
 The Venezuelans had as many submarines as we had flattops and a one for one exchange wasn't exactly even . Venezuela had submarines as many flattops as the Venezuelans did with submarines .
 They'd approach the surface, extend their snorkels and refresh their air supply . Then they would approach the water surface to refresh their water supply . They'd also extend snorkelers and refresh air supplies .
 By the time one of our ASW units could show up, they'd swapped out the air, moved and set down on the bottom in a new position . The crew had already swapped out of the air and moved to the bottom of the ship .
 Their favorite place to hide was near our oil rigs in the Gulf, hence they didn't show up on our MAD detectors . Their love of hiding was near their oil rigs, hence not being detected by MAD .
 There were approximately 3,000 oil platforms under U.S. control in the Gulf of Mexico . The Kilos had plenty of places to hide, including some of the platforms .
 Tripods can be set up in the back of a pickup, anchor it in place and carry reloads . They didn't mean we couldn't set the tripods up in a pickup . The tripods were set up for the first time .
 The downside was it tied up 6 pickups and the upside was that we could move the TOWs wherever they were needed in just a few minutes . The upside is that we were able to move them wherever we needed in a few seconds .
 They trace their roots to Texas as far back as the Texas Revolution . They can trace them back to the 19th century . They have a long history of their roots .
 Mexicans are crossing the Rio Grande into Big Bend National Park, Texas . They wanted us to help them prevent them from crossing the border into the park .
 Hank and Gunny have done most of the training so our forces are more Marines than Army Infantry . The Marines are now more than the Army's infantry force .
 "It's sort of a requirement that they be able to protect themselves. Over the years we've had an incursion or two," she says . "Over the years, it's been a requirement," she adds .
 Nearly every adult on the farm has a Reserve Deputy position . The farm is home to two boys who are Sheriff's Deputies .
 "If the Sheriff called us all up, the farm would basically be unprotected," he says . The farm would be basically unprotected, he says.
 The C-130J modification includes a two-crew member flight station, upgraded Allison AE 2100D3 engines, enhanced performance, and improved reliability and maintainability . The modification includes two crew members and upgraded engines .
 The C-130J/J-30 integrated digital technology provides the capability to airdrop in instrument conditions without zone markers, as a baseline feature of the aircraft . The aircraft is equipped with a range of digital technology .
 C-130J/J-30 provides single-ship or formation all weather aerial delivery . APN-241 Low Power Color Radar is coupled with the dual INS/GPS and digital mapping systems .
 This means the entire J/J-30 fleet will be all weather airdrop capable . This means it will be able to fly in all weather conditions .
 C-130Js will be delivered as weather , electronic combat . combat . and tanker configured aircraft . They will be used as weather, electronic combat and tanker . aircraft . The C130Js are expected to be delivered in 2015 .
 With its 3,000 nautical mile range, increased speed, and air refueling capability, it complements the C-5/C-17 airlift team . The plane has increased speed and increased speed .
 The J-30 can work in the strategic, as well as tactical or intratheater, environment . It can be used in a strategic, tactical, or intraterater environment .
 "No longer is necessary to expend scarce heavy lift resources on strategic contingency requirements," says the U.S. State Department .
 This situation could result in ZEBRA being set slower than had the ship been at material condition YOKE before the emergency . The emergency could mean the ship was set slower . This situation may result in the ship being in material condition again .
 Large ships should therefore consider this when changing material condition . Large ships will need to consider this consideration .
 The Gerald R Ford CVN78, John F Kennedy CVN79 and the Enterprise CVN80 were commissioned by the Ford administration . They commissioned the Gerald R. Ford CVn78 and John F. Kennedy CVn79 .
 I checked what Top brought; we have explosives, detonators, and our choice of weapons . Top said: "We have explosives and detonators - and we have chosen to use them"
 That settled that, although I ended up sleeping in a guest bedroom for over a week . That settled it, although it was not the first time I had slept in the guest bedroom of the house .
 "I had no idea when Randy and I started this preparation business it would turn into what it had. Randy and Randy started this business together," she says .
 Our second husbands were career soldiers who didn't seem to realize their careers were over . They were both career soldiers and didn't realize their career was over . Their second husbands are career soldiers .
 I told her I thought the American experiment was changing, if not coming to an end, she said . She said she thought the U.S. experiment was ending, but it was changing .
 A submarine belonging to either Mexico or Venezuela had sunk one of our super carriers . A sub from either Venezuela or Mexico sank the ship, it is claimed .
 The spread of torpedoes had stitched a row of holes from the bow to the stern and the carrier didn't have a chance . The spread . spread of . torpedoes stitched . holes from bow to stern .
 "We could have nuked Mexico City and put an end to it, but the government in its infinite wisdom used tactical nukes only directly on the Mexican forces across our border," says President Obama .
 California contained the Lassa fever and the CDC supplied vaccine in time to halt the epidemic, but only after tens of thousands had died . California had contained the epidemic and the vaccine was supplied in time .
 After the war, they never rebuilt all of the factories that were destroyed . The factories were never rebuilt after the war .
 Yellowstone erupted, diverting resources away from the region . They started to rebuild some but then Yellowstone erupted . The region has been devastated by the volcano since .
 Medical supplies had become very difficult to find and if you could, they were impossibly expensive . Medical supplies were difficult to buy and expensive to buy .
 Yellowstone put many Kansas farmers out of business for good . Kansas farmers had risen to the need, but Yellowstone put them out of service .
 Almost none of the canned goods in the grocery stores were registered with the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture anymore . The department says canned goods are no longer registered with Agriculture Department .
 Most of those were in canning jars that I had acquired early on until the supply dried up . Most of the jars were bought early on, but most of them were in jars .
 ATF and Kansas Department of Revenue knew who made bourbon by now . Nobody cared, except the ATF and the state's Revenue Department . Ironically, everyone knew who bourbon made by now and nobody cared .
 It was one thing to defend the home place, but it was a different matter to go on another adventure looking for trouble . It's one thing you can defend your home place but it's one of many things you can do to defend it .
 "I let him have it with both barrels and from the phone call; Marilyn must have done the same to Gunny," says Gunny. "Marilyn's phone call must have been from Marilyn," he says .
 Maybe whoever killed them realized what they were up against when the Mk 19 started firing . The Mk 19 is the most powerful weapon in the world's arsenal of weapons .
 "June was really upset by the proposal that we go to Texas and fight," she says . "I didn't take being overruled badly, but I didn't want to take it badly," she adds .
 "I believe in my heart she got together with Marilyn and they staged a coup of sorts," she says . "I'm not surprised that Marilyn and Marilyn got together," she adds .
 At their age, Gunny and I couldn't afford to start over, and when he caved in, I gave up . At our age, he and Gunny had to start new things together, he says .
 'I spent a week in a spare bedroom. It didn't seem to matter to her, she was angry and she didn't care . She was angry . She spent the rest of her life in the spare bedroom of a spare room .
 The news on the TV wasn't good; inch by inch, the Mexican Army was seizing control of their former territories . The news was good, but the news was bad . The Mexican Army is taking control of the former territories of Mexico .
 One commentator speculated they were using an old map and wouldn't stop until they'd reclaimed every square inch of Spanish soil . One commentator speculates they may have been using a map and won't stop using it .
 The DOD released satellite photos to the media showing Russian Topol M missiles on mobile launch stands . The photos were released by the DOD .
 The media also was granted tours of Cheyenne Mountain and given access to our missile silos so they could verify we were ready to respond, if Russia launched .
 Both Lakin and Garden City were north of the dry river bed, but it helped define their boundaries . Garden City was north of Lakin .
 At the very least, the 5 miles of land between the Arkansas River and the MPR Ranch would be overrun with military personnel . The 5 miles stretch of land would likely be overrun by military .
 "When they saw our military hardware, they might make assumptions that we couldn't live with," says President Obama . "They might ... make assumptions ... that we might not live with."
 We could prove we owned the HMMWVs, but not much of the rest of the military equipment . We were able to prove that we own the weapons but not the other equipment .
 Since its inception, the Naval War College has benefited from the contributions of officers from other services assigned to Newport as faculty members and students . The college has been in Newport since its inception .
 Marine Corps has sent many of its finest leaders to learn and to teach about naval warfare . In 1886, our second class at the College included two Marine Corps officers among the students .
 The Naval War College Review is the scholarly professional journal of all three sea services . This issue's cover features Charles Waterhouse's painting of a Marine on the black sand beach of Iwo Jima . Several articles address Marine Corps topics .
 The Marines have been our brothers-in-arms since the birth of our services more than two centuries ago . The Marines are our brothers in arms since they were born in the U.S.
 "I come from a big family that included one brother a year older than I and another a year younger," says the author . He says he comes from a large family, including one year older and one year younger .
 'Even though we spent a lot of energy trying to beat the tar out of each other, we always stood together against the kids up the block or any other outsiders' 'We stood together. We always stand together against each other,' she says .
 The brotherhood of the Navy and the Marine Corps operates too. That's a pretty good description of how the brotherhood operates too .
 I was still a captain when I had been selected for flag rank . Let me recount an incident with one of my ""brother officers"" just after I had won flag rank but while I was captain .
 The FBI Academy at Quantico, Virginia, is home to the FBI Academy . CNN's John Sutter says he was late to attend a lecture at the academy .
 Passing the rifle range, I got stuck behind a car poking along at twenty-five miles per hour . Even though the speed limit signs authorized thirty-five mph, I was stuck behind the car .
 At the first stretch of dashed road-stripes, I accelerated and passed that car . At the start of the dashed road strip, I sped up and passed the car .
 "He immediately hit me with his high-beam headlights, began honking his horn, and tailgated me all the way through the gate at the FBI Academy," he says . "He tailgates me all of the way into the gate," he adds .
 When I parked, his car whipped in next to me, and a very agitated Marine major jumped out, introduced himself, and got right up in my face, chewing me out for speeding . When he parked, he introduced himself to the Marine major, who was angry with her .
 I tried to point out that I had obeyed the posted signs, but he was hearing none of that . He was angry that he had not obeyed posted signs . He said he was not breaking the law .
 I disobeyed the commanding general's written order that forbade driving faster than twenty-five miles per hour in the area of the rifle range . What particularly galled him was that I had disobeyed his written order to drive faster .
 "I'm not sure what I'm going to say about my lack of leadership and his lack of a brain. Indeed, as you might imagine, the conversation quickly went downhill into an argument about leadership and brainlessness," he said .
 It occurred to me that my brother officer's actions might be understandable if I saw them from his background, which expects everyone to know and obey orders, rules, and instructions with no exceptions or excuses . The officer's background is to expect everyone to obey orders and rules, rules with no
 Major's tenacity and insistence on high standards by someone he thought had exceeded the speed limit by ten miles per hour . While I might disagree about whether my driving had broken any rule, I had to admire the major's tenacious tenacity .
 Marines set high standards for themselves and those around them . Marines consider nothing less as acceptable as acceptable, says Sgt. John Sutter . "I like the fact that Marines set . high standards"
 Marines insist on proper salutes and happily provide lessons if a subordinate needs them . Marines always have properly fitted uniforms that they wear with great pride . Marines are very proud of their uniforms .
 Sailors don't march very well, but Marines do always because of how they are trained . Sailors often march very poorly, but the Marines do because they are always trained .
 When Marines complete basic training at Quantico, Parris Island, or San Diego, they can march, shoot, and they have a pride in themselves and the Corps that is unsurpassed anywhere in the world . The Marines are proud of themselves and their Corps .
 If there are one or two Marines who are overweight, they have been well hidden . Marines work hard at physical readiness, and if there are overweight they are well hidden, they are hidden .
 Before meeting with any outsiders, the Marines always get together, decide what their position is going to be . The Marines never break ranks in the bureaucratic battle .
 "Some people might portray this as intellectual rigidity, but I can attest to its effectiveness," he says . "I can't relate to this, but it's a good thing," he adds .
 He said he was tired of studies, so where he could he gave the answer as to what should be done . He said, 'I'm tired of studying so where I could he give the answer'
 He also named who was responsible and stipulated the date for that person to report back on how the job would be done .
 The V-22 Osprey program has had a stake driven through its heart more times than Bela Lugosi, yet it's rising out of the coffin . The program has been in the news for more than a decade .
 The enlisted troops are any service's greatest public relations asset . They knew a long time ago that the press could be enormously useful in bringing their story to the American public .
 The Marines put their people out front with all the media, where reporters and camera crews can see them in action and it pays off . So the Marines put them out front, where they can be seen by reporters and cameras .
 It is more than working hard and doing your job well all of the services do that. It's more than just working hard, it's working hard . It's important to be a good person, not just a bad person, it is a job .
 "It's a commitment to being the best, to dedicating yourself to the Corps and its ideals," he says . It's "a commitment to be the best," he adds .
 First to Fight isn't a motto but a sacred pledge . That's why there aren't any ex-Marines, and why there's not a lot of ex-patriots .
 Whether afloat or ashore, on famous battlefields or unnamed skirmish grounds, the Marines have distinguished themselves by their bravery, tenacity, love of Country, and loyalty to one another .
 Marines have made their mark in setting high standards and fighting for the truth as they have seen it . Here at the Naval War College, Marines have set high standards .
 "They have been our brothers in the quest for intellectual excellence for more than a hundred years," he says . "I am pleased to see their contributions acknowledged in this, their scholarly journal, as well," he adds .
 Right after Korea in 1953 the 1st Amphibious Reconnaissance Company, FMFPAC can be credited with the birth of ""OORAH"" in the Corps .
 Recon Marines were aboard the Submarine USS PERCH, ASSP-313 . This is where they came from when they were Recon Marines on the submarine .
 Perch was an old WWII diesel boat retrofitted to carry UDT and Amphib Recon Marines . The Perch is a small boat that can be used by the Marines .
 If you remember the old war movies, whenever the boat was to dive, you heard on the PA system, ""DIVE, DIVE"", and you heard the horn sound ""AARUGHA""", like an old Model ""A"" horn .
 In 1953 or 1954, 1 st Amphib Recon Marines, while on a conditioning run on land singing chants, someone imitated the ""Dive"" horn sound ""AARUGHA" The sound of the horn sound became a Recon Warrior chant or mantra .
 It is sort of like the martial arts yell and adds a positive inference to the action . The yell is a form of expression that adds positive infusions to the actions .
 The official Marine Corps Training Reference Manual on the history of Marine Recon is titled ""AARUGHA"", giving credence on the origination of the 'Positive Response' accenting anything that is meant to be good .
 Wolf: "Gunny, I didn't say Marines were afraid to fight, I just asked why you didn't want to go to Texas" Wolf says: "I didn't ask why you wanted to fight. I asked why?" Wolf says . Wolf says he wants to know why
 The First Sergeant and Sergeant Major ranks are command-oriented, with Marines of these ranks serving as the senior enlisted Marines in a unit . These ranks are charged to assist the commanding officer in matters of discipline, administration and the morale and welfare of the unit .
 It turns out we actually did become Platoons in the Kansas Defense Force, Seventh Infantry Battalion, Company B . Company B , 1st and 2nd Platoons .
 Top and Gunny were made 1st Lieutenants, and Hank and I Master Sergeants . Hank and Hank were made Master Sergeant . Gunny and Top were promoted to 1st and 2nd Lieutants .
 The 3rd and 4th Platoons were made up of volunteers from Lakin and Deerfield . Lakin volunteers from Deerfield and Lakin are also volunteers .
 Everyone age 18 and up was enlisted into one of the Platoons . Each Platoon had one Medic, Gunny and I had June and Top . Top and Hank had Jim. Gunny had June .
 Company B of the Seventh Battalion was responsible for the Kearny County first, the Southwestern District of Kansas, second, and the whole state, third . As Company B, we were responsible for . Kearny . County .
 Contrary to popular opinion, there is one instance where an officer salutes an enlisted man first . This is not the first time an officer has saluted an enlisted person first .
 It is bestowed for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of life, above and beyond the call of duty, in actual combat against an armed enemy force .
 For the first time since the Mexican American War, American soldiers were fighting foreign troops on American soil . Henry Timrod: Not all the darkness of the land, can hide the lifted eye and hand; Nor need the clanging conflict cease, to make Thee hear our cries .
 The 2nd Mexican American War is a continuation of the war Mexico started and we thought we had finished . Revolutionary War, War of 1812 and the Civil War, Civil War and Spanish American War are all over the world .
 Grenada, Panama and Somalia are excluded as being operations rather than wars . Grenada and Panama are excluded from the list of operations .
 The Corps was the second smallest branch of service and only the Coast Guard was smaller . One couldn't fault the Corps, it was the smallest branch in service .
 Since the founding of the United States of America, there has been a special operation's unit . The unit is based in Washington, DC .
 Rodger's Rangers fought with the British during the Colonial period . First, the Rangers fought for the British in the early 1900s .
 Mosby's Rangers fought for the South during the Civil War . Mosby was the first of the South to fight for the Union during the war . Next was Mosby and the other South Rangers .
 More than 50 years ago, the United States activated the Office of Strategic Services . It consisted of three of the military branches (Navy, Army, and Army Air Force) to help defend the country .
 USSOCOM's mission is to plan, direct and execute special operations in the conduct of the War on Terrorism in order to disrupt, defeat, and destroy terrorist networks that threaten the United States .
 It organizes, trains and equips Special Operation Forces provided to geographic combatant commanders, American ambassadors and their Country teams . The U.S. Special Forces also train and equip Special Forces .
 Since USSOCOM's creation in 1987, the Marine Corps has been an outside factor in helping it accomplish these missions . The Marine Corps was created in 1987 to help the U.S. Marine Corps .
 Marines will directly support current SOF missions and begin new missions with different purposes . Now having their own Special Forces component, Marines will support current missions . Marines will also be able to launch new missions for different purposes.
 MARSOC will train and provide a fully capable Marine Special Operation Force to USSOCOM for worldwide deployments to execute assigned missions . According to the mission statement, the force will be trained and provided a fully able force .
 The MARSOC units will be capable of task organizing as scalable, tailorable and responsive special operations units from sea based platforms as well as from United States locations . The units are expected to be able to task organizing .
 Foreign Military Training Unit will provide tailored military combat-skills training and advisor support for identified foreign forces as well as Marines and sailors . The unit will assist friendly host-nation forces to support their governments' internal security and stability, counter subversion, and reduce the risk of violence from
 The Marine Special Operations Support Group will provide combined arms planning and coordination, K-9 support, communications support, and all-source intelligence fusion capability . The group will also provide combined weapons planning, coordination and coordination .
 Each MSOB will consist of several Marine Special Operations Companies and be taskorganized with personnel uniquely skilled in special equipment support, intelligence and fire-support .
 Elements of different units, including 4th Marine Expeditionary Brigade, will transition into needed areas of MARSOC to give it a stronger foundation in its early years . Forces will transition to needed areas to give the organization a strong foundation .
 Marines have another distinction, The First to Die . Maybe I should point out that Marines are Marines .
 The American Rifleman undoubtedly belongs to the U.S. Marine Corps . The term "American Rifleman" was coined by the Marine Corps.
 The SCAR-H was issued to SOCOM, it next went to the Corps. According to Top, after SOCOM issued it, it went to SOCom . The Corps. is now the sole source of the SCARH .
 USAF was the first branch of service to adopt the Ml 6, thanks to Curtis E LeMay . USAF was first branch to adopt Ml6 in Vietnam .
 Some schools of thinking don't rule out a destruction of the Chinese military potential before the situation grows worse than it is today . That's the reason some schools of think don't ruled out a destroying of China's military potential .
 I once asked Curtis LeMay if he could get in that room, and he just gave me holy hell . Curtis gave me 'holy hell' when I asked him if he wanted to get in there .
 "If he was alive and we still had a Strategic Air Command, we wouldn't be sitting in Kansas worrying about the Mexican Army," says President Obama .
 Frank Lovejoy did the best job of portraying him in the movies, he says . Lovejoy believed that overtime the Soviet Union would mellow .
 If deterrence failed, the U.S. had to be ready to destroy the Soviet Union . Even so, American forces must be strong enough to deter Soviet aggression in Europe .
 He intended to do this not, after but before any attack on the U.S. could be launched, he said . He said .
 Eisenhower was not going to base American security on a strike from beyond the grave . This was the most important single element in Eisenhower's Cold War strategy, he says .
 Eisenhower explicitly ruled out a preventive war, but not a preemptive strike . Eisenhower ruled out preventive war but not an invasion of war .
 He began to create a strategic force capable of detecting any Soviet move toward a nuclear attack . He created the force to detect any Soviet moves toward a nuke attack .
 Once detected, it might only be possible to tell the Soviets to back down or else, but if a warning was tried and failed, or if there was not enough time to warn the Kremlin, he was going to beat the enemy to the punch .
 Any serious move toward launching a surprise attack would be interpreted as a casus belli . The U.S. has not responded to the threat of an attack on Syria .
 As the most obvious and banal, it was the dramatic device of a thousand westerns at the climax . All the bad guy has to do is reach for his gun to justify the good guy drawing quicker and shooting him dead .
 "We have got to be in the position to use that weapon. Otherwise we would not be in a position to . use the nuclear weapon," he said .
 Eisenhower was repeatedly pressed to explain what 'massive retaliation' means . Eisenhower took refuge in ambiguity, giving many people the impression he hadn't thought clearly about how nuclear weapons would be used .
 By maintaining the largest deliverable stock of nuclear weapons think Ohio that are virtually impossible to destroy, the U.S. has the ultimate Doomsday Weapon .
 "At the first sign that the Russians are preparing to launch, we'll launch all of our warheads. And I'm equally as sure that all 14 of our Boomers are on patrol," says President Obama .
 If you require transport of your order from the airfreight company to your location, there will be an additional cost . The cost of transporting your order is an additional fee .
 ANDAIR products are manufactured in Switzerland under the directives of the Swiss Federal Office of Civil Defense . ANDAIR is the world's largest air defense contractor . AndAIR is based in Switzerland .
 All ventilation systems have both hand crank and AC electrical function . The ventilation system is controlled by hand cranks and hand crank .
 Gunny went nuts, he told the contractor to install a 4 tube setup, each culvert was 10'x50' and two had nothing but bunks . Each culvert had a 10' x50' bunks and each was 10"x50" .
 One had a generator compartment, bathrooms and storage and the other kitchen and dining facilities . The other had a kitchen, dining and dining facility .
 The contractor told him to figure on a quarter million before it was done, but that included the 4 air filtration systems, etc. The contractor said it would cost $1.5 million .
 I couldn't understand, the U.S. had announced that they would not use nuclear weapons . I was shocked to see that the United States had announced not to use nukes . I thought it was a sign of weakness in the world .
 "Not until they set one foot beyond the original line, we won't. When I challenged him on it, he said,Not until . they set . one foot further beyond the . original line. He said, "Not . until they . set one . foot beyond .
 Why would the government react it they took a little extra? "They were a bunch of liberal, commie lovers, if you ask me," he says .
 Teddy and the Wicked Witch of the East were still alive . They probably would have been able to kill each other if Teddy was still alive. They would have .
 Top and I stayed home and watched the contractor installing the new quadruple shelter Gunny was having built . Gunny and Top stayed home to watch the contractor install the new quilt .
 Top got the Sheriff to send his Deputies out and he ran a class on familiarizing them with the Ml 4 rifle and Ml 6/M203 . The class was a refresher on the 6/203 rifle .
 Both Randy and Ray's shelters could sleep up to 10 people and 3 more if cots were used . Randy's shelter could sleep as many as three cots per night .
 If small children could double up in bunks, that would further increase our sleeping capacity, it would be even better for us .
 Unlike Sharon Packer and Paul Seyfried, we didn't rely on chemical toilets . We didn't use chemical toilets. We used to do it ourselves. We're not afraid of it now.
 GCK might be a target, but 36K probably wouldn't be but even if it was, it was 31/2 miles from our closest shelter . 36K is a target but it's not a target for GCK .
 Theoretically, the United States could make a first strike on Russia, if and only if, 21 1,2mT nuclear weapons would be sufficient to eliminate the Russian C 3 I . Therein lay the gamble .
 B-2 Spirit bombers could, again theoretically, each drop 1 B83 set at a yield of 1.2mT simultaneously . B-83 could be used to drop a single B83 at a time at a maximum of 1mT .
 Each plane could carry 16 weapons and could strike other targets before they launched their 2,688 Trident warheads . Each plane was able to carry 16 of those weapons .
 If that happened, one could assume a radiation level so high that... well it couldn't happen . It could be assumed that radiation levels would be too high to be detected .
 There were books about those you know; On the Beach and Down to the Sunless Sea . There were also books about people you know, On the beach and Down To the Beach . There was also a book about those who knew .
 Where Alph, the sacred river, ran Through caverns measureless to man Down to a sunless sea .
 And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills, Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree . And here were forests ancient as the hills, Enfolding sunny spots of greenery .
 Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail, Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher's flail: And 'mid these dancing rocks at once and ever' It flung up momently the sacred river. Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst Huge fragments of .
 Down to a Sunless Sea was written by David Graham in the 70s . There was no movie made out of the book Down To a Sunland Sea .
 It is a book about a planeload of people during the ultimate worldwide disaster . The book is about a group of people who survived the ultimate disaster .
 It explores the issues involved in a world without energy, gone mad, that crosses the line into nuclear holocaust . The book is based on the idea of a world gone mad without energy and gone mad .
 The aircraft were last seen at Whitman AFB, yesterday afternoon, but were absent this morning . The aircraft are last seen yesterday afternoon .
 The Department of Defense has declined comment . The aircraft were on a regularly scheduled training mission, the agency says .
 The B-2 Spirit, made by Northrop Grumman, is a multi-role stealth bomber . It is able to drop conventional and nuclear weapons .
 A dramatic leap forward in technology, the bomber was a milestone in the U.S. bomber modernization program . The bomber was the first of its kind and was a major step forward .
 Estimates for the costs per plane range from $1,157 billion to $2. billion . Estimates range between $1.157 billion and $2 billion for each plane .
 Its stealth technology is intended to help it penetrate defenses previously impenetrable by combat aircraft . The stealth aircraft will be the first of its kind to enter the U.S.
 Bush reduced the final buy quantity to the 21 already bought in his now famous ""New World Order"" State of the Union speech, January 1991 . Bush made the announcement in 1991 .
 Whiteman AFB in Missouri was the B-2's operational base until early 2003, when facilities for the aircraft were built on the joint US/UK military base on the British island of Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean .
 Facilities for the aircraft have also been built at RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire in the United Kingdom .
 Weighing 71,668 kg, each B2 cost over $30/g which is just under double its weight in gold . Each B2 weighs 71,000 kg and costs $30 per kg .
 The plane can carry up to 16 Rotary Launcher Assembly mounted B61 or B83 nuclear weapons . It can carry 16 weapons and can carry a total of 16 .
 The B-2 Spirit is a multi-role bomber capable of delivering both conventional and nuclear munitions . It is the first of its kind to carry out a mission in the U.S.
 The bomber represents a major milestone in the United States bomber modernization program . A dramatic leap forward in technology, the bomber is a major step forward in the U.S. program .
 The B-2 brings massive firepower to bear, in a short time, anywhere on the globe through previously impenetrable defenses . It's a weapon that can be easily deployed anywhere in the world .
 18 of the original 21 were equipped with the Rotary Launcher Assembly . Eighteen of the first 21 were fitted with the launcher .
 After the crash, a new Rotary Launcher was added to one of the two equipped without to maintain the status quo . The new launcher will be added to the one equipped without .
 The B-2 provides the penetrating flexibility and effectiveness inherent in manned bombers . Along with the B-52 and B-1B, the bomber is the most versatile bomber in the world .
 Its low-observable, or ""stealth,"" characteristics give it the unique ability to penetrate an enemy's most sophisticated defenses and threaten its most valued, and heavily defended targets .
 Its capability to penetrate air defenses and threaten effective retaliation provide a strong, effective deterrent and combat force well into the 21st century . The U.S. Air Force will be a strong deterrent to the United States .
 The revolutionary blending of low-observable technologies with high aerodynamic efficiency and large payload gives the B-2 important advantages over existing bombers . The B-1 can be fitted with a payload of up to 100 pounds .
 Its low-observability provides it greater freedom of action at high altitudes, thus increasing its range and a better field of view for the aircraft's sensors . The aircraft is designed to be able to operate at altitudes .
 These signatures make it difficult for the sophisticated defensive systems to detect, track and engage the B-2 . The signatures are similar to those used by the U.S. Air Force in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The B-2 has a crew of two pilots, a pilot in the left seat and mission commander in the right, compared to the B-IB's crew of four and a B-52 crew of five . The B2 has two pilots and a mission commander .
 The first B-2 was publicly displayed on Nov., 1988, when it was rolled out of its hangar at Air Force Plant 42, Palmdale, Calif. Air Force .
 The B-2 Combined Test Force, Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., is responsible for flight testing the aircraft . The test center tests engineering, manufacturing and development aircraft on the B.2 .
 Depot maintenance responsibility for the B-2 is performed by Air Force contractor support . The Oklahoma City Air Logistics Center at Tinker AFB, Okla. manages the maintenance of the aircraft .
 The B-2 was responsible for destroying 33 percent of all Serbian targets in the first eight weeks of Operation Allied Force . The aircraft flew nonstop to Kosovo from its home base in Missouri and back .
 In support of Operation Enduring Freedom, the B-2 flew one of its longest missions to date from Whiteman to Afghanistan and back . The mission was one of the longest in the history of the aircraft .
 The B-2 completed its first-ever combat deployment in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom . It flew 22 sorties from a forward operating location as well as 27 sorties .
 The B-2's proven combat performance led to declaration of full operational capability in December 2003 . It was declared fully operational capability by the U.S. in December .
 Boeing Military Airplanes Co. Co., Fiughes Radar Systems Group, General Electric Aircraft Engine Group and Vought Aircraft Industries, Inc. are key members of the aircraft contractor team .
 The minute the first B83 hits, the boomers will start preparing to launch . The moment the first hit will be B83 will be the first of its kind .
 "No one else has stealth bombers. Those Russkies will have to know it was us," says President Obama . "No other countries have stealth bombers," says Obama .
 Their fly time is probably 30 minutes and they do have some solid fueled rockets . Their fly times are probably about 30 minutes .
 In August 2002, the Strategic Missile Forces chief, Colonel General Nikolai Solovtsov, announced that the military will keep one division of train-mounted missiles .
 One division includes up to five trains, each carrying three missiles, and each missile carries 10 warheads . Another division includes five trains each carrying up to three warheads .
 "Of course, we are an honorable people and would never think of doing some damned fool thing like converting those B-1 Bs back to where they could deliver a nuclear payload," says Obama .
 We had more B-1 Bs than B-52s, and it might be a use it or lose it scenario . We might be using it or losing it scenario, says Air Force chief . "We're going to use it, lose it"
 Any aircraft that wasn't in the United States had a chance of surviving . Any aircraft not in the U.S. had a good chance of survival, says CNN.com .
 I can answer that because the closest warhead hit the Garden City Airport was the closest to the airport . I can't answer that question because I know where the closest bomb hit was in Garden City .
 "Because we bought those anti-radiation suits, we were able to get out and feed and water the livestock," she says . "Because of those suits, I was able to feed, water and feed the livestock. Because of that, I can't go out to feed and
 We ended up with extra guests, the Sheriff, his Deputies and all of their families . The Sheriff's deputies and their families also attended the event .
 We caught them by surprise and took out their C 3 I system . They had that thing they called Perimetr, which turned out to be a satellite based backup system . Bottom line was they were slowed some but not out of business .
 "We got off the first shots and they had their solid fueled missiles airborne before ours got them," says President Obama . "They had their good missiles airborne," says Obama .
 Their older liquid fueled missiles never got off the ground and they had scrapped all but one of their Typhoon missile subs . The Navy scrapped all of its Typhoon missiles .
 The Russians wiped out everything we'd rebuilt and tried to eliminate every good runway we had, says the former president of the U.S. State Department .
 "We got our planes back, most of them anyway. They didn't know either and we got their planes back," he says .
 Mexico recalled her troops and the Venezuelan Navy pulled back from their homeports . Mexico recalled its troops and Venezuela pulled back to their home ports .
 Most of the livestock made it through and even after we were able to let them out, we keep the dairy cows on stored hay and feed . Even after the animals are able to be let out of the barn, they are kept on stored feed and hay .
 We had shut down the big wind turbine as a precaution and it started right up after we released the brakes . The turbine was shut down as a safety precaution . We had to release the brakes on the wind turbine to get it working again .
 America was now a third world Country, little better than most of the nations around the world . America was no longer a third-world country, but a third World Country .
 The good news, if you can call it that, was that there weren't many nuclear weapons left . "The good news" is that the good news is that there are no more than a nuclear weapon left .
 Most of the weapons that didn't get used were destroyed; Gunny had been pretty close . "They dumped everything they had on us and us on them. Most of them were destroyed," says Gunny .
 Nobody wins a war like that; you just survive, God willing, and move on from there . Nobody wins that war, nobody wins it like that. Nobody wins it, nobody does, and you survive .
 Russia was the 2nd largest nuclear power on the face of the earth before and we the 1st, and after, we were even both 3rd world nations . Russia and Russia were even 3rd-world nations before .
 We tried to reach the state Defense Force headquarters to submit our resignations, but there was no Topeka, Kansas . "We tried to resign from the state defense force headquarters," says one of the officers .
 According to the few surviving radio amateurs perhaps 20% of the population had survived the initial attack . Perhaps 20% survived the attack .
 By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, we wept, when we remembered Zion . By the time we sat there, there were tears of joy and joy, and wept .
 "They that wasted of us required mirth, saying, sing us one of the songs of Zion. For there they carried us away captive required of us a song," he said .
 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. If I . prefer not to Jerusalem above Jerusalem, Jerusalem will be my main joy, I will remember thee .
 Remember O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, who said Rase it, rase it even to the foundation thereof. Remember O . Lord, O. Remember . Remember O.
 O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us . "Happy will he be," she said of Babylon .
 "Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones," says the author .
 The north and the west and the south are good hunting ground, but it is forbidden to go east . The north is good hunting grounds, but the east is forbidden .
 It is forbidden to cross the great river and look upon the place that was the Place of the Gods . This is most strictly forbidden. The place was the place of the gods .
 It is there that spirits live, and demons it's there that there are the ashes of the Great Burning . It is said to have been the place where spirits live .
 These things are forbidden they have been forbidden since the beginning of time . These things were forbidden, and they are forbidden, since the start of time.
 I have been in the Dead Places near us, with my father, with his father, I was afraid. "I was afraid, but I was not afraid," she says . She says she has been in Dead Places with her father since childhood .
 "When my father went into the house to search for the metal, I stood by the door and my heart felt small and weak," she said . "I stood by my father's door and felt small, weak. When I stood there, I felt like a small child," she
 It did not have the smell of man, though there were old bones in a corner . The smell of the old bones was faint, but it smelled of man . It was the first time a man had been found alive in the country .
 "That was when I was very young nevertheless, nevertheless, my brothers would not have done it, though they are good hunters," he said . "My brothers would have not done it," he added .
 After that, they gave me the good piece of meat and the warm corner of the fire . After that I was given the good meat and a warm corner .
 When I boasted or wept without a reason, he punished me more strictly than my brothers . But when I boasted, he was punished more severely than his brothers, he said . He said: "When I boasted ... he punished him more strictly."
 "After a time, I myself was allowed to go into the dead houses and search for metal," says the author . "I myself myself ... went to the dead house and searched for metal"
 "If I saw bones, I was no longer afraid. So I learned the ways of those houses," she says . She says she learned the way of the houses and if she saw bones it was "no longer afraid"
 The bones are light and old sometimes they will fall into dust if you touch them . Sometimes the bones will fall out of the air and fall out into dust .
 I was taught how to stop the running of blood from a wound and many secrets . I was told the chants and the spells I was teaching how to . stop the run of blood .
 If hunters think we do all things by chants and spells, they may believe so it does not hurt them. If the hunters . think we . do all . things by chanting and spells they may . believe so that it does . hurt them, says author .
 "I was taught how to read in the old books and how to make the old writings that was hard and took a long time," says the author . "It's hard to read, but I'm very happy to be able to read," she says .
 Most of all, I liked to hear of the Old Days and the stories of the gods . Most of the old days, he said, 'Most of all of all was in the Old days' He added that he liked hearing of the tales of gods .
 "I asked myself many questions that I could not answer, but it was good to ask them," she said . "It was good for me to ask questions, but I couldn't answer them," the author said .
 "At night, I would lie awake and listen to the wind it seemed to be the voice of the gods as they flew through the air," says author .
 We are not ignorant like the Forest People, our women spin wool on the wheel, our priests wear a white robe . We're not ignorant, our people say, but we are proud of our people .
 We do not eat grubs from the trees, we have not forgotten the old writings, although they are hard to understand . We have not eaten grubs, but we have remembered the old writing, although it is hard to read .
 Nevertheless, my knowledge and my lack of knowledge burned in me I wished to know more. Nevertheless, I wanted to learn more, I wished for more .
 "It is time for me to go on my journey. When I was a man at last, I came to my father and said, "It was time for . me to be a man again."
 "That night, in the house of the priesthood, I asked for and received purification," he said . "I asked for ... purification. That night," he wrote .
 He bade me look into the smoke of the fire and see I saw and told what I saw . He told me to look in the smoke and see what he saw, he said . He said, 'I saw and said I saw'
 "It was what I have always seen a river, and, beyond it, a great Dead Place and in it the gods walking," he said .
 His eyes were stern when I told him he was no longer my father but a priest . He was stern when he told him that he had changed his name to a priest.
 'They were singing the Star song in the outer chamber and it was like the buzzing of bees in my head,' says the author . 'It was like a buzzing in the bee's head,' she says of the singing .
 He asked me how the gods were dressed and I told him how they were dressed . He asked him how he felt about the gods and he said yes .
 "We know how they were dressed from the book, but I saw them as if they were before me," she said . "I saw them before me. We know that they were there," she added .
 When I had finished, he threw the sticks three times and studied them as they fell . He threw them three times, studying them as the fell, he said . When I finished, I said: 'I don't want to make a mistake'
 Three deer passed in the valley going east they did not mind me or see me . Then three deer passed in the valley .
 The arrow went through the panther's eye and into his brain . It is not easy to kill a panther with one arrow but the arrow went into his eye and brain .
 It is eight suns' journey to the east and a man passes by many Dead Places . The Dead Places are eight-suns' journeys from the east to the south .
 "Once I made my fire on the edge of a Dead Place at night and, next morning, in the dead house, I found a good knife, little rusted. Once I made his fire on a dead place at night, next day, in a dead house," he says
 Twice I passed hunting parties of the Forest People without their knowing . Always when I looked for game, it was in front of my arrow, says the author .
 'I knew my magic was strong and my journey clean, despite the law. So I knew my journey was clean, in spite of the law'
 "I came to the banks of the great river. Toward the setting of the eighth sun, I came to a great river," he said .
 We do not use the god-roads now for they are falling apart into great blocks of stone, and the forest is safer going. It was halfa-day's journey after I had left the road .
 A long way off, I had seen the water through trees through trees but the trees were thick . The water was a long way from the shoreline, but it was not clear whether it was under water .
 "The gods ate me up. Yet, all through the night, I knew that I should have to cross the river and walk in the places of the gods," says author .
 My magic did not help me at all and yet there was a fire in my bowels, my mind. My magic didn't help me . Yet there was fire in the bowels of my mind, and yet I was able to get through .
 If I went to the Place of the Gods, I would surely die, but, if I did not go, I could never be at peace with my spirit again . If I did go, he would die, he said, but if he did not, he could never go,
 It is better to lose one's life than one's spirit, if one is a priest and the son of a priest, says a priest . "It is better than losing a life than a spirit," says the priest .
 The Forest People could have killed me without fight, if they had come upon me then, but they did not come . "The Forest People were able to kill me without fighting," says the author .
 When the raft was made, I said the sayings for the dead and painted myself for death . I said, 'When the raft made, he said, and painted himself for death'
 "As I pushed the raft from the shore, I began my death song / had the right" "Had the right," she says .
 It is forbidden to go east, but I have gone, forbidden to . go on the great river but I am there. It was forbidden to. go east . But I have been there, and I am still there .
 "I was afraid, afraid. All the same, when I came to the Place of the Gods, I was afraid," he said .
 The current of the great river is very strong it gripped my raft with its hands . The current was very strong, it gripped me in the hands of my raft, I said . It was a very strong current that gripped me and my raft .
 Never have I been so much alone I tried to think of my knowledge, but it was a squirrel's heap of winter nuts . "Never have I felt so alone. Never have ever been so alone," she said .
 "There was no strength in my knowledge any more and I felt small and naked as a new-hatched bird alone upon the great river," she said .
 Once there had been god-roads across the river, though now they were broken and fallen like broken vines . I saw both banks of the river I saw that once there had . been god roads across it .
 The Great Burning was the time of the Great Burning when the fire fell out of the sky . Very great they were, and wonderful and broken broken .
 The huge ruins of the Place of the Gods rose before my eyes. And always the current took me nearer to the place of the gods, and the huge ruins rose .
 I thought the river meant to take me past the Place of the Gods and out into the Bitter Water of the legends . I thought it meant to go past the place of the gods and out of the place where legends were born .
 The gods heard me they showed me how to paddle with the pole on one side of the raft . The gods told me to do it, and I was able to get it, she says . She says she was taught how to use the pole to paddle on the other side .
 There was a great spike of rusted metal sticking out into the river . I hauled myself up upon it and sat there, pantinging, to sit there .
 I had saved my bow and two arrows and a knife I found in the Dead Place but that was all . I had only found a knife, bow and arrows, but that's all I had left .
 I looked after it, and thought if it had trod me under, at least I would be safely dead . I looked at it and thought it was safe to be left behind, but it was not safe .
 When I had dried my bowstring and restrung it, I walked forward to the Place of the Gods . Nevertheless, when he had dried his bowstring, he said, "I walked forward"
 It is not true what some of the tales say, that the ground there burns forever, for I have been there. It's not true that some tales say that, but I've been there, and I know it .
 "Here and there were the marks and stains of the Great Burning, on the ruins, that is true. Here and there, there were . The marks of the . Great Burning," says the author of the book "The Great Burning"
 It is not true either, what some of our priests say, that it is an island covered with fogs and enchantments . It is also not true that some of the island is covered in fogs or enchantments, it's not true .
 Everywhere in it there are god-roads, though most are cracked and broken . Everywhere in the world, "God-roads" are broken and cracked, but most are still there .
 There should have been the wailings of spirits and the shrieks of demons, but there were not . There were not. There should be wails of spirits or shrieks from demons, says author .
 It was very silent and sunny where I had landed the wind and the rain had done their work . The grass grew in the cracks of the broken stone, the birds that drop seeds had done the work .
 The towers are not all broken here and there one still stands, like a great tree in a forest, and the birds nest high . The towers still stand, and there is still one that still stands in the forest .
 I saw a little dance of white butterflies over a great heap of broken stones and columns . I saw the little dance over a little bit of broken buildings and columns, says author .
 I went there and looked about me there was a carved stone with cut letters, broken in half . It was carved in half and carved in the shape of a stone, broken into half .
 It had been made of white stone and he wore his hair tied back like a woman's . He wore it like a man's hair, and it was made of stone .
 The gods must have loved pigeons, or, perhaps, they used them for sacrifices . There are many pigeons nesting and dropping in the towers of the towers .
 There are wild cats that roam the god-roads, green-eyed, unafraid of man . The wild cats roam the God-roads in North America .
 The wild dogs are more dangerous, for they hunt in a pack, but them I did not meet till later . The wild dog is more dangerous than the wild dog, says the author .
 Everywhere there are carved stones, carved with magical numbers or words . The carved stones are carved by magical numbers and words .
 "When a god or a demon saw me, then I would die, but meanwhile I was no longer afraid," she says . "I would die if I was killed by such a demon or a god," she writes .
 "My hunger for knowledge burned in me there was so much that I could not understand," she said . "There were so many things that I couldn't understand. There were so much to be understood"
 "Food is death. But my father found out and punished me for it strictly, for, often, that food is death," she wrote .
 I had long gone past what was forbidden, and I entered the likeliest towers, looking for the food of the gods . Now, though, I had gone past the forbidden and entered the most likely towers .
 A mighty temple it must have been, for the roof was painted like the sky at night with its stars that much I could see, though the colors were faint and dim . The roof of the temple was painted by the roof, and it looked like a giant temple .
 It went down into great caves and tunnels perhaps they kept their slaves there. Perhaps they kept them slaves there . It may have led them to great caves or tunnels, perhaps they had slaves .
 But when I started to climb down, I heard the squeaking of rats, so I did not go rats are unclean . There must have been many tribes of them, from squeaking, from the sounds of them .
 Food was found in the heart of a ruin, behind a door that still opened . But near there, I found food, in a heart-of-a-brutal ruin, inside a door still opened.
 There was drink, too, in bottles of glass the drink of the gods was strong and made my head swim . There was also drink, also in bottles, that made me feel dizzy and confused .
 After I had eaten and drunk, I slept on the top of a stone, my bow at my side . I slept in a stone with a bow at his side, his bow at the side .
 His tongue was hanging out of his mouth; he looked as if he were laughing . He looked like he was laughing, his tongue was in his mouth, his eyes were wide open .
 I sprang up and shouted at him but he did not move he just sat there as if he were laughing . 'I sprang up but he didn't move and sat there like if he was laughing,' he said . 'He sat there laughing. He did not even move. I sprang
 When I reached for a stone to throw, he moved swiftly out of the way of the stone . He moved quickly away from a stone he threw at him .
 "No doubt I could have killed him with an arrow, but I did not know if there were others," she says . "I did not want to kill him," she adds. "I didn't know if he had any other victims"
 "I looked about me not far away there was a great, broken god-road, leading north," he said . "Not far from far from there, I looked about myself not far back there was ... a great God-road leading north"
 The towers were high enough, but not so high, and while many of the dead-houses were wrecked, there were some that stood . Some of the towers are still visible today .
 "I went toward this god-road, keeping to the heights of the ruins, while the dog followed" The dog followed him as he walked through the ruins .
 When I had reached the god-road, I saw that there were others behind him. When I reached that, I realized that there had been many others behind me. I saw them behind him .
 "If I had slept later, they would have come upon me asleep and torn out my throat," he said . "They would have torn out the throat of me if I'd slept later," he added .
 When I went into the dead-house, they kept watch at the entrance doubtless they thought they would have a fine hunt . When I . went there I thought it would have been a good hunt, but they were not .
 A dog cannot open a door and I knew, from the books, that the gods did not like to live on the ground but on high . But a dog can't open the door, he says, but a dog cannot .
 'They were surprised when I shut the door in their faces it was a good door, of strong metal' 'I shut them in the face it was the good door,' she said .
 I could hear their foolish baying beyond it but I did not stop to answer them . "I could hear them baying but I didn't stop," he said. "I'm not going to listen to them."
 I was in a long small chamber on one side of it was a bronze door that could not be opened, for it had no handle . On the other side of the chamber was a small chamber that could only be opened by a door with no handle, the author says .
 The first room was a small ante-room, where I waited there for some time, telling the spirits of the place that I came in peace and not as a robber . I waited in the ante-rooms for a long time before entering the room .
 The great windows that looked over the city had not been broken at all though they were dusty and streaked with many years . The windows were dusty, streaked, and had been dusty for many years. The windows had not broken .
 There were coverings on the floors, the colors not greatly faded, and the chairs were soft and deep . There were also soft, deep chairs and soft furnishings in the rooms .
 There were pictures upon the walls, very strange, very wonderful I remember one of a bunch of flowers in a jarif you came close to it, you could see nothing but bits of color, but if you stood away from it, the flowers might have been picked yesterday .
 It made me feel strange to look at the figure of a bird, in some hard clay, on a table and see it so like our birds. It made my heart feel strange, but I'm glad to see it as a symbol of our birds .
 Everywhere there was books and writings, many in tongues that I could not read . Everywhere there were books and writing, many of them were in tongues .
 The god who lived there must have been a wise god and full of knowledge, says the author of the book . He said: "The god who . lived there was full of wisdom and knowledge"
 There was a cooking-place but no wood, and though there was a machine to cook food, there was no place to put fire in it . There was also a cooking place but no . wood, though there were no . place to . cook food .
 There were no candles or lamps there were things that looked like lamps but they had neither oil nor wick . Nor were there candles or . lamps . There were also things like lamps without oil or wick.
 "All these things were magic, but I touched them and lived the magic had gone out of them," says the author . "I touched these things and lived them. All these things are magic," she says .
 In the washing-place, a thing said ""Hot"" but it was not hot to the touch another thing said "Cold" but it wasn't cold . A thing that said "Hot" but not cold was not cold. A thing said 'Hot' but not 'Cold'
 I have said the magic was gone but that is not true, it had gone from the magic things but it had not gone . The magic was not gone in the place but it was not from the place. The magic is not gone, it is still there.
 "I've never slept in a Dead Place before and yet, tonight, I must sleep there. Nor had I ever slept there before," he says .
 When I thought of it, my tongue felt dry in my throat, in spite of my wish for knowledge, I thought it was a dream .
 When it fell, I went back to the big room looking over the city and made fire . "When it fell," he said, "I went back looking over [the city] and made it fall," he added .
 'I wrapped myself in a floorcovering and slept in front of the fire I was very tired. I wrapped myself into a floorcoverying,' she said . 'I had to be very tired' she said.
 "I could feel the spirits drawing my spirit out of my body as a fish is drawn on a line. I could feel it drawing me out of the body," she said .
 Ten thousand torches would not have been the same. Everywhere there were lights lines of light circles and blurs of light blurs . Everywhere . Everywhere there there were . lines of . light circles .
 The sky itself was alight you could barely see the stars for the glow in the sky . The sky was so bright that the stars could barely be seen in the night sky .
 "I knew that I was seeing the city as it had been when the gods were alive," says the author of the book . "I was seeing that I knew that . I knew I was . seeing the . city as . it had . been when it was when the . gods
 Everywhere went the gods, on foot and in chariots there were gods beyond number and counting and their chariots blocked the streets. Everywhere went . The gods, from foot and chariots, blocked the roads .
 They had turned night to day for their pleasure- they did not sleep with the sun . They did not have to turn night into day for pleasure .
 "I looked out of another window the great vines of their bridges were mended and godroads went east and west," he said . "The great vines were mending and god roads went east, west and east"
 With unbelievable tools they did giant works no part of the earth was safe from them, for, if they wished for a thing, they summoned it from the other side of the world . They summoned the world from other sides of the globe .
 "There was a drum in their ears the pulse of the giant city, beating and beating like a man's heart," she says .
 "As I looked upon them and their magic, I felt like a child but a little more, it seemed to me, and they would pull down the moon from the sky," says the author .
 And yet not all they did was well done even I could see that and yet their wisdom could not but grow until all was peace . And yet they did not always do well done, even even I was able to see .
 "Then I saw their fate come upon them and that was terrible past speech," she said . "That was a terrible past past speech. Then I saw [the victims] come upon me," she added .
 Even after the city had become a Dead Place, for many years the poison was still in the ground . For many years, even after it had become dead, the city was still poisoned by the poison .
 "When I woke in the morning, I was hungry, but I did not think first of my hunger for my heart was perplexed and confused" "I did think first, my hunger was perplexing and confused," she says .
 I knew the reason for the Dead Places but I did not see why it had happened . I knew why it happened, but I didn't see it happening again .
 'It seemed to be like it should not have happened, with all the magic they had. It seemed to me it should have happened,' she said .
 There was so much in the house I could not understand and yet I am a priest and the son of a priest. Yet I am still a priest, and I'm a son and a priest," he said . "There were so many things I couldn't understand," he added .
 He was sitting in his chair, by the window, in a room I had not entered before . "For the first moment, I thought that he was alive," he said .
 He was sitting looking out over the city he was dressed in the clothes of the gods . He was looking at the city looking out of the city .
 He had sat at his window, watching his city die then he himself had died . He had watched the city die before he himself .
 "It is better to lose one's life than one's spirit," says the father-of-one . "You could see from the face that his spirit had not been lost. But it was better than losing one of his life," he says .
 I knew, that, if I touched him, he would fall into dust and yet, there was something unconquered in the face . I knew that, that . if . if I touch him, I would fall . into dust . Yet, there were still unconquering in
 Then I knew he was a man / knew then that they had been men, neither gods nor demons . That is all of my story, for then I knew that they were men .
 I had no fear going home, though twice I fought off the dogs and once I was hunted for two days by the Forest People . I had 'no fear' after that, though I had fought off dogs and fought off them twice .
 The law is not always the same shape you have done what you've done, he said . He said, ""The law is . not always always the . same shape."
 "After that, I wished to tell all the people but he showed me otherwise," says the former footballer . "He showed me that," he said .
 It is not for the metal alone we go to the Dead Places now there are the books and the writings . It's not for metal alone, it is for the writings and the metal .
 "We shall go to the Place of the Gods the place newyork not one man but a company," says the author of the book .
 We shall look for the images of the gods and find the god ASHING and the others the gods Lincoln and Biltmore and Moses . We shall search for the gods in the image .
 The first controlled chain reaction occurred on December 2, 1942, in Chicago, Chicago .
 According to June, after WW III they scraped off the topsoil and after Yellowstone, we plowed in the volcanic ash wearing out a plow in the process . After WW III, after . WW III . They scraped . off the . top soil .
 "I felt defeated, and quite frankly, couldn't see the use of doing it all over. I felt defeated," she said .
 We didn't want to end up like the priest in the short story we didn't . Not if we were like them, they didn't. Not if they were like the priests in the story .
 "The day might come, it was inevitable, when our last working rifle no longer functioned and we ran out of powder and primers," says the author . The day might be inevitable, it's inevitable, says author. "We're going to run out of our powder and
 Only then would we be forced to resort to bows and arrows, knives and tomahawks . Only then we would have been forced to use guns and knives to defend ourselves .
 "Nothing lasts forever. One day we could lose the capacity to produce electricity, nothing lasts forever," says John Defterios . "Nothing will last forever," he says .