 This allowed for Soviet ships to arrive safely to Cuba before the escalation and this represents weakness on Kennedy's part . Kennedy's weakness on Cuba represents weakness, writes CNN's John Avlon .
 Khrushchev reacted by stating that the Soviet government cannot give instructions to the captains of Soviet vessels bound for Cuba to observe the instructions of the American navel forces . The Soviet government refused to allow the captain of the ships bound to Cuba to obey the American's instructions .
 Both leaders may have had many different advisors aiding their decisions, but what it really came down to was their leadership styles . Both leaders had different advisors helping them make decisions .
 JFK achieved the hero status that allied to his youthful college boy looks and turned him into a legendary figure . JFK and Khrushchev, a Relationship, have a long-standing relationship .
 His charismatic image survives in American culture despite rumors of his womanizing, his commitment to Vietnam and other political shortcomings . He was a Vietnam War hero .
 He displayed extraordinary skill playing a military game without striking without striking . It was the first time he had been able to do so without striking.
 Kennedy struggled with sparse communication from the Soviet leader Khrushchev . Kennedy struggled to communicate with the Soviet Union leader .
 The two men remained true to their beliefs during the crisis . Rather it is differences in culture or communication, they say, than differences in communication .
 Surprisingly, they both had much in common regarding leadership traits and backgrounds . Surprisingly, both of them had much of a common common background .
 This type of leadership takes a display of curiosity and the guts to be daring, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "This is a great example of the courage and courage of courage of leadership"
 Bennis reflects, there are two kinds of people who are paralyzed by fear, and those who are afraid but go ahead away . Bennis says, "there are two types of people ... those who go ahead ahead away"
 "A healthy leadership inspires options and the innovations that grow out of creativity," says President Obama . "Healthy leadership inspires innovation and innovation," says Obama .
 Such a leader will be able to communicate and create a . repoire with their country, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Still as much as they performed poorly at crisis avoidance due to communication issues, it must be said that they fared much better at crisis management . Still, they did not fare well in crisis avoidance .
 Their failure to understand each other during the crisis and this inability did not set the tone for their post crisis relationship . The pair's relationship was not strong enough to overcome each other's failure during crisis .
 They had every reason not to trust each other after all the behind your back type maneuvers . They were all over the world's most famous couple . They had a lot of trust in each other .
 The two men were able to put these transgressions aside and move forward toward peace . Still, the two men are able to move forward .
 The peace process was on the road to reality for relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Putting aside their differences and past hostilities, the peace process began in 1953 .
 This would open up a whole new world for both countries as far as communication and strengthening the allied bond from before the Second World War . This would help both countries strengthen their bond and strengthen their ties .
 "It was a difficult road to face because of the constant competition that would remain in other areas such as the Space Race and other technologies," says the astronaut . "The road was difficult to face," he says. "It's a long way to go"
 Khrushchev became alarmed for the safety of his country after Kennedy's assassination . The world also mourned the loss of such a dynamic leader along with the world .
 Oswald's ties to Marxism was feared there would be retaliation or backlash toward the Soviet Union . It was feared because of Oswald's links to Marxism that there would not be retaliation . Oswald died in August 1945 .
 Fursenko reflects, ""News of Kennedy's death shocked and alarmed Khrushchev" Fursenkovsky: "Krushchev alarmed by the death of Kennedy." Furshenkovsky says, "I was shocked by the news"
 Khrushchev rushed to establish communication with the new administration and assess the skills of the new president Johnson .
 He expressed his condolences to a grieving nation and worried that Kennedy's death had happened at the worst time possible . He said he was concerned Kennedy died at the wrong time possible.
 He worried that this event would impact not only relations with the United States but effect progress of peace . He also worried that it would impact relations with U.S. relations with Russia .
 He and his advisors scrambled to relieve their relationship with Castro for fear that this debate would be opened again . Obama and Castro have been at odds for years over the issue .
 This strategy, however, was only temporary in nature and maintained a level of damage control for the Soviet Union . This strategy was not only temporary but maintained a temporary damage control .
 This paper included a brief look as the historical event for a frame of reference . This paper includes a brief take on the historical events .
 This paper looked at issues of foreign policy and strategies used to remedy this troubling event . It also looked at strategies used by the US government to remedy the problem .
 This paper displayed how these strategies only worsened the situation by causing diplomatic troubles between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . This paper was published by the Washington-based International Security Council .
 President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev's leadership styles varied but also made strides toward a peaceful solution possible . The two leaders' leadership styles also varied in their respective leadership styles .
 This paper discussed the nature of diplomatic problems and explored strategies . This paper also explored strategies to avoid diplomatic problems .
 Diplomatic problems found in U.S. foreign policy never really find solutions . Diplomatic issues found in American foreign policy often don't find a solution . The U.N. State Department has been criticized for its lack of diplomacy .
 America continues to dominate the global chessboard and sees itself as the peace provider . Possibly for a moment or that particular country is no longer a threat, but the U.S. sees it as a peace provider.
 The threat of an attack on U.S. soil was made clear to President Kennedy by his Joint Chiefs of Staff . President Kennedy was urged to take aggressive counter-measures .