 The two R-14/SS-5 Skean Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile regiments were still at sea . They were among the last of the Anadyr units scheduled to arrive and required a great deal of site preparation to be ready .
 As it turned out, the Americans knew a great deal more than the Soviets and Cubans suspected . The Americans knew more than they suspected .
 President John F Kennedy Addresses the Nation on the Crisis in Cuba, Oct. 1962 . President Kennedy Addressed the nation on the crisis in Cuba .
 The morning of October 16, and almost every other morning during the following weeks, began with a meeting at the White House to review the previous day's take of photographic and other intelligence that had been processed overnight .
 Called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , the meetings were attended by President John F Kennedy, his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy and various cabinet secretaries, agency heads, senior staff and the vice president .
 The briefings were delivered by either Art Lundahl and/or Dino Brugioni of NPIC with their ubiquitous briefing boards and bound daily intelligence documents . The briefings would normally be delivered by Lundahl or Brugionei .
 Kennedy: Brief briefings would then be followed by a general roundtable and free discussion . Kennedy: "Free discussion" was a favorite technique of Kennedy’s .
 He preferred cabinet-level meetings be more like the Harvard debates of his youth . He preferred the “chairman of the board” style that had been favored by Presidents Eisenhower and Roosevelt .
 EXCOM ordered more U-2 flights over Cuba to cover the whole island . The first order of business for the EXCOM was to discuss the meaning of Soviet missile deployment .
 U.N. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson wanted to pursue an all-diplomatic course of action . Military and intelligence leadership wanted an immediate air campaign followed up by an invasion .
 The problem was that diplomacy alone was unlikely to dislodge the Soviet strategic ballistic missiles from Cuba given Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's bombast and bluster .
 Airstrikes and an invasion of Cuba would place Americans in direct combat with Soviet and Cuban forces .
 Moscow, Havana, and Washington, D.C. leaders began to push Russia and Cuba toward that very horrifying outcome . However, a number of factors began pushing them toward that horrifying outcome.
 The photos from daily U-2 Cuban overflights and U.S. Navy RF-8U Crusaders from Light Photographic Squadron 62 wound up driving and steering the EXCOM discussions .
 Sleep deprivation, physical exhaustion, and personal emotions would become serious factors on both sides, making mistakes and misinterpretations .
 For most of the first week of the crisis, Kennedy left the discussions of response scenarios to the rest of the EXCOM membership led by his brother Robert F Kennedy . Kennedy's brother led the discussion of possible response scenarios .
 By the weekend of Oct.-20, EXCOM had come to an unsteady consensus to respond to the Anadyr deployment with a maritime blockade and diplomacy . EXCOM was preparing to execute an invasion if those measures failed . By the end of the weekend, the consensus had grown
 Kennedy announced this policy on the evening of Oct. 31, 1962 . Congress, NATO, and other allies were briefed and an ultimatum served to the Soviets .
 President John F Kennedy personally presents the Navy Unit Commendation to VFP-62 . Four aviators of VMCJ-2 who participated in the missions over Cuba are visible alongside their Navy counterparts .
 The aviators flew their first missions on Oct., 1962, and began carrying out low-level reconnaissance flights on Oct. 31, 1962 .
 The following morning, the machine that was the U.S. military began to move into position to fulfill Kennedy’s orders . National Museum of Naval Aviation photo .
 At sea, the quarantine line was quickly established, and elements of the Atlantic and Pacific fleets began gathering to prepare for the invasion of Cuba if required . The quarantine line quickly established .
 Every unit of the U.S. military shook out the cobwebs and moved into place across the globe for the potential war that was causing a near panic worldwide with the news about Cuba .
 Commanders of the Strategic Air Command and Air Defense Command unilaterally declared DEFCON-2 for their forces . The situation was tense as the U.S. military declared the move .
 Kennedy and his staff were outraged at this unasked-for escalation in the SAC and ADC alert levels, and began to worry about how to de-escalate the crisis . Kennedy's staff was outraged at the level of alert levels being raised .
 Nikita Khrushchev and his leadership in the Kremlin had the same fears, along with the knowledge that their attempt to bring some stability to the strategic balance and Cuba had blown up into the worst crisis of the Cold War .
 Everyone wanted a way out that did not involve open war across the globe . Everyone wanted to find a way to avoid war .
 The naval quarantine of Cuba, which went into effect on October 24, succeeded, to the degree that no further weapons reached Cuba . No further weapons were allowed into Cuba .
 Both sides realized they needed trustworthy, rapid communications, but the technology limitations of 1962 made that impossible . Despite worldwide military alert by America and its allies, along with public diplomatic coups at the Organization of American States and United Nations .
 Diplomatic notes made use of the Western Union telegram system . One-way, secure text notes took 12 hours to send each way . Diplomatic note notes were used to send around the world .
 The Soviets decided to reach out to the Kennedy Administration with one of their best and oldest diplomatic ploys, the “back channel” contact .
 Khrushchev began to reestablish his dialog with Kennedy, sending more philosophical notes than his earlier denials and threats after the Oct. 1962 speech . In addition to his threats and denials, he also began to send philosophical notes to Kennedy .
 The Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba proclamation with President John F Kennedy’s signature after its signing on Oct. 22, 1962 . President Kennedy signed the proclamation in 1962 .
 The diplomatic breakthrough came on Friday, Oct. 31, with word that several Soviet back-channel contacts had come forth with nearly identical offers for the solution of the crisis . John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum photo .
 Alexander Feklisov was the KGB Resident at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. He was one of the most prominent KGB officers in the Soviet Union .
 They met and discussed a proposal where the Soviets would withdraw their ballistic missiles from Cuba if the United States would pledge to never invade the island . The U.S. and the Soviet Union discussed the proposal .
 Within hours, the Kennedy Administration had not only the offers from the back-channel contact, but also a note from Khrushchev directly indicating the same basic proposal . The proposal was rejected by the Soviets, and the proposal was never discussed .
 Kennedy was concerned that exhaustion was beginning to show in his advisors . It was the first sign in two weeks of a path away from the brink of the brink, he said .
 Kennedy sent his people home for a night of desperately needed sleep, so they would be fresh in the morning . Believing that a genuine settlement deal was on the table, Kennedy sent them home to sleep .
 Saturday, Oct. 31, would be the high-water mark of the Cold War . Everyone who went to sleep that night across the globe had no idea it would be that night .
 Googletag.push is a push to send a message to the user . Lt. Cevallos is a former soldier who served in the U.S. Army .