 Many factors led to the confrontation . Many factors were not simple Soviet belligerence . The U.S. military responded to the situation .
 The genesis of the crisis was the introduction of Soviet ICBMs into Fidel Castro’s Cuba . The missiles were capable of striking all major U.S. cities except on the West Coast . The West Coast was hit by the missiles .
 The Soviets had never before transferred any of their small missile force from their own territory to any of the Warsaw Pact allies, let alone Cuba . Lost in the media noise and public fear, public fear was the fact that the Soviets did not before transfer their missile force .
 The 13-day crisis of October 1528, 1962, lasted for 13 days . It was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in the crisis .
 The United States took forceful military steps for a potential invasion of Cuba, mobilizing thousands of troops as well as naval vessels, staging them off the Florida coast . Thousands of troops and naval vessels were mobilized off the coast of Cuba .
 The United States Navy put a quarantine into effect that would stop further Soviet ships heading to Cuba from delivering their military cargos . The quarantine was put into effect after the U.S. Navy put the quarantine in effect .
 American U-2 photoreconnaissance aircraft kept a close watch as the Soviets went ahead with the construction of their missile bases . Overhead, American U.2 photorespectors watched as the Soviet missile bases began .
 The crisis came to a dangerous head when a Soviet anti-aircraft battery shot down a U-2 taking pictures of the missile buildup . The crisis simmered, then came to an end when the U.2 was shot down by a U.S. missile defense system .
 President John F Kennedy did not order a retaliatory strike against the offending Soviet battery . Despite heavy pressure from his military advisers, President Kennedy chose not to strike .
 Kennedy resorted to behind-thescenes dealing with certain trusted Russian intermediaries . He threatened an imminent American invasion if the missiles were not removed . Instead, Kennedy negotiated a deal with the Russians behind-scenes .
 Premier Khrushchev decided to end the crisis and took the missiles out of Cuba . Khruschev ended the crisis by taking them out of the country .
 As part of the unwritten deal with the Soviets, the U.S. removed from Turkey its Jupiter missiles . The missiles had been targeted against the Soviet heartland .
 The missiles were crated aboard Soviet cargo ships and taken back to Russia . Under American naval and aerial supervision, the missiles were removed from the Soviet Union .
 The Kennedy administration was conducting a secret war to take down Fidel Castro by any means possible . Unknown to the public at the time of the crisis however, the Kennedy administration had been conducting a covert war to topple Castro .
 Operation Mongoose ran from 1961-1963 and was a full-court press by all branches of the U.S. military, CIA and others . The secret war was a secret war between the United States and North Korea .
 A secondary part of Operation Mongoose was the CIA-Mafia plot to kill Castro that began during the last days of President Dwight D Eisenhower’s administration . The plot was a second attempt to kill the Cuban leader . The operation was part of the CIA and Mafia plot .
 The Cuban leader asked the Soviet Union for protection from what Castro and the Soviets believed was an imminent invasion of Cuba by the U.S. Still, it was not even these plans to kill Castro that led the Cuban leader to ask the Soviets for protection .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961 was the most important event leading President Kennedy to go ahead with Operation Mongoose . The ill-fated invasion was led by President Kennedy in 1961 .
 When Castro came to power after overthrowing dictator Fulgencio Batista in 1959, he turned the sunny island into a totalitarian Communist bastion . He turned it into a communist state .
 The pointman for the invasion was Vice President Richard Nixon, then running for president against Senator John F Kennedy . Richard Nixon was the president when Kennedy was assassinated .
 Originally Nixon planned a covert operation headed by the CIA, to coincide with the closing days of the 1960 campaign . Nixon planned to use the CIA to help him win the election in 1960 .
 The exile-backed invasion had to be pushed back until after the November election . This proved impractical at the time, however, and the invasion was pushed back . The invasion was postponed until after November's election .
 Cuban exiles had begun training at a secret base in Guatemala called Camp Trax . By the time Kennedy became president, the exiles were training at the base . The base is now a military base in the country .
 An airstrip at Retalhuleu was built for the invasion’s air force . A secret radio station called Radio Swan was established to broadcast propaganda into Cuba .
 The operation was scheduled for late March 1961 at the town of Trinidad along Cuba’s southern coast . It was scheduled to take place in the town along the southern coast of the island .
 The site was canceled, and a new and now infamous landing point called the Bay of Pigs was chosen instead . However, the new landing point was the site .
 It was thought that when the exiles landed in Cuba, a spontaneous revolt among the mass of the population would take place . Castro’s downfall was thought to be the downfall of Castro .
 The invasion force left its base at Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, on April 17, 1961 . The invasion was the first of its kind in Nicaragua .
 Shortly before the landing, a number of bombers, based in Nicaragua and flown by exiles, attacked the small Cuban air force .
 The raid failed to take out all of Castro’s planes, and the remaining aircraft created havoc at the landing site, killing hundreds of exiles and sinking their supply ships offshore . The raid killed hundreds of Castro's exiles .
 The CIA asked Kennedy to call in an airstrike from American ships offshore, but the president refused . Kennedy refused to do so, and the CIA asked him to do it .
 More than 1,000 men were captured and imprisoned for almost a year before being ransomed for medical supplies and other essentials . More than a year after capture, they were ransomined for supplies .
 In December 1962, speaking before the now freed members of the Bay of Pigs invaders at Miami’s Orange Bowl, President Kennedy promised that their flag would someday fly in a free Havana . President Kennedy said in December 1962 that the flag would fly in Cuba .
 The Bay of Pigs defeat was the first major drubbing for the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy brothers did not take it lightly, and the defeat was a major blow .
 Kennedy set in motion operations to oust Castro, including the use of the mob and the CIA’s covert/overt plans in Operation Mongoose . The mob, the CIA and the mob were used in the overthrow of Castro .
 In the fallout from the bungled Bay of Pigs invasion, the president ordered an internal investigation into what went wrong . In the aftermath of the invasion, President Obama ordered a probe into what happened .
 Declassified a number of years ago, this report offers a complete internal critique of the operation, from beginning to end . The report was released by the U.S. Department of State Department .
 Another recently declassified memo, written by CIA officer George McManus, makes it strikingly clear that political motivations drove the attempts to take out Castro .
 The political stigma of the Bay of Pigs folly drove Attorney General Robert Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara to find a way to redeem the president’s credibility for the next round of elections .
 McManus’ memo lays out in stark detail why the Kennedy administration wanted to get back at Castro . It was intended to seek revenge for the Bay of Pigs fiasco and ensure Kennedy’s reelection in 1964 .
 The official CIA plan for the removal of Castro was run entirely out of the White House . The plan was run by the CIA in the wake of Castro's assassination .
 As a clandestine CIA project, it was to be a plausibly deniable concept, one that could be discarded and denied in case something went wrong . The CIA project was designed to be plausible deniable, one of the CIA's most secretive .
 Operation Mongoose began in the spring 1961 to the late summer and early fall of 1963 . The operation was closely supervised by Robert Kennedy, who oversaw it closely . The U.S. government spent two years running the operation .
 A special group, or SGA, was created to oversee the project and met almost daily basis .
 Among the members of the SGA were Robert Kennedy, McNamara and McNamara . McNamara, Maxwell Taylor and McGeorge Bundy were among the advisers .
 Edward Lansdale was a veteran of antiguerrilla campaigns in the Philippines and Vietnam in the 1950s . Lansdale is a Vietnam War veteran who was involved in anti-war efforts .
 His flamboyant style attracted the attention of journalists, among them Graham Greene . Greene modeled the main character in his novel The Quiet American after Lansdale . Lansdale died at the age of 92 at age 81 .
 Lansdale teamed up with Bill Harvey, a tough James Bond-type CIA officer, to get all phases of Operation Mongoose underway . Lansdale and Harvey teamed up to get the operation underway .
 Harvey wanted to use traditional CIA methods to get Castro . Lansdale insisted on the use of counterinsurgency tactics . RFK’s request for “boom and bang” operations inside Cuba .
 The CIA ran the covert project out of the former Richmond Naval Air Station southwest of Miami .
 Hundreds of agents set up shop there, including dozens of dummy or front organizations . "Hundreds of agents" are set up in the U.S.
 A fleet of high-powered boats operated out of the Florida Keys, smuggling raiders into Cuba, where they would attack Cuban military installations . The boats would attack military installations in Cuba .
 When any of these secret soldiers got into trouble with the local or federal law enforcement agencies anywhere in Florida, all it took was a single phone call on their part to be set free .
 The Miami Herald reported the arrest of 10 American mercenaries operating out of Sombrero and Marathon keys in 1962 . The story was published in the Miami Herald in December 1962 .
 Dressed in battle fatigues and supplied with large amounts of guns and ammunition, they were blocked by U.S. Customs Service agents from sailing their small ship, Sally, to Cuba for hit-and-run raids .
 Operation Mongoose carried top priority in the U.S. government . Attorney General Robert Kennedy made it clear that Operation Mongoose was a top priority . Operation 'Operation Mongoose' was a major operation in the United States .
 The operation had many different components and units, including an air arm, fast-moving boats owned or leased by the CIA . The only things that worked on site were the phones, as well as the phones .
 One of the main dummy corporations was Gibraltar Steam Ship Corporation, which was actually the agency’s parent for all its seagoing operations . The agency's parent was the parent of all its operations in the world .
 The agency’s fast fleet of ships was called Ace Cartography Company, supposedly a marine surveying firm . The “kinsman” of the agency's fast fleet was called a ‘kinkin’
 Cubans and Americans were trained as frogmen to infiltrate Cuban harbors and attack boats in port . There was also a underwater component, in which Cuban and American were trained to attack boats .
 These UDT squads went by the fictitious name of Marine Engineering and Training . The UDT squad was known as Marine Engineering & Training .
 The Cuban intelligence service was buzzing with activity in Cuba during the summer .
 Castro had infiltrated hundreds of agents-in-place among Cuban exiles who had fled Havana after he took power . Castro's agents were in place among the hundreds of thousands of exiles fleeing Havana . Castro infiltrated the agents in Havana .
 Castro agents mingled at bars, restaurants and shopping centers in Miami and the Keys . Very little got by the ears and wallets of Castro’s agents, who mingled with locals .
 Castro’s intelligence people may not have known the full scope of Operation Mongoose, they surely knew that the U.S. government was up to something .
 Thousands of Castro opponents were systematically rounded up for questioning, and arrests were commonplace . At the same time, on mainland Cuba, thousands of Castro supporters were rounded up . Arrests were commonplace in Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration was laying down the law on Mongoose . Meanwhile, the Kennedy administration had a bigger problem .
 By the latter part of 1962, despite the buildup, there was no military success in toppling Castro . By the mid-1960s, the military buildup had been successful .
 Small-scale raids had been carried out, including attacks on oil installations, maritime centers and even run-ins with Russian ships at dockside in Cuban ports .
 Marines from this task force landed off the beaches at Vieques Island, using the same tactics they would need in a real assault on Cuba . Marines from the task force used the same techniques they would use in an assault .
 Castro knew that the United States, by means of these covert and overt military actions, was bent on his removal by force . By this time, Castro knew he needed Soviet military assistance .
 Khrushchev met with his top military advisers in April 1962 . The Cuban leader met with the Soviet Union's top diplomats to discuss the situation .
 American Jupiter missiles were operational just across the border in Turkey, aimed at Soviet targets . Jupiter missiles fired at Soviet Union targets in the early 1950s .
 By the end of the month, Khrushchev had talked his top military and political advisers into sending their most powerful intermediate missiles to Cuba in response to Kennedy’s secret war against Castro . The missiles were sent to Cuba as part of a response to the secret war .
 CIA-backed exile raids into Cuba grew in scope and intensity . While the war games were visibly underway, the raids were visible in Cuba . The raids continued to grow in the years following the war .
 Cuban exiles aboard two small boats slipped into Havana Harbor and moved close to Hotel Icar in Miramar province . On August 24, 1962, Cuban exilees slipped in Havana Harbor to move close to the Hotel Icar .
 Numerous rounds hit the hotel, but Castro, who was inside, managed to survive the attack . Castro was inside the hotel when it was attacked . Castro managed to escape the attack, but was not injured .
 Two days later, another exile attack took place at the Sierra Maestra Hotel . Two days after the attack, another attack was held at the same hotel .
 Three months earlier, members of the exile group Alpha 66 attacked a Cuban Coast Guard cutter, killing two sailors . The attack occurred near the town of Santa Clara de Norte . Three months before, two sailors were killed .
 CIA reports said Castro expected an American-led invasion of Cuba during the summer of 1962 . Castro expected a U.S. invasion of the island nation in the summer .
 The same report also noted that the Cubans were not worried about a United States invasion after September . It said any danger of an American attack on Cuba would be over by then .
 Castro knew Soviet missiles would be arriving in the September/October time frame . This surely had to do with the fact that Castro knew they were coming in . Castro knew that Soviet missiles were arriving in September .
 As September wore on, the United States prepared military options for an attack . Cuban exiles were raiding harbors and other military and economic installations on the island nation .
 The CIA was monitoring the arrival of a large number of Russian freighters arriving in Cuba, including Omsk, which docked at the port of Casilda on September 8 . Meanwhile, the CIA was also monitoring the arrivals of a Russian freighter .
 A few weeks before, French intelligence officer Philippe de Voskjoli told CIA Director John McCone that his agency had received credible reports of the arrival of certain types of Soviet missiles .
 Thousands of Russian soldiers have been deployed to man the missiles, says CNN's John Sutter . He also reported the deployment of thousands of Russian troops to man those missiles .
 The failure so far of Operation Mongoose took center stage in October 16, 1962, meeting chaired by Robert Kennedy and attended by General Lansdale and other SGA members . The failure of the operation was discussed at the meeting .
 He said the operation had been under way for a year, that the results were discouraging . He pointed out that there had been no acts of sabotage, and that even the one which had been attempted had failed twice .
 He indicated that there had been noticeable improvement during the year in the collection of intelligence but that other actions had failed to influence significantly the course of events in Cuba .
 In reaction to the Cuba project, the Soviet Union began secretly to send thousands of military “advisers” Mikoyan-Gurevich MiGs and ICBMs to Cuba in defense of that country . Robert Kennedy and his brother didn't know that thousands of Soviet
 The 1962 missile crisis was a direct result of the Kennedy’s secret war against Castro . It now can clearly be stated that the 1962 missile . crisis was the result of Kennedy's secret war with Castro .
 At the height of Operation Mongoose, the CIA and the military devised numerous clandestine operations aimed at destroying and creating havoc throughout the Cuban population and economy .
 Operation Bingo was an audacious plan prepared by the CIA that had little chance of succeeding . The CIA said the plan was 'ineffective' and 'likely to fail'
 The concept was to cause an incident that looked like a Cuban attack on the naval base at Guantanamo Bay . The U.S. planned to create a scenario that resembled an attack at the base .
 Such an attack, if genuine, would give the U.S. reason to retaliate against Cuba .
 The blueprint for this operation would be a live firefight right outside the base during which, upon hearing the noise, troops inside Guantanamo would think a real attack by Cuban forces had begun . The plan for the operation was to be carried out in Guantanamo .
 The United States would then make a counterattack upon the phony Cuban forces, thus creating a pretext for going to war against the Castro government . The U.S. would then go on to go on a war against Castro government.
 The plan was to convince the Castro government that American naval forces were only a cover . The real purpose was an invasion of Cuba, the author says . The plan to convince Castro that the landing of the Mercury space capsule carrying an American astronaut was only cover .
 Pan American Airways tickets to destinations such as Mexico, Venezuela and other parts of South America to be given to Cuban people . The program was to be implemented by the Cuban government .
 During a certain period, any Cuban who wanted to leave the country would supposedly be able to do so, paid for by Uncle Sam . During that time, the Cuban government would supposedly pay for the people to leave .
 Operation Northwoods was no joking matter, Washington officials say . The Northwoods program was the first of its kind in Washington's history .
 Northwoods was to destroy an American warship in Guantanamo Bay and blame it on the Cubans . One action envisioned as a part of Northwoods would be to destroy a U.S. warship . One of the Northwoods members was to blame the U.C. military for
 A Washington-initiated wave of terror was then supposed to sweep over innocent Americans in the Miami and Washington areas, killing countless citizens . The Washington-based attack was supposed to kill countless citizens in Miami and D.C.
 Other despicable actions allegedly considered included the deliberate sinking of boatloads of Cuban refugees seeking asylum in the United States, the false hijacking of civilian American registered airliners, and a false story that Cuban MiGs destroyed a number of American aircraft .
 President Kennedy was shown the blueprints for Operation Northwoods . President Kennedy turned it down . Operation Northwood was the brainchild of President Kennedy .
 From the summer and through the fall of 1962, U.S. intelligence had been keeping a close watch on the steady stream of Soviet cargo ships heading for Cuba .
 Reports from the CIA’s agents inside Cuba came back of large-scale Soviet missile deployments . The presence of thousands of Russian technicians to man the missiles was reported .
 Even prior to the Soviets erecting their missiles, the U.S. had made a tentative decision to invade Cuba in October 1962 . The United States had made an attempt to invade the island in October .
 U-2 returned with proof that the Soviets had covertly sent long-range missiles to Cuba capable of hitting the U.S. That all changed when, on October 16, 1962, a U.2 found out .
 During the 13-day crisis that followed, the U.S. placed a naval quarantine around Cuba, threatened to sink Soviet ships that crossed the quarantine line . Thousands of troops were streaming into Florida for a possible invasion .
 The Soviets had in place a number of tactical nuclear weapons which could be used in the event of an American invasion . Unknown to the U.S. at the time was that the Soviets had . in place . The Soviet Union had a number . of tactical . nuclear weapons that could be
 If those weapons were employed, thousands of Americans soldiers would be wiped out as they landed on Cuban shores . Thousands of Americans would die in Cuba if they were killed .
 During the height of the crisis, the CIA landed an unauthorized team of agents in Cuba from a two-man sub to reconnoiter with the underground and report on the Soviet buildup . The CIA landed the team in Cuba on a sub sub .
 When it was learned that CIA men were in Cuba, frantic communications were issued from Washington to the team inside Cuba .
 No harm was done, however, and the team members eventually returned safely to the United States . The team members were not injured .
 The crisis ended when Khrushchev decided to remove the missiles in exchange for a secret pledge by the United States to remove its outdated Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The crisis was resolved when the U.S. agreed to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 Small-scale hit-and-run raids continued into the fall of 1963 . No appreciable damage to the Cuban state took place .
 The official record is replete with discussions about ending the mission . The mission to the U.S. ended in 2007 .
 JFK decided to reduce tensions with the Soviet Union after the crisis . JFK's decision was made to ease tensions between the two countries .
 In June 1963, the United States and Soviets concluded a nuclear test ban treaty . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and the Soviets .
 The following fall, the administration received tentative feelers from Castro wanting to know if Kennedy would be willing to enter into secret talks with him . Castro asked Kennedy if he was willing to talk with him, Kennedy said .
 JFK's personal emissary was meeting with Castro in Havana when JFK was killed in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 .
 Rolando Cubela, a Cuban agent working for the CIA, was meeting with his CIA contact officer in Paris, planning another assassination attempt on Castro . That same day a Cubela was meeting to discuss a possible assassination attempt .
 The inspector general’s report on the CIA-Mafia links describes that final meeting . The report describes the final meeting between the CIA and the Mafia .
 The placement of Russian missiles in Cuba was never the simple act of belligerence it was touted as by the news media and official U.S. government sources . Given what we now know, the placement of the missiles was never as simple as the claim .
 The Kennedy brothers’ secret war against Castro helped push Castro into seeking Russian support against what he saw as a possible U.S. invasion . Castro saw a possible American invasion and assassination plots .
 Popular myth persists of evil Russians armed and at the doorstep in 1962, bent on attacking America with nuclear weapons for no apparent reason at all . Yet the popular myth persists .
 The discovery of 19 Revolutionary War cannons has led to negotiations between the British government, United States federal government and the state of Georgia . US, UK must decide fate of the cannons .
 There are no records that detail how the soup was made or where it came from . The story of the milk soup, known as “Kappel Milchsuppe” has become an integral story in Swiss history .
 Industrial Age ushered in weapons that didn’t require their wielders to be anywhere near the field of combat . From Mines to Robot Dogs, weapons can be found in mines, mines and even robots .
 David McCullough, author of “1776,’s ‘1776” Historynet.com is brought to you by Historynet LLC, the world's largest publisher of history magazines . McCullough: "1776"
 Historynet.com contains daily features, photo galleries and over 11,000 articles originally published in our nine magazines . Historynet .com contains 11,500 photos, articles, galleries and galleries .