 I present a framework for understanding a class of intelligence failures that are caused by the mis-assessment of how an adversary frames a decision and the risks that they are willing to take . The author says intelligence failures are often caused by a mis assessment of the risks an adversary is willing to
 I present a two-stage process for understanding how individuals assess the risk-propensity of adversaries in international politics . I also present a new two-step process for assessing the risk of adversaries .
 This is a vitally important question with significant implications for national security . This is an important question for the U.S. national security. This is the most important question of national security, says President Obama .
 A significant amount of research has been devoted to suggesting possible answers . It is therefore not surprising that a significant amount has been dedicated to finding out what is possible .
 Intelligence analysis is so clearly linked to the judgment and information processing of those who make it . It has been relatively open to approaches that draw upon psychology, such as psychology .
 Most scholars have been content to simply list ways in which individuals have been demonstrated to make judgments in a non-rational or suboptimal manner . These cognitive shortcomings have important implications for the analysis of intelligence, they say . However, with a few notable exceptions, most scholars are content to
 What is needed is a more detailed exposition on what psychological phenomena are relevant for the study of intelligence and intelligence failures, when they are likely to significantly affect analysis and judgments, and what can be done to correct or compensate for these potential problems .
 A misperception or a misunderstanding of any of these central factors is likely to make ‘strategic surprise’ more likely . ‘Strategic surprise is more likely to be made more likely,’ says David Cameron .
 Many factors – from bureaucratic impediments to time pressure – may contribute to such a misunderstanding .
 One critical factor in assessing intentions is how actors perceive and understand risk . However, one critical factor is how actor perceive risk .
 In this article, I examine the mis-assessment of Soviet intentions by the U.S. in the months before the deployment of nuclear weapons to Cuba in 1962 . In 1962, the United States deployed nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 The critical problem in 1962 was not that the U.S. hadn’t considered the possibility of a deployment of nuclear weapons to Cuba, it was that the United States had considered a deployment .
 "The cause of the estimative failure was the manner in which this possibility was considered," the author says . "Rather than the estimation failure, the cause of this was the way it was considered"
 The United States assessed Soviet intentions taking into account only the risks and costs of deploying strategic weapons into Cuba . The U.S. failed to consider the potential benefits that such a deployment would have for Khrushchev .
 The risks of such a deployment (as assessed by US officials) were judged to be too high for such a deploy to be at all likely . As a result of this skewed assessment, the risks of a deployment were judged too high to be possible .
 Mirroring risk is the tendency to project one’s own framing of a situation on to another, and/ or assume one's own risk-profile to be shared by others . The risk of mirroring risk in mirroring a situation is to be seen as a problem .
 The case of the Cuban Missile estimation illustrates both aspects of mirroring risk . The Cuban missile estimation illustrates that risk .
 The first section of this article will present a framework for understanding how actors assess the risk-propensity of their adversaries in international politics . It will present an understanding of how actors are able to assess their adversaries' risk-problems .
 The second section will examine the process of estimation in the spring and summer of 1962 . It will focus on how U.S. officials assessed the intentions, framing and risk-propensity of Soviet leaders .
 The third and final section will analyze the Cuban Missile estimation in light of the ‘mirroring risk’ concept, as well as suggesting steps that might be taken to avoid such problems in the future .
 Notable topics of research have included the bureaucratic processes that impacted the implementation of political decisions,5 US6 and Soviet decision-making during the crisis .
 There has been a great effort to determine what lessons should be drawn from the crisis . Additionally, there has been an effort to find out what lessons can be drawn .
 The majority of work devoted to answering these questions arose in the near-immediate aftermath of the crisis . In fact, the majority of the work was done in the days before the crisis began .
 The failure to follow through on analyzing these important questions is troubling for two reasons . It's troubling for both the government and the public, especially in the U.S.
 The release of archived documents and transcripts gives us much better insight into the questions of both Soviet motivations and U.S. assessments of those motivations than we have had in previous decades . First, the release of archives and transcripts from the Havana, Cambridge and Moscow conferences .
 This allows us to determine the ways in which U.S. assessments of the Soviet Union were incorrect, says historian John Avlon .
 There have been substantial advances in our understanding of the psychology of decision-making and how individuals react to risk, both of which are perennial problems of intelligence analysis . Second, there have also been significant advances in understanding of decision making and individuals reacting to risk .
 These advances allow us to finally place the erroneous U.S. estimation of Soviet intent in the proper context . These advances . . . allow us . finally place . the erroneous United States estimation of . Soviet intent . in the context .
 U.S. intelligence services identified the missiles before they became operational, and provided useful updates during the actual crisis . United States intelligence services did identify the missiles .
 It was a failure of estimation, and it took place well before the actual crisis . Rather than an actual crisis, it was an estimation of estimation . It took place before the crisis, rather than before it actually occurred .
 In fact, it was the failure of estimation that was partially responsible for the crisis . The failure to estimate the size of the crisis was partly to blame for the collapse .
 Had U.S. leaders believed the Soviets would deploy missiles to Cuba, or even taken the possibility of such a tactic seriously, there would have been several options .
 U.S. leaders did not believe that Khrushchev would order the deployment . Yet, United States leaders believed it would not happen .
 The critical failure was not in detecting what the Soviet Union was actually doing, but in the biased and incorrect assessments of what they were likely to do . The failure was to detect what was actually happening, but to anticipate what it was likely to be doing, he says .
 The failure was in the incorrect assessment that the Soviets would not deploy strategic weapons in Cuba because they would not accept the ‘high risk’ of such a deployment .
 We must examine how individuals typically assess the ‘risk’ associated with a given decision . To attempt to answer these questions, we must first examine how people assess the risk of a decision .
 The first stage is assessing or estimating how a target ‘frames’, or understands, the situation . The first step is assessing how a person ‘frame’ or understands the situation, or not .
 Consequential decisions may have farreaching effects on any number of issues, but may have been framed as a response to only a single one of them . Consequentially decisions may be framed as one response to many of those issues, such as the issue of immigration .
 The second stage is assessing the most likely choice of the target, given the previous assessment of their decision-frame . The final stage of assessing the target is assessing how likely it is to be chosen .
 This second stage must take into account the risk-tolerance of the target in order to allow the assessor to make a judgment as to the most likely behavior . The assessor must also consider the risk tolerance of a target .
 This two-stage process of risk assessment is often done so quickly and intuitively that the multiple stages meld into one, but they are conceptually distinct . The two stages are often done quickly, intuitively, but not necessarily meld together .
 bias, misperception or error may enter at either or both stages of the assessment . And bias or error could enter at both or both levels of assessment .
 I introduce the concept of ‘mirroring risk’ to describe what occurs when individuals project their framing of a situation onto that of a target and/or assume the target to share their risk profile .
 Assessing the Decision-Frame Framing involves the decision-maker’s conception of the ‘acts, outcomes and contingencies associated with a particular choice’, and is inherently tied to the concept of risk . Assessing is a decision-making process that is tied to
 Framing is integral to decision-making, and reflects the decision-maker’s conception of what type of problem they are dealing with, what the stakes of the situation are and what the appropriate means to deal with the problem are . Framing reflects a person’’
 It affects their estimates of probabilities of outcomes associated with a given choice and the value attributed to each outcome . It also affects their estimate of the probabilities of each choice .
 Assessing how adversaries frame situations is a crucial first step in estimating their intentions and likely courses of action . Assessing a situation is crucial to assessing the intentions of your adversaries .
 There are generally several alternate decision-frames that would be equally valid . However, in any given situation, there are several alternate decisions-making-frames .
 Two individuals with exactly the same information who are asked to make a decision might not only come to a different judgment, but also frame the problem in different ways .
 Sherman Kent – author of the infamous National Intelligence Estimate prior to the Cuban missile crisis – speaks of the necessity for intelligence analysts . 15 Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, ‘The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice’, Science 211/4481
 Mirroring risk occurs in this initial phase if individuals project their own understanding of a decision onto that of a target . Mirroring risks occur in this first phase of a person's decision to take action .
 In essence, the error is to assume that the target of assessment perceives and understands a given risk in the same way that you do . The error in assessing a risk is not to assume the target understands the risk .
 Mirroring risk may occur if an assumption is made that a target will not pursue a given action because it entails a high degree of risk . Mirroring risks may also occur if a target is not pursued because it is a high risk of pursuing it .
 This error occurs in the second stage of assessing risk, when the target’s most likely choice is being predicted . This error, discussed in more detail below, is discussed in the more detailed detail below .
 The former is an assessment of how an adversary ‘frames’ a situation, while the latter engages one’s judgments of the risk-profile of the target . The latter is a judgment of how a target is perceived to be a threat .
 Though the concept of mirroring risk is introduced in this article, there is an empirical basis for it in social psychology . The concept is based on the empirical basis of it .
 Participants indicate what they would choose as well as what percentage of a ‘target group’ they believe would make the same choice . One way in which this effect is demonstrated is to give participants a story that culminates in a 'decision point’
 Some of the stories used in these experiments bear on the issue of assessing risk . Some of these stories are based on the fact that risk is real and real .
 He can pay a $20 fee by mail, or show up at court and contest the violation . The fee can be paid by mail or by contesting it .
 In essence, this is a choice between accepting a certain loss of $20, or choosing a gamble in which there is some possibility of losing $20 and expending effort going to court and not having to pay any money at all .
 The results indicated that subjects who chose either of the options tended to rate that option as relatively probable for ‘people in general’ and subjects who rejected that option rated it as ‘relatively improbable’ for others . Subjects who rejected the option rated that option 'relatively
 An Egocentric Bias in Social Perception and Attribution Processes’, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 13/3 280.’
 ‘An Egocentric Bias in Social Perception and Attribution Processes’,282.282. ‘,’ is a study of the social bias in social perception and attribution processes .
 Mirror imaging – projecting your thought process or value system onto someone else – is one of the greatest threats to objective intelligence analysis . Mirror imaging is a form of mirror imaging that can only be seen in a person's eyes .
 Not everyone is alike, and cultural, ethnic, religious, religious and political differences do matter . Not everyone has a common sense sense of understanding, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Just because something seems like the logical conclusion or course of action to you does not mean that the person or group you are analyzing will see it that way . Differences in values and thought processes come into play when analyzing something .
 Mirror imaging is a common ‘fallacy’ of intelligence analysis . Intelligence analyst Raymond Garthoff mentioned mirror imaging in his book .
 ‘mirror imaging’ has been a pervasive problem in international politics, says Garthoff . The tendency is to project onto the subject of the estimate one’s views, perceptions, values and behavior’
 Goodman traces some of the difficulty of Britain in assessing the Soviet nuclear program to this problem . Goodman: The difficulty of assessing Soviet nuclear programs was partly due to the problem .
 British analysts relied on assumptions that centered on an interpretation of the Soviet atomic program as a ‘mirror image’ of the Anglo-American program .
 Mirroring risk is an important and distinct sub-category of the more general phenomenon of mirror imaging . It is important to consider whether the Soviet program could not have been further advanced than the British one .
 Mirror imaging refers to the more generalized tendency to assume that an adversary will act a certain way 23 Frank Watanabe, ‘Fifteen Axioms for Intelligence Analysts’, Studies in Intelligence 1/1 .
 Mirror imaging can include the projection of one’s motivations, goals, fears, desires, risks, and even standard operating procedures on to a target . Mirror imaging is a projection of a person's motivation, goals and fears on to the target .
 ‘mirror imaging’ can refer to so many distinct assumptions, it becomes relatively less useful as an analytical or conceptual device . ‘Mirror imaging' is a tool that can be used as a tool of analysis and analysis . However, it can also be useful as a
 The phenomenon encompasses so many potential problems that a realistic plan to ameliorate its deleterious effects is often reduced to prescriptions such as ‘being the other person, at least for a while’ or to avoid the ‘everybody-thinks-like-us
 U.S. analysts would not have had to possess any special talent for empathy in order to have produced a more accurate estimation of Soviet intentions in Cuba . As the analysis in the later sections of this paper will illustrate, the analysis will illustrate .
 There were several simple steps that could have been taken, such as including a possible alternative framing of the situation as a matter of standard procedure . There were many simple steps .
 Assessing a target’s decision-frame, though crucial, is only a first step . Assessing the ‘Risk Profile’ of an Adversary is a step-by-step process . Assess the risk profile of an adversary is a crucial first step
 The process of estimation and intelligence analysis must necessarily follow that assessment with a prediction of likely behavior . Intelligence analysis must follow an assessment with an assessment of the likely behavior of the situation, the author says .
 In making this estimation, a number of important factors come into play, including an estimation of the target’s goals, beliefs and values . In making an estimation, an important factor is also considered .
 The target’s risk profile is also crucial to assessing this second-stage of decision-making . However, also crucial is the assessment of the target's risk profile .
 The most obvious example of an error in the second stage of risk assessment would be the judgment that an adversary is riskaverse when in fact they are risk-acceptant .
 An erroneous assessment of an adversary’s framing might mislead the intelligence analyst about what risks the target is willing to accept . The intelligence analyst should be careful not to mislead his intelligence analyst .
 Prospect Theory has demonstrated the importance of framing and ‘domains’ in affecting the risk-profiles of individuals making decisions under conditions of risk and uncertainty . Relevant to this issue is Prospect Theory .
 Richards J Heuer, Jr., Jr., The Psychology of Intelligence Analysis 70. Emphasis in original . Richards J. Heuer Jr.
 It has been convincingly demonstrated, both experimentally and in real-world circumstances, that choices framed in terms of gains often lead to risk-averse choices . Framing a problem in terms terms of losses leads to risk seeking behavior, experts say .
 The United States failed to anticipate Soviet intervention in the Egyptian-Israeli war of attrition . U.S. intelligence analysts incorrectly assessed the Soviet framing of the situation and inferred that the Soviets would be risk-averse .
 It was only after the first Soviet airlift of military supplies that U.S. analysts revised their analysis of Egypt's vulnerability .
 Intelligence analysts had noted that in that particular context, the Soviet Union was facing a choice between a certain loss and a risky decision to aid Egypt, the analysts said .
 While it has been convincingly demonstrated that framing can push people to be more or less risk-averse, the ability to make use of this knowledge requires knowledge of a ‘base-rate’ of risk-acceptance .
 Intelligence analysis might know that a certain framing of a situation is likely to make an adversary somewhat less risk-acceptant, but that has very different implications depending on whether that adversary was very risk acceptant to start with, or just moderately so .
 Both articles focus on decisionmaking during the crisis, not on the relevance of prospect theory to estimating the behavior of others .
 Haas article may be correct in declaring that the ‘most important decisions’ made by both Kennedy and Khrushchev conform to the predictions of prospect theory, but that is not the focus of this article .
 U.S. estimations of Soviet behavior were incorrect, author says . "I'm interested in examining why United States estimations were incorrect," he says .
 U.S. intelligence failed to estimate the Soviet intervention in the Egyptian-Israeli War of Attrition, according to the Journal of Strategic Studies .
 American Assessments of Soviet Intentions in Cuba . We now turn to events and assessments leading up to the deployment of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, seen from the perspective of U.S. decision-makers .
 The primary question is whether U.S. analysts fell prey to the potential mistakes noted earlier . Progressing from the framework provided above, the primary question will be whether analysts fall prey to potential mistakes .
 U.S. decision-maker and analyst didn't question the assumptions that underlay intelligence estimates, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The most remarkable aspect of this case is the unwillingness of virtually every United States decision-making and analyst before the crisis"
 Soviet leaders would perceive the deployment of missiles to Cuba as entailing a high degree of risk . A1: Soviet leaders may have considered deploying missiles in Cuba as a risk .
 The inevitable conclusion that flowed from these faulty assumptions was that the Soviet Union would not deploy missiles to Cuba . The Soviet Union did not want to deploy missiles in Cuba .
 Let us turn now to how the estimation process unfolded in the spring of 1962 . The estimation process took place in 1962 .
 US intelligence community issued a number of National Intelligence Estimates on the subject of Soviet intentions with respect to Cuba . Early Estimations were issued just days before the crisis began .
 In January of 1962, an NIE was released that explicitly considered the possibility that Cuba (or other Caribbean states that ‘fell under communist control’) might be used by the USSR as areas in which to establish missile, submarine or air bases . Cuba was considered as an area
 The estimate posited that the rationale for such a move would be to ‘bring North America under attack’ or ‘add to the deterrent to any conceivable United States military action’ in the Caribbean .
 When Situationally Determined Bargaining Behaviors are Attributed to Personality Traits’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77/1 57 .
 It assumed that Soviet leaders believed the deployment of missiles to Cuba would entail a high degree of risk . It assumed they would not be willing to take such risks, it said .
 In fact, this estimate spends a paragraph discussing the potential risks involved for the Soviets . The estimate is based on the fact that the Soviets could be at risk .
 Such a deployment would heighten the risk of general war, increase the probability that the US would attempt to overthrow the Castro regime before the missiles or bases became operational, and involve the USSR in a ‘politically difficult’ situation .
 Nowhere does the estimate compare risks of deploying missiles to the risks of not deploying missiles . Even without a technical understanding of prospect theory, such a comparison would perhaps have highlighted the strategic balance between the two superpowers that were relevant for Soviet leaders .
 It did not consider that such a deployment might change the strategic balance between the two superpowers, or simply embarrass President Kennedy . Khrushchev did not think it might change strategic balance in the world .
 There is no discussion of the potential gains from such a deployment, or consideration of whether Soviet leaders framed the situation in an alternate way . Also notable for its absence is any discussion of any potential gains or potential gains .
 Kent mocks the suggestion to put oneself in the place of an adversary – to him this is as obvious as telling a baker the usefulness of flour . Almost zero effort was expended in questioning a key assumption .
 Khrushchev would hold a large bargaining chip to coerce the U.S. into removing its missiles from Turkey . The risk of not deploying the missiles was that the Soviets would continue to fall further behind in the strategic balance, the author says .
 If this were true, it would mean that analysts considered and decided to ignore the possibility that the Soviet Union might see things differently . Yet, it is even more damning, since it would have been more damning .
 This raises the issue of whether an alternative framing should be incorporated into the assessment process, especially in cases such as this, in which the costs of mis-assessment are high and an alternate framing would suggest significantly different policy options .
 Intelligence analysts' diversity of judgments can be of little help to decisionmakers, says John Defterios . After all, complexity and diversity in the judgments of intelligence analysts can't help decisionmakers who are never aware of them .
 It's not enough for only intelligence analysts and mid-level officials to consider alternate hypotheses and framings . Leaders must do so as well as leaders as well, he says .
 Another intelligence estimate was released on the subject of Cuba in March . Three months later, in March, another intelligence estimate of Cuba .
 The estimate noted that Cuban military capabilities were being augmented by technology from the Soviet Bloc . It was ‘unlikely’ that the Bloc would provide Cuba with ‘strategic weapons systems’ or station combat units in Cuba .
 Increasing amounts of information that the Soviet Union had increased military assistance to Cuba – that ‘something different’ was taking place – were not sufficient to force analysts to confront and examine their core assumptions . As the next section will demonstrate, increasing amounts of . information that . . that �
 Evidence accumulated that indicated an increased flow of military supplies and even personnel from the Soviet Union to Cuba in the summer of 1962 .
 NIE concluded that it would be ‘unlikely’ that the Soviet Bloc would provide Cuba with the capability to 40 missiles . Ernest May, for instance, has suggested that some of the writers of the NIE might have been uncomfortable with the ‘action implications’
 The writers would have been hesitant to include what they believed to be a very low-probability event in the NIE knowing that it might be used by others in the administration who were known to be in favor of a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Intelligence analysts were forced to continually adjust their estimates of Soviet assistance upwards as the extent of the military aid to Cuba became apparent . In fact, intelligence analysts continually adjusted their estimates .
 At no time, however, did this lead to a major revision of the underlying assumptions of the intelligence estimates, the intelligence agency says .
 In fact, we have no evidence that the assumptions were even questioned, let alone revised . In fact there is no evidence of the assumptions being even questioned or revised .
 The premises of these assessments, once formalized in the NIEs, seem to have been surprisingly resistant to change or reconsideration . This is particularly true in the case of climate change in the United States .
 Between July and August, analysts estimated that between four and six thousand Soviet Bloc personnel had arrived in Cuba . Analysts estimate that between 4 and 6 thousand Soviet-bloc personnel arrived in the summer .
 Some of the Cuban troops were presumed to be technicians, but some of them were also troops . The Soviet Union did not station any combat units in Cuba that year .
 On 21 August, McCone reported that new information indicated that the extent of the Soviet supply operation was ‘much greater’ than had previously been reported . McCone: New information (obtained since 10 August) indicated that . new information indicates that the . extent . of the
 There also seemed to be indications that Soviet personnel were involved in construction work on island .
 The speed and magnitude of this influx of personnel and equipment is unprecedented in Soviet military aid activities . Clearly something new and different is taking place taking place .
 The report went on to recount evidence that the material being transported from the port areas was done at night . Streetlights were turned off in the towns as convoys passed through, the report said .
 Memo of 21 August noted that the principals (Rusk, Robert Kennedy, General Taylor, McNamara and Bundy) did discuss ‘courses of action’ open to the U.S. if the Soviet deploy medium range ballistic missiles to Cuba .
 The debate was clearly the act of responsible statesmen, willing to consider for a few moments what they might do if the unexpected and improbable happen . However, that discussion was clearly an act of responsibility for the country .
 Though we cannot know for sure, this seems to have been a discussion of a worst-case scenario, not a meaningful reconsideration of Soviet intentions or risk-tolerance . This seems to be nowhere near a formal assessment of those factors .
 It is clear from the documented record that the underlying assumptions remained unchanged, even as evidence accumulated that should have forced their reconsideration . The underlying assumptions remain unchanged, the authors say .
 Without an accurate and full understanding of the adversary’s decision frame, this is useful only on a superficial level . However, it is useful to understand the adversary's decision frame in order to achieve success .
 The prediction of likely behavior (no deployment of missiles to Cuba) did not change . As long as the basic assumptions underlying the assessment remain unquestioned, it is no surprise that the prediction was accurate .
 Evidence continued to accumulate through the end of August and the beginning of September that the Soviet deployment represented a departure from precedent .
 A memo written on 25 August by Roger Hilsman (Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research) noted the ‘unusually heavy Soviet shipments to Cuba’ The ‘most likely explanation’ was to enhance the Cuban regime’s defensive capabilities, he said .
 Hilsman concluded, in fact, that the Soviets had undertaken the military buildup with ‘reluctance’
 The military buildup in Cuba caused concern to U.S. leaders in August . The Cuban military buildup caused enough concern to consider issuing a public statement .
 There was a surprising amount of internal disagreement on whether to issue such a statement . Yet, there was a surprise amount of internally disagreement on such a decision .
 A report on this issue declared that the disadvantages of such a statement outweighed its potential advantages . A report by the U.S. government declared that such a claim was 'unacceptable'
 The memo was clearly that warning the Soviets against deploying nuclear missiles close to U.S. borders would give them ‘leverage’ to complain about US-controlled nuclear forces surrounding the Soviet bloc .
 President Kennedy did issue public warnings on 4 September and 13 September, though by that time the Soviet deployment had already been underway for over two months . President Kennedy issued a warning to the public, but the deployment was already underway .
 Robert Kennedy was attorney general and close advisor to his brother, President John F Kennedy . The first was Robert Kennedy , attorney general .
 RFK asked the Special Group50 what an appropriate course of action would be in the event that the Soviets did establish a military base in Cuba . RFK: 'The best way of dealing with the situation is to prepare for a possible military base'
 We have no evidence that anything came of Kennedy’s question until months later, during another meeting of the Special Group . We have been unable to find out what Kennedy said .
 Establishment of a military base in Cuba would cost the Soviets very little in terms of world public opinion, the group said . Establishment of the Cuban military base would cost little to the Soviets, it said .
 They could explain that they were simply taking a page from our book, and would remove their base form Cuba if we would remove ours from Berlin, Turkey or Formosa . For example, they could . explain that . they could remove their bases from Cuba, Turkey, Formosa or Form
 The group concluded by agreeing to prepare written responses to RFK’s question for the next meeting .
 A week later, Gilpatric noted that RFK’s question had gone unanswered, and distributed a memo reminding participants of it . Yet, there is no further mention of it in declassified sources . Yet at a meeting over a week later a memo was distributed reminding participants .
 RFK provides an illustration of how one might re-examine core assumptions . RFK did not appear to follow up on the matter, though he did .
 In doing this, he used a frame of analysis that more closely approximated how the Soviets might see the situation, he said . He said that in doing this he used an analysis to more closely resemble the Soviet Union .
 This is in marked contrast to most other U.S. policy-makers, who focused on the risks as they understood them, and ignored other elements of the decision-frame, such as the benefits or possible motivations of the deployment .
 U.S. policy-makers knew that they would interpret a deployment of strategic weapons to Cuba as a major provocation, which would possibly precipitate a crisis and lead to increased chances of war . They projected that knowledge onto Soviets leaders .
 U.S. assessments of the Soviet decision-frame were incomplete, the author says . Soviet leaders might have understood the risks in the same way, without also considering the advantages of such a deployment for the Soviets .
 The type of analysis recommended in this article requires no special talent for empathy . While it is often noted how difficult it is to put one’s self in the mindset of an adversary, the analysis is simple .
 Decision-makers and intelligence analysts must remember that their adversaries are unlikely to frame situations with reference only to the costs/risks of a given action . Intelligence analysts must simply remember that .
 A major component of their decision is likely to be what benefits they might derive from an action . In fact, a major part of their decisions is likely be what they might benefit from an act .
 The second person who questioned the consensus judgment of Soviet intentions was Director of Intelligence John McCone . McCone was the second person to question the consensus consensus judgment .
 McCone was utterly convinced that the Soviets would deploy strategic weapons to Cuba . Kennedy had merely asked other decision-makers to consider the possibility .
 The possibility seems to have been first mentioned in a memo of 21 August in which McCone predicts that Cuba seems to be getting stronger, not weaker, and that such a country would serve as ‘a possible location for MRBMs’ deployed by the Soviet Union .
 During his absence, he shared his concerns with the acting DCI, Lt. Lt. John D. Paul O'Neill . The DCI said he was 'concerned' about the situation .
 I recognize Cuban policy decisions most delicate and beyond agency or my competence . Cuban policy is "most delicate" of its own agency or its own, he says .
 We must give those making decision our best estimate of possible developments and alternative situations which might evolve and unexpectedly confront us . However believe we must give . those making decisions our best . estimate of . possible developments . We must . give those . making decision their best estimate .
 This memo offers a tantalizing glimpse into what could have been – what should have – been the process of estimation in the case of the Cuban missiles .
 "The stakes of such a deployment were so high that alternate conceptions of Soviet behavior should absolutely have been considered," says the author of the book .
 This was especially true in this case, where so much of the analysis rested upon one key assumption that was never questioned . This is especially true, where much of this case rests upon a key assumption never questioned.
 McCone’s concerns were raised in Washington, but there was little that could be done to prove his hypothesis correct . Unfortunately, though McCone's concerns were .
 In McCone’s absence, Carter proposed extensive overflight photography utilizing U-2 planes . In the absence of McCone, Carter planned extensive photography .
 Few flights were undertaken because of the concern that one of the planes might be shot down . The planes were shot down, but few flights were carried out .
 All flights since 5 September had been either ‘peripheral’ or ‘limited’ as a result of restrictions put in place . In fact, as McCone noted on 4 October, there had been no coverage of the center of Cuba .
 RFK suggested the more complete and accurate assessment of Soviet intentions . McCone is generally McCone that is mentioned in scholarly accounts of the crisis . RFK was in fact RFK who suggested a more accurate assessment .
 He did not have any more evidence than any other U.S. official at the time of the incident . He did have no evidence of wrongdoing .
 He hadn't actually challenged or reformulated the basic assumptions that underlay the intelligence estimates . He simply believed the Soviets were likely to deploy missiles since that is what the scattered evidence indicated to him .
 In many ways this parallels an earlier incident in U.S. intelligence . The incident occurred in the 1980s and 1990s .
 During the purported 'missile gap' of 1957–1961, American intelligence services drastically over-estimated Soviet intercontinental ballastic missile stockpiles . At the height of the ‘gap’, the United States estimated that the Soviet Union would have almost 1,000 IC
 The lone figure in the U.S. government that was not convinced by the intelligence estimates, was President Eisenhower . President Eisenhower never believed in the existence of a missiles gap .
 McCone's position, like McCone’s, was based on intuition, not evidence . Yet, his position, as well as his, was that of McCone, was not based on evidence .
 Neither he nor McCone were able to convince their colleagues, and in both cases the estimation process continued farther down the wrong path . As a result, neither he or McCone managed to convince his colleagues, they continued their estimation process .
 The immediate lead-up to the missiles’ discovery on 14 October has been well documented by other scholars, and does not bear repetition .
 As intelligence reports piled up throughout the summer, analysts continually revised their estimates . The U.S. intelligence community was shocked to learn of the threat .
 They adjusted their assessments only incrementally, and failed to fully re-examine the assumptions underlying their assessments . However, they adjusted their assessment only incrementalally .
 The first reports of sightings of Soviet MRBMs in Cuba were published on 21 September .
 Analysts clung to their initial formulation that assumed that a deployment of missiles to Cuba was ‘high risk’ and that the Soviets were risk-averse with respect to Cuba . Even as previous predictions of likely Soviet behavior were invalidated, analysts continued to think that the Soviet
 With our enhanced understanding of the estimation process, we can now turn to the critical question of why U.S. officials were incorrect in their assessments .
 U.S. intelligence analysts repeatedly predicted that a Soviet deployment of missiles to Cuba was unlikely because of their beliefs that the risks of such a deployment were high and the Soviets would not be willing to take such risks .
 U.S. officials mirrored risk by projecting their own framing of the situation onto the Soviet Union, authors say . United States officials also incorrectly assessed the risk profile of Khrushchev and his advisors, they say .
 In the first stage, U.S. officials erred in their estimation of how Soviet leaders would frame a decision to deploy missiles to Cuba . In the second stage, the United States erred its estimation of the Soviet leaders' intentions .
 The U.S. has been in touch with the Soviet Union since the Cold War began . The Soviet Union was the only country that had a strong anti-Soviet influence .
 They based their prediction of likely behavior on an assumed framing of the decision that was both incomplete and misleading . As a result of the framing, they based their predictions on an incomplete, misleading framing . The study was published in the U.S.
 U.S. officials focused only on the ‘disadvantages’ for the Soviets in having a military presence in Cuba . Only once noted that if the missiles were deployed it would be extremely difficult to force their removal .
 It was not until the actual crisis, for example, that officials questioned whether the deployment might be for the purpose of exerting pressure on the U.S. over the Berlin issue, or addressing the strategic imbalance .
 What U.S. officials did not do was to empathize with Soviet decisionmakers in any meaningful sense . What United States officials did was not to empathise with Soviet leaders, says historian .
 "Yes, it is true that they attempted to see the potential costs and risks as the Soviet Union likely would have," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com . Sutter: "Yes. Yes, it was true that . Yes, yes, yes. Yes
 Khrushchev considered the risks and costs of deployment, but not the benefits or gains that might accrue, he says . The risks or costs of the deployment were thoughtfully considered, he writes . The benefits and gains were not included in the assessment, he adds .
 Khrushchev’s decision to step down from the Soviet Union was a major mistake . The decision was made after a series of Soviet-Russian tensions erupted in 1956 .
 Intelligence analysts should be concerned primarily with assessing and estimating behavior, leaving the political implications, or the ‘action implications’ of such analysis to political leaders . One might concede that .
 Sherman Kent: How a possible deployment of Soviet missiles to Cuba would affect the overall strategic balance would be a question for the President, not Sherman Kent . By this logic, the question of how such a move would affect strategic balance is not a question .
 The distinction between analysis and implications might be useful in the abstract, in practice it seems likely to produce less accurate analysis than would otherwise be the case .
 Questions that on the surface seem to bear only on what the implications of a given action might be are actually important for any intelligence estimate . This is because questions that appear to bear solely on implications are important for intelligence estimates .
 How an adversary perceives the consequences and implications of a decision is likely to directly affect what decision is made . That's how an adversary sees the consequences, implications of such a decision .
 Intelligence officials must consider all aspects relevant to the adversary’s decision-frame . Therefore, intelligence officials must not resort to an artificial dividing line between objective analysis and political implications . Intelligence officials need to consider the political implications of their analysis .
 The second problem in the estimation process was that U.S. officials seem to have incorrectly assessed the risk-acceptance of the Soviet Union . The second mistake was that the United States incorrectly assessed Khrushchev’s Risk-Propensity .
 There is little doubt that U.S. officials believed the deployment of missiles to Cuban to entail a high degree of risk for the Soviet Union . This was likely to constrain the behavior of Soviet leaders who would (in the US’s estimation) be unwilling to accept such a
 Khrushchev's risk profile depends on how he characterized the risks of the deployment, the authors say . The risk profile of the U.S. response to the deployment depends on the risk profile, they say . This is not the case for the United States .
 Khrushchev and his associates believed the missile deployment would have to be accepted by President Kennedy if it could be presented as a fait accompli . We do know, for instance, that Khrush .
 The missiles would have had to have been deployed in secret, without the U.S. finding out . The plan would have to be done in secret .
 The risks of the plan were thought to be in the initial deployment . Khrushchev and his advisors considered the plan, but the risks were not serious enough .
 The U.S. flew high-altitude U-2 flights regularly, which could possibly have turned up evidence of missile sites while they were being constructed . As Soviet policy-makers knew at the time, the United States flew .
 Khrushchev would have had confidence that the plan would work, says historian . It seems highly likely he would have believed it would be possible to move forces undetected by the United States .
 Taking a risk only makes sense if one believes there is at least some chance that it will pay off . The risk of taking a risk makes sense only if you believe there is a good chance it pays off . Take a risk to take a risk and make sure you have the right to
 The explanation for why he believed this, despite abundant evidence to the contrary, might result from either motivated bias or simply bad advice . The more we want something to be true, the more we believe it to be false, or perhaps bad advice.
 'Daring and Caution in Foreign Policy Making’, Journal of Conflict Resolution 41/5 619. ‘Caution in foreign policy making’ was published in the journal of conflict resolution .
 There is no attribution for this quote, nor is it repeated in any other accounts of the Soviet decisionmaking process . The quote is not attributed to any other account of Soviet decision making .
 The strength of this effect increases in proportion to how important the outcome is, say experts . It is also the strength of the effect of the outcome of a vote in a presidential election .
 See Steven J Sherman, ‘On the Self-Erasing Nature of Errors of Prediction’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39/2 211 .
 That it was impossible – that the missiles would be discovered before they would be completely deployed – would be found before they were completely deployed . That would be impossible to say, but that it would be possible to do so .
 Even Fursenko and Naftali suggest Khrushchev (and some of his inner circle) ‘clung to the thesis that United States intelligence would not detect the missiles until it was too late to do anything about them’81 Just as we may never have an exact
 We can infer, however, that he at least had some belief that it would succeed . He was certainly aware of the possibility that the U.S. would discover the missiles before they were fully deployed .
 We can rule out the hypothesis that Khrushchev was unaware of the risks of his plan, or ignored them . Therefore, we can with some degree of certainty rule out .
 The remaining possibilities are that he saw the deployment as high risk, or as a low to moderate risk . It's unclear whether he saw it as a high risk or low risk .
 Until more documentation of the Soviet decision process is made available, we are unlikely to be able to answer this question definitively . Unfortunately, until more documentation is made .
 Khrushchev was certainly not as risk-averse as U.S. officials believed him to be, author says . Yet, he was aware of the risks involved, and we know that he did decide to deploy the missiles .
 U.S. officials projected their own framing of the situation on to the Soviet Union . United States officials projected themselves on to Soviet Russia .
 This framing was both incomplete, and biased heavily toward the risks and costs of such a deployment . However, this framing is both incomplete and biased toward the risk and cost of the deployment .
 U.S. officials concluded that the risks of such a deployment were so high that such action was highly unlikely . Because of this assumed framing, United States concluded that such an attack was unlikely .
 U.S. intelligence analysts estimated Khrushchev’s likely decision . The error in the first stage of assessing risk – the decision frame – led to, and was magnified in, the second stage when United States intelligence analysts .
 Because of the framing that United States officials had had 78 Allyn, Blight, and.78 Allyn and Blight . Because of that framing that U.S. officials had . had 78,000 people in the United States . Because the framing of this article was incorrect,
 Khrushchev’s framing of a possible deployment seems to have been critical, and was only compounded further by the assumption of riskaversion . Thus, the magnitude of the error in assessing the possibility of a deployment seems critical, according to the author .
 Government officials and scholars claimed intelligence before the crisis had worked as well as could be expected . Though this might seem obvious, for many years government officials said intelligence had worked well .
 Arnold Horelick, author of the first major study of the crisis, claimed as late as 1988 that the U.S. had ‘simply misjudged Khrushchev’s capacity to make mistakes’82 .
 Of course, we cannot expect intelligence analysts to get everything right, all the time – such a standard would be unreasonable . Such a standard is unreasonable, but intelligence analysts cannot get everything wrong .
 International politics is a complicated business, and any number of unexpected or unanticipated factors might cause reality to deviate from the predictions of an intelligence estimate .
 The failure of the U.S. to anticipate the deployment of Soviet missiles to Cuba was largely a result of a faulty and incomplete assessment of the Soviet decision-frame .
 This assumed decision-frame completely neglected the factors – the benefits of such a deployment, the motivation for deploying the missiles and the reasons that such a plan might succeed – that were most salient to Premier Khrushchev and other Soviet leaders .
 As a result of the incomplete decisionframe assessed by U.S. intelligence officials – combined with the assumption that Khrushchev would be risk-averse – their estimates were incorrect as well .
 The assumptions of Soviet intent with respect to Cuba did not change in the face of new and potentially disconfirming information . And because their assumptions were never updated or re-examined, they were not re-evaluated . The Soviet policy was never updated .
 Ralph White, for instance, declares that empathy might be achieved by ‘being the other person, at least for a while’83 However, a rough, instrumental, version of empathy may be achieved with far less effort . Ralph White declares that empathising might be possible by �
 The analysis will almost always be a significant improvement upon assessments based on incomplete framings . Though including these four factors is no guarantee that the analysis that follows from them will be correct .
 Case study suggests that high-level decision-makers should have access to at least one ‘alternative framing’ of a situation . The case study presented above suggests that the case study was a case study .
 In the Cuban Missile estimation, virtually everybody assumed that the Soviet Union would frame the decision in a specific way . The decision to launch the Cuban missile system was expected to be made public .
 That framing suggested Khrushchev would not deploy missiles to Cuba . The framing suggested that Khrushvic would not have deployed missiles . That framing was later rejected by the Soviets .
 Alternative framings would have generated directly opposite predictions . However, several alternative framings could have generated the opposite results .
 ‘estimative empathy’ and the perils of mirroring risk will a have similar impact and can now be added to that important list . Hopefully this lesson will have a similar impact as well as a lesson in ‘empathy’