 Two ducks were tethered and members of the Guantanamo Bay Association held a brief memorial service for their deceased members . Guantanamo Bay has been a flashpoint for debate about the U.S.-led war on terror .
 Nearly 50 veterans who were stationed at Naval Station Guantanamo Bay have different memories of their service there . They say they remember the historic Cold War happenings that unfolded all around them .
 Much of the American public knows only about the detainee center or perhaps references to ""Gitmo,"" the station's nickname, from the 1992 film ""A Few Good Men" starring Tom Cruise . The station is known for its nickname, "Gitm," from a 1992 film
 The Guantanamo Bay Association is in Chattanooga for their annual reunion . Members of the group say their time on the U.S. military installation on the island of Cuba was some of their best .
 The place was isolated, and sailors and Marines were not allowed off site . It was isolated and the Marines were kept inside .
 Though many people dreaded the assignment before arriving, that quickly changed once they got to the Caribbean post . The Caribbean post is the first of its kind .
 Walker and others also found themselves in the midst of tensions that played out after the Soviet Union placed nuclear warheads in Cuba . President John F Kennedy demanded their removal from Cuba .
 Shortly after arriving at work on Oct. 1962, her boss told her and the other civilian employees to go home, pack their bags and leave their keys in their car . She was told to pack her bags, leave their car and go home .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev relented and removed the missiles . After some tense days and with U.S. warships arrayed off Cuba, Soviet leader finally relented . The missiles were removed from Cuba .
 Bill Sedlak, a New Jersey native, requested duty in the Pacific rather than go to Gitmo . He requested to go to the Pacific instead of Gitmo, a Navy veteran .
 Sedlak worked on the FA-Crusader naval fighter jet and had to be on standby, ready to work in minutes if called . He had to work on the plane and was ready to fly in minutes .
 When not on duty, the then-single Navy petty officer spent his time snorkeling and scuba diving off the facility's beaches .
 He returned to Gitmo in 1998 as part of a trip for Gitmo veterans commemorating the Spanish-American War in 1898 . He returned in 1998 to the place in 1998, part of the trip commemorating a Spanish War anniversary .
 Sedlak has a photograph of the flight line in 1964, jammed full of jet planes and one in 1998, nearly empty . Sedlaks has a photo of the airport in 1964 and 1998, almost empty .
 Sedlak and other Gitmo veterans at the reunion said the public image of the site from detainee dealings tarnishes the otherwise charming location . Gitmo vets said Gitmo is a charming place to spend time at, but it tarnishes it .
 Kimball, Tenn., eyes air ambulance insurance insurance . Kimball: "I'm looking forward to the best of my life"
 Chattanooga Times Free Press is a Chattanooga-area free press . This document may not be published without the express written permission of the Chattanooga Times .
 Associated Press text, photo, graphic, audio and/or video material shall not be published . The Associated Press does not publish any of its own images or videos .
 AP materials may not be stored in a computer except for personal and noncommercial use . Use of these materials includes the content of this article to help people with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 AP will not be held liable for any delays, inaccuracies, errors or omissions therefrom or in the transmission or delivery of all or any part thereof or for any damages arising from any of the foregoing . The AP does not hold any responsibility for the delivery of the content .