 The Second Set of Four Bond Novels . Edited and annotated by Patrick Bruskiewich July, 2018 Volume Two: The Best of Ian Fleming Series .
 This book or any part thereof must not be reproduced in any form without the written permission of the author . The author of this book and others have published numerous editions of this article .
 This is the second volume in a series of books The Best of Ian Fleming meant to encourage the reading public to pick up the Ian Fleming novels and read them . The Second Set of Four is available in the UK .
 Bond novels are masterful undertaking of political and psychological warfare aimed at Soviet machination and propaganda in the West . The Bond novels were masterfully aimed at psychological warfare .
 In this volume, we shall look at the second set of four Bond Novels From Russia With Love, Dr. Dr. James Bond . In the second volume we will look at James Bond's Bond novels from 1959-1960 . Ian Fleming and Smith and Wesson pistol circa 1960 .
 Each of 4 these novels are different in character and in plot, although they share the Fleming writing panache and the fight between good and evil . Each of the four novels is different in . character and plot .
 In his measure one of these four novels is one the iconic espionage novels of the 20 th century . In my measure, one of this four novels was one of the most famous espionage novels .
 If you have read these four novels you would immediately know which one it is. If you've read them, you'll know which of them is the one you've written .
 The plot involves a honey trap, the purloining of an encryption machine, a life and death struggle on the Orient Express and the use of a nerve agent .
 The antagonist is SMERSH, a real Soviet espionage organization that was tasked with killing enemies of the Soviet Union . Bianchi and Connery from Russia with Love Film 5 .
 SMERSH could only be tasked to execute Soviet citizens who had defected or were undertaking what the Soviet Politburo decreed were treasonous acts against the Soviet State . As a matter of Soviet decree, SMERH was tasked with executing Soviet citizens defected .
 SMERSH was involved in the murder of a number of Soviet expatriates, many of them Ukrainian nationalists . In the 1950’s the group was responsible for the deaths of many of the Soviet expats .
 Ian Fleming was working on the foreign news desk for the Sunday Times in the 1950’s . He was working for the paper on foreign news .
 Eugene Karpe was murdered while fleeing Eastern Europe on the Orient Express from Budapest in Hungary fearing his imminent on capture by the KGB on charges of espionage . The naval attache from the American Embassy in Bucharest was killed in 1950 .
 Interior Minister Holds Captain Karpe Met With Foul Play Autopsy Is Inconclusive . Captain Eugene S Karpe, U.S. Naval Attache in Rumania, probably was murder, says minister .
 The dead man as a close friend of Robert A Vogeler, a U.S. businessman who was convicted as a spy in Hungary earlier this week . The dead body was found in Budapest, Hungary .
 Captain Karpe had just visited Mr Vogeler's family in Vienna . He was en route to Paris when he plunged from the speeding Orient Express .
 Captain Karpe’s death was linked with Mr Vogeler's trial, sources say . Sources say the death of the captain was linked to the trial of the former police chief .
 Captain Karpe's brother-in-law told the United Press in Delhi, Louisiana, that the Naval officer had said on his last visit home, "I kind of hate to go back to Europe"
 Autopsy performed at an Army General Hospital in Munich, Germany, said that ""no positive proof of foul play can be ascertained"" because of the mutilated body .
 Herr Helmer recalled that Captain Karpe had been the second high ranking American mysteriously killed in Austria since the war . Herr . Helmer recalls that Captain . Karpe was the second . highranking American killed mysteriously in Austria in the war.
 Irving Ross, an official of the Economic Cooperation 7 Administration, was found stabbed and beaten to death soon after having been seen in the company of four men wearing Russian uniforms . Ross was the second official to be found stabbed, beaten and stabbed to death in Russia .
 U.S. Army investigators combed the rail tunnel where Captain Karpe's body was found for clues . The Naval officer had clung frantically to a compartment doorway on the speeding train before falling under its wheels .
 Close examination of the ground in the Hallein Tunnel showed that he had been dragged for some distance by the train before he lost his grip and was swept beneath the wheels .
 Herr Helmer, chief of Austria's security forces, said there was little likelihood that the death had been an accident . He said there were little chances that it was an accident, adding that there is little chance it was accidental .
 Five government investigators boarded the Cunard White Star liner Queen Mary late yesterday when the ship arrived at quarantine . They spent two hours questioning Milburn Richard McKichanm, 21, regarding the mysterious death of Captain Eugene S Karpe, former United States Naval Attache in Ruman
 The agents, three of them from the Army and two from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, declined to comment on the results of the 9 questioning .
 Mr McKichan, a biochemistry student whose home is in Forest Grove, Oregon, refused to discuss the case .
 The young man was reported to have had breakfast and lunch with Captain Karpe aboard the Orient Express last Thursday . The Naval officer was thrown from the train in a tunnel in Salzburg, Austria .
 Captain Eugene Karpe, 45, was buried with full military honors today in Arlington National Cemetery . Karpe fell or was pushed to his death from a train near Salzburg, Austria, February 23 .
 Captain Karpe was a close friend of Robert A Yogeler, a U.S. businessman, who was convicted of spying by a Hungarian court . Karpe is a former captain of the Hungarian Air Force .
 Vogeler was a 39 year old executive for International Telephone and Telegraph Corp. stationed in Vienna and responsible for Eastern Europe when he was arrested, tortured, forced ""to confess"", tried before a ""kangaroo court" and sentenced to 15 years imprisonment for spying . Vogel
 He was tried by the same Judge who in 1949 convicted Cardinal Mindszenty, the most famous Communist prisoner, who was convicted by a ""people's court"" of espionage and sentenced to life but actually served five years until released during the Hungarian uprising in 1956 .
 Winston Churchill had dubbed the Iron Curtain in a 1946 speech warning America that the Soviet Union was solidifying its control over war-torn Eastern Europe . Vogeler became a valued speaker and expert on the newly forming bloc of totalitarian states which Winston Churchill dubbed the .
 The communist tactics of trumped up arrests, show trials, suborned witnesses, nationalization of private industry, suppression and intimidation of opponents, systematic rape and robbery are described by Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
 Vogeler in his book in harrowing detail based on his personal experiences and observations . Vogelers' book details his experiences in his personal life in the United States .
 A recent expose of what was going on in post-war Vienna is rather interesting . The EC A, also in Austria, was used heavily as a new and convenient cover organization for CIA operators .
 Irving Ross was ECA trade negotiator with the Soviets . He was murdered in the Russian zone in Vienna on the night of 30/31 October 1948 .
 He may have been lured there by a female Soviet double agent named Dana Superina . Superina had pretended to be a Croatian anti-communist agent .
 All intelligence records pertaining to this case have remained tightly closed ever since .
 Irving Ross was only one of several American victims of the bitter intelligence battle which was fought in Austria, foremost in Vienna and which had greatly escalated in 1948 .
 Ross was known to have smuggled people out of the Soviet sectors in Europe to the West . Ross smuggled people into the West to escape the Soviet sector in Europe .
 Irving Ross was murdered in Vienna, Austria . That was the last I saw of Ross ... at a time when I was living like a lord in Lugano, Lugano . He says he was living in a luxury apartment in Vienna .
 He had gone there with his girl friend in the same Cadillac in whose boot I had crossed the frontier so uncomfortably . They drove through the Russian sector in the Cadillac in which he had crossed .
 The Cadillac was stopped by four men in Russian uniforms armed with sub-machine guns . Shortly 13 before they came to the South Railway Station they were stopped by the men .
 There was blood staining his shirt front and his eyes had been gouged out . There were also gouged eyes and blood was on the front of his shirt . He had been stabbed to death .
 As recent as 2017 historians have been searching for the full story behind the Irving Ross murder . Irving Ross was found dead at the scene of the murder .
 Irving Ross was killed when he was driving home the night he was killed . He and Clara Ross shared a letter Clara had from the woman she was driving with him that night .
 One of the mysteries confronting Lindner that was resolved thanks to connecting with Lyla was the name of the woman . Lindner: "I don't know what happened to the woman I was trying to find"
 Superina doesn't explain her connection with the General, but he obviously intervened on her behalf in a significant way . Superina's relationship with the general is not known to explain .
 Superina recounts for the general her recollection of the attack the night of Oct. 1948 that killed Mr Ross . Superina recalls the attack on Mr Ross the night he died .
 Ross had been driving Superina home after a party . Lindner's research revealed that Ross was driving the car after a night out . Superina was the first car to be driven by Ross .
 Ross was beaten and killed in the Soviet sector when the car was stopped and stopped . Ross was killed in a car crash in Soviet-held territory .
 She tried to escape by jumping from the car, but the Russians put her back in the car until she jumped out a second time . She jumped out of the car twice before she was put back into the car .
 She was found later by Austrian police and taken to the hospital with a skull fracture . Austrian police found her with skull fracture after she was found by police .
 She doesn't offer details of the attack but writes a lot about her state of fear after the fact . She writes about her fear of attack .
 She wrote that when she realized she was being taken to a hospital in the Soviet zone she panicked . She said she was taken to hospital in a Soviet zone .
 Superina stated, ""My mind worked frantically, but there was no way out of it," Superina said . Superina's death was the result of a suicide attempt .
 She had been held in the hospital for 50 days, before stating the truth that she wanted to know . Her letter continues to say she had been fearful to share prior to writing the letter .
 Superina was the only eye witness to the murder of Ross . Ross's death at the hands of Russian soldiers was communicated early on . Superina wrote the letter to warn her of her safety .
 Lindner recently returned from the National Archives where he found a lot of new information on Superina . Lindner: "Superina" is the world's most famous record-breaking artist .
 At the time she was serving as a translator and had proximity to people within the U.S. State Department to include Mr Ross .
 Ross realized Superina was being threatened and tried to help her get to South Africa, Lindner said . Lindner: Ross realized that Superina's life was at risk . He said Ross was trying to help Superina escape to the country .
 His wartime experience and his expertise in the newspaper world lent credibility to the fiction in Fleming’s espionage novels . Fleming's espionage novels reflect the facts of the real world .
 The other stories include the use of cyanide gas that was used to murder several Ukrainian nationalists (Lev Rebet in 1957 and Stefan Bandera in 1959) on the streets .
 The autopsy reports for the men murdered by the cyanide gas claimed heart failure for their demise . The men were found dead in a cyanide-infused car explosion .
 Bohdan Mykolayovych Stashynsky, the man who killed these Ukrainian nationalists, defected and confessed to the murders in 1961 . It was only in 1961 that the Soviet KGB agent defected from the USSR and confessed .
 There have been the use of radioactive substances, dioxin and other exotic poisons by agents of the Russian State Security 17 as they affect revenge of people they consider traitors or spies .
 The 2006 murder of Russian expat Alexander Litvinenko in London using Polonium-210 is the most notorious . The most notorious is the 2006 murder by Russian ex-Russian ex-Litvinenko . The murder was the first of its kind in London, the most famous
 He himself played a role in some still clandestine post-war and Cold War operations, including one that smuggled arms into a province in India and gold and jewelry out of India to England . He also smuggled arms and gold out of England to India in converted bombers .
 Like many men of his ilk they stepped in from time to time to help out friends, if not out of friendship then in some accommodating fashion . Like many others, he stepped in to help friends, not just friends .
 Ian Fleming was also associated with a family Bank . Let us not forget that Ian Fleming also had a family bank .
 A book worth writing would be the secret lives of former British agents and their colleagues in the Special Air Service . The Secret Air Service is based in London and based in Scotland .
 At the time it was reported that the murders of the Ukrainian nationalists Rebet and Bandera were sanctioned by the Soviet General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev . At the . time, the murders were reportedly sanctioned by . Soviet general secretary Nikita .
 From Russia With Love, was published in 1957 and in the early 1960’s Soviet General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev ordered the remnants of SMERSH be closed and disbanded .
 This public disclosure of the organization, and closure and dismantling of SMERSH was one of the political coups that Fleming achieved in his life time . Fleming achieved the political coup of his life .
 The KGB and the Red Army ran in the period 1943 to 1946 during their ‘Great Patriotic War’ with Nazi Germany . If you have the time you might look beyond the KGB sponsored espionage to the rather extensive network of SMERSH agents the KGB ran .
 Ian Fleming has fun with his British Espionage counterparts by writing about the purloining of an encryption machine similar in size and character to the Enigma . The Polish cryptographic service purloined the machine from Bletchley Park .
 UK citizen who divulged such secrets unofficially ran the risk of prosecution and incarceration . Note the word 'official', for the whole matter was governed by The Official Secrets Act .
 Winterbotham was in charge of the security and dissemination of the highly secret Enigma decrypts . He was responsible for the security of the Enigma decryption of the German code .
 After months of intensive effort by a team of Britain’s top mathematicians and cryptanalysts, the supposedly unbreakable Enigma system was solved with the aid of another sophisticated machine .
 Marian Rejewski was one of three Polish cryptographers who cracked Enigma in the 1930’s . Marian was still alive to help Josef Garlinski write his remarkable book about the Enigma . Marian's book was published in October 2013 .
 The Enigma War shares many of the intricate details of the Enigma machine with the world for the first time . The film, based in Germany, is based on the book "Enigma War" and "The Enigma"
 It was perfected by the Wehrmacht in 1943, but never used for fear of reprisals . The weapon was perfected in 1943 but was never used in Germany .
 In fact, it is a more effective instrument of destruction than the hydrogen bomb, says the U.S. State Department .
 Its disadvantage lies in the difficulty of applying it to the populace, says CNN.com editor John Sutter .
 The Russians captured the entire German stocks at Dyhernfurth on the Polish frontier . The Russian forces captured the whole German stocks on the border .
 The allied decision to bomb the railway switching yard at Dresden, Dresden, to destroy a large shipment of nerve gas the German high command was transporting west from Silesia . The nerve gas was produced at the Dyhernfeld facility, the nerve gases produced there and how this related to the
 The Nazis were trying to evacuate the large stockpiles of nerve gases from Silesia . The Nazis tried to evacuate large quantities of nerve gas from the region .
 I have included some excerpts from my novel Gotterdamerung in the Appendix to this book .
 Ian Fleming tried to include technology and technology as plot in a James Bond novel . No was a first attempt by Ian Fleming at including technology and technological intelligence in a novel .
 Much of the secret intelligence work undertaken by Ian Fleming and his colleagues during the Second World War centered on scientific and technological intelligence . Ian Fleming's secret work during the war centered on technological and scientific intelligence .
 To reconnaissance pilots like Tony Hill: To radio observers like Eric Ackermann and Harold Jordan: and to men of the Bruneval raid . The Bruneval Raid was the first of its kind in the World War II .
 No published in 1958 was timely in that the Cuban revolution would begin the following year . Cuba would become a vassal state of the Soviet Union by 1960 .
 President Kennedy masterfully maneuvered his way through the pitfalls of the crisis . President Kennedy was a friend and fan of Ian Fleming, a friend of the author . Fleming was assassinated in 1968 .
 No has at its heart the toppling of missile being tested by the U.S. military in a test range in the Caribbean . It is at the heart of No's claim that the missile was being tested in the region .
 These short vignettes are of a different character than the body of the three other books in the set, and reminds me of the writing styles of the writer’s friend and wartime espionage colleague Roald Dahl .
 Of these four novels, three were made into feature length films in the 1960’s starring Sean Connery as 007 . Three of these novels have been adapted into feature films starring Connery .
 Most of the vignettes in the fourth novel, For Your Eyes Only were made into a feature length films beginning with the film For Your eyes Only in the 1970’s starring Roger Moore as James Bond .
 The story Quantum of Solace was used as a title only (the story has never been in film) made into a film with a very different plot line in the early years of the 21st century starring Daniel Craig as 007 .
 The Second Set of Four Novels is a further indepth study of Fleming’s writing . It is meant to encourage you not only to read the novels but to research the hidden treasures found within the writing of Ian Fleming .
 From Russia With Love is one of over twenty Bond novels written by Ian Fleming in the period 1954 to 1964 . First published in April 1957 in London, this espionage thriller featuring the fictitious British secret agent James Bond .
 From Russia With Love is a well researched and well written novel . It is based on a factual world with a make-believe plot . The novel is well researched, well written .
 From Russia With Love was made into a film of the same name in 1963 with Sean Connery playing the role of James Bond . A mere six years after the book was first published it was made a film .
 The film From Russia with Love is considered one of the iconic spy films of the twentieth century . It is considered the most popular film of its genre from the past six decades . The film is considered a classic spy film of the 1960s .
 Author’s Note: A great deal of the background to this story is accurate . Not that it matters, but it matters .
 SMERSH, a contraction of Smiert Spionam —Death to Spies—exists and remains today the most secret department of the Soviet government . SMERSh is a . contraction of SMiert . Spionams .
 SMERSH headquarters are where, in Chapter 4, I have placed them—at No 13 Sretenka Ulitsa, Moscow .
 The Conference Room is faithfully described and the Intelligence chiefs who meet round the table are real officials who are often summoned to that room for purposes similar to those described . Intelligence chiefs are frequently summoned to the Conference Room for purposes .
 If you undertake your own research into SMERSH you will find that it had a much larger organization then in intimated in the Fleming novel . If you do so, you can find out that the organization was larger than in the novel .
 Josef Stalin knew how Soviet agitators within the Russian Army took the Russia army out of the First World War and overthrew the Czar . The Czar was eventually overthrown by the Soviet army .
 At the darkest hours after the Nazi invasion of Soviet Russia SMERSH was established by Stalin to insure the loyalty of the Red Army to him, the supreme Soviet leader .
 At one point over 1. million informants in the Red Army were on the SMERSH payroll . Over 200,000 enforcers were out in the field, like inquisitors .
 SMERSH assassins reported directly to Beria, the head of the KGB, who reported to Stalin . Beria was head of KGB, and Stalin was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 SMERSH assassins in the field rarely needed a signature from Moscow . SMERSh assassins rarely needed signatures from Moscow to carry out their assassinations .
 Ian Fleming knew first-hand about espionage having served as a Commander Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve . Fleming also served as deputy director of Naval Intelligence for the Royal Navy during the Second World War .
 Operation MINCEMEAT involved false information planted off the coast of Spain on a cadaver dressed as a Royal Marine Officer . Operation was one of Ian Fleming's most successful wartime espionage .
 The cadaver was delivered by submarine and fooled the Nazi high command into redeploying 27 troops from Sicily to Greece immediately prior to the Allied Invasion of Sicily in 1943 .
 Most of Fleming’s other clandestine operations still remain classified . With the passage of time more and more of these stories are being told .
 Fleming undertook some of his training as a secret agent at Camp X in Ontario in 1942 to 1944 . In a future book in this series I will write about Fleming's training at the camp .
 A few years ago the BBC released a four episode series about Ian Fleming titled The Man Who Would Be Bond .
 There is also a recent movie called Age of Heroes about his 30 Assault Unit and one of their clandestine operations to snatch and grab technical and scientific intelligence from a German Freya radar installation .
 Ian Fleming also played a role in the Bruneval and Dieppe Raids, as well as the prelude the deceptions of Operation Fortitude .
 Fleming also played a crucial role in Operation Overlord the Normandy Invasion . Fleming was also involved in the Second World War II .
 In and above his naval intelligence work, Fleming was given additional Operational responsibilities in Norway, Spain and Gibraltar . Fleming was also given additional responsibilities in Spain, Norway and Spain .
 I will speak more about Fleming's Operational responsibilities in Norway, Spain and Gibraltar in a subsequent book of The Best of Ian Fleming Series .
 As you read them, you realize that the Fleming books are as much psychological thrillers as they are stories about the realities of clandestine operations and espionage . The Fleming books have a psychological edge as they tell the reality of the world's clandestine operations .
 The plot to From Russia With Love reads like a mix of an Agatha Christie thriller and a Graham Greene spy novel . It is also based on real-life espionage from the 1950’s . The plot is based on a real-time spy novel from the same era .
 The Lektor is in fact a bomb meant to kill the best Western cryptanalysts . It is meant to be a bomb for the best cryptanalysisists, experts say .
 While in Turkey Bond is involved in a number of adventures with the vibrant Karim Bey . Bey is the Station Chief for MI6 in Turkey .
 This story was written twenty years before Enigma and the Ultra Secret was made public in 1977 . The Ultra Secret is published in the U.S. at the request of the author .
 James Bond encounters SMERSH’s chief assassin, Red Grant, pretending to be a fellow British secret agent . The Lektor and the cipher clerk aboard the Orient Express encounter Red Grant .
 James Bond fights then kills Grant in a remarkable battle in a train compartment in the middle of the night . Bond fought Grant in the most famous battle of his career in the film .
 My favorite part of this book is Chapter 26 The Killing Bottle . The fight between Bond and Grant in the train compartment is the fight between the two men .
 Bond kills Grant and then tracks down and confronts Colonel Klebb and is then nearly killed by Klebb, before he manages to capture her . Bond then confronts Klebb again and nearly kills her .
 The ending of the story leaves you wondering whether Bond will survive . The film ends with the death of James Bond, James Bond .
 In real life in the early 1930’s Fleming himself survived an attempted assassination in a manner not all that different to how Bond manages to survive his misfortune aboard the Orient Express . Fleming survived an assassination attempt in the 1930s .
 Ian Fleming, serving as a Reuter’s correspondent in Moscow, had filed a truthful story about a show trial in Moscow involving some British Nationals accused of sabotage . At that time Ian Fleming was serving as an editor in Moscow . Ian Fleming filed a true story about the show trial
 The story had laid bare the truth about what was going on in Moscow and had embarrassed Josef Stalin . Stalin had been embarrassed by the story .
 He had to flee Moscow in the middle of the night hidden aboard a train bound for Warsaw . He was found by the authorities in the early hours of the morning .
 He was found out and tossed from the train by the NKVD agents and shot . He was one of the most prominent members of the Soviet Union to be executed .
 Fleming’s good luck ‘knight on a white horse’ keepsake stopped a bullet meant for his heart . Fleming's good luck keepsake saved his life in 1933 . Fleming was shot in the head by a bullet which was meant to hit him in the heart .
 White Russians Cossacks found him, barely alive, lying beside the train track and carried him unconscious to a hospital in Warsaw, Poland . White Russians found him barely alive .
 When Fleming returned to Fondon he soon left Reuters and became a bad-boy Bohemian in the heart of the British Empire . Fleming was a bad boy Bohemian .
 If you want a taste of Fleming's bad30 boy Bohemian character you can watch the first episode of The Man Who Would Be Fleming .
 As you read the Fleming novels you realize that there is something timeless about them . Fleming novels are timeless and timeless, says author .
 In the 1990’s Skripal had been a MI6 secret agent under deep cover in Russia . He had been working for the British government in the 1990s .
 Skripal was caught by the Russians and jailed and later found his way to the United Kingdom after an exchange for some Russian spies that were caught in the West . He was later found in the UK after being exchanged for some spies caught in West .
 As we look back a half century at the Fleming phenomena we must not forget that for the first few years after their publication the Bond books were not all warmly received . The Bond books have been a huge success in the world since they were published .
 Some literary critics even described the first few Fleming novels as childish and sadomasochistic . Fleming's first few novels were described as childish by some literary critics .
 Life magazine article listed From Russia, With Love as one of John F Kennedy's ten favourite books . President Kennedy's favourite book was from Russia, with Love .
 Kennedy and Fleming had 31 previously met in Washington and had struck up a friendship . Fleming and Kennedy were both married at the time . Fleming died in a car crash at a hospital in Washington, Washington state .
 President Kennedy’s approval and the associated publicity led to a surge in the Bond book sales that made Ian Fleming the biggest-selling thriller writer in the U.S. in the 1960s . Ian Fleming was the biggest seller of Bond books in the United States .
 A special advanced showing of the film From Russia With Love was given at the White House a few days before President Kennedy left for his fateful visit to Dallas Texas . To accommodate his love of Fleming novels a special screening was given to President Kennedy days before his visit .
 It was reported in the press after his assassination that President Kennedy was reading the novel From Russia With Love on the eve of his assassination .
 He had served as a ‘doorman’ at the Soviet Embassy in London under Litvinoff . He had worked as a 'doorman' at the embassy .
 For five years he had been Military Attache under the brilliant Madame Kollontai in the Stockholm Embassy . He had served under the Russian diplomat for five years in Stockholm .
 He had helped train Sorge, the Soviet master spy, before Sorge went to Tokyo . Sorge was a master spy in the Soviet Union .
 During the war, he had been for a while Resident Director in Switzerland, or ‘Schmidtland’, as it had been known in the spy-jargon . He had helped sow the seeds of the sensationally successful but tragically misused ‘Lucy’
 He had even gone several times into Germany as a courier to the ‘Rote Kapelle’ He narrowly escaped being cleaned up with it . He had gone into Germany several times to collect it .
 After the war, on transfer to the Foreign Ministry, he had been on the inside of the Burgess and Maclean operation and on countless other plots to penetrate the Foreign Ministries of the West . He had been working on countless others plots to try and penetrate foreign Ministries .
 He was a professional spy to his fingertips and he was perfectly prepared to put on record his opinions of the rivals he had been crossing swords all his life . He was prepared to talk to the rivals with whom he had crossed swords all the time .
 In an appendix to this book, I include information about the Lucy Ring from the public archives of the Central Intelligence Agency . In the appendix, this book includes information about Lucy Ring .
 I also give a short excerpt from a book describing the execution of Sorge . The executioner was executed at the hands of the Romans .
 Sorge and the Tokyo Network are the subject of this week's iReporter's weekly online travelogue . The Tokyo Network is based in Tokyo, Japan .
 Sorge was capture around the time that the Japanese Imperial Navy attacked Pearl Harbor . He was captured in 1941 .
 From Russia With Love is Fleming's best written novel . I believe this is indeed his best novel and recommend this excellent and timeless novel .
 If there is only one of the Bond novels you will read I hope it is From Russia With Love . James Bond is best known for his portrayal of Bond in Bond films .
 In 1955, it employed a total of 40,000 men and women . It operates both at home and abroad and employs 40,500 people .
 "No sane member of the public would dream of allowing the word to pass his lips," says the author of the book .
 SMERSH is a very large and ugly modern modern building on the Sretenka Ulitsa . The headquarters of SMERSh is located in a large modern building in the city centre .
 It is No 13 on this wide, dull street, and pedestrians keep their eyes to the ground . Two sentries with submachine guns stand on either side of the broad steps leading up to the door .
 If they remember in time, or can do so so inconspicuously, they cross the street and pass by on the other side . If they do so, they pass by and cross the road .
 The most important room on the 2nd floor is a very large light room painted in the pale olive green that is the common denominator of government offices all over the world .
 Two wide windows look over the courtyard at the back of the building . Opposite the sound-proofed door, two wide windows are open .
 The floor is close-fitted with a colourful Caucasian carpet of the finest quality . The floor was close to-fit with a colourless Caucasian carpet .
 The top of the desk is covered with red velvet under a thick sheet of plate glass . The desk was covered in red velvet and covered with plate glass under plate glass.
 From the centre of the desk, to form a T with it, a conference table stretches diagonally out across the room . A conference table can be seen stretching diagonially out across a room .
 This table is also covered with red velvet, but without protective glass . This table was also covered in red velvet but with no protective glass.
 Ashtrays are on the table, and two heavy carafes of water with glasses with glasses . The pair sit around a table with a heavy carafe of water .
 In 1955, these were a portrait of Stalin over the door, one of Lenin between the two windows and, facing each other on the other two walls, portraits of Bulganin and Beria . Until January 13th, 1954, a portrait . had hung, where until January 13
 On the left-hand wall, under the portrait of Bulganin, stands a large televisor or TV set, in a handsome polished oak cabinet .
 Concealed in this is a taperecorder which can be switched on from the desk . It can also be used to record messages from a computer .
 The microphone for the recorder stretches under the whole area of the conference table . Its leads are concealed in the legs of the table . The microphone is concealed under the table and the leads are hidden in the table's legs .
 Next to the televisor is a small door leading into a small lavatory and washroom . A small projection room for showing secret films is also located in the room .
 Under the portrait of General Serov is a bookcase containing, on the top shelves, works of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin . More accessibly, books in all languages on espionage, counter-espionage, police methods and 35 criminology .
 Next to the bookcase, against the wall, stands a long narrow table on which are a dozen large leather-bound albums with dates stamped in gold on the covers . The album collection is a collection of gold-bound photographs taken in New York City .
 About the time Grant was coming into land at Tushino Airport, just before 11.30 at night, a . tough-looking, thick-set man of about fifty was standing at this table leafing through the volume .
 Head of SMERSH, Colonel General Grubozaboyschikov, known in the building as ‘G.G.’, was dressed in a neat khaki tunic with a high collar, and dark blue cavalry trousers .
 The trousers ended in riding boots of soft, highly polished black leather .
 On the breast of the tunic were three rows of medal ribbons—two Orders of Lenin, Order of Suvorov and Order of Alexander Nevsky . The tunic also included the Twenty Years Service medal and medals for the Defence of Moscow and Capture of Berlin .
 At the tail of these came the rose-pink and grey ribbon of the British CBE and the American Medal for Merit . The ribbon was also the claret and white ribbon for the U.S. and the British .
 There were flabby pouches under the eyes, which were round and brown and protruded like polished marbles below thick black brows . There were also flabilitated pockets under the skin .
 The skull was shaven clean and the tight white skin glittered in the light of the central chandelier . The skull had been shaven and the skin was tight white .
 The man walked with tight and precise steps to his tall chair behind the desk . The man's precise steps were followed by tight steps to the tall chair .
 He sat down and picked up the receiver of the telephone marked in white with the letters VCh . The phone was marked with the initials of VCh. The phone is marked with white letters and the letters "VCh"
 Only some fifty supreme officials are connected to the VCh switchboard, and all are Ministers of State or Heads of selected Departments .
 It is served by a small exchange in the Kremlin operated by professional security officers . The exchange is served in a small Kremlin office .
 Every word spoken over its lines is automatically recorded . Even they cannot overhear conversations on it, but every word is recorded .
 I shall have a meeting with my Head of Operations and Head of Plans. After that, if action is agreed, I shall meet with my head of Operations . I will also meet with head of operations and head of plans .
 "In case liquidation is decided upon, I have taken the precaution of bringing the necessary operative to Moscow," he said . "I have taken a precaution," he added .
 In a few minutes six men, five of them in uniform, filed in through the door . With hardly a glance at the man behind the desk, took their places at the conference table .
 "For his own protection, and for the reassurance of his department, he invariably takes a witness," he says . The witness is important for his department to have independent versions of what happened .
 No notes are taken at the conference and decisions are passed back to departments by word of mouth . The conference is held in secrecy, with no notes taken at all .
 On the far side of the table sat Lieutenant-General Slavin, head of the GRU, the intelligence department of the General Staff of the Army, with a full colonel beside him . A full colonel was also sitting on the table at the time .
 At the end of the table sat Lieutenant-General Vozdvishensky of RUMID, the Intelligence Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, with a middle-aged man in plain clothes .
 With his back to 38 the door, sat Colonel of State Security Nikitin, Head of Intelligence for the MGB, the Soviet Secret Service, with a major .
 Each one knew, and thought he was the only one to know, that the room was wired for sound . Each one, without telling his ADC, had decided to utter the bare minimum of words consonant .
 General G took out a packet of Moskwa-Volga cigarettes and lit one with an American Zippo lighter . General G lit one of the cigarettes with a lighter .
 General G pinched the long cardboard tube of his cigarette so that it was almost flat and put it between his teeth on the right side of his mouth . General G pinned the tube to his mouth on the left side of the mouth .
 He stretched his lips back from his teeth and started talking in short clipped sentences that came out with something of a hiss from between the teeth and the uptilted cigarette . It came out from between his lips and his cigarette .
 General Serov, on behalf of the Praesidium, has ordered me to make known to you certain matters of State Policy . General Serkov: "General Serov has ordered that certain matters be made clear to you"
 We are then to confer and recommend a course of action which will be in line with this Policy and assist it. We will then be able to advise the Government on how to deal with the situation .
 He slowly examined the faces of the three senior officers at the table . One by one, he slowly examined each other's faces . He slowly looked at each other again, examining the faces .
 They were about to learn a State secret, the knowledge of which might one day have most dangerous consequences for them . The knowledge of the State secret might be one of the greatest secrets in the world .
 The High Praesidium was the centre of all power in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was the heart of Soviet power . The Soviets felt bathed in the dreadful incandescence that shines out from the centre .
 The final ash fell off the end of General G. G.’s cigarette on to his tunic . General G.'s cigarette fell off end of end of his cigarette . The last ash fell from end of the cigarette .
 He brushed it off and threw the cardboard butt into the basket for secret waste beside his desk . The butt butt was a cardboard butt .
 Six pairs of expressionless eyes stared at the head of SMERSH, waiting for him . The head of the SMERSh was waiting for his arrival in Moscow .
 Formerly, it was a “hard’s policy—a policy of steel,’S. of steel . ‘I allowed himself the joke of Stalin's name, of Stalin’�, he said .
 This policy, effective as effective as it was, built up tensions in the West, notably in America, which were becoming dangerous . It was effective as well as effective, the policy built up tension, especially in America . This policy was effective, but it was becoming dangerous, and it
 Certain powerful Americans, notably the Pentagon Group led by Admiral Radford, were helped in their firebrand schemes by the very successes of our “hard” policy .
 It was decided that the time had come to change our methods, while maintaining our aims . So it was decided to change the way we look at the game, and the way they play .
 We open our frontiers to a lot of newspaper men and actors and artists, although we know many of them to be spies . We open ourselves to the world's frontiers, although many of the people we know are spies .
 Khrushchev and his comrades visit India and the East and blackguard the English. Comrade General Serov carefully included the names for the ears of the tape-recorder .
 When they get back, they have friendly discussions with the British Ambassador about their forthcoming goodwill visit to London . The British Ambassador is also expected to visit the UK .
 The stick and carrot, the carrot and the smile, the smile and then the frown. And so it goes on—the stick and then carrot, then the smile . The stick, carrot, smile, frown. The smile and frown.
 The Intelligence services would also have to pull their weight in this great game that was being played on their behalf . The intelligence services would have to perform their part in the great game .
 General G thought how well he was delivering the denunciation demanded by the Praesidium . General G was pleased with the way he delivered his denunciation .
 General G sought for a final phrase to convey the threat without defining it . General G. sought for the final phrase, "General G sought . to convey . the . threat without . defining it," he said .
 General G gave them a few minutes to lick their wounds and recover from the official lashing that had been meted out .
 "No one spoke up for his department or mentioned the countless victories of Soviet Intelligence that could be set against the few mistakes," he said . No one spoke out against the mistakes .
 No one questioned the right of the Head of SMERSH, who shared the guilt with them, to deliver this terrible denunciation . And no one questioned . The Head of the SMERSh shared the responsibility with them .
 The Word had gone out from the Throne, and General G had been chosen as the mouthpiece for the Word . General G was chosen as a mouthpiece to the Word.
 It was a great compliment to General G that he had been chosen, a sign of grace . Everyone present made a careful note of the fact that, in the Intelligence hierarchy, General G. had come to the top of the pile .
 Molotov had privately told him, when Beria was dead, that General G would go far . At the end of the table, Lieutenant-General Vozdvishensky of RUMID, watched the smoke curl up from the tip of his long Kazbek cigarette .
 There had been no great foresight in this prophecy, reflected Vozdvishensky . The prophecy was not foresight, he said .
 Beria had disliked G and had constantly hindered his advancement, sidetracking him away from the main ladder of power into one of the minor departments of the then Ministry of State Security, which, on the death of 44 Stalin, had quickly abolished as a Ministry .
 When the post was abolished, he devoted his energies to plotting the downfall of Beria, working under the secret orders of the General Serov .
 Serov, a Hero of the Soviet Union and a veteran of the famous predecessors of the MGB, was in every respect a bigger man than Beria . Serov was a hero of the . Soviet Union . He was a member of the Cheka, the Ogpu, the
 He had been directly behind the mass executions of the 1930s when a million died, he had been metteur en scene of most of the great Moscow show trials . He had organized the bloody genocide in the Central Caucasus in February 1944, and inspired the mass deportations from the Baltic
 General G had been given SMERSH as his reward . Beria and all his court had gone to the gallows, while General G was given SMERH . General G and his court were all executed .
 General Ivan Serov, with Bulganin and Khrushchev, now ruled Russia . Serov ruled Russia in the early 1950s . He ruled the Soviet Union .
 General Vozdvishensky, glancing up the table at the gleaming billiard-ball skull, probably with General G not far behind him . But, guessed General G . But he was probably not far from General G, probably .
 The skull lifted and the hard bulging brown eyes looked straight down the table into the eyes of General Vozdvishensky . The skull lifts and the eyes look straight down to the table . The eyes of the general looked straight into his eyes .
 General Vozdvishensky managed to look back calmly and even with a hint of appraisal . He said: "I don't think it's a good thing for me to be in the military. I don't believe it's good for me"
 "We have never thought that our departments were so successful as to be beyond criticism," says President Obama . "We're not going to be so successful that we're beyond criticism. We're not," says Obama .
 "What I have been instructed to say to you will not have come as a surprise to any of us. What I have told you will have been told to say will not surprise us."
 "Our operation must be delicate, refined and aimed at the heart of the Intelligence apparat of the West," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We need to be delicate and refined"
 It must do grave damage to the enemy apparat -- hidden damage which the public will hear perhaps nothing of, but which will be the secret talk of government circles . The public should hear nothing of the damage, but it will be discussed in government circles, the author says .
 It must also cause a public scandal so devastating that the world will lick its lips and sneer at the shame and stupidity of our enemies . But it must also be so devastating it must cause the world to lick their lips .
 The agents and spies of the West will know it, too, and they will marvel at our cleverness . And they will tremble. And the agents and spy chiefs of the west will know, too .
 "They will be encouraged to greater efforts by our display of strength and genius," he said of the display .
 It is desirable that the common people of the Soviet Union should remain in complete ignorance of our complicity . But of course we shall deny any knowledge of the deed, whatever it may be, and it is desirable .
 Comrade LieutenantGeneral Vozdvishensky, since you observe the foreign intelligence scene from a neutral standpoint, perhaps you would survey the field for us . This was a jibe at the notorious jealousies that exist between the GRU and the Secret Service of the MGB .
 We wish to have your opinion of the relative importance of the Western Intelligence Services .
 He rested his elbows on the arms and supported his chin on the interlaced fingers of his joined hands, like a teacher preparing to listen to a long construe . He rested the elbows and the fingers of the hands .
 For five years he had been Military Attache under the brilliant Madame Kollontai in the Stockholm Embassy . Lor five years had been military Attache .
 After the war, on transfer to the Loreign Ministry, he had been on the inside of the Burgess and Maclean operation and on countless other plots to penetrate Loreign Ministries of the West . He had been working on countless others plots, including countless others, he said .
 He was nervous at RUMID being pinned down in this way, and without a full departmental briefing, he said .
 Every country has good spies and it is not always the biggest countries that have the most or the best . Every country's spies are spies, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Secret Services are expensive, and small countries cannot afford the co-ordinated effort which produces good intelligence . Small countries can't afford the forgery departments, the radio network, the record department and the digestive apparatus that evaluates and compares the reports of agents .
 There are individual agents serving Norway, Holland, Belgium and even Portugal who could be a great nuisance to us if these countries knew the value of their reports .
 Instead of passing their information on to the larger powers, they prefer to sit on it and feel important . The U.S. government prefers to use it as a tool to get its information passed on to them .
 'We need not worry with these smaller countries,’ he paused, ‘until we come to Sweden. So we need not . worry with smaller countries,' he paused . ‘Until we come . to Sweden,' he said .
 They have always had better information on the Baltic than even Finland or Germany . The Baltic has always been better informed than Finland, Germany or Finland .
 To mount an operation against them would probably cost us more men. But to mount a . operation against . them would . probably cost . more men .
 In France, 49 while we have penetrated most of their Services, the Deuxieme Bureau is still clever and dangerous, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy . "In France, they are still clever, dangerous and dangerous," he says .
 I think we all have respect for her Intelligence Service,’ General Vozdvishensky looked round the table . ‘I think we are all respecting her intelligence service.’
 There were grudging nods from everyone present, including General G . ‘Their Security Service is excellent,' he said .
 England, being an island, has great security advantages and their so-called MI5 employs men with good education and good brains .
 "In certain types of operation, we are constantly finding that they have been there before us. In certain situations, we find that they are constantly ... there are always things that have been done before us," says the head of the operation .
 They pay them little money—only a thousand or two thousand rubles a month—but they serve with devotion . They pay little money, only a small amount of two thousand a month, but they serve .
 Agents have no special privileges in England, no relief from taxation and no special shops such as we have, from which they can buy cheap goods . Yet these agents have no . special privileges, no . relief from tax and no . shops such a . shop such as . which shops such
 Their social standing abroad is not high, and their wives have to pass as the wives of secretaries . They have to dress as secretaries, and pass as their wives .
 General Vozdvishensky felt that his remarks might be taken as too laudatory . General felt that he might have been taken as laudatory by the Russian general .
 General G wanted to put a stop to Vozdvishensky’s attempts to qualify his praise of British Intelligence . General G. wanted to stop the attempts to . qualify his . praise of . British intelligence .
 Next, hoped General G. G. will be saying that the Pentagon is stronger than the Kremlin .
 "Technically, in such matters of radio and weapons and equipment, they are the best. Technically, it is the best," says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 They get enthusiastic about some Balkan spy who says he has a secret army in the Ukraine . They say he has been a spy in the past, but that's not true .
 The head of RUMID sat back in his chair and stolidly took out his cigarette case . He sat back and took a cigarette out of his chair .
 General Slavin of the GRU had no intention of committing himself on behalf of the General Staff of the Army . The GRU did not want to commit himself to the Russian Army .
 Colonel of State Security Nikitin of MGB felt it would do no great harm to show up the GRU as being too stupid to have any ideas at all, and at the same time to make a modest recommendation that would probably tally with the inner thoughts of those present . General
 Colonel Nikitin also knew that given the proposition that had been posed by the Praesidium, the Soviet Secret Service would back him up . The Soviet secret service would also back him .
 General G was annoyed by the authority in the man’s voice, and by having his thunder stolen, for he also had intended to sum up in favour of an operation against the British . General G had also intended to . sum up against an operation .
 I remember Comrade General Vozdvishensky saying something about a myth upon which much of the alleged strength of this Secret Service depends . I remember . Comrade Vozshensky said something about . which much . of the . alleged strength . of this . strength of
 Colonel Nikitin decided that this was a question he could and perhaps should answer . He decided to take a look at the history of the country .
 We have a zapiska on him, but it contains little. He is known by the letter M . He is also known as the inventor of the world's greatest inventions .
 So many names to remember, so many dossiers going on every day all over the world . "So many names ... I remember. So many operations going on each day," she says .
 There were the noises of the train—the soft iron stride, pounding out the kilometres, the quiet creak of the woodwork, a tinkle from the cupboard over the washbasin where a toothglass was loose in its holder . There were also the sounds of a train
 The spectral eye of the nightlight cast its deep velvet sheen over the little room . It was the first time I had seen the light of this little room in my home .
 By the window, Captain Nash sat in his place, his book open on his lap, a flicker of moonlight from the edge of the blind showing white on the double page . Nash sat by the window with a book open and his eyes on the page .
 Perhaps it was madness in the room, and not danger, that Bond could smell . Perhaps madness was not the danger that Bond smelled .
 "It would be a question of somehow getting rid of him at the next station," he said . "I would be able to get him out of the system," he added .
 The book was still open on Nash’s lap, but now a thin wisp of smoke was coming out of the hole at the top of its spine . The book is still open, but there was a faint smell of fireworks in the room .
 He had even put wedges under the doors so that Nash would feel more secure . Nash had even had wedges put in the doors to make sure he felt secure .
 There are ten bullets in it ... .25 dumdum, fired by an electric battery . 25-dum is a .25-pound dum .
 You must admit the Russians are wonderful chaps for dreaming these things up. You can admit that, but admit it's a bit of a mistake .
 This was Bond’s first reaction to utter catastrophe. When there was so much to know, so much was there much to think about, this was Bond's first reaction . Bond's reaction to the death of James Bond was his first reaction.
 It was the reaction of someone in a burning house who picks up the most trivial object to save from the flames . The reaction to the incident was a typical reaction of a person in a house burning .
 'It’ll give me an extra kick telling the famous Mister Bond of the Secret Service what a bloody fool he is. It’s given me a bit of a kick telling him what he is,' he said. 'I’m going to tell him what a
 You're just a stuffed dummy and I’ve been given the job of letting the sawdust out of you. You’re just a dummy,’s just the dummy, I say . You're not a dummy. You're a dummy .
 The angry sneer in the man’s voice told Bond that he had touched a nerve . Bond was in the middle of a row with the man .
 Fed her a pinch of chloralal hydrate when I poured her that glass of wine . Fed her with chloralhydrate when she poured it .
 "If I don’t like even the smell of a move, it’ll be just one bullet through the heart," he says . "I’m not afraid to move. If I’s not happy even even I don't like the smell, it
 SMERSH decided to kill you—at least I gather it was decided even higher up, right at the top . Well, SMERSh decided to .
 The White House wants to "bring them down a peg or two" with a poke at the Secret Service .
 He said vanity would get you and greed and a bit of craziness in the plot . He said greed and craziness were the reason for the plot to get you .
 Bond remembered how much the eccentric angles of the story had aroused their curiosity . Bond remembered just how much of the eccentric angle had aroused his curiosity .
 He had to admit that the idea of this Russian girl being in love with him had helped . Yes, he had admitted that he had helped.
 I'd say she’s killed more people than anyone in the world, or arranged for them to be killed . I’d say she has killed more than anyone else in world—or arranged for it to be .
 She had always said she would tell him everything when she got to England . She said she had always told him she would always tell him about her life .
 Any hint would have saved the life of Kerim Kerim, for instance, would have been enough . But any hint would've been enough to save Kerim .
 I suppose it was his gang that blew up our Centre in Istanbul yesterday afternoon . I suppose he blew up the centre in Turkey yesterday afternoon. I suppose that's what he did .
 The noise of the tunnel will help in case you’re a noisy dier—rattle, rattles and so forth .
 One in the back of the neck for her—with your gun --and out of the window she goes. Then one in the . back of her neck for . her, she goes . She was shot in the head by a police officer .
 They’ll find the film in her bag, and in your pocket there’s a long love letter from her to you—a bit threatening. They”ll find her film in their bag, she says . The film will be found in the hands of the film
 It says that she’ll give the film to the newspapers unless you marry her . The film will be given to the media if she marries her husband . It says she'll give it to the press if she gets married .
 When your cipher experts start fiddling with it, it’s going to blow them all to glory, it will blow them to glory . The cipher experts are going to fiddle with it. It's not going to be easy for them to do so again.
 Handsome British spy with career ruined murders her and commits suicide . Handsome spy with . career ruined murdered her and committed suicide .
 The French papers would give it such a send-off there’d be no stopping it. The former footballer would be given a farewell to his country by the French papers .
 They wouldn't mind how far they went with the pictures or anything else . They wouldn’t mind if they went further with their pictures or other .
 Bond’s eyes stared into the violet gloom, measuring the depth of the shadow in his corner under the roof of the top bunk, remembering exactly where his attache case stood on the floor, guessing what Nash would do after firing .
 Every January you lose one of your small chaps somewhere, maybe Tokyo, maybe Timbuktu . If anyone in your show noticed these things, noticed the pattern of them, like my show does, you’d realize that every January, you lose a small chap somewhere
 "We certainly had you sewn up all right. But the main target was you, old man, and we certainly had it sewn-up all right."
 "You were in the killing bottle from the minute you got off that plane in Turkey," says President Obama . "You're in the kill bottle," he says . "I'm not going to let it slide down," says Obama .
 Bond's mind raced round the details of his pitifully thin, pitifully desperate plan . Bond’s mind raced around the details . Bond's plan was a pitiful thin and desperate attempt to save his life . Bond: 'I’m not sure what I’
 There were no formalities for the through carriages until they got to France, to the frontier, Vallorbes .
 It was only people who got out at Brigue or Lausanne who had to go through customs in the stations . Only those who got through customs had to get through customs .
 He put his left hand casually over the book and the cigarette case as if to prevent them slipping off his lap . The book and cigarette case were in his lap as he sat in front of the camera .
 At least he had achieved his objective and hadn’t been shot in the process . But at least at least he’d achieved his objectives and hadn't been shot .
 Bond described an airy circle with his cigarette to distract Nash from Nash’s attention . Bond described the circle as ‘airy circle’ to distract the actor from Nash .
 His left hand slipped the flat cigarette case between the pages of 66 his book . The cigarette case was slipped between pages of the book .
 The second bullet will come out later when they dig the second bullet out of you and can’t find the second gun . Anyway it’ll come out when they’re trying to find the other gun, he says .
 'I think she may have the Order of Lenin for me in her bag. Come to think of it, old man,’ the flat voice showed emotion, became greedy .
 Four days of love had sucked him along on the easy stream down which it had been planned that he should drift . But conceit and curiosity and love had pulled him along . It was not planned to drift, but he had been drawn along .
 SMERSH was the one enemy he had always sworn to defeat wherever he met it . That was the damnable part of the whole business, he says .
 67 all the time SMERSH had been watching, watching him go through his conceited paces, as it had been planned that he would, so that the smear could be built up . The smear on him was the smear on M who had sent him to Istanbul, the smear
 In a second the dark tunnel would switch out the moonlight on the pages and the blue tongue would lick out for him . The dark tunnel was switched out the . moonlight .
 Bond pitched forward on to the floor and lay sprawled sprawled under the funereal violet light . Bond pitched into the air and lay on the floor under the light of the dying light .
 The film version of From Russia With Love was already being filmed in England . No was released and in the theaters of both Europe and the U.S. No .
 From Russia With Love is the icon Bond film from the 1960’s . It is the most popular among admirers of Sean Connery and his portrayal of James Bond . The film is one of the most famous in the world .
 It is considered by many film critics as the iconic espionage film of the 1960’s . It is also considered by some to be one of the iconic spy films of the era .
 The film was released in 1963 and paid for out of the proceeds of the Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s death .
 The film company that has brought the Fleming novels to the big screen since the 1960’s have done a remarkable job to grow their organization using retained earnings . Starting right from the very beginning of their franchise, the film company has done a . remarkable job .
 This is one of the great secrets that have made the Bond films such a success, that and the fact that each of the films has been innovative in their own right . Bond films have always been innovative and innovative, and Bond films are a big part of that .
 The Bond film makers have built their success upon their previous successes . Bond film stars include James Bond, James Bond and James Bond .
 This is an ‘old school’ business practice that few companies seem to follow in the modem world . This is a 'old school' business practice .
 From Russia with Love was the second film made from the Fleming books . The film was based on the books Dr. Fleming and the film Dr. Peter Fleming . It was released in 1964 .
 From Russia with Love is an excellent film produced jointly by Albert R Broccoli and Harry Saltzman and directed by Terrence Young . The film is a great example of the best British film ever made .
 Peter Hunt’s editing brought the Bond films into the avant guard of film making . It is said to have brought the films into an avantant guard .
 The film From Russia With Love changed the espionage genre, it changed the whole of the 1960’s film industry . It changed the entire of the film industry, including the espionage film industry.
 This is understandable given the uncertainty of what the audience might accept in 1962 . This is not the case for the first time since then .
 The second Bond film overflowed with action . The climax of the film is the man-to-man fight in the train compartment between Bond and his would be assassin Grant .
 SPECTRE plays the British Secret Service off against the Soviet Secret Service . In the film SPECTre plays the role of the Secret Service against the Soviets .
 Perhaps it was a political decision, or perhaps there was an ulterior motive? Perhaps there was perhaps a motive for the decision . Perhaps there is a political or political motivation?
 The film From Russia With Love came out just before Nikita Khrushchev was ousted by Brezhnev in 1964 . The film was released just before the overthrow of the Soviet Union .
 Dr. No was filmed the previous year and the arch villain in that story worked for SPECTRE . The two films were joined thematically in that Bond’s assassination was meant to be revenge for the loss by SPECTre of their operative Dr. James Bond .
 The KGB planted spies within the film crew to get an insider’s view of the Bond films, their plots and even their gadgets . It is believed that the KGB even planted spies in the crew themselves to get a sneak peek into the films .
 In both films he is debonair, unflappable and in every way a gentleman spy spy . In both movies, he is a good guy and a good spy .
 In some sense Bond follows in the footsteps of Cary Grant and his role in the masterful 1959 Alfred Hitchcock film North by Northwest . Cary Grant starred alongside Bond in the classic film . Bond is the latest James Bond film to be released .
 Cary Grant was in fact a friend of Albert 'Chubby' Broccoli . He was best man when he married his wife Dana Wilson Broccoli on June 21 st , 1959 .
 Connery follows in the footsteps of Ian Fleming and ‘Chubby’ Broccoli in that they both had to prime or educator him for his role in the film .
 Connery was a determined young actor in the 1960’s who had been bom and raised on the wrong side of the tracks . Connery had been raised in the wrong way of life .
 In From Russia with Love Sean Connery plays his role superbly . He brings sophistication and wit to even the most awkward or action pact parts of the film .
 The Battle of Britain later produced by Harry Saltzman in the late 1960’s . Robert Shaw in a lead role in that film . If you have seen the film, you will see Robert Shaw .
 In terms of film presence Robert Shaw is in every way an equal to Sean Connery in From Russia with Love . This lends a degree of verisimilitude to the inevitable struggle between the two adversaries .
 It is the first time that edge of the seat action is used as a psychological device at the beginning of a Bond film to get the viewer’s adrenaline pumping .
 The opening credits have a lovely set of dancing belly dancing figures that lead the way to eventual figurative silhouettes and nude images to be found in many of the later Bond films . That and the fact that the opening credits of the Bond films have a set of dancers .
 He was on set during the filming of From Russia with Love to enjoy belly dancing . The actor enjoyed belly dancing on set .
 The role of Tatiana Romanova is played by the Italian model Daniela Bianchi . The actress plays the Russian model .
 As far as I know, apart from Dietrich’s portrayal of Mata Hari, there was no other film before From Russia with Love that used sex in this way .
 Daniela Bianchi in Bed Wearing Nothing but her Black Ribbon . Bianchi gets under the covers of the bed in James Bond’s room .
 In terms of the U.S. film market, this was a bit edgy for the time, but not for the UK film market . The film was released in the UK in 1994, but was not released in 2004 .
 In the early 1960s in the UK there occurred the Profumo Affair which involved the Minister of State for War in the Harold MacMillan Government, John Profumo, and his love affair with Christine Keeler .
 Christine Keeler was also romantically involved with the naval attache in the Soviet Embassy in London, Yevgeny Ivanov . She also had a relationship with the Soviet Navy attache at the time .
 The question was whether there had been a breech of National Security in the U.K. The question is whether there was any breach of national security in the United Kingdom .
 Rumors would begin to come from Washington swirling about the libido and amorous appetites of the President of the 76 United States John F Kennedy .
 Some have even tried to link the President to some of the players in the Profumo Affair . In the film From Russia with Love the female arch villan Rosa Klebb is played by German actress Lotte Lenya in the film .
 Bond’s Turkish colleague, the head of Station T, Kerim Bey, is played by Pedro Armendariz . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in November .
 Connery and Armendariz appeared to thoroughly enjoy working together on the film . The film was released in 1977 .
 The film was released 50 years ago this year and has been viewed as a cult classic . The film is still being viewed as one of the best-loved films in the world .
 In From Russia with Love we are introduced to Q or the Quartermaster for the first time . Desmond Llewelyn is played by the experienced British actor Desmond .
 He had previously appeared in a war film by ‘Chubby’ Broccoli from the 1950’s titled They Were Not Divided about the Welsh Guards .
 In From Russia with Love the head of MI-6, M is played by the experienced British actor Bernard Lee . The film stars Sean Connery and Pedro Armendariz .
 Bernard Lee has served with the Royal Sussex Regiment during the Second World War . Bernard Lee is a former soldier who served in the RAF and served in World War II .
 The Third Man is one of my favorite films because of its avant garde style and the credibility of the plot . It's one of the best films I've ever seen because of the style of the film and credibility .
 Bernard Lee played Captain Patrick Dove in the 1956 film The Battle of the River Plate . He also played the Master of the Africa Shell in the 1950s film The Third Man .
 He headed the British Secret 79 Intelligence Service beginning in September 1939 and during the Second World War, and until his retirement in 1952 . He was one of the most senior intelligence officers in the world .
 In a subsequent book in The Best of Ian Fleming series I may elaborate on who Major General Menzies was and the role he played in both the Ultra Secret and with the secret operations he undertook from 1939 to 1952 .
 From Russia with Love has M’s secretary Moneypenny played by the Canadian actress Lois Maxwell . From Russia With Love is based on a novel written by L.I. Maxwell .
 She of course pines for James Bond but they both know it won’t go past flirting .
 The film is very much based on the book, with a few venues and scenes added or revised, including the excellent beginning which I have hinted to . The film will be released in cinemas on Friday .
 The script to the film is available online if you are interested in reading it . The script is available to read online .
 The camera work on From Russia with Love draws on some of Alfred Hitchcock’s best film work, as well as from those of the director and producers . From Russia With Love is directed by Alfred Hitchcock .
 The film also benefits from having Ian Fleming himself working alongside the crew as they filmed in and around Istanbul, a part of the world he knew intimately and enjoyed for its many pleasures, including belly dancing, which Fleming admired .
 From Russia with Love had its world premier on the 10 th of October, 1963 at the London Pavilion . The film was released in 1963 .
 Ian Fleming provides an explicit presentation of this in From Russia With Love . Ian Fleming provided an explicit version of the book .
 If you want to learn more about the Profumo Affair, watch the 1989 film Scandal . Scandal is based on the infamous scandal that led to the death of the couple .
 The final comment is about the mock killing of James Bond and the training center that is depicted near the beginning of the film . The training center is depicted in the film's opening scene .
 This short vignette in the film is a tribute of sorts to the special operations training facility Camp X in Ontario Canada . Camp X is where the British sent many of their SOE agents to be trained . Ian Fleming received some of his training in clandestine operations .
 Camp X is featured in the BBC series The Man Who Would Be Bond . Camp X was set up in the early 1950s and is set to be featured in a new series .
 There is something significant in the film From Russia With Love and it is the boat chase scene where Romanova and Bond are trying to make it to Venice up the Adriatic in a small high powered boat . In a subsequent book to The Best of Ian Fleming series I will provide more
 Throughout the Second World War the Royal Navy ran clandestine small boat operations off Norway, off the European continent and in the Mediterranean .
 Operations were used to run agents, arms and material into and out of occupied Europe . These operations were used by the Nazis in the early 1940s .
 Germans would try to intercept the RN ships using Eboats or Shnell Boats . These actions became known as E-Boat runs, for the Germans .
 Intrepid bought up a group of Swedish vessels filled full of speciality Swedish metals and ball bearings . They sailed down the Baltic, through the Skagerrak, and into the North Sea to Britain . The Germans were none the wiser that they had been there .
 The Norwegian town of Telavag was razed to the ground by the Gestapo in the spring of 1942 . The men of the town were either killed or sent to concentration camps and the women and children were sent into internment . The town was destroyed in retribution for its role in
 The Telavag Tragedy ranks with the Lidice Massacre and the Oradour-sur-sur Glane Massacre as one of the terrible war crimes inflicted on noncombatants by the Nazis in occupied Europe during the Second World War . It ranks in the same category as
 Ian Fleming’s role in some of the clandestine operations involved Royal Navy ships . In a subsequent book to The Best of Ian Fleming series I will provide more background information about Ian Fleming's role .
 The film is a better rendition of the book than the book . The book and the film differ somewhat, but the film is better than the film .
 The book is a hard read in that the action is slow to develop and climaxes rather quickly . It is hard to read because of the slow development of the book .
 The beginning of the book introduces a little about the radio routine used by the British during the S.O.E. days, in particular the radio contact procedures and security .
 Commander John Strangways, RN , Regional Control Officer for the Caribbean and the local representative of the British Secret Service of MI6 in Kingston, Jamaica, and his secretary are both quietly murdered and their bodies disposed of .
 Bond discovers his old friend Commander Strangways had been investigating the activities of a reclusive Chinese-German who lives on Crab Key . Bond discovers that the reclusive German-German runs a guano mine named Dr. Dr.
 Investigators sent to the island before have mean suspicious deaths . He finds out that investigators have been sent to investigate suspicious deaths before . He learns that investigators sent there have been suspicious deaths.
 Bond suspects a connection between the disappearances of Strangways and his secretary . Bond undertakes a clandestine visit to Crab Key to investigate the disappearance .
 Bond encounters a beautiful young 85-year-old woman named Honeychile Rider naked on the beach . She is sneaking to Crab Key to collect rare and expensive sea shells . Bond encounters the young woman who has been sneaking to the beach to collect shells .
 "How Fleming introduces Honeychile Rider is marvelous and I think is the best writing in the book," says author .
 His heart missed a beat and then began pounding so that he had to breathe deeply to quieten it . He had to take a deep breath to calm it down and breathe deeply .
 She wore a broad leather belt round her waist with a hunting knife in a leather sheath at her right hip .
 She stood not more than five yards away on the tideline looking down at something in her hand . She was standing five yards from the shoreline looking at something she was holding up .
 She stood in the classical relaxed pose of the nude, all the weight on the right leg and the left knee bent and turning slightly inwards, the head to one side as she examined the things in her hand .
 The skin was a very light uniform cafe au lait with the sheen of dull satin . The skin had a dull sheen with a sheen, rather than a very thick satin.
 The gentle curve of the backbone was deeply indented, suggesting more powerful muscles than is usual in a woman, and the behind was almost as firm and rounded as a boy's .
 The legs were straight and beautiful and no pinkness showed under the slightly lifted left heel . No pinkness was visible under the heel of the leg .
 It was cut to the shoulders and hung there and . along the side of her bent cheek in thick wet strands . It hung there, along the . side of the bent cheek .
 A green diving mask was pushed back above her forehead, and a green rubber thong bound her hair at the back . A green rubber thong was also bound in her hair .
 The scene, the empty beach, the green and blue sea, the naked girl with the strands of fair hair, reminded Bond of something . The whole scene was the perfect beach scene for Bond .
 Quarrel is killed in a gun fight with Dr. No’s people . Dr. Dr. no's people give chase to the three of them and Quarrell is killed .
 In a strange twist the two captives are invited to dine with their captor . The two captives have been held captive for more than a decade .
 He tells him that the Americans do not suspect what he is doing and that he might end his sabotage one day by sending a missile crashing into a major American city . He says he might send a missile into the U.S. city .
 Others have seen the complete abandonment of one series, the MASTODON, because of its recurring navigational errors . Others have said the series has been abandoned because of the errors of navigation errors .
 Two of those men are on watch at this moment, watching the radio frequencies, the beams on which these weapons travel . Two of the men are in the U.S. military's most dangerous places in the world .
 There is a million dollars’ worth of equipment up above us in the rock galleries, Mister Bond, sending fingers up into the Heavyside Layer, waiting for the signals, jamming them .
 A rocket soars up on its way a hundred, five hundred miles into the Atlantic . And from time to time, a rocket is soars into the ocean .
 "We track it, as accurately as they track it in the Operations Room on Turks Island," says CNN.com. "We are tracking it, and we track it as well as they tracking it in Turks Island."
 'The rocket's brain is confused, it goes mad, it plunges into the sea, it destroys itself' 'It roars off at a tangent. Then, suddenly, our pulses go out to the rocket,' says the author of the book .
 Something else must be tried, different frequencies, different metals, a different radio brain. "Something else must have been tried," he says .
 We track practice shoots without being able to get through to the brain of the new rocket . We track many practice shoots with the help of a team of engineers .
 A cipher machine with its own frequencies and routines has been created by the government . It has even been given us a cipher machine . It's even been programmed to make its own frequency and routines .
 "It is like catching the attention of a man in a crowd. And then, one day, Mister Bond, it is like Mr Bond," she says .
 Bond and Honey chile Rider to be gotten rid of Honeychile to be tied down and eaten by the infamous giant crabs of Crab Key . No condemns Bond and no condemns Bond .
 Bond has to navigate through a brutal obstacle course meant to kill him in a most cruel fashion . Bond has been killed in the latest James Bond film, The Death of James Bond .
 Bond survives the ordeal and goes back to kill an unsuspecting Dr. Dr. Bond . Unbeknownst to his captors, Bond survives his ordeal and kills Dr. James Bond .
 The novel Dr. Dr. is based on the story of a woman who was once accosted by a man but is inexperience in the way of love ... well you can imagine .
 No is not one of my favorite Bond books, but the film more than makes up for my disappointment . The film is a must-see at least one of the Bond books .
 The Electric clock in the cool dark room in the heart of the mountain showed four-thirty. No. No . No.
 Outside the mountain, Crab Key had sweltered and stunked its way through another day . Crab Key was sweltering and stinking in the heat .
 At the eastern end of the island, the mass of birds, Louisiana herons, pelicans, avocets, sandpipers, egrets, flamingoes and the few roseate spoonbills, went on with building their nests or fishing in the shallow waters of the lake
 Most of the birds had been disturbed so often that year that they had given up any idea of building . The birds were disturbed by so much that they gave up any attempt to build .
 In the past few months they had been raided at regular intervals by the monster that came at night and burned down their roosting places and the beginnings of their nests . The monster had been coming at night to burn down the roosts and nestlings .
 Many birds would die of nervous hysteria that seizes bird colonies when they no longer have peace and privacy . There would be vague movements to migrate and many would die . Many would die from nervous hysteria .
 At the other end of the island, on the guanera that gave the mountain its snow-covered look, the vast swarm of cormorants had passed their usual day of gorging themselves with fish and paying back the ounce of precious manure .
 The guanay is a quarrelsome bird and this sixty-centimetre ring represents their sparring space . Now they were noisily fiddling with the untidy piles of sticks that would be their nests . Each pile at exactly sixty centimetres from the next, for
 The females would lay three 91 eggs from which their master’s flock would be increased by an average of two young cormorants . Soon the females would be laying the three 91 egg eggs from their master's flock .
 Below the peak, where the diggings began, the hundred or so Negro men and women who were the labour force were coming to the end of the day’s shift . Below the . peak, the 100 or so . were the . labour force .
 Another fifty cubic yards of guano had been dug out of the mountainside . Another twenty yards of terrace had been added to the working level .
 Below, the mountainside looked like terraced vineyards in Upper Italy, except that here there were no vines, only deep barren shelves cut in the mountainsides . Below was a deep barren shelf cut in mountainside, with no vines .
 Instead of the stink of marsh gas on the rest of the island, there was a strong ammoniac smell . The ugly hot wind that kept the diggings dry blew the freshly turned whitish-brown dust into the eyes and ears and noses of the diggers .
 The workers were used to the smell and the dust, and it was easy, healthy work . But the workers are used to it, and the smell is not unusual .
 The last iron truck of the day started off on the Decauville Track that snaked down the mountainside to the crusher .
 A whistle blows and the workers shouldered their clumsy picks and moved lazily down towards the high-wired group of Quonset huts that was their compound . A whistle blew . The whistle blew.
 Tomorrow, on the other side of the mountain, the monthly ship would be coming in to the deep-water quay they had helped to build ten years before, but which, since then, they had never seen .
 That would mean fresh stores and fresh goods and cheap jewellery at the canteen . That would include fresh stores, fresh goods, and cheaper jewellery .
 Life was good, too, for the senior outside staff—all Chinese Negroes like the men who had hunted Bond and Quarrel and the girl . Life was also good for the staff, including the senior staff .
 They also stopped work 92 in the garage and the machine shops . They filtered off to the ‘officers” quarters .
 Apart from watch and loading duties, tomorrow would also be a holiday for most of the crew .
 Some ‘marriages’ from the last lot would continue for further months or weeks according to the taste of the ‘husband’ But for the others there would be a fresh choice .
 There would be some older girls who had had their babies in the creche and were coming back for a fresh spell of duty ‘outside’ and there would be a sprinkling of young ones who had come of age and would be ‘coming out’
 Officers' quarters would settle down for another month of communal life, each officer with his woman to look after his needs . There would be fights over these and blood would be shed, but in the end the officers’ quarters settled down again .
 Bond awoke in his comfortable bed. Deep down in the cool heart of the mountain, far below this well-disciplined surface life . Bond woke in a comfortable bed .
 He swung his feet to the ground and, avoiding the fragments of glass from the broken lamp, walked softly over to the clothes cupboard . He put on the first kimono that came to his hand .
 The girl had a pile of kimonos out on the bed and was trying them on in front of the wall mirror . The girl was trying to wear a kimono when she found out she was wearing it .
 At the back of Bond’s mind was the urgent necessity to get his hands on some kind of weapon . A pair of scissors would be better than nothing, Bond's character says .
 Someone had come while they were asleep and taken away the breakfast things . Someone had gone while they slept and taken them away from them .
 Propped among the bottles were two menus, huge double-folio pages covered with print . Propped up among bottles was two menus covered in print .
 They might have been from the Savoy Grill, or the '21', or the Tour d’Argentine . They might be from Savoy, the ‘21’ or the “Savoy Grill’s ‘19’, or ‘
 In between is every dish whose constituents would not be ruined by a deep freeze . In between was every dish not to be ruined .
 Bond ordered tea and buttered toast for Honeychile and told them to look after her hair and nails . Bond brushed aside their amiabilities, ordering tea and toast for her .
 "I had a couple of Aspirins and a cold shower. Then he went into the bathroom," he said . "Then he went to the bathroom and had a few aspirin and cold shower," he added .
 He put on his kimono again, reflected that he looked idiotic in it, and went back into the room . He reflected on his decision to wear it again and reflected that it was idiotic .
 May asked if he would be good enough to select what he and Mrs Bryce could care to have for dinner . A beaming May asked him if he could choose what he would like to have .
 Bond ordered caviar, grilled lamb cutlets and salad, and angels on horseback for himself . Without enthusiasm, Bond ordered the caviar and grilled cutlets .
 Honeychile chose melon, roast chicken a l'Anglaise and vanilla ice cream with hot chocolate sauce for her .
 Bond walked over to where Honeychile was being ministered to at the dressing table . Bond then walked to the dressing room and sat down to watch the ministrations . Bond walked away from the scene .
 He watched the busy delicate fingers at work on her hair and her nails . He watched them work on the hair and nails .
 He said gruffly, “Don’t let them make too much of a monkey out of you,” and went to the drink tray . "Don't let them [the media] make too many of them of you," he said .
 He poured himself out a stiff Bourbon and soda and took it into his own room . He poured it in a stiff bourbon and soda .
 The scissors and files and probes were attached to the manicurist’s waist by a chain . It was attached to a chain attached to her waist .
 Bond sat down on his rumpled bed and lost himself in drink and gloomy reflections . Bond sat sat down in bed to drink and reflected on his gloomy reflections. Bond sat in bed and sat down to drink .
 When he didn’t lift his head she went back into her room and left him alone . She went back to her room to find out what happened .
 He glanced at the clock on the wall and went back and drank his drink . He put on another of the idiotic kimonos, a plain black one . He looked back and put on the black one.
 In due course there came the soft knock on the door and the two of them went silently out of the room and along the empty corridor .
 He didn't want to tell her that all this luxury play-acting was getting him down, that he hadn't the smallest idea what it was all about . But he knew it was bad news, and that he had no idea how to get them out of the situation .
 There was nothing that depressed Bond’s spirit so much as the knowledge that he hadn’t one line of either attack or defence . Bond's spirit was not depressed by the fact he had no line of defence or attack .
 The automatic doors hissed back and Bond and the girl stepped out into a large room . Bond and a girl were in the room at Bond's request . Bond was able to get his hands on the girl's hand .
 It was a high-ceilinged room about sixty feet long, lined on three sides with books to the ceiling . The room was lined on all three sides . It was lined with books .
 At first glance, the fourth wall seemed to be made of solid blue-black glass . The fourth wall was made of a solid blue black glass .
 There was a paper-strewn desk in one corner and a central table with periodicals and newspapers . There was also a big paper-studded desk .
 Club chairs, upholstered in red leather, dotted about . Comfortable club chairs dotted about in the club .
 The carpet was dark green, and the lighting, from standard lamps, was subdued . The carpet is dark green . The lighting was subdued.
 The only odd feature was that the drink tray and sideboard were up against the middle of the long glass wall . chairs and occasional tables with ashtrays were arranged in a semicircle round it so that the room was centered .
 A silvery spray of small fish with a bigger fish in pursuit fled across the dark blue . Small fish chased by a larger fish in a silvery stream of water .
 Above the waves was a strip of greyer blue-black, dotted with sparks of light . Above the water, the waves were grey and black . Above it was the strip of light dotted with sparkles .
 They were under the sea, looking straight into its heart, twenty feet down . They were looking at the heart of the heart, looking into it .
 A golden sheen of head and deep flank showed for an instant and was gone . The sheen was gone in an instant, and the moment was gone.
 The twenty-foot tendrils of a Portuguese man-o’-war drifted slowly across the window, glinting violet as they caught the light .
 Up above there was the dark mass of its underbelly and the outline of its inflated bladder, steering with the breeze . Up above, there was an outline of the inflated bladder . It was the first time a plane had seen a plane in the sky .
 Bond walked along the wall, fascinated by the idea of living with this slow, endlessly changing moving picture . Bond walked through the wall and was fascinated by its slow-moving moving image .
 A big tulip shell was progressing slowly up the window from the floor level, a frisk of demoiselles and angel fish and a ruby-red moonlight snapper were nudging and rubbing themselves against a corner of the glass .
 A long dark shadow paused in the centre of the window and then moved slowly away . The long shadow paused before moving slowly away from the window . It is not the first time a shadow has been seen in the window of this window .
 Two great shafts of light, from off the ‘screen’, lanced out into the water . Obediently, two great shaft of light from the 'screen' came out of the 'screens'
 The dull grey torpedo of a twelve-foot shark showed up in all its detail . Then they converged on the departing shadow and the shark appeared . The shark was the first shark to appear in a shark attack .
 Bond could even see the piglike pink eyes roll inquisitively in the light and the slow pulse of the slanting gill-rakers . Bond could also see the pigs' pink eyes rolling inquistatoryly in light and pulse of slanting .
 For an instant the shark turned straight into the converged beam and the white halfmoon mouth showed below the reptile’s flat head .
 It stood poised for a 98 second and then, with an elegant, disdainful swirl, the great swept-back tail came round and with a lightning quiver, the shark had gone .
 It looked static and lifeless compared to the pulsing mysteries outside the window . It looked lifeless compared with the pulsed mysteries outside of the window. But it looked like it was all over .
 The waves crashed noiselessly against the glass, delving almost to the floor and then sweeping up and out of sight . What must it be like in a storm when the waves crashed?
 He must have built the glass wall deep inside the cliff and then delicately removed layer after layer of the outside rock until the divers could prise off the last skin of coral .
 "My guests usually think about the material side after about fifteen minutes," she says . "I'm not going to let my guests think about my material side," she adds .
 Doctor No came slowly out of behind the desk and moved towards them . Still smiling, Doctor No smiled as he approached them . Doctor No was smiling as he slowly made his way out of the room and smiled .
 His knees did not dent the matt, gunmetal sheen of his kimono and no shoes showed below the sweeping hem . No shoes were visible below the broad hem .
 Doctor No was at least six inches taller than Bond, but the straight immovable poise of his body made him seem still taller . Doctor No is six inches shorter than Bond but has a straight, immovable body .
 The head also was elongated and tapered from a round, completely bald skull down to a sharp chin . The impression was of a reversed raindrop, for the skin was a deep almost translucent yellow yellow .
 It was odd to see a forehead as smooth as the top of the polished skull . The skull's smooth top was the first of its kind to be seen in the world .
 Even the cavernous indrawn cheeks below the prominent cheekbones looked as smooth as fine ivory . Even the . cavernous . indrawn cheekbones below the . prominent . cheekbones . looked as . smooth as . fine ivory.
 There was something Dali-esque about the eyebrows, which were fine and black and sharply upswept as if they had been painted on as makeup for a conjurer .
 They looked like the mouths of two small revolvers, direct and unblinking and totally devoid of expression . They looked at each other's eyes as if they were looking at the mouth of a small revolver .
 The thin fine nose ended very close above a wide compressed wound of a mouth which, despite its almost permanent sketch of a smile, showed only cruelty and authority . Despite this, despite his almost permanent . smile, despite . having a thin fine . nose ended up very close . above a
 Later Bond was to notice that it rarely moved more than slightly away from centre . It gave the impression that the head and the vertebra were in one piece . Later Bond noticed that the body was in one part .
 The bizarre, gliding figure looked like a giant venomous worm wrapped in grey tin-foil . Bond would not have been surprised to see the rest of it trailing slimily along the carpet behind .
 The two pairs of steel pincers came out on their gleaming stalks . They were held up for inspection like the hands of a praying mantis . The mantis is the world's largest praying spider .
 Doctor No moved to a high leather chair and folded himself down on to the seat . He folded himself into a leather chair to sit in front of the camera .
 A short man, a Chinese Negro, with the build of a wrestler, stood at the drink tray . A short, a short man with a short build, was at the drinks tray at the time .
 Black almond eyes in a wide moon face met his and slid incuriously away from him . The eyes of a man's eyes slid away from the man's face .
 I always carry what is known as a walkie-talkie here,” he says . “I always carry a walky-talky here, and I'm always carrying it,’ he adds .
 Bond said, “And I would like a medium Vodka dry Martini— with a slice of lemon peel” Bond said .
 Sam-sam, put the shaker beside the man and another bottle of Coca-Cola beside the girl . Sam-Sam: "Sam-Sam, put a shaker next to the man, and a bottle of Coke next to a girl"
 Doctor No said, “And now Mister James Bond of the Secret Service, let us tell each other our secrets.” Then Doctor No added “Let us tell our secrets’.
 Doctor No brought the steel claw delicately in front of each eye and tapped the centre of each eyeball . Doctor No tapped each eye's centre to make sure they didn't have to be touched .
 His story of representing the Audubon Society was anyway a thin one which could be punctured by anyone who knew about birds . His story was anyway, anyway, a thin story which could have been punctured .
 Doctor No recorded the fact and it will be divulged in certain circumstances . Doctor No’s expression showed no interest .
 But, if we are to have a talk, let us have it without any more stage effects. Let's have it, let's not use stage effects again. We need to be able to talk without stage effects, he says .
 It is not necessary to make yourself more interesting than you are. But it's not necessary for you to be interesting, says CNN.com .
 Doctor No is still a man who sleeps and eats and defecates like the rest of us . But, Doctor No, you are still a . man who slept and eats like the . rest of the us .
 I have no doubt developed annoying mannerisms from living too long in the company of apes . I'm not sure how long I've been with apes, but I'm sure I've developed annoying waysisms .
 “Let us proceed with our talk. However,” Doctor No raised his joined sleeves an inch and let them fall back in his lap, “let us proceed to our talk” He said .
 It is a rare pleasure to have an intelligent listener and I shall enjoy telling you the story of one of the most remarkable men in the world . It is the rare pleasure of having an intelligent listening to the story .
 There had been little doubt in Bond’s mind ever since the Spandau had opened up on them, and since, even before then, in Jamaica, where the attempts on him had not been half-hearted . Bond had been trying to kill him in Jamaica before, and
 Bond assumed from the first that this man was a killer, that it would be a duel to the death . Bond had assumed that from the . first that . this man is a killer . Bond assumed that this . man was the killer, and that it was a duel .
 He had had his usual blind faith that he would win the duel . All the way until the moment when the flame-thrower had pointed at him .
 "There was no anger in it, no obstinacy—nothing but a supreme indifference," she said . "There were no anger there in it," she added. "It was no obstinate or obstinate"
 It was as if her lover had threatened to send her out of the cinema and now had relented . It was like if she had been threatened with sending her out, she said .
 Doctor No said, in the same soft resonant voice, “You are right, Mister Bond.” Doctor No . Doctor No then said, ‘You are also right,” he said .
 They are possessed by a mania which drives them forward towards the goal . They were possessed by the mania that drives them to the goal. They are now possessed by an obsession with the game. They will never be able to get back to the top of the league .
 The great scientists, the philosophers, the religious leaders—all maniacs, all maniacs . "All maniacs are maniacs," he says. "They were maniacs."
 Bond: "I am, as you correctly say, a maniac—a maniac, Mister Bond, with a mania for power. I am ... a maniac," Bond says . Bond: 'I am a maniac' Bond says, "I'm a maniac with a maniac"
 It’s the old business of thinking you’re the King of England, or the President of the United States, or God . It's not the only question: What do you think you're the King?
 The only difference is that instead of being shut up, you’ve built your own asylum and shut yourself up in it . Instead of shutting yourself up, the asylum is shut up in the asylum, you've built yourself up .
 Any man with a loaded revolver has the power of life and death over his neighbour, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A greater power than they possess is exerted upon them by the community, says the author of the book . "A greater power" is exerted on them, says author .
 I know philosophy, ethics, and I know logic, better than you do, I daresay. I'm not afraid to say, but I do know logic better than anyone else, I say .
 Let us return to where I began, with my mania for power, or, if you wish it, for the illusion of power . Let us back to where we started, with the mania of power for power .
 "Please do not imagine that half an hour’s conversation with you will alter the pattern of my life," Bond says . "And please, Mister Bond,” again the extra crease in the fixed smile, “Please don’t imagine that . half an
 He wondered when it would amuse Doctor No to crack her pose of indifference . He wondered if it would be enough to crack the pose of her indifference .
 He fixed his eye on the elegant tulip shell that had now wandered half way up the outside of the window .
 Even the drama of it, the danger, were fragile things compared with the progress of the tulip shell up the glass outside . The Tulip shell is still growing up in the glass of the window .
 Supposing stresses had been badly calculated, the workmanship faulty . Supposing the stresses were badly calculated or faulty . It is not known if the stresses are caused by the design of the structure .
 Supposing the sea decided to lean a little more heavily against the window. Supposing it was the sea leaning in heavily .
 Doctor No said, “I was the only son of a German Methodist missionary and a Chinese girl of good family.” Doctor No was born in China .
 "I enjoyed the conspiracies, the burglaries, the murders, the arson of insured properties," says the author . He says he enjoyed the "conspiracies" and "the burglaries"
 I became adept in the technique of criminality, if you wish to call it that. I became an expert in criminality,’s the author says. ‘I became an adept in criminality—if you wish it that,' he says .
 I had been given a letter of introduction, in code, to one of the two most powerful Tongs in America . The Hip Sings are known as the "Hip Sings"
 "I never knew what the letter said, but they took me on at once as a confidential clerk," she says . "They took her on as soon as they took on as once," she recalls .
 In due course, at the age of thirty, he was made the equivalent of treasurer . He says: "I was made a treasurer. I am very proud of my achievements"
 Over the weeks hundreds on both sides were killed and their houses and properties burned to the ground . Hundreds of people were killed in the fighting .
 The headquarters of the two Tongs were raided and the ringleaders were sent to jail . The two underground armies were prised apart and the headquarters were raided .
 A few hours before it was due, I got to the safe and rifled the million dollars in gold and disappeared into Harlem and went to ground . "I got to a million dollars ... and disappeared in Harlem," he says .
 "Even from the condemned cells in Sing Sing the heads of my Tong reached out for me," she said . Even from the prison cell in Singapore, she said. "I'm not a prisoner. Even from my Tong, I'm a prisoner," she added .
 They cut off my hands to show that the corpse was that of a thief, and they shot me through the heart and went away . Then, when they could not break me, they cut off his hands to prove that he was a thief . Then they cut him off and shot him
 "I am the one man in a million who has his heart on the right side of his body," he says . "I'm a man in one million who is one of a million," he adds .
 'By sheer willpower I survived the operation and the months in hospital. By sheer willpower, I survived by sheer willpower,' she says .
 I bought an envelope, just one envelope, full of the rarest postage stamps in the world . I bought a rarest stamp of the world in a bid to find out what is the world's best .
 I had all my hair taken out by the roots, my thick nose made thin, my mouth widened, my lips sliced . I had a thick nose, thick lips, thick hair, thick eyes, thick nose and thick lips . I'm not sure how much of my hair was taken
 I changed my name to Julius No—the Julius after my father and the No for my rejection of him and of all authority . Julius No. was Julius after his father and Julius No for his rejection of authority. Julius No was Julius No when Julius was Julius .
 I threw away my spectacles and wore contact lenses—one of the first pairs ever built . The first pair of contact lenses was one of the world's first pairs .
 "I went to Milwaukee, where there are no Chinamen, and enrolled myself in the faculty of medicine," he says . Then he went to Wisconsin, where he enrolled himself in the medical faculty, he says.
 "I hid myself in the academic world, the world of libraries and laboratories," she says . "I hide myself in libraries and classrooms and campuses," she writes .
 "There, Mister Bond, I lost myself in the study of the human body and the human mind," Bond says .
 I had to learn what my tools were before I put them to use on my next goal, "total security from physical weaknesses, from material dangers and from the hazards of living," says author . "Total security is the ultimate goal," he says .
 She seemed composed and indifferent—as if her mind was on other things . She was composed, indifferent, and seemed composed .
 "In due course, I completed my studies and I left America and went by easy stages round the world," says Simon Cowan .
 I called myself ‘doctor’ because doctors receive confidences and they can ask questions without arousing suspicion . ‘Doctor’s ‘confidential’ is a form of honesty that doctors receive from their patients, she said . She said: ‘Doctors receive
 It had to be safe from the coming war, it had to . be an island, it must be entirely private, and it had . been capable of industrial development . It also had to have an island that was completely private .
 "They have been secure and fruitful years, without a cloud on the horizon," says Mark Hughes . "They are secure and productive years," says Hughes .
 I was entertained by the idea of converting bird dung into gold, and I attacked the problem with passion. I was attacked with passion, I said . I'm not afraid to say yes, but I'm glad to say 'yes'
 The digging of the guano is only a question of not spoiling the crop by digging too much . It's only a good thing to say: 'Don't dig too much'
 I tempted a hundred of them over to the island by paying them twelve shillings a week . I tempted them over with a twelve-shillings-a-week offer .
 Harsh methods have had to be used from time to time, but the result is that my men are content with their wages because they are the highest wages they have ever known . The result of the harsh methods have been used, but they have been successful .
 "I brought in a dozen Chinese Negroes with their families to act as overseers," says President Obama . "We have a lot of respect for the people of China," he says .
 They lived inside the mountain until their work was done and then left by ship . They lived in the mountains until they had their work done and lived inside .
 "My fortress was built while the birds defecated on top of it. And gradually, methodically, my fortress ... was built," she says .
 He lifted his arms an inch an inch and dropped them again resignedly in his lap . He lifted an inch, dropped one arm, one arm and one arm again .
 Two wardens, miles away in the middle of the lake, were provisioned by launch from Cuba . The two wardens were supplied with food and water by boat from the island .
 Ornithologists from America came by the launch and spent some days at the camp . Occasionally, ornithologists visited the launch camp .
 "From the first I made it clear to the Audubon Society that I would not meet their representatives," says President Obama . "I would not met their representatives. From the first, I made the clear to . make it clear," he says .
 The roseate spoonbills have become one of the bird wonders of the world . They are the largest species of the species in the world and are the only species to be seen in the wild . The species is a species of bird that has become a global bird wonder .
 The Society give me formal notification that they intend to build a hotel on their leasehold, near the river up which you came . The Society gives me formal notice that they intends to build the hotel on the leasehold .
 Crab Key, they told me in their flattering, persuasive letter, would become famous . Crab Key would be famous, they said. Crab Key .
 The marsh buggy is a vehicle used for oil prospecting, that will cover any kind of terrain . It's a vehicle that can be used for prospecting in Florida .
 It smashed the camp, both wardens were reported killed, though one escaped to die in Jamaica . It burned the nesting places, it spread terror among the birds .
 A lorry goes out of control down the airstrip as the plane is coming in . The incident happened at the end of the day when the plane came in .
 My men suggest that the wardens went mad with loneliness and fought each other . My men say that they suggest that they were mad by loneliness and fighting each other.
 He looked from Bond to Bond to the girl and back again, “And that, my friends, is my story—or rather the first chapter of what I am confident will be a long and interesting tale.”
 No doubt the Audubon Society will decide to accept my offer for the rest of their lease . I'm sure it will be accepted .
 "If they start their puny operations again, other misfortunes will befall them," says the former president . "They will be doomed if they start again," he says .
 I have established a watch on the intelligence services in Jamaica and Cuba . I have set up an 'watch' on intelligence services . I'm not sure what intelligence services are involved in Jamaica or Cuba .
 He wondered if it was worth while even trying to make a dent in this impregnable man . He wondered whether it would be worth while trying to stop him from reaching out .
 My thoughts on this case, the poisoned fruit and the centipede and the crashed motor car, are on record . My thoughts of the case, which led to the crash of a motor car and poisoned fruit, are now public .
 He said softly, “But because of the girl, and only because of her, Doctor No, I will strike a bargain.” Doctor No. said softly .
 In exchange for our safe return to Jamaica, you may have a week’s start . We are offered a week-long start in exchange for a safe return .
 It is kind of you both to have listened to me with such exemplary patience. It's kind of a good thing for you to be so patient with me, I say .
 Bond and the girl followed Doctor No through into a small octagonal mahogany paneled room . The room was lit by a central chandelier in silver .
 Doctor No took the centre high-backed chair and bowed the girl into the chair on his right . Doctor No bowed his daughter into his right chair .
 He slowly ate through three bowls of different soup, feeding himself with a spoon with a short handle that fitted neatly between the pincers . He was fed through three different bowls of soup, using a spoon that fits neatly between his pinchers .
 He talked cheerfully to the girl about Jamaica—about the birds and the animals and the flowers which were an easy topic for her . He talked about the birds, the animals, the flowers and the plants .
 Bond thought they were putting on an excellent imitation of an engaged couple being given dinner by a detested uncle . Bond thought it was an excellent imitation of an engagement couple .
 Perhaps there are other people in the world with their private kingdoms, away from the beaten track, where there were no witnesses, where they could do what they liked . Perhaps there were other people with private kingdoms .
 Doctor No would shrug his shoulders over the disappearance of Bond and Quarrel .
 In Morgan's Harbour they would think she had been drowned on one of her expeditions . In Morgan’s Harbour, she would have been drowned .
 It was hard to see what could interfere with Doctor No—with the second chapter of his life, whatever it was . "It's hard to imagine what could happen to Doctor No," he said .
 Bond fiddled indecisively with the knives and chose the bread knife to eat them with . When the cutlets came, perfectly cooked, he chose bread knife for them .
 While he ate and talked, he edged the big steel meat knife towards him . He edged it towards him with the knife .
 An expansive gesture of his right hand knocked over his glass of champagne and in the split second of the crash his left hand flicked the knife into the deep sleeve of his shirt .
 Bond felt the knife slip back to below his armpit and then fall inside the kimono against his ribs . Bond raised his left arm and felt it slip back below his . bodyguard mopped up the spilled champagne .
 When he had finished his cutlets he tightened the silk belt round his waist, shifting the knife across his stomach . He tightened the knife around his waist and shifted it across his abdomen .
 The knife nestled comfortingly against his skin and gradually the steel grew warm . It was the first time the knife had ever been placed in his skin .
 The two guards came and stood close behind Bond's chair and the girl's . The guards came close to Bond’s chair and stood behind it . The two security guards came to the scene .
 They stood with their arms crossed on their chests, impassive, motionless, like executioners . They stood in impassives, like executionsers, they said . They said: "They stood with arms crossed, legs crossed, eyes crossed, arms crossed and arms on their
 Bond smoked busily, agitating his hands and forearms to create an atmosphere of movement . Bond smoked  agitated his hands, forearms, creating an atmosphere for movement .
 The monthly ship is putting in tomorrow and I have the loading to supervise . I have been supervising the loading of the monthly ship . The ship will put in tomorrow .
 The deep quiet authoritative voice came to him as if it was coming down from the night sky . It was the voice of a deep, authoritative voice that came from the sky .
 This was a big game, a game that explained everything, says the author . This was certainly, in the international espionage market, well worth the candle. This was the game that explains everything .
 For this it was certainly worth scaring away a few birds and wiping out a few people . For this, it was also worth wiping out people .
 The signals from Moscow have been innocent of any sign of conspiracy . So far, the signals have been from Moscow .
 "I accept the dangers and, so far, I have equipped myself against them," she says . "So far as I can, I'm prepared to cope with them. I accept the risks," she adds .
 “I am on the edge of still greater things. You see, Mister Bond,” the deep voice held a hint of greed . “Mister Bond” was Bond’s first public appearance .
 The Chapter Two to which I referred holds the promise of prizes which no one but a fool would throw away because he was afraid . No one but one would throw them away because they were afraid . The prize-winning chapter Two is Chapter Two .
 "I have told you that I can bend the beams on which these rockets fly, Mister Bond," Bond says . Bond: "I'm not afraid to bend the beam of these rockets" Bond: 'I'm sure you can bend this beam of light'
 If I could bring them down into the sea near this island, I could salvage the secrets of their construction, I would be able to bring them back to the island .
 At present American destroyers salvage these missiles when they come to the end of their fuel and parachute down into the sea .
 No one on Turks Island would be surprised if every now and then the prototype of a new series broke off its flight and came down near Crab Key .
 Later, perhaps, they would discover that other radio signals besides theirs were guiding their rockets . Later they would find out that they were guided by radio signals .
 I found they were looking for me, I would have one last fling. Directly I found them looking for him, I decided to have one final fling with them . Directly found they found them, I was looking for them .
 Five tons of metal arriving at a thousand miles an hour can cause plenty of damage in a crowded town . Even without warheads, Mister Bond, even without warheads can cause lots of damage .
 Now he's going to be politely shown the way to his grave, taking the secrets with him and the waif he had picked up and dragged along with him on his lunatic adventure . Now he was going to take the secrets he picked up with him .
 The bitterness inside Bond came up into his mouth so that for a moment he thought he was going to retch . Bond thought he might retch when he saw the bitterness in his mouth . The bitterness in Bond's mouth came up .
 I am also interested in finding out how much the human body can endure . I'm looking to find out how long a person can endure. I'm interested in knowing how much of the body can withstand. I hope to see how much it can be endured by the body .
 "From time to time I make experiments on those of my people who have to be punished," says the author . "I'm not afraid to punish my people," says author .
 The German experiments on live humans during the war were of great benefit to science . The experiments were conducted during the Second World War .
 It is a year since I put a girl to death in the fashion I have chosen for you, woman . It is the first time I have worn a dress I've worn for you .
 She stared back at him, half hypnotized, like a bush mouse in front of a rattlesnake . She was hypnotized by the hypnotic gaze of the animal .
 At this time of year they come up in thousands from their holes near the shore and climb up towards the mountain . Thousands of people are believed to be in the hundreds of thousands of years .
 There, in the coral uplands, they go to ground again in holes in the rock and spawn their broods . There, they then go back to ground and spawn in holes where they can be found .
 They are coming up the mountainside in their tens of thousands, great red and orange and black waves of them, scuttling and hurrying and scraping against the rock above us at this moment .
 He waited for his voice to steady, then he said, with all the venom he could put into the words, “You bastard.” He waited until his voice was steady before he said the words .
 The guard behind the girl’s chair leant forward and plucked her bodily out of the chair as if she had been a child . The guard slung the inert body over his shoulder .
 The guard went to the door and opened it and went out, closing it noiselessly behind him . The guard then went out .
 Bond thought only of the knife against his skin and of the lighter under his armpit . Bond had only thought of his own life in the last few moments . Bond thought of the gun as he lay on the ground in the dark .
 Doctor No said quietly, “You said that power was an illusion, Mister Bond.” Doctor No replied, ‘Yes,” he replied . Doctor No then said quietly: “Mister Bond said power is an illusion .
 "My power to select this particular death for the girl is surely not an illusion," she said . "I'm sure that my power is not illusion. My power must be strong," she added .
 You see, Mister Bond, I am interested in the anatomy of courage—in the power of the human body to endure, I said . "I'm interested in ... the anatomy . of courage," Bond said .
 I have given much thought to the problem, and I believe I have solved it. I have had a lot of thought to come up with the problem. I believe it has solved it, and it's a good thing,’s a good idea. I'm not going to
 It is, of course, only a rough and ready method, and I shall learn by experience as more and more subjects are put to the test . It's only a 'rough and ready' method, but it's only 'only a rough' method .
 I gave you a sedative so that your body should be rested and I have fed you well so that you may be at full strength . I gave . you a . sedative . I have given you a well-rested body so that . you may . be at . full
 "I will say no more about it because the element of surprise is one of the constituents of fear," she said .
 It is the unknown dangers that are the worst, that bear most heavily on the reserves of courage . The unknown dangers are often the worst that require courage, says author .
 "I flatter myself that the gauntlet you will run contains a rich assortment of the unexpected," he says . "And I'm not afraid to say anything," he adds .
 "It will be particularly interesting, Mister Bond, that a man of your physical qualities is to be my first competitor," Bond says .
 "It will be most interesting to observe how far you get down the course I have devised," says the author of the book .
 You should go far, but when, as is inevitable, you have finally failed at an obstacle, your body will be recovered . I shall most meticulously examine the physical state of your remains, says the author .
 Bond gathered his reserves of courage, steeling his mind against the fear of the unknown that already had him by the throat, focusing his whole will on survival . Bond gathered the courage and steeled his mind to survive .
 Doctor No turned away and the door closed softly behind the long thin gunmetal back . The door was closed softly by Doctor No .
 The film is more exciting than the book, which is a rarity as far as the Fleming novels are concerned . No. No. The film was more exciting . No .
 The first lines spoken by Sean Connery is one of the iconic moments of James Bond . The first line is repeated a number of times in the way of introduction, in subsequent Bond films .
 This scene had to be repeated a number of times until the right tone and delivery had been achieved .
 Watch the BBC series The Man Who Would Be Bond . She turns up unexpectedly reminiscent of a wartime incident with the woman who would become his wife .
 I wonder if Sylvia Trench is perhaps patterned after Fleming’s real world wife . I wonder whether she is the same as his real-world wife . Sylvia Trenches is a model for Fleming .
 Ursula Andress's iconic white bikini was custom made late the night before by a local actress turned dress maker Marie Therese Prendergast custom made to fit Andress’ physique .
 On the first scene between Andress and Connery on the beach, she managed to slip and cut her leg . The pair were filming a beach scene on the first day of filming .
 No has a nuclear reactor to power his island hide out and is trying to topple a rocket set to send a space probe to the Moon . He is also fighting a mission to destroy a rocket sent to the moon .
 The script is no longer about the missile race, but about the Space Race and the prestige that the U.S. had invested in the effort . The script now focuses on the prestige of the United States had invested .
 The reason for including the character Felix Leiter and the Central Intelligence Agency might be to provide some continuity to future scripts as well as to give U.S. theater goers some American content .
 If you carry a double-0 number, it means you’re licensed to kill, not get killed . M. M. says he's licensed to carry a number, not to get killed.
 You’ll carry the Walther from now on ... unless you want to go back to standard intelligence work . You'll carry it from now .
 There is a great deal of true to life espionage trade craft to the film . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September .
 The film’s action is well paced and the climax is indeed a one-on-one fight between good and evil ... between Bond and Dr. James Bond .
 Bond pushes the atomic reactor past its safe operating limits, defeating Dr. No . Bond meets Dr. James Bond as Bond pushes his atomic reactor beyond its safe limits . Bond is the first time Bond has been seen in a nuclear reactor .
 The arch villain dies a quick and painful death either being boiled alive or fried by the gamma radiation and neutrons . He is boiled alive and fried by gamma radiation or neutron radiation .
 As a nuclear astrophysicist I can tell you that, in real life, James Bond would also irradiated himself with enough gamma radiation and neutrons to die of radiation poisoning long before the next film, From Russia With Love, found its ways to the theaters .
 I am unsure how one can extract electrical power from a water pool reactor, apart from thermionic means, which has a very low conversion efficiency . I am also unsure how . one can extracted electrical power . apart from . thermionic . means, it is not clear how one . can
 The delayed release was due to trepidation that United States theater goers would not relate to a debonair British secret agent . The film was released in the U.S. in theaters on July 26, 2013 .
 A decision was made to let the press build up good standing for the film in the UK before being released elsewhere . The film will be shown in cinemas around the world before being shown elsewhere .
 The Bond phenomena, along with the Beatles, took many media watchers by surprise . The Bond phenomenon, like those of the Beatles and Bond, was a phenomenon in the 1960s .
 No. No exceeded $ 60 million, despite the delayed release to the U.S. and international markets .
 Sometimes late at night, after a long hard day at work when I just want to relax, I pop my Dr. Dr. Pepper .
 No film into the DVD and enjoy the well paced action of the film and the rather remarkable story that it depicts .
 Every time I watch this film I can see how James Bond became an instant hit in the 1960’s . The film was released in the UK in 1960s .
 Good fights evil and wins the fight, but goodness wins because of a good fight . Good wins because it's a fight against evil, but evil wins because a fight is a fight .
 It is not that the end justifies the means ... the ends and the means are one and the same . It's not that that the ends justify the means, it's the end and the end .
 You can see him and his film making colleagues at their finest in every second of the beauty and professionalism of this film .
 As a banker and someone who was knowledgeable about gold, the novel is an excellent look at the smuggling world . The novel is a look at a world of gold smuggling, says author .
 There are many inklings that Ian Fleming drew from real life for detailed aspects of this novel . Ian Fleming also drew on real life to draw from the world's most famous characters .
 The British gold reserves, the solvency of the pound sterling and the balance of trade were major concerns for the UK Government from at least August 1939 until well into the 1970’s .
 The savings transferred from the old world to the new world constituted over three hundred years of earnest effort by the People of Britain . The savings . constituted over 3 hundred years . of earnest efforts by the . People of . Britain .
 President Roosevelt received from the French Government in 1940 did not endear the French to the American President . The answer that the French government gave to the U.S. President Roosevelt was rejected .
 In 1940, France had already decided not to share their wealth with the United States . France buried some of their gold deposits in North Africa, and stored some of the gold in the hold of a French aircraft carrier in one of the French islands .
 Great Britain, on the other hand, did not expect a free ride from the United States and did their earnest effort to fight the war against Germany and fulfill their financial obligations to their American allies . Great Britain did not want a free-ride from the U.S.
 In the space of three years the entire wealth of Great Britain found its way into American coffers, making the United States the wealthiest people in the history of the English speaking world .
 The injection of wealth into American life lasted perhaps from 1941 to 1981 ... then the whole thing went bust . The whole thing goes bust. It was perhaps the most significant injection in American life .
 The financial tug of war between the United States and the rest of the world continues to this day . The U.S. has been in the midst of a financial crisis .
 A sideline to this is how a similar but smaller financial drama played out from 1935 to 1975 in Sweden . A similar but a smaller but smaller scandal played out between 1935 and 1975 .
 Intrepid was a Canadian and was known as the man known as 'Intrepid' He was also known as a Canadian . He was a member of the Royal Family .
 When these reserves ran out the U.S. implemented the policy of Lend Lease . The policy was implemented by the United States in 1973 .
 The Operation to Transfer the wealth of Great Britain to the new world was known as Operation FISH . Not a single penny of this transfer was lost on the high seas to U-Boats, and on land due to graft or theft .
 The orders for the first shipment of gold bars under Operation FISH aboard the RN light cruiser HMS Emerald were made in early October 1939 . The orders were made under the name of Operation Fish .
 Two million Pounds Sterling in gold bars is to be embarked in each ship to Halifax . Gold bars will be sent to Halifax to be loaded into ships .
 A railway truck is expected to be placed alongside each ship about 01.00 October 7.00 .
 The UK£ 2,000,000 sterling in this single shipment alone is equivalent to an estimated UK£ 100,000 in 2018 .
 The Best of Ian Fleming is a new book in the best Ian Fleming series . It is published by Ian Fleming and is based on The Best Ian Fleming novels .
 Smuggling and black marketeering of illicit goods and services in Great Britain is an interesting story . The smuggling of precious metals and luxury items is a big problem in Britain .
 The plot and characters in Goldfinger draw directly from all that I have just recounted . Goldfinger is based on the story of Goldfinger . The plot, characters in the novel, Goldfinger, are all based on this story .
 Auric Goldfinger was named after British architect Emo Goldfinger, whose London architecture Ian Fleming abhorred . Goldfinger is the arch villain Auric, the villain of the James Bond film .
 Goldfinger tried to sue Fleming for commandeering of his surname as an arch villain in his book, but lost the suit . Goldfinger lost the lawsuit .
 The Swiss angle in the Goldfinger novel is an obvious tie to the role the Swiss played as a purported ‘neutral country ’ during the Second World War .
 The coffers of Swiss banks swelled during the Second World War as citizens of the axis powers squirrereled away ill gotten wealth in Swiss banks .
 This wealth remained locked tight from foreign scrutiny until well into the 1990’s . This wealth was kept from the public eye for decades .
 There has still to be a full accounting of where all the gold taken off the cadavers of concentration camp victims ended up . The gold was taken from the victims of the concentration camp .
 Plomer was a South African and British author, as well as a literary editor to Faber and Faber . He was a literary advisor to the publisher of the Bond novels Jonathan Cape .
 Plomer worked closely with Ian Fleming edited a number of the Bond novels . Plomer edited a series of Bond novels for Ian Fleming . He edited several Bond novels and edited numerous others .
 On his way back to London he makes a detour to help an acquaintance of his a Mr Dupont . The film is set to be shown on BBC2 at 8.30pm .
 The opening of the main plot begins with the matter of a crooked card game that Auric Goldfinger is involved in . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September 2015 .
 Spotter is using a spotter to read his opponent’s cards, sending the information to Goldfinger by radio . Goldfinger uses a radio to communicate with his opponent's cards .
 The spotter is a demi-monde type and is a sort of ‘girl friend’ paid to be seen with Goldfinger . Goldfinger's spotter was a 'girl friend' paid to appear with the actor .
 Bond thwarts the card racket, then steals away the pretty young woman and has a fling with her . Bond steals the pretty woman from a pretty young young woman . Bond has been married for more than 20 years .
 In the process of tailing Goldfinger using a radio tracker Bond finds out how Goldfinger is financing SMERSH’s western networks with smuggled gold . Bond learns that Goldfinger financing SMERH's western networks by smuggling gold .
 Bond reconnoiters Goldfinger’s Swiss operation only to be foisted by an encounter with the sister of the dead woman he had a fling with . Bond then reconnoitsits Goldfinger's Swiss operation after being foisted .
 The Second phase is to explode a small gamma ray producing nuclear weapon in the United States gold reserves at Fort Knox, rendering the reserve radioactive and therefore non-negotiable . The U.S. gold reserve is the most radioactive in the world, and the second phase will explode a
 Bond had had one last try to transport the tons of gold out of the town . Later, when they had got to the problem of transporting the gold out, Bond had tried again . Bond had one final try.
 Nobody's going to get their hundred tons of gold out of the place, let alone five hundred tons, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Gold will arrive on board the cruiser by midnight on D-Day . Initially by train and then by transporter convoy, the gold will arrive by train .
 Everything has been carefully planned, every possible hitch has been foreseen . Everything has to be foreseen, including the possibility of a hitch, it is said .
 "Such small debris as remains of my former life can go to the scavengers who will shortly be sniffing on my trail," says the author . Such small debris can be left behind to scavengers, he says .
 I shall have emigrated and, Mr Bond, I will have taken the golden heart of America with me, Bond says . Mr Bond: 'I shall have taken a golden heart with me'
 Bond manages to alert the U.S. authorities through his friend, Felix Leiter, and the plot is foiled . In a clever way, Bond also alerts the United States authorities . The plot was foiled by the plot .
 The small nuclear weapon is from the Corporal Intermediate Range Guided Missile is a W7 with a variable dial-a-yield of between 2 kt to 60 kt . Incidentally, the small nuclear missile is from a Corporal . Intermediate Range . Guided missile is
 The W7 was also used in ten different delivery systems, from the MGM-5 Corporal Intermediate Range Guided Missile mentioned in Goldfinger, to the MGR-2 Honest John missiles, to nuclear depth charges .
 Between 1952 and 1967 some 1,800 W7 warheads were produced in the United States and deployed with the armed forces of a number of NATO countries .
 The book Goldfinger is the first time a form of nuclear extortion had been written into a novel in the English speaking world, even a Bond novel . Goldfinger was the first novel to have a nuclear extortion novel written into English speaking .
 The nuclear side to the Goldfinger plot is also the first inkling of what would become the core of the plot to the book Thunderball . Thunderball is based on Goldfinger .
 Incidentally, the effort was underway to film Thunderball before either Dr. Dr. or Dr. Thunderball was set to appear .
 No and Goldfinger got tied up in a legal battle over Goldfinger . Thunderball is a new book about the book Thunderball . The book is based on Goldfinger, but that effort was tied up by a legal dispute .
 The book Thunderball would be filmed a year after the release of Goldfinger to American theaters . Thunderball is based on the book Goldfinger . The book would be released in theaters a year later .
 Through twenty-foot-high arched arched windows, green grass and geraniums blazed in the central courtyard . Under his feet glittered the brilliant golden patterns of the Boris Anrep mosaics . Beyond beyond, through 20-foot high arches windows, through twenty-
 Over all hung the neutral smell of air-conditioned air and the heavy, grave atmosphere of immense riches . Over all hangs the neutral .
 One of the pink frock-coated commissionaires came up to him . He was approached by the commissionaires . He said: 'I'm looking forward to this'
 The commissionaire knocked at the last of several finely carved oak doors that were just so much taller and more elegant than ordinary doors .
 She smiled with a hint of conspiracy, picked up a telephone and dialed a number . She picked up the phone, dialing a number. She smiled as she dialed it .
 She crossed the room to a door covered with green baize and held it open for Bond to go through . She crossed it to a room covered in baize . Bond was the first person to meet Bond in the film .
 Colonel Smithers looked exactly like someone who would be called Colonel Smerts . "Colonel Smither's" looks like he would have been a Colonel in his own life .
 He had obviously been a colonel, probably on the staff, and he had the smooth, polished, basically serious mien that fitted his name . He was obviously a colonel .
 For his horn-rimmed glasses, he might have been an efficient, not very wellfed courtier in a royal household . But for his hornrimed glasses he might be an efficient and not very very well fed courtier . He may have been a well-fed royal household
 He looked up, saw that he had put his foot in it, and tried to make amends . "I'm sorry for what I've done," he said .
 Bond said, 'We all think our own secrets are the only ones that matter' Bond said: 'We think our secrets are only ones which matter. Bond said .
 You can go to any town in the world, almost to any village, and hand over a piece of gold and get goods or services in exchange . You can also give a gold piece to anyone who wants to exchange it for goods .
 "He was prepared to listen to anyone who was master of his subject, any subject," he said . He said: "I was prepared for anyone to be master of any subject"
 If gold bars have Mint marks stamped on them the marks can be shaved off or the bar can be melted down and made into a new bar . Gold bars can also be melted into new bars or melted down .
 We can only tell what the true strength of the pound is, by knowing the amount of valuta we have behind our currency . Other countries only tell it by knowing how much valuta the UK has behind its currency .
 Colonel Smithers's bland eyes had become unexpectedly sharp 'My main job is to watch for any leakage of gold out of England—out of anywhere in the sterling area'
 Gold Squad on to the fugitive gold and try to get it back into the vaults, plug the leak and arrest the people responsible . Gold Squad will try to find the gold and plug the leaks and arrest those responsible for it .
 'Gold attracts the biggest, the most ingenious criminals. And the trouble is, Mr Bond' Colonel Smithers gave a forlorn shrug of the shoulders . 'Gold brings the biggest criminals to the biggest,' he said .
 The population of the world is increasing at the rate of five thousand four hundred every hour of the day . The world's population is growing at an increasing rate of 5,000 four hundred people a day .
 A small percentage of those people become gold hoarders, people who are frightened of currencies, who like to bury some sovereigns in the garden or under the bed .
 "All these new people will be taking tons of gold off the market every year," says Goldman . Goldman says the goldman says it's a sign that the world is ready to accept the idea of gold .
 Gold has extraordinary properties which are being put to new uses every day . Gold has been used in the past for more than 30 years in the world . Gold is being used in a new way to make it easier to access the world's best gold .
 It is brilliant, malleable, ductile, almost unalterable and more dense than any of the common metals except platinum . It is more dense and brilliant than any other metal except platinum.
 "It wears out quickly, leaves itself on the linings of our pockets and in the sweat of our skins," says the author of the book .
 Fear, Mr Bond, takes gold out of circulation and hoards it against the evil day . Fear takes gold from circulation and keeps it in circulation, says Bond's Bond .
 Bond had first to educate himself in the fascination, the myth of the stones . In the days when Bond had been after the diamond smugglers he had had had first been educated himself .
 Gold production is so vast nowadays that it ought to take care of all these various consumers . Well, you were suggesting that gold production was so vast today that it should take care for all these consumers .
 You may think that large areas of the world have still to be explored for gold . You can still find gold in many of these areas .
 There only remains the land under the sea and the sea itself, which has a notable gold content . Broadly speaking, there only remains land under sea and sea itself itself .
 People have been scratching the surface of the world for gold for thousands of years . The search for gold has been on the rise for centuries . People have tried to find gold from all over the world to find it .
 There were the great gold treasures of Egypt and Mycenae, Montezuma and the Incas . There were also the great treasure treasures of the Egyptians and Montezumans .
 Europe was worked for it—the valleys of the Rhine and the Po, Malaga and the plains of Granada . Europe's first great cities were worked for by the Spaniards .
 Ants coming up from under the earth carrying grains of gold led the Indians to their alluvial fields . Ants came up from beneath the earth with grains of the gold .
 These were followed by the opening up of the Gold Coast, then called Negro-land, and after that came the Americas . The Americas came after the opening of the Black Coast, and then the Americas, in the Americas.
 The famous gold rushes of the Yukon and Eldorado were the first modern Gold Age . The rich strikes at Eureka sounded off the first major Gold Age in the U.S.
 Russian deposits at Lena and in the Urals were making Russia the largest gold producer in the world in the middle of the nineteenth century . Meanwhile, Bendigo and Ballarat had come into production .
 Then came the second modern Gold Age -- the discoveries on the Witwatersrand . The discoveries were made in the early 1900s, the first time they were discovered .
 These were helped by the new method of cyaniding instead of separation of the gold from the rock .
 From 1500 to 1900, when approximate figures were kept, the whole world produced bout eighteen thousand tons of gold . Just to show you, from 1500-1900, when . approximate figures are kept, when about eighteen thousand ton of gold was produced .
 Bond, smothered by this cataract of gold history, found no difficulty in looking as grave as Colonel Smithers . Bond, however, was not the only man to blame for the loss of Bond .
 Sports and welfare are becoming almost too much of a fetish at the Bank of England . It is almost too many sports and welfare at the bank, says the boss .
 Colonel Smithers waved these minor irritations aside . 'as you say, time to get on to the smuggling,' he said .
 England and the sterling area is a very big business indeed, writes Sportsmail's John Defterios .
 Mr Bond: We employ three thousand staff at the Bank, Mr Bond, and of those no less than one thousand work in the exchange control department .
 Bond measured it against the Secret Service which had a total force of two thousand . Bond measured the size of the force of the two thousand men . Bond measures it against a force of more than a thousand .
 Colonel Smithers now talked in the soft, tired voice of an overworked man in the service of his Government . Colonel Smithers now talked in a soft voice of a tired man in his Government.
 It was the voice of the specialist in a particular line of law enforcement . It was a voice of a specialist in the field .
 It said that he knew most things connected with that line and that he could make a good guess at all the rest of the rest . He knew most of the details of the line and said he could guess most of it .
 Supposing you have a bar of gold in your pocket is about the size of a couple of packets of Players .
 Never mind for the moment where you got it from stole it or inherited it or something. It's never mind where it came from . It's important to find out where you bought it from . Never mind .
 The law says you have to sell that to the Bank of England at the controlled price of twelve pounds ten per ounce . Now, the law says that's not allowed to be sold to the bank of England .
 All you have to do is cut your bar into thin sheets or plates you'd soon find someone to do this for you and sew the plates they'd be smaller than playing cards into a cotton belt .
 Your friend flies off to Bombay and goes to the first bullion dealer in the bazaar . Your friend goes to Bombay to buy bullion bullion from his friend .
 He will be given one thousand seven hundred pounds for your five-pound bar and you're a richer man than you might have been .
 Colonel Smithers waved his pipe airily, 'that's only seventy per cent profit. Mark you,' he said . 'That's only a quarter profit'
 The Indian Intelligence Bureau and their Customs captured forty-three thousand ounces of cocaine in 1955 .
 He was only twenty when he arrived, but he must have been a bright lad because he smelled that the Russians would be swallowing his country pretty soon . He smelled that Russia would swallow his country soon .
 He was a jeweler and goldsmith by trade, like his father and grandfather who had refined gold for Faberge . He was also a goldsmith and jeweler .
 He had a little money and probably one of those belts of gold I was telling you about. He had probably one belt of gold, he said . He also had a lot of money, he added .
 After naturalized he started buying up pawnbrokers all over the country . He was a harmless sort of chap .
 "Always chose good sites, just on the dividing line between the well-to-do streets and the lower-middle," says author .
 He lived in London and toured his shops once a month and collected all the old gold . He toured his stores once a week and collected old gold from them .
 Twenty little shops, each one buying perhaps half a dozen bits and pieces every week. So they are, but they mount up if you've got twenty little shops . Each shop owner buys perhaps half-dozen bits of pieces a week .
 Goldfinger, like all other jewelers, had to declare his stock of gold . Well, the war came and Goldfinger was forced to declare gold .
 It was fifty ounces for the whole chain . Just enough of a working stock to keep his shops supplied with ring settings .
 He tucked himself away in a machine-tool firm in Wales during the war well out of the firing line . He kept as many of his shops operating as he could .
 G.I.s generally travel with a Gold Eagle or a Mexican fifty-dollar piece as a last reserve . Must have done well out of the G.S. who generally travel .
 He bought himself a pretentious house, pretentious sort of place, at Reculver, at the mouth of the Thames . He bought the house, which is at the heart of the River Thames, for £1.5 million .
 He also invested in a well-found Brixham trawler and an old Rolls Royce armoured car .
 He set up a little factory called ""Thanet Alloy Research" in the grounds of his house . He staffed it with a German metallurgist, a prisoner of war who didn't want to go back to Germany, and half a dozen Korean stevedores he picked up
 "They didn't know a word of any civilized language so they weren't any security risk," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They were the only ones who knew what they were doing"
 For ten years, all we know is that he made one trip a year to India in his trawler and a few trips in his car very year to Switzerland . Then, for 10 years, only we know that he visited India in a year or a few times a year .
 I do want you to get the picture of the sort of man this is quiet, careful, law-abiding and with the . sort of drive and single-mindedness we all admire . I do not want to give you the impression of the man you admire, I said .
 In the summer of 1954, his trawler, homeward bound from India, went ashore on the Goodwins . He sold the wreck for a song to the Dover Salvage Company .
 When this company started breaking the ship up they got as far as the hold they found the timbers impregnated with a sort of brown powder which they couldn't put a name to .
 Gold can be made to dissolve in a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids . The reducing agents the sulphur dioxide or oxalic acid precipitate the metal as a brown powder . Gold can also be made in a mix of reducing agents .
 This powder can be reconstituted into gold ingots by melting at around a thousand degrees Centigrade . Gold ingots can be melted into ingots at around 1,000 degrees centigrade.
 Goldfinger had been refining down his old gold, precipitating it into this brown powder and shipping it to India as fertilizer . Goldfinger's old gold was being shipped to India .
 We dressed a couple of the Gold Squad up and sent them down to knock on the door of Mr Goldfinger's factory at Reculver .
 The factory was devoted to designing a cheap alloy for jewelers' findings . It tried out aluminum and tin instead of the usual copper and nickel and palladium that are used in gold .
 Goldfinger was a jeweler and smelter in a small way, and all this was perfectly above-board . There were traces of gold about, of course, and furnaces to heat up to two thousand degrees .
 The rumble of the City came through the halfopen window high up in the wall behind his chair . It was the first time he'd heard the City's rumble in the City .
 I flew to Nassau and had a look at the five million pounds' worth or so he holds there in the vaults of the Royal Bank of Canada . The five million pound of gold is in the bank's vaults .
 Like all artists, the artist couldn't refrain from signing his handiwork .
 On each Goldfinger bar, a minute letter Z has been scratched in the metal . It needs a microscope to see it, but it is not impossible to see the letter Z .
 The Bank can do nothing about it, so we are asking you to bring Mr Goldfinger to book, Mr Bond, and get that gold back . The Bank of England can't do anything about it .
 Bond glanced out of the tall window at the end of the passage . While they waited for it, Bond glanced back at the window . Bond was waiting for it .
 He was looking down into the deep well of the back courtyard of the Bank . The bank was in a back courtyard at the time of the incident .
 A trim chocolate-brown lorry with no owner's name had come into the courtyard through the triple steel gates . The lorry had come in with no owners' name .
 Reichsbank forgeries during the war were a sight too good . Trouble was that those Reichs bank forgeries were a darn sight too real .
 When the Russians captured Berlin, amongst the loot they got hold of the plates . The plates were found during the capture of the city in 1945 .
 At any moment, if Moscow had been inclined, they could have started a major raid on our currency . The Russian government could have raided the country's currency at any moment .
 He had never thought very much about the Bank of England, but now that he had been inside the place he decided that the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street might be old but she still had some teeth left in her head .
 Bond noticed the conscious effort M made to clear his mind, cope with the new problem the day was to fling at him . Bond went in and took the chair across he desk, noticing the effort .
 When he had finished, M said thoughtfully, 'Suppose we've got to take it on. Suppose we're getting to take on it'
 Don't understand a thing about the pound and bank rate and all that but everyone seems to be taking it seriously seriously . Don't know why the pound is being devalued .
 I should have thought the strength of the pound depended on how hard we all worked rather than how much gold we’d got. Personally I should’ve thought that the strength . of the . pound depended upon how hard . we all work rather than what we got .
 Politicians have an easy answer to the question: 'Yes, yes, yes' But that's probably too easy an answer for politicians or more likely too difficult .
 I should say he's the sort of man who only respects people who are tougher or smarter than he is . He should say that he only respects those who are smarter or tougher than he himself .
 I’ve given him one beating and the only message I got from him was that he'd like me to play golf with him. I've given him a beating, he said, but he’d like to play with him,’s the one message he got
 It just happens that I also know what Mr Goldfinger's gold bars look like . "I just happens to be a Goldfinger fan," he says .
 Redland Resident Director's office 'caught fire' in Tangier . It had come in with that haul we made last week . Redland resident director's office caught fire .
 James Bond flung the D.B.III through the last mile of straight and did a racing change down into third and then into second for the short hill .
 Leashed in by the velvet claw of the front discs, the engine muttered its protest with a mild back-popple from the twin exhausts . The car is powered by a Valtterioglia-powered version of the Bugatti 500 .
 Bond went up into third again, beat the lights at the bottom of the hill and slid resignedly up to the back of the queue that would crawl on for a quarter of an hour if he was lucky through the sprawl of Rochester and Chatham .
 He reached for the wide gunmetal case of Morland cigarettes on the neighbouring bucket seat, fumbled for one and lit it from the dashboard . The driver reached for one of the wide, gunmetal cases of cigarettes .
 He had chosen the A2 in preference to the A20 to Sandwich because he wanted to take a quick look at Goldfinger-land Reculver and those melancholy reaches of the Thames which Goldfinger had chosen for his parish .
 He would cross the Isle of Thanet to Ramsgate and leave his bag at the Channel Packet . He would then have an early lunch and be off to Sandwich, Sandwich, then cross the Channel .
 D.B.III had the advantage of an up-todate triptyque, an inconspicuous colour battleship grey and certain extras which might or might not come in handy .
 Bond's car had a long-barrelled Colt .45 in a trick compartment under the driver's seat . There were switches to alter the type and colour of Bond's lights if he was following or being followed .
 Bond saw a chance and picked up fifty yards, sliding into a ten-yard gap left by a family saloon of slow reactions . Bond saw the chance to pick up a fifty-yard stretch and slid into the safety zone . Bond won't be the first time Bond has seen a
 The man at the wheel, who wore that infallible badge of the bad driver, clamped firmly on the exact centre of his head, hooted angrily . The man in the car was wearing a hat with a hat on the top of the head, and a hat in the
 Bond reached out of the window and raised an enigmatically clenched fist . Bond reached for the fist and raised a clenched fist as he left the window . Bond then raised his clenched fist to raise his fist .
 Their centres were always running out of funds—their men complaining to Moscow that they couldn't afford a square meal . Their centres always ran out of money, and their men complained to Moscow .
 Perhaps SMERSH couldn't get the valuta out of the Ministry of Home Security .
 The Ministry of Home Security couldn't get the money out of the Ministry of Finance . Or perhaps the money couldn't be found in the ministry's budget .
 "Endless money troubles" resulted in missed chances, broken promises and waste of dangerous radio time . But it had always been the same—endless money problems that resulted from missed chances and broken promises .
 On the side, Goldfinger was appreciably damaging the currency base of an enemy country . On the other side, he was damaging the currencies of the enemy country.
 If all this is correct, it was typical of SMERSH a brilliant scheme, faultlessly operated by an outstanding man . The scheme was 'faultlessly operated' by the outstanding man, says Simon Tisdall .
 Bond reflected as he roared up the hill into Chatham, putting half a dozen cars behind him . Goldfinger would partly explain Goldfinger's greed for more and still more money . Bond reflected that, reflected Bond as he sped up the . hill .
 Devotion to the cause, to SMERSH, and perhaps the dangled prize of an Order of Lenin, would be the spur to pick up even ten or twenty thousand dollars when the odds were right or could be favorably adjusted .
 The funds for Red Revolution, for the discipline by fear that was the particular specialty of SMERSH, could never be big enough . The funds were used to fight for the country's democracy .
 The minor risk of being found out, as he had been by Bond, was nothing . Bond's mission was to find out what he really wanted to do .
 Bond started motoring again, but easily now, not hurrying, following his thoughts . Bond followed his thoughts as the hands and feet went through their automatic responses . Bond started driving again, not hurried, following the instructions again .
 In 'thirty-seven, SMERSH must have sent Goldfinger out with the belt of gold round his young waist . So, in '30th-seven' SMERSh must have . sent Gold Finger out with a belt of . gold around his waist .
 He had shown his special aptitudes, his acquisitive bent, during his training in the spy school in Leningrad .
 He would have been told there would be a war, that he must dig himself in and start quietly accumulating . He would've been told that he would have had to dig in and begin quietly accumulating. He would be told there was a war .
 Goldfinger must never dirty his hands, never meet an agent, never receive or pass a message . Goldfinger will not be allowed to meet agents or receive a message from an agent .
 Always an advertisement that would not attract attention or correspondence . Always an advert that would never attract attention, correspondence.
 Goldfinger would leave the two thousand pounds or five thousand pounds gold bar at one of a long, very long series of post-boxes that had been arranged in Moscow before he left .
 A particular bridge, a hollow tree, under a rock in a stream somewhere, anywhere in England . A hollow tree or a bridge under a stream, a particular bridge or under a tree, is found in the UK .
 Goldfinger was blossoming out, when he had become a big man, the post-boxes would no longer be bridges and trees . Later, after the war, when . Goldfinger's post-boxes would . no longer . be bridges or trees .
 Goldfinger must never revisit the scene, never endanger himself . But still there would be the rule that Goldfinger would never revisit it . Goldfinger is still famous for his role in the film series .
 Perhaps he would only get instructions once a year, at a casual meeting in some park, in a letter slipped into his pocket on a train journey . Perhaps he'd only get his instructions once or twice a year at a meeting .
 Gold bars would be anonymous, anonymous, untraceable if captured . But always it would be bars of gold, anonymous . Except for tiny Z that his vanity had scratched on his handiwork .
 Bond was running through the endless orchards of the Faversham growers . Now Bond is running through an endless number of fields of fruit in the area .
 There was traffic on the river long, glistening tankers, stubby merchantmen, antediluvian Dutch Schuyts . There were also long, long tankers and stubby merchantsmen .
 Bond left Canterbury road and switched on to the incongruously rich highway that runs through Whitstable, Herne Bay, Birchington, Margate . The highway runs through the cheap bungaloid world of the holiday lands .
 Bond reflected that while Goldfinger was pumping a million, two million pounds a year into the bloody maw of SMERSH, he was pyramiding his reserves, working on them, making them work for him whenever the odds were right . He was piling up the surplus for the
 No one outside Moscow had been watching the process . No one suspected that Goldfinger the jeweler, the metallurgist, the resident of Reculver and Nassau, the respected member of Blades, of the Royal St. St. London .
 Marks at Sandwich was one of the greatest conspirators of all time, that he had financed the murder of hundreds of victims of SMERSH all over the world .
 Bond launched against this man by a series of flukes, a train of coincidence that had been started by a plane breaking down on the other side of the world . And here was Bond launching his own campaign against the world's most powerful man .
 How often in his profession had it been the same the tiny acorn of coincidence that soared into the mighty oak whose branches darkened the sky. The acorn was not the same in his professional life, he said .
 He was setting out to bring the dreadful growth down . And now, once again, he was setting . out to . bring it down .
 A repainted sky-blue Ford Popular with large yellow ears was scurrying along the crown of the road ahead . The car was repainted by a repainted blue Ford Popular .
 The usual tense figure, hands held too high up on the wheel, and the inevitable hat, this time a particularly hideous black bowler, square on a large bullet head . This time, the usual figure is seen in the usual tense scene .
 He changed down and contemptuously slammed the D.B.III past on the inside . The D.C.I.I.'s past has been tarnished by the scandal .
 Bond was through the dainty teleworld of Herne Bay . Another five miles and Bond was back in the UK . Bond's final destination was the Isle of Wightendenders .
 They skimed below his right-hand horizon as if they were diving into the earth . They skimmed below his left hand horizon as they flew over the horizon .
 With half his mind, Bond heard the roar of their jets catch up with them as they landed and taxied in to the hangars . Bond was not in the mood, but was in the air at the time .
 The shoreline was too exposed for a trawler to do anything but beach or anchor . The shorelines were too exposed to the trawlers to do much more than anchor .
 Customs and police were probably only on the look-out for brandy coming over from France . Customs were only looking out for the brandy .
 There was a thick clump of trees between the road and the shore, a glimpse of roofs and of a large factory chimney with a thin plume of light smoke or steam .
 He took the next righthand turn across the Manston plateau to Ramsgate . Ramsgate was the last stop in the town of Ramsgate, England .
 Bond inspected his room, a double with bathroom, on the top floor of the Channel Packet . Bond had one vodka and tonic and two rounds of excellent ham sandwiches with plenty of mustard . Bond's room is a double .
 He got back into his car and drove slowly over to the Royal St Marks at Sandwich . Then he got back inside and got back in his car .
 Bond carried his clubs to the professional's shop and through to the workroom . Bond carried the clubs to a professional's workroom and through the work room .
 Someone was telling me only the other day that you’re in the diplomatic or something, he says . "Someone told me only a few days ago that you're in the Diplomatic ... or something," he says.
 There had been a time in his teens when he had played two rounds a day every day of the week at St. Paul's .
 It's all there except for that flat swing and wanting to hit the ball out of sight when there's no point in it . It's the same thing you would do if you were a professional golfer .
 Bond said he'd better forget about lessons and just play as much of it as he could . But something had told Bond that there wasn't going to be a great deal of golf in his life .
 It would be about twenty years since he had played his last round on St. Patrick's Day . The world No. 1 had played a round of golf at the time .
 He'd never been Back even when there had been that bloody affair of the Moonraker at Kingsdown, ten miles down the coast . He had never been back even though there was no sign of him ever coming back .
 Since St Marks, Bond had got in a good deal of weekend golf when he was at headquarters . Bond had been playing golf at St Marks since then . Bond has been playing regularly at headquarters in London .
 Huntercombe, Swinley, Sunningdale, and Huntercombe all round the Berkshire course . Huntercombe is based in London Huntercombe and Swindley .
 He was a real nine—had to be with the games he chose to play, the tenpound Nassaus with the tough cheery men who were always anxious to stand you a couple of double kummels after lunch .
 The professional glanced through his back window at the parking space round the tall flag-pole . The professional looked at his parking space through the window .
 Cecil’s gone over to Princes to get in some practice for the championship . And the trouble is that Cecil is going to get some practice at Princes, Princes .
 Alfred found it difficult to believe that anyone knew Mr Goldfinger . Alfred obviously found it hard to believe anyone knew him . Alfred found the truth out of his own life .
 Blacking had an unfavourable view of a particular member but that he was too good a servant of the club to pass it on . It meant that Blacking's view of the particular member was that he had a view of him unfavourably . Blacking was a good servant
 The professional took up a stance, gazed towards an imaginary hole and banged the head of the club up and down on the floor as if addressing an imaginary ball . Rory McIlroy took the driver he was holding, took a stance and gazed at the hole .
 David Beckham has been in England for a few weeks at a time . But for the last few years he's only been coming to England for few weeks . He has been staying in England at a number of times during the summer .
 Cecil and Cecil play for each other when there is no one else to play . The pair have been together for more than a decade .
 "I'll stay in the shop so it'll give him a chance to take his choice without offending me," says the owner of the shop .
 Half a mile away, a bright yellow car was turning off the road and coming up the private drive . The driver of the car was seen coming up a private drive in the area .
 The sun glitters off the silver radiator and off the engine-turned aluminum shield below the high perpendicular glass cliff of the windscreen .
 The luggage rail on the roof of the limousine was polished brass, as were the two Lucas 'King of the Road’ headlamps that stared so haughtily down the road ahead, and the wide mouth of the old boaconstrictor bulb horn . The
 The whole car, except for a black roof and black carrosserie lines and curved panels below the windows, was primrose yellow . The whole of the car, including the black roof, was Primrose yellow, but the interior was black .
 It crossed Bond's mind that the South American president might have had it copied from the famous yellow fleet in which Lord Lonsdale had driven to the Derby and Ascot . It crossed the mind that it might have been a copy of the yellow fleet .
 In the driver's seat sat a figure in a cafe-au-lait dust coat and cap, his big round face obscured by black-rimmed driving goggles . In the passenger seat was a man wearing a cafe au-au lait dustcoat and cap .
 Beside him was a squat figure in black with a bowler hat placed firmly on the middle of his head . Beside them was a man in black standing in front of the crowd .
 The two figures stared straight in front of them with a curious immobility . They stared straight out of front of the camera with a curiously immobile stare .
 The six pairs of eyes—the eyes of the two men and the great twin orbs of the car seemed to be looking straight through the little window and into Bond's eyes . The six sets of eyes were looking straight into the eyes of Bond's .
 Bond took a few paces back into the dark recesses of the workroom . Bond took an instinctive step back to the work room .
 He bent down and thoughtfully addressed a knot in the wooden floor . He picked up somebody's putter and bent down to address the knot .
 He had scrawled plusses against all the names except Ring and Helmut Springer . Ring and Springer were among the names he scrawled out .
 Nothing had been betrayed by The Grinner's unwavering false smile . He had come to his conclusions by watching eyes, mouths, hands, but nothing had betrayed him .
 The wink in his right eye had been as steady on the pulse-beat as a metronome . He had kept his hands below the table and kept his eyes closed .
 Billy Ring brought his hands up from below the table and formed a cat's cradle with them on the green baize in front of him . Ring formed the cradle with his hands on the baize and formed his hands to form his arms and legs . Ring said: "I'm not
 For a moment he watched the two thumbs twirling, then he raised his nightmare face to Goldfinger's . For a second time, he looked back at Goldfinger for a moment before raising his eyes .
 Mr. Mister--' he found difficulty with his b's, m's and p's . He produced them by bringing his upper lip down over his teeth like a horse does when it takes sugar out of your hand .
 "Me and my associates, we do all right with the girls, the hemp, and the racetrack," he says . "When we're short there’s our good friends the Unions to slip us the odd fin," he adds .
 "We figger the old days are gone. Ya see, mister The Grinner opened his hands and then put them back into the cradle," he said . "The Grinner's hands were opened up and put back in the cradle"
 People were shooting at each other so fast you'd often need a programme to tell the act from the spectators . Well, siree, in those days, people were shooting so fast that you'd need to watch a programme .
 People got tired of it those that hadn't already got tired to death, if you get my meaning . When the 'fifties come along and I take over the team, it's unanimous that we get out of the fireworks business, it was unanimous .
 Goldfinger said cordially, 'Thank you for your most interesting statement, Mr Ring. Mr Ring' Goldfinger .
 Mr Solo leant his head back and began running the machine thoughtfully up the right side of his face .
 He switched the razor off, put it down on the table in front of him and jerked his head down and forward like a snake striking . Suddenly he switched off, putting it down and . put it on the . table on the  table, jerking his head . forward like
 The black gun-muzzles of his eyes pointed threateningly across the table at Goldfinger and moved slowly from feature to feature of the big moon-face .
 The other half was dark with the Italian swarthiness that comes from an uncontrollable beard growth . Half of the beard was dark, half dark and half dark .
 Last man I knew was so much relaxed he got himself totally relaxed by a quick burst of the chopper. He said: 'Last man I know was so relaxed that I knew he was totally relaxed'
 'either we get that billion or you get dead. But mister—’ there was a pause for emphasis—'either we got that billion . Or you get . dead,' he said . 'Mister,’ he said. ‘Either we get . that billion
 He said pompously, 'I am still giving the matter my full consideration. He said . He said he was still giving it his full consideration . He added that he was 'still giving it all the time'
 He said, ‘Mister, I figure you know the odds and you surely pay the best since one of our machines at Vegas got the trots and gave continuous jackpots.’ He said smoothly, ’Mister . He said . ‘I figure you .
 His eyes, now frightening again, turned, with Goldfinger’s, to Miss Pussy Galore . His eyes then turned, as well as Goldfinger's, to the woman in the film .
 Miss Galore veiled her violet eyes so as not to have to look at either of them . She smiled as she walked away from the pair .
 She tapped with long, silver-painted finger-nails on the gold bar before her . The gold bar is a long-awaited gift to the world .
 Slowly his head moved from side to side as if he was trying to exercise fibrositis in his neck muscles . Slowly he moved his head from side-to-side as he tried to exercise .
 Mr Springer tucked his handkerchief carefully into the left-hand cuff of his immaculate pin-stripe . He turned and walked softly to the door and let himself out .
 He got close to Bond and said earnestly, 'Mister, if that's your doll, you better watch her. You better watch your doll,' he said .
 Bond was having a quiet square meal off caviar and champagne when the door at the end of the room opened and one of the Koreans hurried in and went up to Goldfinger . Bond was thinking how well Goldfinger had handled the meeting when he was approached .
 Bond at last got to bed that night, he couldn't wipe the word out of his mind . Bond was not happy to find out what happened to him .
 Oddjob got the signal, and Springer and his guard had got hit . Oddjob had got the . signal, a double ring, and a double . ring . Springer got hit by Oddjob .
 Goldfinger had dismissed the girl and kept Bond in the room . When the meeting of paramount hoods had broken up to go about their various duties, Goldfinger dismissed her .
 He told Bond to take notes and then for more than two hours went over the operation down to the smallest detail . Bond then spent the next two hours going over the details of the operation .
 Bond had to work out an exact timetable to ensure that the people of Fort Knox would all be 'under' in good time . Bond had asked for details of the drug and its speed of action .
 From now, Oddjob will not be more than a yard from your side and his orders will be strict and exact . Oddjob is not allowed to be within a yard of the play area .
 "Fort Knox will be dead or incapacitated by midnight on D-l. So I can tell you that the entire population of Fort Knox will die or incapacitate by midnight"
 Russia captured the entire German stocks at Dyhemfurth on the Polish frontier . The Russians captured the whole German stocks . The entire German stock was captured by the Russians .
 You'll find yourself tearing down the Dixie Highway in a truck with a few gold bars loaded with gamma rays . The American Army will be on your tail .
 'This unique performance will not be immaculate. Naturally’ Goldfinger was indulgent—'this unique performance is not immaculates,' he said .
 I need these clumsy gangsters with their guns and their men, but I could not bring them into the plan until the last moment . I need them with guns and men, he says. I need their guns, men .
 These men are amateurs who were needed, so to speak, for the crowd scenes . These amateurs were needed to make the scenes, but they were needed for the crowds scenes .
 "What happens to them after the play is of no interest to me whatsoever," he said . "I'm not interested in what happens after they play," he added .
 This was not only Goldfinger operation with SMERSH in the background . So in fact, reflected Bond feverishly, this was not just Goldfinger . It was also a Goldfinger mission . The film was released in November 2013 .
 To them Goldfinger was just another of them, another gangster, slightly larger than life-size . Goldfinger is just another member of the gangster world .
 There was no difference except that the weapons and the techniques had been brought up to date . There were no difference in the weapons or techniques used in the fight against the Taliban .
 Every half-hour a note would come in from Goldfinger's operations room asking for schedules of this, copies of that, estimates, timetables, lists of stores . Goldfinger was the first film to be set up in the world's largest film company .
 Another typewriter was brought in, maps, reference books anything that Bond requisitioned . Bond was given a typewriter, maps and reference books .
 Not once did Oddjob relax the extreme care with which he opened the door to Bond's knock, not once did his watchful eyes wander from Bond's eyes, hands, feet and feet .
 She worked like a machine quick and willing, willing, accurate, but uncommunicative . She worked as a machine, willing and accurate .
 She responded with cool politeness to Bond's early attempts to make friends, share his thoughts with her . She responded to the actor's attempts to talk to her in a cool manner .
 Her hobby had been indoor pistol and rifle shooting and she had belonged to two marksman clubs . Her hobby was indoor pistol, rifle shooting .
 Bond came to the conclusion that Tilly Masterton was one of those girls whose hormones had got mixed up . Bond said Masterton's hormones were mixed up and she was a good girl .
 As a result of fifty years of emancipation, feminine qualities were dying out or being transferred to the males . As a . result of . emancipation, female qualities were . dying out . and transferring to males .
 Pansies of both sexes were everywhere, not yet completely homosexual, but confused, not knowing what they were . "Pansies" were everywhere not yet fully homosexual .
 The result was a herd of unhappy sexual misfits barren and full of frustrations, the women wanting to dominate and the men to be nannied . The result of the result was the result of an unhappy sex life, with many unhappy men .
 Bond smiled to himself as he remembered his fantasies about this girl as they sped along the valley of the Loire . Bond smiled sourly to himself. Bond smiled .
 Fie worked for an hour, typing, single-spaced, on both sides of the sheet, exact details of the operation . Fie's work was so detailed that she spent an hour typing the operation on a sheet .
 He folded the sheet, rolled it to a small cylinder about the size of his little finger . He sealed it carefully with gum .
 Bond rolled this message round the cylinder, wrote $5000 REWARD in red ink on the outside . Bond stuck the little package down the centre of three inches of Scotch tape .
 He strapped the free ends of the Scotch tape down the inside of his thigh . Then he sat down again on the edge of the bed and carefully strapped the tape down .
 Its release on the 17 th of September 1964 occurred during a year with a number of earth shattering events that scarred the psyche of people throughout the English Speaking World .
 First and foremost was the assassination of President John F Kennedy in November, 1963 .
 The Bay of Tomkin incident saw the Johnson Administration ramp up U.S. involvement in Vietnam . The incident occurred in the early 1960s and early '60s .
 Kim Philby defected to the Soviet Union, and became evident he was the Third Man in the Cambridge spy ring, after Burgess and Maclean . Philby was one of the three men who defected from Cambridge to the USSR .
 On August 8 th , 1964 twelve bandits robbed a train of over £ 2. million in cash and jewelry . The robbery took place on a train from London to New York City .
 Ian Fleming died of heart failure on August 12 th , 1964 . Bond fans were saddened by the sudden death of Fleming in 1964 .
 His life style caught up with him the Turkish cigarettes, the dry vodka martinis, the half-pounds of beluga caviar . He also drank half a bottle of Turkish cigarettes and a half-a-half-ounce of vodka .
 Fleming played a role in the filming of Goldfinger, but he did not live long enough to see the film premier . Fleming died shortly before the film was released .
 The film follows much of the plot outlined in the novel, but has added components to it . The film is based on the novel's plot, which was released in 2012 .
 He infiltrates the secret drug production facility of the Mexican cartel and destroys it using plastic explosives C-4 . He then infiltrates it using the plastic explosives used to destroy it .
 The secret drug production facility is blown to bits, then the demi-monde tarantella dancer is almost Bond’s undoing . The film begins in earnest .
 It is another ten minutes of adrenaline to start the audience onto the main plot of the film . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in cinemas on Friday .
 There is also the homer used to track Goldfinger's Rolls Royce with a cathode ray television display .
 The question from that point of the film onwards then becomes, how will Bond escape his captivity and how will Goldfinger be defeated we know that in the fight of good with evil in a Fleming novel, good must prevail .
 The plot of the film is simple Goldfinger, with the help of Red China, plans to detonate a ‘dirty’ atom bomb inside the gold vaults at Fort Knox, irradiating the United States Gold Reserve .
 1964 was the year that the Peoples Republic of China exploded their first atomic bomb . Perhaps it was because of 1964, China exploded its first atomic bombs .
 The role of the henchman Oddjob is played by the Japanese Wrestler Harold Sakata . Oddjob was played by Harold Sakata in the film .
 Bond seduces Pussy Galore and gets her to contact the CIA who foils the plot to bomb Fort Knox with an atom bomb . The CIA foils a plot to blow up Fort Knox in a bid to get the bomb .
 Bond ends up defeating Goldfinger a second time, this time fatally . Then in a twist of fate on his flight to the White House to be thanked by the President, Bond is recaptured and ends up defeated Goldfinger .
 In the film Goldfinger there is less murder and intrigue than in From Russia With Love, but the audience loved the movie nonetheless . In the movie Goldfinger, the audience was more intrigued by the murder plot .
 The name Pussy Galore caused quite a stir in the UK when it was announced that the Goldfinger movie was being filmed . Incidentally, the name caused a stir when the movie was announced .
 Blackman was announced as the Pussy Galore actress on January 8 th , 1964 . Blackman is one of the most famous actresses in the world .
 From Russia With Love and Goldfinger in both countries there began a flood of other espionage films and television series ... some fifty projects in all, helping to define the 1960’s as the decade of the spy .
 I bet you can name of few of the 1960’s espionage films and television series . The spy films and TV series were made in the 1960s and 1960s .
 The short story Risco ends up as the central plot of the 1981 film For Your Eyes Only . The film was based on the short story, which was published in 1981 .
 Short story A View to a Kill Bond investigates the murder of a motorcycle dispatch-rider and the theft of his top-secret documents by a motorcycle-riding assassin .
 I do not believe this short story has been used yet in any way, shape, or form in any of the Bond films . I believe this story has not yet been used in any form of use in the films .
 Bond avenges the murder of M's closest friends, the Havelocks, by a group of Cubans . In the short story For Your Eyes Only Bond avenged the murder . Bond's best friend was killed by Cubans in the short novel .
 Their death is also avenged by the Havelock daughter, as well as by James Bond . Bond happens upon the girl just as Bond is about to terminate the conspirators to the murders .
 She ends up killing her parent’s Cuban murderer in a very medieval fashion, while Bond takes out the gang leader and other gunmen . The film is based on the murder of her parents in Cuba .
 This short story is used, with significant modification, as a subplot in the 1981 film For Your Eyes Only . The 1981 film was based on the story .
 Quantum of Solace Bond is told a story of a failed marriage with an emotive twist . The story is told of a relationship between Bond and Bond . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray at the end of October .
 I do not believe this short story has been used yet in any way shape or form in any of the Bond films . The short story is not believed to have been used in any form in the films .
 The title, Quantum of Solace, is used in a Bond film starring Daniel Craig . The title was used in the other Bond film, starring James Bond's Daniel Craig, in 2007 .
 In the short story Risico Bond investigates a drug-smuggling operation run in the Mediterranean with ties in Italy and Great Britain, with ties to the Soviets . The story is set in the early 1930s .
 Rarity Bond helps find a rare and deadly fish for an obnoxious millionaire who is subsequently murdered by someone who uses the deadly fish . The Hildebrand Rarity Bond is a short-story short story .
 There is something rather wonderful hidden away in the heart of the book For You Eyes Only . It is in both the mention of the Greek Island of Corfu and the Albanian angle to both the novel and the film .
 The Corfu Albanian theme was drawn from Fleming’s newspaper clipping files and an international incident that occurred in 1946 known as the Corfu Channel Incident . Fleming's book is based on a newspaper clipping from a Corfu incident in 1946 .
 The Corfu Channel Incident involved three separate incidents in the channel between Italy and Albania in 1946 . Three separate incidents occurred in the Corfu channel between 1946 .
 The UK government lodged an official protest and asked for an immediate and full apology from the Albanian Government . The Albanian government has apologised for the incident .
 Albanians claim that the RN ships had sailed through their territorial waters . No apology was forthcoming from the Albanians . Albanians say they are not entitled to any apology .
 Second incident occurred on October 22 nd , 1946 when a RN flotilla led by the cruisers HMS Mauritius and HMS Leander along with destroyers HMS Saumarez and HMS Volage exercised the right to innocent passage .
 Naval Mines had been set in the channel by the Albanians and both destroyers struck mines . Both destroyers were sunk by Albanian mines .
 HMS Volage had her bow completely blown away by the naval mines . HMS Volage was blown over by the mines in the Battle of the Word .
 HMS Saumarez bow down under tow by HMS Volage after striking a mine . There were fatalities and injuries in the second incident . There are also fatalities in the first incident .
 Forty five men died and forty two men were injured aboard the two RN destroyers as a result of the Albanian naval mines . The two destroyers were sunk by Albanian mines .
 Operation RETAIL had the additional purpose of clearing mines as evidence . Evidence (as corpora delicti) was used to prove that the British were acting in self-defense by attempting innocent passage .
 HMS Volage with its bow blown off during operations . Aircraft carrier HMS commanded by Captain, later Admiral of the Fleet, Sir Caspar John). cruisers and other smaller warships provided cover .
 Minesweepers discovered twenty-two contact mines were discovered . Contact mines were cut-away from their undersea moorings . The mines are believed to have been cut away from undersea .
 Two of the cut mines have been sent to the RN base on Malta for further examination . Two were sent to be examined by the RN Base on Malta .
 It was then discovered that the mines were of German origin but they were free of rust and marine growth . The mines were then discovered to be the mines of the German origin .
 They were also freshly painted and their mooring cables were recently lubricated .
 They were not mines left over in the ocean from the Second World War but of more recent placement . The mines were not left over from WWII but of recent placement in the sea .
 Court of Inquiry concluded that the minefield in the Corfu Channel was laid shortly before the incident involving HMS Saumarez and HMS Volage .
 HMS Volage was struck by a mine they struck in Malta . Mine fragment analysis confirmed it was similar to the recovered mine found at Malta .
 The Film For Your Eyes Only begins with the Royal Navy losing a spy ship the St. St. Peterborough . The film is based on the story of the loss of the spy ship St.Peterborough .
 The film makers included this scene to tie the Bond story to the Corfu Channel Incident . The scene was included in the film to tie it to the story of Bond and the incident .
 When the film came out, the matter of innocent passage and naval mines were a contemporary issue . The film was released in 2010 .
 There was a war going on between Iran and Iraq and naval mines were being sown throughout the Persian Gulf . There was also a war in the region between Iraq and Iran and Iran .
 Innocent passage of oil bearing tankers through the Strait of Hormuz was being threatened . Innocent passage was not being threatened, says Iranian President Bashir Khanna .
 The shallow bottom of the Strait of Hormoz made it an easy region for moored contact mines, as well as bottom mines using magnetic or pressure fuses . Contact mines were moored contacts mines, and bottom mines were also used .
 This period of the Iran-Iraq war was known as the Tanker War, since many of the ships struck by the mines were tankers .
 I have included an article about the Tanker War as an Appendix in this book . I have also included a piece of information about the tanker war in this Appendix .
 The Battle of the Atlantic was not merely a battle of battleships and U-boats . It was a war that included naval technology like naval mines . The battle included naval mines, which were used in mines mines .
 The story as to how the German naval mines were defeated by the Royal Navy and its allies has been told in a number of books and films .
 As deputy director of naval intelligence for the Royal Navy, the naval technology war with Germany was one of the many things that directly involved Ian Fleming and his colleagues . Ian Fleming was the Deputy Director of Naval Intelligence .
 The Germans dropped magnetic mines by aircraft into the Thames estuary on the first day of the war . One of the first maritime casualties was a ship proceeding to London up the Thames . The mines were dropped by aircraft by aircraft .
 One of the mines was discovered in the mud and defused and studied . One of these mines was defused by the team of engineers .
 It took a great deal of courage and ingenuity to defeat the Germans at their mine technology . It took the Royal Navy great courage to defeat them .
 Ian Fleming sent naval clearance divers by X submarines to Normandy beaches to check for mines and hazards . Operation was one of Fleming's most clandestine operations of Second World War .
 Several naval clearance divers had in fact died in the spring of 1944 trying to recover one of these mines for study back at their naval base . Several of the mines were found in 1944 .
 The mines in question were made out of glass and had a chemical fuse . Supposedly the mines were made from glass .
 They had read of this in one of the secret messages sent from Berlin to Tokyo by Ambassador Oshima . The ambassador had sent a secret message to Tokyo from Berlin .
 The decryption of this secret message was done at Bletchley Park and Arlington Hall . It was done off messages taken out of the air by intercept operators at Station Point Grey .
 Perhaps I will write something about this remarkable clandestine operation to the Normandy beaches, as well as Station Point Grey, in a future book in The Best of Ian Fleming series .
 The cock bird is about nine inches long, but seven inches of it are tail . The tail is two long black feathers that curve and cross each other and whose inner edges are in a form of scalloped design .
 The head and crest are black, the wings are dark green, the long bill is scarlet, and the eyes, bright and confiding, are black . The long bill, the black head and the green wings, are scarlet .
 The body is emerald green, so dazzling that when the sun is on the breast you see the brightest green thing in nature . When the sun hits the breast, the body is so bright green that it's so dazzling . The baby's body is the most beautiful baby in the world
 Trochilus polytmus is called ‘doctor bird’ because his two black streamers remind people of the black tail-coat of the old-time physician . The bird is called 'doctor bird' because of its two black streams .
 Havelock was particularly devoted to two families of these birds because she had been watching them sipping honey, fighting, nesting and making love since she married, and came to Content .
 The original two pairs had been nicknamed Pyramus and Thisbe and Daphnis and Chloe by her mother-in-law . She was now over fifty, so many generations of these two families had gone .
 Havelock now sat at her elegant tea service on the broad cool veranda and watched Pyramus dive-bomb Daphnis who had finished up the honey on his own .
 Chap at Barclay's told me this morning that there’s a lot of funk money coming over here already . Chap told me that there's a . lot of Funk Money coming over .
 The island of Cuba is being bought up by Cubans, says CNN's John Sutter . But he says he doesn't like the idea of the whole island being taken up by the Cubans .
 Jamaica’s as good as anywhere else now we’ve got this convertibility with the dollar,’S. ‘Jamaica’’�s ‘as good as anyone else’ now, says the president .
 The man who bought Belair just shovelled the money on the floor of Aschenheim’s office out of a suitcase .
 I suppose he’ll keep the place for a year or two, and when the trouble’s blown over or when Castro's got in and finished cleaning up he will put it on the market again, take a reasonable loss and move off somewhere else . I suppose .
 Havelock said ‘Yes, dear’ calmingly and pinged the bell for the teathings to be cleared away . The bell rang for the first time ever .
 Agatha, a huge blue-black Negress wearing the old-fashioned white head-cloth that has gone out in Jamaica except in the hinterland, came out through the white and rose drawing-room . Fayprince, a pretty young quadroon from Port Maria whom
 Havelock had not lived most of her life in Jamaica without learning that a mash is a mash and that one would not get anywhere hunting for a culprit . She had learned that one of her best friends in Jamaica would not be able to find the culprits .
 Havelock picked up a piece of petit-point and began stitching, her fingers moving automatically . She said: "I don't have to wait until I find out what I want to do"
 The sun was low on the horizon and every now and then there was a flash of almost piercingly beautiful green . Every now and now, there were flashes of green green in the sky .
 A mocking-bird, on the topmost branch of a frangipani, started on its evening repertoire . The mocking bird was on its way to the top most branch of the tree .
 The tinkle of an early tree-frog announced the beginning of the short violet dusk . The tingle of a tree-furry announced the end of the day .
 The Havelocks maintained the plantation through three centuries, through earthquakes and hurricanes and through the boom and bust of cocoa, sugar, citrus and copra . Unlike so many other settlers of those and later times, the Havelock's plantation has been maintained through earthquakes, hurricanes .
 The estate was one of the richest and best run of all the private estates in the island . Now it was in bananas and cattle, and it was the richest of its kind run .
 The house, patched up or rebuilt after earthquake or hurricane, was a hybrid . The house was a mahogany-pillared, two-storeyed central block on the old stone foundations . The central block was flanked by two single-stageyed wings with widely overhung
 The Havelocks were now sitting on the deep veranda of the central block facing the gently sloping garden . Beyond which a vast tumbling jungle vista stretched away twenty miles to the sea .
 He was still wearing his panama hat, a panama with a short very up-curled brim . He was wearing it when he was killed .
 The sun glitters on hair-grease and on a mouthful of smiling white teeth . The rays of the sun glittered on hair greasing and on the mouth of a smiling white tooth .
 He went up to Colonel Havelock, his outstretched hand held straight in front of him . He held his hand straight out of front of the crowd . "I'm not going to be surprised," he said .
 He looked over the Major’s shoulder at the other two men who had stationed themselves on either side of the door . The Major looked at the men standing by the door to the Major's side .
 They were both carrying that new holdall of the tropics—a Pan American overnight bag . The pair were carrying the same overnight bag as the other .
 The two men bent down together and placed them beside their yellowish shoes . They placed them next to each other, placing them on the ground .
 They wore flat white caps with transparent green visors that cast green shadows down the cheekbones . They wore transparent visors .
 Through the green shadows their intelligent animal eyes fixed themselves on the Major, reading his behaviour . The Major's behaviour was not the first time the Major had been seen in the Major's life .
 His direct blue eyes took in the sharp clothes, the natty shoes, the glistening finger-nails of the Major and the blue jeans and calypso shirts .
 He wondered how he could get these men into his study and near the revolver in the top drawer of his desk . The revolver was in his study .
 As he lit his pipe he watched the Major’s eyes and mouth through the smoke . The Major's eyes were on his lips as he lit up his pipe .
 I represent a certain gentleman in Havana’—he made a throw-away gesture with his right hand. ‘He made the right hand,’ he said. “I represent a gentleman in Cuba’. He made the gesture with a throwaway gesture. I
 He asked me to present his compliments and to inquire the price of your property, he said . He asked for me to give him his compliments . He then asked for the price .
 Havelock, who had been watching the scene with a polite half-smile on her lips, moved to stand beside her husband . The couple's daughter, who was in the middle of the scene, was in tears .
 Your friend should have written first, or asked anyone in Kingston or at Government House . Your friend really should have asked anyone to write first .
 I wonder where your important friend can possibly have got the idea from. I wonder if you've got an important friend's idea from .
 He shook his head as if he was explaining something to a rather dense child . He shook it off as he shook his hands as he tried to explain something to him .
 There was perhaps one less tooth in Major Gonzales’s smile and his eyes had become watchful . Gonzales' eyes became watchful as he watched the scene unfold .
 Both the Havelocks noticed the jolly mask slip with the few sharp words through the teeth . The Havelock was not the first time he'd heard the words .
 Two men picked up their blue Pan American bags and stepped forward . The two men were arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
 Major Gonzales reached for the zipper on each of them in turn and pulled them out of the closet . Gonzales pulled the zipper off each of the women's zips in turn . The zipper was pulled from the back of the zipper in turn by Gonzales .
 That is, in your money, let us say, one hundred and eighty thousand pounds . That is in your . money . We are happy to clarify that it is not the same amount of money .
 And perhaps my gentleman would add a further twenty thousand pounds to make the round sum . And perhaps perhaps, perhaps, he would add an additional 20 thousand pounds .
 Colonel Havelock laid his cold pipe on the table as if he was preparing to roll up his sleeves . Colonel Hvelock was in the middle of the war with the British government .
 My gentleman has instructed me to say that if you will not accept his most generous terms we must proceed to other measures, we will proceed with other measures . My gentleman told me that if . you won't accept his generous terms, we must . proceed to . other measures. My gentleman
 The pink tip of Major Gonzales’s tongue came out and slowly licked along his lips . Gonzales' tongue was the pinkest tip of his tongue .
 All the light had gone out of his face and it had become taut and hard . The light went out of the face and his face became taut, hard and taut .
 His right hand went behind his back and he clicked his fingers softly, once, once . He clicked the fingers of his right hand behind the back of his back .
 Behind him, the gun-hands of the two men slid through the opening of their gay shirts above the waistbands . Behind him the gun hands of the . two men slide through the . opening of the gay shirts .
 The ugly sausage-shaped hunks of metal spat and thudded again and again, even when the bodies were on their way to the ground . The two bodies were found in the wreckage of the crash .
 Three small men walked quickly back through the rose and white drawingroom and across the dark carved mahogany hall and out through the elegant front door . Then the three small men returned to the drawingroom .
 Major Gonzales and two gunmen sat upright in the back seat of a black Ford Consul Sedan with Jamaican number plates . They drove off at an easy pace down the long avenue of Royal Palms . The two gunmen are believed to have been involved in the murder of Major Gonz
 At the junction of the drive and the road to Port Antonio, the cut telephone wires hung down through the trees like bright lianas . At the . junction, the . telephone wires hang down from the trees .
 Major Gonzales slalomed the car carefully and expertly down the rough parochial road until he was on the metalled strip near the coast . He slalomed carefully and carefully down the road until the meetingalled strip .
 Twenty minutes after the killing he came to the outer sprawl of the little banana port . Twenty minutes later, he was back in the streets of the city .
 The three men got out of the car and walked the quarter of a mile through the main street to the banana wharves . There he ran the stolen car on to the grass verge beside the road and the three men then got out .
 The three men got in and the boat zoomed off across the still waters of what an American poetess has called the most beautiful harbour in the world . The men got into the boat and it zoomed away from the harbour .
 The anchor chain was already half up on the glittering fifty-ton Chriscraft . The glittering 50-ton Christiscraft was half up when it arrived .
 The two graceful antennae of the deep-sea rods explained that these were tourists . They were tourists from Jamaica, perhaps, or Montego Bay .
 Major Gonzales tossed a fifty-cent piece to each of the stripped men . The stripped men dived and dived in the water . Gonzales tosses the fifty-cents to each other .
 The twin diesels awoke to a stuttering roar and the Chriscraft settled her stern down a fraction and made for the deep channel below the Titchfield hotel . It was the first time the two diesels had ever made their way into the channel .
 Content's last rays of the sun glittered on the red stains . Content was the last of the last rays to shine on the stains .
 One of the doctor birds whirred over the balustrade and hovered close above Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The doctor birds are part of a team of doctor birds from the Smithsonian .
 There came the sound of someone in a small sports car making a racing change at the bend of the drive .
 In London, October had begun with a week of brilliant Indian summer . The noise of the mowers came up from Regent’s Park and in through the wide open windows of M’S office .
 James Bond reflected that one of the most beautiful noises of summer, the drowsy iron song of the old machines, was going for ever from the world . They were motormowers and James Bond reflects that one . beautiful noises . of summer was going to the end of the world
 Perhaps today children felt the same about the puff and chatter of the little two-stroke engines . Perhaps today's children still feel the same .
 Bond had time for these reflections because M seemed to be having difficulty in coming to the point . Bond was having time for this because M was having difficulty coming to a point .
 He was mildly intrigued because M had addressed him as James and not by his number—007 . He was surprised to discover he had been addressed by James .
 It sounded as if there might be some personal angle to this assignment, as if it might be put to him more as a request than as an order .
 Bond seemed to have an extra small cleft of worry between the frosty, damnably clear, clear, grey eyes . And it seemed to Bond that there was a small clefts of worry .
 Three minutes was certainly too long to spend getting a pipe going . And three minutes is too long for a pipe to start .
 Bond fielded it and skidded it politely back to the middle of the desk . Bond fielded the question and skid it politely to the end of the question .
 If you send a havering signal to the Admiralty you deserve to be put on the beach. If you want to be sent to the beach, you will be put in the sand .
 He had not got a wife or children—had never suffered the tragedy of a personal loss . He had never suffered a tragedy of his own loss. He had no wife or kids .
 He had absolutely no idea how he would face these things that needed so much more toughness than he had ever had to show . He had no idea what he would do .
 'If the cause is—er— sort of just, sir. I mean’—he did not like using such words—‘if the cause was—er, sir,’ he said . ‘I mean”, he said. ‘If the
 M put his pipe back in his mouth and drew on it deeply to relieve his feelings . M put it back in the mouth and put it in the back of his mouth again .
 If M could get the odds more or less right, he would risk anything, anywhere in the world . If he could risk anything he would be willing to risk anything anywhere, anywhere .
 M did not give a damn for the susceptibilities of any Ministry and thought nothing of going behind their backs to get a personal ruling from the Prime Minister . M did nothing for the sporporations of any Ministry .
 M looked briefly, thoughtfully at Bond, and then swivelled his chair so that he could look out of the window at the high summery clouds . M looked at Bond again, and swiveled his chair to look at the clouds .
 Castro is a good man with the other side -- with this chap Castro, Castro . Castro is the leader of the Cuban Revolution, which overthrew the Batista government .
 Castro's Intelligence people seem to have the Government pretty well penetrated . Castro’s Intelligence people appear to have been penetrated by the Government . Castro's intelligence people have been in touch with the Government for years .
 It boils down to the fact that a man called Hammerstein or von Hammerstein, had the couple killed . The couple were killed by a man known as von Hammerstein, in the 1930s .
 He cut one of his officers in on his loot, a man called Gonzales, and this man travelled around the Caribbean with a couple of gunmen to protect him and began salting away Hammerstein’s money outside Cuba .
 When money didn’t work he’d use force— kidnap a child, bum down a few acres, anything to make the owner see reason . Anything to make a person see reason, he'd use force when money didn't work, he said . He'd kidnap a
 Hammerstein heard of the Havelocks’ property, one of the best in Jamaica, and he told Gonzales to go and get it .
 I suppose his orders were to kill the Havelocks if they wouldn’t sell and then put pressure on the daughter . I suppose he was trying to get the daughter to sell .
 Hammerstein cleared out and took his little team of three with him with him . But, anyway, he cleared out .
 He's certainly chosen himself somewhere where he won’t be troubled with visitors . He’s certainly chosen a place where he’ll be troubled by visitors .
 He has been interested in Havana ever since the big American gangster money started following the casinos there . And he’s been interested ever since, he says, since the casinos started following American money there .
 Hammerstein and his party had come into the U.S. on six months visitors’ visas . He said they were on a six-month visa . Hammerstein said he and the party were on their six months visa .
 Attorney General said there wasn’t a hope unless we could get witnesses from Havana, he said . I talked it over here with the Attorney General and he said there was a hope . The Attorney General told me there wasn't a hope for the case .
 It was only through Castro’s Intelligence that we even know as much as we do . Castro's Intelligence is the only way to know what happened to the Castro family .
 Next Hoover offered to have their visas revoked and get them on the move again . Hoover also offered to revoke their visas to get them back on their way .
 He strayed one of his frontier patrol planes over the border and took a full aerial survey of Echo Lake place . He took a look at Echo Lake, a lake popular with tourists in Mexico .
 Bond realized why M was troubled, why he wanted someone else to make the decision . Now Bond realizes why he was troubled . Bond realized that he wanted M to make a decision .
 Because these had been friends of M, M had worked on the case by himself . Because of a personal element involved, M was involved in the case .
 It had come to the point when justice ought to be done and these people brought to book . And now it had become the point where justice should be done, he said .
 No judge would take a murder case in which he had personally known the murdered person . Judge would not take a case where he personally knew the victim .
 Hammerstein operated the law of the jungle on two defenceless old people . Hammerstein had operated on them with the help of the police .
 The law of the jungle should be visited upon Hammerstein . Since no other law was available, Hammerstein should have visited upon him, he did .
 If foreign gangsters find they can get away with this kind of thing they’ll decide the English are as soft as some other people seem to think we are, he says . The English are not soft, he adds .
 M opened the pad, tamped the rubber stamp on it and then carefully, so that it was aligned with the top right-hand corner of the docket, pressed it down on the grey cover .
 M replaced the stamp and ink pad in the drawer and closed the drawer . M replaced them with the ink pad and the stamp .
 He turned the docket round and pushed it gently across the desk to Bond . He turned it around and gave it gently to Bond, who was in charge .
 He regretted the days of the old Stratocruiser —that fine lumbering old plane that took ten hours to cross the Atlantic . He regretted that old plane took 10 hours to fly .
 The stewards had to serve everything almost at the double, and then one had a bare two hours snooze before the hundred-milelong descent from forty thousand feet .
 Only eight hours after leaving London, Bond was driving a Hertz U-drive Plymouth saloon along Route 17 from Montreal to Ottawa .
 The Headquarters of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police are in the Department of Justice alongside Parliament Buildings in Ottawa . The headquarters are located in the Department of Justice .
 Like most Canadian public buildings, the Department of Justice is a massive block of grey masonry built to look stodgily important and to withstand long and hard winters .
 A young fresh-faced R.C.M.P. corporal took him up in the lift to the third floor . He was handed over to a sergeant in a large tidy office which contained two girl secretaries .
 The sergeant spoke on an intercom and there was a ten minutes delay during which Bond smoked and read a recruiting pamphlet . Bond smoked, read and read the recruiting pamphlet which made the Mounties sound like a dude ranch, Dick Tracy and Rose Marie .
 When he was shown in through the connecting door a tall youngish man in a dark blue suit and black tie turned away from the window and came towards him .
 Colonel: 'I’ve been on one or two hunting-trips myself and the Commissioner fixed on me to handle this little holiday of yours,’ the Colonel paused, ‘on me only.’ The Colonel paused and said: ‘I've been on
 The Commissioner was glad to help but he was going to handle this with kid gloves . The Commissioner said he would handle the situation with "kid gloves" The commissioner said he was happy to help .
 Friends in London didn’t want the Commissioner to bother himself personally with any of this, they say . ‘My friends in London wanted to avoid the Commissioner’s interference,’ she says .
 "I haven’t seen the Commissioner or been anywhere near his headquarters," he said . "I'm not sure if I've seen him," he added. "And I haven't seen him anywhere near my headquarters"
 "You and I are about to connive at various felonies," he says . "I'm going to get a Canadian huntinglicence under false pretences and being an accessory to a breach of the frontier laws"
 It wouldn't do anyone one bit of good to have any ricochets from this little lot. It wouldn’t do any good to be ricocheted from the little lot, he said .
 When I go out of here, we’ll forget each other, and if I end up in Sing-Sing that’s my worry. I’m worried that I might be going to be in the same place as I was in the U.S.
 James Bond's old black and white hound’s-tooth tweed suit and white shirt and thin black tie .
 Nothing fancy, nothing conspicuous—khaki shirt, dark brown jeans, good climbing-boots or shoes . Nothing fancy or conspicuous: dark brown shirt .
 There are plenty of browns in the hills at this time and you won’t want to be wearing parachute cloth or anything that smells of camouflage .
 If you're picked up, you're an Englishman on a hunting-trip in Canada who’s lost his way and got across the border by mistake . If you’re picked up by police, you may be a British man .
 "Put it in the boot of your Plymouth while you were waiting. Went down myself and put it in your car," he said .
 One of the new Savage 99Fs, Weatherby 6 x 62 ‘scope, five-shot repeater with twenty rounds of high-velocity -250-3,000 . Savage 99F is Weatherby’s Weatherby . Weatherby. Weatherby six x 62
 He won't miss it if it doesn’t turn up. Glad to have it back one day one day, but he’s not sure if it turns up . He says he won't be surprised if it's found .
 'issued here in the city in your real name as that fits with your passport,' says Colonel Johns .
 Hunting-license ditto, but small game only, vermin, as it isn’t quite deer season yet . Also driving-license to replace the provisional one I had waiting for you with Hertz people .
 Colonel Johns walked round with the map to Bond and spread it out . Colonel Johns got up and walked round the map with Bond .
 Turn right in Stanbridge for Frelighsburg and leave the car in a garage there . The car can be left in the garage in a parking lot in a village near Stanbridge .
 Colonel Johns went back to his chair and took two more pieces of paper off the file . Colonel Johns then took a final look at the file and took another piece of paper out of his file .
 The first was a scrap of penciled map, the other a section of aerial photograph . The two images were taken from the same photo of the World War II era .
 'This is a rough sketch of an old smuggling-route from Prohibition days,' he said .
 This route was used for runners between Franklin, just over the Derby Line, and Frelighsburg . It was used to run between Franklin and the town of Frelghsburg .
 You follow this path through the foothills, and you detour Franklin and get into the start of the Green Mountains . Follow this path into the Green Mountain foothills .
 Vermont spruce and pine with a bit of maple is Vermont's best . You can stay inside that stuff for months and not see a soul. There it’s all spruce .
 Enosburg Falls to the West is one of the best places to visit in the United States . Enosberg Falls Falls is located in the heart of the country .
 The top of the valley is over a steep range and down a steep mountain range . Then you’re over a hillside and down into the valley you want to reach the top of it .
 The cross is Echo Lake and, judging from the photographs, I’d be inclined to come down on top of it from the east . Echo Lake is the largest lake in North America and is located in the US .
 The roofs were of slate, and there was a glimpse of graceful bow windows and a covered patio . The roof was of slate and there were bow windows .
 A dust road ran past the front door and on this side were garages and what appeared to be kennels . On this side of the door was garages, what appeared like a kennel area .
 On the garden side was a stone flagged terrace with a flowered border, and beyond this two or three acres of trim lawn stretched down to the edge of the small lake .
 Lake appeared to have been artificially created with a deep stone dam . The lake appeared to be artificially created by a deep, deep lake .
 There were no people in the photograph, but on the stone flags in front of the patio was a quantity of expensive looking aluminum garden furniture and a central glass table .
 Bond remembered that the larger photograph had shown a tennis court in the garden and on the other side of the road the trim white fences and grazing horses of a stud farm . Bond remembers that the photograph had been taken at the time of the photograph .
 Echo Lake looked what it was—the luxurious retreat, in deep country, well away from atom bomb targets, of a millionaire who liked privacy and could probably offset a lot of his running expenses against the stud farm and an occasional good let . Echo Lake was the luxurious retreat of a wealthy
 It would be an admirable refuge for a man who had had ten steamy years of Caribbean politics and who needed a rest to recharge his batteries . The Caribbean should be a place to recharge its batteries .
 Talking about all this has reminded me of one or two sniping jobs at the end of the War. Talking about it has been a bit like sniping in the past, I say .
 It was much the same sort of country as you’ll be using, only different trees . It was also the same kind of country that you'll be using in the book .
 He passed the day looking to his equipment and wearing in the soft ripple rubber rubber climbingboots he had bought in Ottawa .
 He bought glucose tablets and some smoked ham and bread from which he made himself sandwiches .
 He also bought a large aluminum flask and filled it with three-quarters Bourbon and a quarter coffee . He also filled this with three quarters of the coffee and half of the whiskey .
 He diluted the walnut stain and washed himself all over with the stuff even to the roots of his hair . When darkness came he had dinner and a short sleep and then diluted the .
 Just before midnight he quietly opened the side door into the automobile bay, got into the Plymouth and drove off on the last lap south to Frelighsburg .
 Bond said indifferently ‘That so?’, paid for two nights and walked out of the garage . Bond said 'That so?' and walked away from the garage. Bond then paid for the two nights in the garage and walked off .
 He had stopped on the far side of the town, and now he only had to follow the highway for a hundred yards before he found the dirt track running off into the woods on his right . The dirt track was running off the town's main road .
 A chained dog set up a frenzied barking, but no light showed in the farmhouse . Bond skirted it and at once found the path by the stream . Bond was able to find a path by a stream .
 When the barking stopped there was silence, the deep velvet silence of woods on a still night . The barking of the dog stopped, and the silence of the still night fell silent .
 It was a warm night with a full yellow moon that threw enough light down through the thick spruce for Bond to follow the path without difficulty . Bond was able to find the path easily without difficulty.
 The springy, cushioned soles of the climbing-boots were wonderful to walk on, and Bond got his second wind and knew he was making good time .
 Fie crossed a secondary, tarred road, and now there was a wider track through more woods and on his right the pale glitter of a lake . Fie was on his way to the end of his first day in the country .
 On the latter was a sign saying ENOSBURG FALLS 1 ML . Now he was on the last lap—a small huntingtrail that climbed steeply .
 Well away from the highway, he stopped and shifted his rifle and knapsack round, had a cigarette and burned the sketchmap . The sketchmap was a sketch of a road in the desert .
 Already there was a faint paling in the sky and small noises in the forest . The harsh, melancholy cry of a bird he did not know and the rustlings of small animals .
 Bond visualizes the house deep down in the little valley on the other side of the mountain ahead of him . Bond visualized the house in a little valley in the mountainside .
 He saw the blank curtained windows, the crumpled sleeping faces of the four men, the dew on the lawn and the widening rings of the early morning rise on the gunmetal surface of the lake .
 "Here, on the other side of the mountain, was the executioner coming up through the trees," she says . "And here, here, was . The executioner ... coming up from the . trees."
 Bond closed his mind to the picture, trod the remains of his cigarette into the ground and got going . Bond closed himself to the photo, trotting the remains into the grass . Bond was in the middle of the road when he got going.
 When you sit on top of a mountain and watch the sun go down behind the mountain opposite, the darkness rises up to you out of the valley . This is when you sit in front of the sun, the sun goes down behind a mountain .
 It must be centuries since man has killed a small bird for food in these woods, yet they are still afraid . The birds are afraid of being killed for food .
 Bond steadily climbed upwards and obstinately pushed away from the thought of the four faces asleep on the white pillows . With these and other random thoughts Bond climbed upwards . Bond climbed up and out of the room and pushed the thought away .
 The round peak was below the tree-line and Bond could see nothing of the valley below . Bond was unable to see anything of a valley below the peak .
 He rested and then chose an oak tree, and climbed up and out along a thick bough . He then chose a thick oak tree to climb out of .
 The Green Mountains stretching in every direction as far as he could see, away to the east the golden ball of the sun just coming up in glory . Below, two thousand feet down a long easy slope of tree-tops broken once by a wide band of meadow, through a thin
 Bond lay along the branch and watched the band of pale early morning sunshine creeping down into the valley . Bond lay on the branch as he watched the early morning morning sunshine creep down the valley to the edge .
 It took a quarter of an hour to reach the lake, then seemed to flood at once over the glittering lawn and over the roof tiles of the roofs .
 The target area, washed and bright and new, lay waiting like an empty stage . Then the mist went quickly from the lake .
 Bond slipped the telescopic sight out of his pocket and went over the scene inch by inch . Bond slipped into his pocket to watch the scene in the dark .
 If by the end of it they had not come down to the lake, he would just have to take his chance at the patio and five hundred yards . He would have to wait until he could see if he had a chance to play .
 It was a wide meadow, perhaps five hundred yards of going without cover . It was the meadow where the children were playing in .
 A white blind rolled up in one of the smaller windows to the left of the main block . The blind rolls up in a small window in a smaller window to the right side of the block .
 The sounds in the valley would bounce upwards off the surface of the water . The sounds would bounce off the top of the river surface .
 A thin column of smoke began to trickle up straight into the air from one of the left-hand chimneys . It is not the first time a chimney has been blown out of the roof .
 "He would have something to eat, smoke his last safe cigarette and get on down to the firing-point," he said . He would have been able to eat and smoke his final safe cigarette .
 The skin dented, broke and then closed up again leaving a small hole with bruised edges . The skin then dented and broke again leaving the skin with a bruised edge .
 The bullet ploughed on, unhurriedly, towards the pulsing heart—the tissues, the blood-vessels, parting obediently to let it through . The bullet hit the heart, and the tissues parted obediently for it to pass .
 He crooked it slowly, feeling in his imagination the cool curve of metal . He crooked the curve of the metal in his hand .
 He put the flask top back on the flask and waited for the warmth of the whisky to reach his stomach .
 He yawned deeply and picked up the rifle and slung it over his shoulder . Then he got slowly to his feet, stretched and yawned, yawning deeply . He slung the rifle over his shoulders .
 He looked round carefully to mark the place when he came back up the hill and started slowly off slowly off down through the trees . He looked carefully and carefully as he went down the hill .
 Now there is no trail and he had to pick his way slowly, watching the ground for dead branches . Now there was no trail, he had had to watch for dead trees .
 Among the spruce and silver birch there was an occasional oak and beech and sycamore . Here and there, the blazing Bengal fire of a maple in autumn dress .
 Under the trees was a sparse undergrowth of their saplings and much dead wood from old hurricanes . Underneath the trees were undergrowth, undergrowth and dead wood .
 Bond went carefully down, his feet making little sound among the leaves and moss-covered rocks, but soon the forest was aware of him and began to pass on the news . Bond's feet made little sound as he walked through the forest .
 Large doe, with two Bambi-like young, saw him first and galloped off with an appalling clatter . A large doe with two young galloped away from the scene with a clattering .
 Bond willed them to have no fear, that the gun he carried was not meant for them, but with each alarm he wondered if, when he got to the edge of the meadow, he would see down on the lawn a man with glasses who had been watching the frightened birds
 He stopped behind a last broad oak and looked across the long meadow to the final belt of trees and the lake and the house . But when he stopped behind the broad oak, nothing had changed . He stopped to look at the lake, lake and house, but nothing changed .
 All the other blinds were still down and the only movement was the thin plume of smoke . The only movement in the thin smoke was that of a small plume .
 Bond gazed down across the meadow to the trees, looking for one which would suit his purpose . Bond gazed into the trees looking for a way to get his hands on the ground .
 This would be right for his clothes, its trunk was thick enough and it stood slightly back from the wall of spruce . The trunk of the trunk was thicker enough to fit into his clothes . It was right for him to wear his clothes.
 From there, standing, he would be able to see all he needed of the lake and the house . The lake and house would be visible from the lake .
 Bond stood for a while, plotting his route down through the thick grass and golden-rod of the meadow . Bond stood and plotted his route for a long time before he left .
 A branch snapped off a tree on the edge of the trees, a branch snapped . It's not the first time a branch has snapped in the rain .
 He stayed like that for a full ten minutes, a motionless brown shadow against the wide trunk of the oak . He stayed there for ten minutes. He stayed motionless .
 Even a large animal like a deer with antlers and four hooves moves silently in a forest unless he is in flight . Birds never alight on twigs that will break under them, and even large animals with antler and four feet move silently .
 Gently Bond eased the rifle off his shoulder and put his thumb on the safe . Bond eased his thumb onto the safe and put the gun safely in place .
 A single shot from high up in the woods would pass for a hunter or a poacher . Perhaps, if the people were still sleeping, a single shot would pass as a hunter . The people are still sleeping .
 Two deer broke cover and cantered unhurriedly across the meadow to the left . But then, between him and approximately where the twig had snapped, two deer break cover . The twig snapped, and the deer ran away from him .
 It was true that they stopped twice to look back, but each time they cropped a few mouthfuls of grass before moving on to the distant fringe of the lower woods .
 A five-hundred-yard crawl through tall concealing grass is a long and wearisome business . A crawl through the grass is not the only way to get around the world .
 It is hard on knees and hands and elbows, there is a vista of nothing but grass and flower-stalks, and the dust and small insects get into your eyes and nose and down your neck .
 Bond focused on placing his hands right and maintaining a slow, even speed . Bond was aiming for an even-even speed in the first round .
 The breeze had kept up and his wake through the grass would certainly not be noticeable from the house . The breeze was keeping up and it would not have been noticeable from house .
 From above, it looked as if a big ground animal -- a beaver perhaps, or a woodchuck -- was on its way down the meadow . From above it looked like a large animal was coming down from the top of the hill .
 It looked as if whatever it was would slowly catch up on Bond and that the two wakes would converge just at the next tree-line . It looked like it was slowly catching up with Bond as it looked as though it would converge .
 Bond crawled and slithered steadily on, stopping only to wipe the sweat and dust off his face and, from time to time, to make sure that he was on-course for the maple . Bond crawled, slithered, crawled, crawled and crawled steadily on .
 When he was close enough for the tree-line to hide him from the house, he stopped and lay for a while, massaging his knees and loosening his wrists for the last lap .
 He had heard nothing to warn him, and when the soft threatening whisper came from only feet away in the thick grass on his left, his head swiveled so sharply that the vertebrae of his neck made a cracking sound . The soft, soft, threatening whisper was only feet
 It had been a girl’s voice, but a voice that fiercely meant what it said . It was the voice of a girl, but it was a girl's voice that had been fierce .
 Bond, his heart thumping, stared up the shaft of the steel arrow whose bluetempered triangular tip parted the grass stalks perhaps eighteen inches from his head . Bond, who had been shot at the head, was struck by the arrow . Bond's heart thumped as he
 The knuckles of the brown fingers that held the binding of the bow below the arrow-tip were white . The white knuckles were used to bind the bow and bind the binding .
 Bond gathered saliva back into his dry mouth and began slowly to edge his right hand, his out-of-sight hand, round and up towards his waistband and his gun . Bond began to edge the right hand towards his out of sight hand, and the gun .
 The tension in the voice had slackened, but it was still hard, suspicious . The tension had dropped, but the voice was still suspicious . It was hard to hear from the voice of the man in the room .
 Without waiting, Bond rose on hands-and- knees and started to crawl again . Bond rose to crawl on hands and knees and crawled again to crawl .
 Whoever this damned girl was, she would have to be disposed of quickly and discreetly, before the shootingmatch began . Whoever it was, it would have had to be done quickly .
 He got carefully to his feet and took a quick look through the blazing leaves . He was careful to avoid being hit by the heat of the day .
 Two slow-moving coloured maids were laying a large breakfast table on the patio . The maids laid the large table on a large patio in the garden .
 The field of vision over the tops of the trees that now fell sharply to the lake was perfect . The view of the lake from the top of the tree was perfect. The view over the lake now fell to the bottom of the water .
 Bond unslung his rifle and knapsack and sat down with his back against the trunk of the tree . Bond sat down in the tree with his rifle, knapsacks and his rifle . Bond's rifle was unloaded and he sat in a treehouse .
 The girl came out of the edge of the grass and stood up under the maple . The girl stood up and said, "I am not afraid to say goodbye to me"
 The girl looked like a beautiful unkempt dryad in ragged shirt and trousers . The girl was a beautiful dryad with ragged ragged trousers .
 The shirt and trousers were olive green, crumpled and splashed with mud and stains and torn in places . Her pale blonde hair was bound with golden-rod to conceal its brightness for her crawl .
 The beauty of her face was wild and rather animal, with a wide sensuous mouth, high cheek-bones and silvery grey, disdainful eyes . Her beauty was 'wild' and 'rather animal', says the author .
 There was the blood of scratches on her forearms and down one cheek, and a bruise had puffed and slightly blackened the same cheek-bone .
 The metal feathers of a quiver full of arrows showed above her left shoulder . She was carrying an arrow-shaped quiver when she was attacked .
 Apart from the bow, she carried nothing but a hunting-knife at her belt and a small brown canvas bag that presumably carried her food .
 "She looked like a beautiful, dangerous customer who knew wild country and forests and was not afraid of them," she said . "I'm not afraid. She looked like she knew wild land and forests," she added .
 She would walk alone through life and have little use for civilization, she said . She would be alone and had little use of civilization, the author says .
 She sat like a Red Indian, her knees splayed wide and her ankles tucked high under her thighs . She sat in front of the camera with her knees and ankles tucked up high under the thighs .
 She said ‘Thanks’ grudgingly, and took her arrow and thrust it over her back to join the others in the quiver .
 Without protest she took out from one of the white paper and handed it over . Without protest, she took it over and gave it to her .
 Judy Havelock had given her age as twenty-five and her place of birth as Jamaica . She gave her birth to Jamaica and gave her age of 25 and her birth place in Jamaica .
 "There was only one way out of this mess and that was to join forces with the girl," she said . "I'm not going to be able to find a way to get back in touch with her," she added .
 I've been sent out from London by, er, Scotland Yard, I know all about your troubles and I’ve come out here to pay off some of the score and see you’re not bothered by these people. I've come out to pay them off, and
 I was to put a notice in the paper, in the personal column, on a particular day . It was to be put in the newspaper, in which day it was published . I was asked to write a personal column on the day of the day .
 I pretended I wanted to see the underworld and some real gangsters, and so on. "I pretended I was out for thrills," he says . "I wanted to go to the underworld," he adds .
 The voice was as casual as if she had said she was going to pick a wild flower . The voice of the woman in the voice was casual as she said she wanted to go for a wildflower .
 There was talk and laughter as they pulled out chairs and sat down at the table . "There were talk, laughter and laughter," they said .
 One place is left empty at the head of the table between the two girls . One place was left empty between the girls .
 Gonzales smiled all the time and his clothes looked the cleanest and smartest . Gonzales' clothes looked clean and smartest, and he smiled all time .
 The pair sat together at the foot of the oblong table and took no part in the talk . They sat together in silence at the end of the talk and sat together again .
 They wore bright bathing-dresses and a lot of gold jewelry, and laughed and chattered like pretty monkeys . They laughed and chatted like little monkeys .
 The voices were almost clear enough to understand, but they were talking Spanish . The voices are almost clear, but the voices are not clear enough .
 She took a quick look through the glass and handed it back without comment . She took it back to her desk and left it without comment.
 Bond wondered if she realized that she had been looking at the murderers of her father and mother . Bond wondered whether she realized if she'd been looking for the killers of her mother and father .
 The two girls had turned and were looking towards the door into the house . The girls were looking at the door to the house when they were attacked .
 A mat of black hair covered his breasts and shoulder-blades, and his arms and legs were thick with it . The mat was also thick with black hair .
 There was not a hair on his face or head and his skull was a glittering whitish yellow with a deep dent at the back that might have been a wound or a scar of a trepanning .
 The bone-structure of the face was that of the conventional Prussian officer . The eyes under the naked brows were close-set and piggish . The large mouth had hideous lips—thick and wet .
 He wore nothing but a strip of black material, hardly larger than an athletic supportbelt, round his stomach . He wore a large gold wrist-watch on a gold bracelet .
 Von Hammerstein looked just about as unpleasant as M’s dossier said he was . The dossier says he was a 'unpleasant' man .
 The mouth looked grim, almost cruel, as she looked down on the man she had come to kill . She looked grim and grim as the man was killed . The mouth was grim and her eyes looked grim .
 She might interfere with his own plans and insist on playing some silly role with her bow and arrow . She might even interfere with him and insist with her own plans .
 One short tap at the base of the skull and he would gag her and tie her up until it was all over . He would tap her down, gag her up, tie her down until it's all over, she says .
 Just as nonchalantly she bent down, put the glass on the ground and picked up her bow . She bent down to put her bow on the floor and picked it up .
 I haven’t come all the way here to be knocked on the head by a flat-footed London bobby. I'm not here to knock it down, but I'm here to defend myself . I haven't come to the UK to knock down a Londoner. I
 'I can’t miss with this at fifty yards, and I’ve killed birds on the wing at a hundred. I've killed birds in the wings at a 100. I can't miss . I can kill birds on a hundred yards,’ he says .
 This was good hard English stock spiced with the hot peppers of a tropical childhood . This was a good English stock .
 He was certain that she would think nothing of putting him out of action . He was quite certain that . She would put nothing of . nothing of her own .
 I was ordered to do it -- by a close friend of your family, if you want to know, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says he was ordered by a 'close friend' of his family .
 "I know the moment to get von Hammerstein and I’ll be well away from the lake before they take in what’s happened," says the director of the opera .
 She gave Bond the brief, pitying, self-congratulatory smile of the woman who has had the last word, and turned and made off down through the trees .
 Bond watched the lithe dark green figure until it had vanished among the tree-trunks, then he impatiently picked up the glass and went back to his vantage-point .
 "It was time to clear the silly bitch out of his mind and concentrate on the job. It was time for him to clear his mind," he said .
 If he fired first there was no knowing what the hot-headed bitch would do, she would do . But if she fired first, there would be no better .
 Bond's mind luxuriated briefly in the thought of what he would do to the girl once all this was over . Bond’s mind luxuried briefly in thought of . what he . would do with the girl after all this .
 There was movement in front of the house, and he put the exciting thoughts aside and lifted his glass . Then there was movement from the house .
 Von Hammerstein was lying back among the cushions of an outdoor couch reading a newspaper and occasionally commenting to Major Gonzales, who sat astride an iron chair near him .
 Gonzales was smoking a cigar and from time to time he delicately raised a hand in front of his mouth, leant sideways and spat a bit of leaf out on the ground . Gonzales is a former World Cup winner and has been a professional footballer since 1986 .
 Since the scene seemed to be static, Bond sat down with his back to the tree and went over the Savage with minute care . Bond then sat down in front of the tree to watch the scene unfold .
 "At the same time he thought of what would shortly have to be done with it," he said . "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with it."
 Bond did not like what he was going to do, and all the way from England he had had to keep on reminding himself what sort of men these were . Bond had to remind himself of the sort of people these were. Bond was not happy with the decision .
 Von Hammerstein and his gunmen were particularly dreadful men . Many people around the world would probably be very glad to destroy them out of private revenge .
 This was merely his job—as it was the job of a pest control officer to kill rats . This was simply his job, as it was his job to kill them .
 He was the public executioner appointed by M to represent the community . He was appointed by the community to represent his community .
 Bond argued to himself that these men were as much enemies of his country as those of SMERSH or of other enemy Secret Services . In a way, Bond argued that the agents of these agents were also enemies of the country . Bond argued in a way that these agents are as much
 They had declared and waged war against British people on British soil and they were currently planning another attack . They had already declared war against Britain and are currently planning a new attack .
 They had killed the girl’s pony and her dog with two casual sideswipes of the hand as if they had been flies . The girl's pony and dog were killed by the girl's sidewipes, the police said .
 The kingfisher, a handful of tattered blue and grey feathers, thudded to the lawn and lay fluttering . It was the last of the kingfishers to die in the wild .
 He took his heel away and wiped it on the grass beside the heap of feathers . He wiped it off the ground with his heel .
 He handed the gun to one of the gunmen and wiped his hands down his fat backsides . He handed his gun to the gunmen . He then handed his hands over to the gunman .
 He gave a sharp order to the two girls, who ran off into the house, then, with the others following, he turned and ambled down the sloping lawn towards the lake .
 He clipped the telescopic sight on to the barrel of the Savage and took his stance against the trunk of the tree . He clipped it onto his rifle barrel and took a stance against a tree trunk .
 He found a bump in the wood as a rest for his left hand, put his sights at 300, and took broad aim at the group of people by the lake . He found his target was 300, with a view of a group of 300 .
 He leaned against the trunk and watched the scene with a rifle . Then, holding the rifle loosely, he leaned out of the trunk .
 Gunman: "It was going to be some kind of a shooting contest between the two gunmen" Gunman says he and gunman were going to go head-to-head .
 They snapped fresh magazines on to their guns and at Gonzales’s orders stationed themselves on the flat stone wall of the dam some twenty feet apart on either side of the diving-board . At Gonzales's orders, the men were stationed 20 feet apart .
 Von Hammerstein took up his place on the grass verge, a champagne bottle swinging in each hand . The show will be held in New York City on Sunday night .
 Through the telescopic sight their faces looked sharp with concentration . The children's faces were sharp and focused on the camera .
 With the 'tres' he hurled the champagne bottles high into the air over the lake . With the ‘tres’ he hurled them into the sky .
 The thunder of the guns split the peaceful scene and racketed up from the water . It was the first time the guns had been fired at the scene of the shooting .
 Birds fled away from the trees screeching and some small branches cut by the bullets pattered down into the lake . The bullets were fired in a hail of bullets .
 The left-hand bottle disintegrated into dust, the right-hand one, hit by only a single bullet, split in two a fraction of a second later . The bottle was hit by a bullet and split into two pieces of glass .
 The fragments of glass made small splashes over the middle of the lake . The fragments were scattered over the lake by the water .
 The smoke-clouds over the two of them joined and drifted away over the lawn . The smoke clouds over two men drifted away from each other .
 The two gunmen walked along the wall to the grass, the rear one looking sullen, the leading one with a sly grin on his face . The two men were seen smiling and laughing as they left the scene .
 Hammerstein patted the girl on the rump as if she had been a cow . Hammerstein reached out and patted her rump like if she was a cow.
 The prize girl took a quick run and dived into the lake, perhaps to get away from the man who had won her favours, and the other girl followed her . The other girl dived in the lake to escape the prize girl .
 Major Gonzales took off his coat and laid it on the grass and sat down on it . Gonzales sat down in the grass to sit down and talk to the crowd .
 He was wearing a shoulder holster which showed the butt of a medium-calibre automatic . He was also wearing shoulder holster showing the gun butt .
 He watched von Hammerstein take off his watch and walk along the dam wall to the diving-board . Von Hammerstein was on the diving board at the end of the show .
 The gunmen stood back from the lake and also watched von Hammerstein and the two girls, who were now out in the middle of the little lake and were making for the far shore .
 The gunmen stood with their guns cradled in their arms and occasionally one of them would glance round the garden or towards the house . The gunmen would look at the house and occasionally glance towards it .
 Bond thought there was every reason why von Hammerstein had managed to stay alive so long . Bond thought he had a good reason why he was able to keep his career alive .
 Through the telescopic sight Bond could see the thick hair over his shoulder-blades tremble in a breeze that came to give a quick shiver to the surface of the lake .
 There was a fraction of a second when his feet had left the board and he was still almost upright . Now his arms were coming forward and there was coming forward . He was almost upright when his arms came forward and his feet were still upright .
 In that fraction of a second there was a flash of silver against his back . Then von Hammerstein’s body hit the water in a neat dive .
 Gonzales was on his feet, looking uncertainly at the turbulence caused by the dive . Gonzales looked uncertainly as he landed on the surface of the water .
 They crouched, looking from Gonzales to the trees behind the dam, waiting for an order . The men crouched in their crouches, looking at each other waiting for the order .
 A foot or so of steel shaft stuck up from below the left shoulder-blade . The sun winked on the aluminum feathers .
 Major Gonzales yelled an order and the two tommy-guns roared and flamed . The two Tommy-gun guns roared and burst into flames . Gonzales yells an order to fire the guns .
 The Savage shuddered against his shoulder and the right-hand man fell slowly forward on his face . The Savage fell slowly to his face and died slowly from his injuries. The Savage was hit by the Savage .
 The other man was running for the lake, his gun still firing from the hip in short bursts . Now the other man is running for a lake, still firing his gun .
 The clenched finger went on firing the gun aimlessly up towards the blue sky . The water throttled the mechanism until the gun could be throttled .
 Major Gonzales had a chance to score after the seconds wasted on the extra shot had been wasted . Gonzales was the only player to score a goal in the extra-time period .
 He had got behind the body of the first gunman and now he opened up on Bond with the tommy-gun . He had opened fire on Bond, killing him in the first place in the world .
 Whether he had seen Bond or was only firing at the flashes from the Savage he was doing well . Whether he was seeing Bond or not he was firing well .
 Bullets zwipped into the maple and slivers of wood spattered into Bond’s face . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in November .
 Gonzales was up and running forward to the group of garden furniture . He shook it free, but now Gonzales is back in the saddle .
 He hurled the iron table on its side and got behind it as two snap shots from Bond kicked chunks out of the lawn at his heels . He hurled it onto the ground as two snaps from the film kicked chunks from the lawn . Bond then got behind the table and threw it on top
 Bond’s single shots clanged against the white iron or whined off across the lawn . With this solid cover his shooting became more accurate, and burst after burst, now .
 Gonzales was cunning with his changes to the telescopic sight . It was not easy to traverse the telescopy sight quickly from one side of the table to the other . Gonzales won the match by a narrow margin of three points .
 His bullets thudded into the trunk beside and above Bond . Again and again he fired bullets into the car .
 He would fire, standing, from the open meadow and catch Gonzales off-guard . Gonzales would fire standing in front of Gonzales, standing in the meadow . He would stand in the front of the crowd and fire with his gun .
 He was running for the dam to get across and into the woods and come up after Bond . Bond was trying to escape from the dam and get across the dam . He was in the woods when he was killed .
 He raised his arms and, with his gun still pumping bullets into the sky, dived clumsily face forward into the water . He raised arms and dived to the water, diving into the ocean .
 He lowered his rifle and wiped the back of his arm across his face . Slowly he lowered his gun and wiped his face on his hands . He said, "I don't know what I'm going to do with this"
 The echoes, the echoes of much death, rolled to and fro across the valley . The echoes of the echoes rolled to . and fro . across the . valley .
 Away to the right, in the trees beyond the lake, he caught a glimpse of the two girls running up towards the house . The two girls were running up to the house from the lake .
 Blood was running down the right arm and dripping to the ground . There was a black stain high up on the sleeve of the dark green shirt . Blood was dripping down the arm .
 Bond reached for the hunting-knife at her belt and cut off her shirt-sleeve at the shoulder . Bond then cut it off with the hunting knife . Bond reached out for the knife at the belt .
 Bond took out his own khaki handkerkerchief, cut it into three lengths and joined them together . Bond cut the three lengths from his own handkerchief . Bond then joined the three pieces of his khaki shirt with his own .
 He washed the wound clean with the coffee and whisky, then took a thick slice of bread from his haversack and bound it over the wound . He then bound the bread over his wound and washed it clean before bound it .
 He cut her shirt-sleeve into a sling and reached behind her neck to tie the knot . The couple tied the knot in front of each other in a sling .
 He kissed her again at each corner of the mouth and the mouth slowly smiled . He kissed the lips again at the corners of her mouth . The kiss was the first time he'd kissed her in a row .
 He softly picked up her right hand and slipped it into the sling . He softly slipped her wrist into a sling. He gently placed it in the sling.
 CNN.com will feature a Q&A series of exclusive interviews with iReporters . This week's episode will be featured on iReport.com . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter .
 Bond bent down and picked up his rifle and knapsack and slung them over one shoulder . Bond then slung his rifle over his shoulder and put them in his knapsacks .
 He hung her bow and quiver over the other, and turned and started up through the meadow . Then he hung her quiver and bow and bow over the one he had left .
 The hard black eyes moved slowly over Bond’s face and down to his hands which were carefully shredding a paper match on which was printed Albergo Colombo d’Oro . Bond's hands were carefully shredded with a match .
 The same surreptitious examination had been going on since he had met the man two hours before at the Excelsior bar . The man had met him two hours earlier in a bar in Excelsor .
 Bond was told to look for a man with a heavy moustache who would be sitting by himself drinking an Alexandra . Bond had been told to find the man who was sitting alone drinking a drink by himself . Bond was looking for a heavy-moustache man who had a heavy
 The creamy, feminine drink was so much cleverer than the folded newspaper, the flower in the buttonhole, the yellow gloves that were the hoary, slipshod call-signs between agents . It was so clever that it was much more clever than the fold-in
 It had also the great merit of being able to operate alone, without its owner . It was also the 'great merit' that it had also been able to run alone, says the BBC .
 Bond had come into the bar and looked round there had been perhaps twenty people in the room . When Bond looked round, he looked down to see there were perhaps 20 people .
 On a corner table at the far side of the tall, discreet room, flanked by a saucer of olives and another of cashew nuts, stood the tall-stemmed glass of cream and vodka .
 The big hairy hand picked up the small chair as if it had been as light as a match-box and swept it under the heavy hips . It swept the chair under his heavy hips and into his arms .
 The two men sat back comfortably, each one satisfied that he had to do with a man in the same league . They sat back, each satisfied that they had done the same .
 So many times, before one had even started on a tandem assignment like this, one had lost confidence in the outcome . "So many times," says one of the team members at the centre of the story .
 There was so often, at least in Bond’s imagination, a faint smell of burning in the air at such a rendezvous . Bond's imagination was often of the same kind of smell .
 In due course the smouldering fabric would burst into flames and he would be brule . He would be killed by the explosion of the fabric .
 The game would be up and he would have to decide whether to pull out or wait and get shot at by someone . Then the game would end and he'd have to choose between pulling out or pulling out .
 Later that evening, at the Colomba d’Oro, Bond was amused to find that he was still on probation . Bond was at the little restaurant off the Piazza di Spagna called the Colombiaa d'Oro .
 Kristatos was still watching and weighing him, wondering if he could be trusted . Kristatos still watched and weighed him, still weighing him. Kristatos wondered if he was trusted .
 Kristatos had so far got to admit that there existed any business between the two of them . Kristatos' remark about the risky business was as near as he'd so far gotten to admitting that there is no business between them .
 Kristatos' intuition could only mean that M’s intuition had paid off, Kristatos knew something big . But surely all these precautions could only be precautionary measures? Kristatos says, "M's intuition has paid off"
 Business which brings us together pays up to one thousand per cent and is conducted almost exclusively at night . The business which brings together people is almost exclusively in the dark .
 M picked up a bundle of dark red files tied together with tape and slid them so sharply across the desk that Bond had to catch them . The files slid across Bond's desk so sharply that Bond needed to catch one of the files .
 Wads from the Home Office and the Ministry of Health, and some nice thick reports from the International Opium Control .
 "There was nothing that made him more angry than having to divert his staff from their primary duty," he said. "He was angry that his staff had to divert their primary duties," he added .
 Anything else was a misuse of the Service and of Secret Funds which, God knows, were meagre enough . Anything else would be a misuse .
 The jaw seemed to tell Bond to pick up the files and get the hell out of the office and let M move on to something important . Bond's jaw told Bond to get up and leave the office .
 There were queen bees, like the misuse of the Service, and the search for true as distinct from wishful intelligence . There were worker bees, queen bees and queen bees .
 These included not employing men with beards, or those who were completely bilingual, dismissing men who tried to bring pressure to bear on him . Also mistrusting men or women who were too ‘dressy’ and those who called him ‘sir’ off-duty
 M was ironically conscious of his obsessions, as, thought Bond, Churchill or a Montgomery were about theirs . But M was ironic about his obsession, as was Churchill or Montgomery .
 He never minded his bluff, as it partly was, being called on any of them . "He never mind his bluff," he says of his bluff .
 He would never have dreamed of sending Bond out on an assignment without proper briefing, he said .
 He swiveled his chair sideways so that he could watch the high, scudding clouds through the broad window . The high-scudding clouds were seen through the window .
 He reached out for his pipe, blew through it sharply, and then, as if this action had let off the small head of steam, replaced it gently .
 Earlier this year I had to take you off other duties for a fortnight so that you could go to Mexico and chase off that Mexican grower . You had to go off to Mexico to chase off the grower, but you've never been there before .
 Ronnie Vallance went behind the back to the Home Office and the Ministry of Health . Ronnie went behind his back to Home Office, and the Health Secretary, to the home office and the MoH . He said: 'Ronnie went behind my back'
 Took the line that heroin, in the quantities that have been coming in, is an instrument of psychological warfare—that it saps a country’s strength, he said .
 His narcotics people have been having a time with the traffic, trying to stop it getting a hold on the teenagers as it has in America . Apparently his narcotics people are having a problem with the . traffic .
 Vallance’s Ghost Squad have managed to penetrate back up the line to one of the middle-men, and there's no doubt it's all coming from Italy, hidden in Italian tourists’ cars .
 Vallance has done what he can through the Italian police and Interpol, and got nowhere . Vallance: "I've done what I can, and I've got nowhere. I'm not going to get nothing"
 'They get so far back up the pipeline, arrest a few little people, and then, when they seem to be getting near the centre, there’s a blank wall' 'They seem to get closer to the centre', she said .
 The Montesi case resulted in a pretty extensive clean-up . And you’ll have to watch out for that too .
 The White House has been in touch with Washington for more than a decade . President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House this week .
 Treasury Department runs the C.I.A. run by the Treasury Department, of course, of all people . They’re nothing to do with them, he says .
 The American Treasury control a socalled Secret Service that looks after drug smuggling and counterfeiting . The Secret Service was created by the US Treasury .
 He linked his hands behind his head and leaned back, looking across the desk at Bond . Bond leaned back and looked at Bond as he sat in his chair .
 Alan Dulles himself gave me the name of the top narcotics agent used by the Bureau. And C.I.A.A., as a matter of fact, as a fact, he said .
 Dulles said that of course he couldn’t involve his people in any way . Dulles: "He was pretty certain the Treasury Department wouldn't welcome their Rome Bureau playing too closely with us"
 He said that if I wished, he would get word to this Kristatos that one of our, er, best men would like to make contact with a view to doing business . But he said that, if he wished, it would be possible to contact Kristatos .
 Bond was thinking that the whole affair sounded unpleasant, probably dangerous and certainly dirty . Bond thought that the entire affair was unpleasant and probably dangerous . Bond was in the middle of his thoughts .
 Bond ordered Tagliatelli Verdi with a Genoese sauce which Kristatos said was improbably concocted of basil, garlic and fir-cones . Bond's meal was served with a sauce made of basil and garlic .
 Kristatos chewed silently on a wooden toothpick when the waiter left . Kristatos sat silently on the floor and chewed on a toothpick .
 His face gradually became dark and glum as if bad weather had come to his mind . His face slowly became dark, glum and his face became glum .
 The black, hard eyes that glanced restlessly at everything in the restaurant except Bond, glittered . The black-hard eyes glittered as Bond glitters .
 Bond guessed Kristatos was wondering whether or not to betray somebody . Bond guessed that Kristatos had been thinking about betraying someone else .
 He broke a roll and began eating, smothering each mouthful with deep yellow butter . He broke the roll and then smothered it with butter .
 He wondered why rolls and butter were delicious only in France and Italy . He said it was delicious only to be eaten in France or Italy .
 "That's why I chose him as the permanent tail for that bastard Kristatos. That's why he was chosen to be a permanent tail," he said .
 The man took out of his pocket one of those cheap tin snappers that are sometimes given out, with paper hats and whistles, on carnival nights . He took it from his pocket and took it to a tin snapper .
 The maitre d’hotel, on the far side of the room, stopped whatever he was doing and hurried over to the hotel . The hotel was in the early hours of the morning .
 He nodded briefly, walked over to a door near the kitchens marked UFFICIO, and went in and closed it behind him .
 Phase by phase, in a series of minute moves, an exercise that had long been perfected was then smoothly put into effect . Phase by . phase, the exercise that was . long to be perfected was . put into . effect .
 He followed the maitre d’hotel over to a space adjoining Bond’s table, clicked his fingers for help . He borrowed a chair from one table, another from another table and, with a bow and an apology, the spare chair was taken from Bond�
 The fourth chair was being carried over from the direction of the door marked UFFICIO by the maitre d’hotel . The hotel was carrying four chairs from the side of the road .
 He placed it square with the others, a table was lowered into the middle and glass and cutlery were deftly laid . He placed the table in the middle of the room and laid it square .
 He casually took the chair he had himself brought to the table and switched it to Bond’s table . He casually switched the chair to Bond's table .
 He gave a wave of the hand to dismiss his helpers and everyone dispersed about their business . He then gave a wink of approval to the crowd .
 The innocent little flurry of restaurant movement had taken about a minute . It was the first time a restaurant had been closed for more than 30 minutes .
 The maitre d’hotel greeted them personally and bowed them to the new table, and the gambit was completed .
 Kristatos returned from whatever business he had been about, their food came and they got on with the meal . Kristatos and his wife sat down to enjoy their meal .
 Italian shoes compared with English are more popular in Italy than in English . The pair sat down to talk about the latest Alfa Romeo in Italy .
 He spoke his own kind of English with an occasional phrase borrowed from other languages . He spoke English with a few phrases borrowed from others languages .
 Bond was not surprised that the U.S. Intelligence people found him good value . Bond: "I'm not surprised" Bond was found to be a good value by the American Intelligence people .
 Kristatos lit a thin black cigar and talked through it through it, the cigar jumping up and down between the thin straight lips . Kristatos: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to do it" Kristatos says, "It's a great
 "Like good commercials we make the terms. Now, before I give you the informations, like good commercials, we make them up . Now, with the help of CNN iReport.com, please submit your best photos and videos .
 "When you have destroyed the machina I wish for a further twenty thousand," says author . "I wish for an additional twenty thousand. When you have . destroyed the . machina, I wish you a further 20 thousand," she says .
 He gazed quizzed at the other man who now leaned slightly forward over the table, waiting for him . The other man now leans slightly forward, waiting .
 He was not paying the gunman, the gunman was paying him for the privilege of disposing of an enemy . He was paying the man to dispose of the enemy, he said .
 The fixer was certainly working on a big fix this time—using the Secret Service to pay off his private scores . He used the fixer to pay for his own scores with the help of Secret Service .
 If his success benefited others, nobody, least of all M, could care less . Nobody, least, would care less if M's success helped others, M says .
 If this unnamed man was the machine, it would be merely carrying out orders to destroy the man . The unnamed man is believed to be the man responsible for the attack .
 Signor Kristatos took a toothpick out of the toothpick holder, stripped off the paper and set about cleaning his finger-nails . Kristatos is a member of the signor's family .
 This time I will do so because it is you who are paying me, and not me you . This time, I will pay you back because it's you .
 He never hesitated for a fact and he did not waste time on irrelevant detail, he said . He said: 'He never hesitated to a fact. He never wasted time'
 There were two thousand American gangsters in the country—Italian-Americans who had been convicted and expelled from the United States. There were also two thousand Italian-Americans in the U.S. The gangsters were convicted and expulsed from the country .
 They were on the blackest of all police lists and, because of their records, their own people were wary of employing them . Their records were so bad that they were banned from employment in Britain .
 The bosses had acquired, through nominees, a small and respectable pharmaceutical business in Milan . A further large section acted as couriers, and a further large . section of the bosses acted .
 Bribed members of train cleaners in Istanbul fitted sections of bogus upholstery on Orient Express . They used small craft across the Mediterranean, a group of stewards in an Italian charter airline and a regular weekly source of supply .
 Milan firm acted as clearinghouse and as a convenient centre for breaking down the raw opium into heroin . The Milan firm—Pharmacia Colomba S.A. acted as a clearinghouse .
 Couriers used innocent motor-cars of various makes to run delivery service to middle-men in England . The couriers, using innocent motor cars, ran the delivery service .
 If they are convicted, they receive ten thousand dollars for each year spent in prison . If convicted of the crime, they will receive ten,000 dollars .
 She had the gay, bold, forthcoming looks the Viennese are supposed to have and seldom do . She had a gay and forthcoming looks . She was one of the most beautiful women in the world .
 There was a vivacity and a charm about her that lit up her corner of the room . She was a star of her own, but she had a lot more to do .
 She had the wildest possible urchin cut in ash-blonde, a pert nose, a wide laughing mouth and a black ribbon round her throat . She was cut in a pert blonde, with apert nose and a wide, laughing mouth .
 James Bond knew that her eyes had been on him at intervals throughout the evening . He knew that she had been looking at him throughout the night .
 Her companion had seemed just the type of rich, cheerful, good-living man she would be glad to have as her lover for a while . Her companion was just the kind of rich and cheerful man she'd been pleased to have .
 Bond, Bond, could not have the girl, but it was at least something that she was in good hands . Since he could't have it, Bond kept her safe .
 Fler eyes swept past him, but there was a half smile, as if for herself, on her lips . When she took a cigarette out of her case and lit it and blew the smoke straight up towards the ceiling there was an offering .
 The maitre d’hotel was supervising the clearing of the unoccupied tables and the setting up of new ones .
 There was the usual bustle and slapping of napkins across chair-seats and tinkle of glass and cutlery being laid . There was also a tinkle and tink of glass being laid.
 Vaguely Bond noticed the spare chair at his table being whisked away to help build up a near-by table for six . Bond noticed a spare chair was being taken away from his table at the end of dinner .
 Kristatos asked Enrico Colombo's personal habits, where he lived, the address of his firm in Milan, what other business interests he had . He began asking Kristatos specific questions, where Colombo lived and what his firm address was .
 He lifted off the squab cushion and put it on his desk . Then he went to the chair and lifted it off his desk, putting it on the desk .
 He sat down at his desk and lit a cigarette and listened, occasionally making further adjustments and repeating passages . Then he sat down and lit up a cigarette, adjusting his notes and adjusting them again .
 He looked back once more at the Grundig, said ‘Son-a-beech’ again with more emphasis and went out and back to his table . He then looked back and went back and said 'Son-A-Beech' again with emphasis .
 Just because you give me dinner in your lousy restaurant you think you have the right to insult me with your filthy propositions’—the girl’s voice had got louder. ‘Just because you . think you . have the . right to . insult me,’ the
 She stood beside the table directly in the line of Bond’s approach on his way to the exit . Bond was in the middle of the exit when he left the scene .
 She reached for a half-full glass of wine and hurled it accurately in the man’s face . The woman threw it accurately into the man's face .
 When he came at her it was easy for her to back the few steps into Bond who was standing with Kristatos politely waiting to get by . Kristatos was politely waiting for him to get past Kristatos .
 Enrico Colombo stood panting, wiping the wine off his face with a napkin . Colombo was panting as he tried to keep his face dry .
 There was a buzz in the restaurant and a renewed clatter of knives and forks . The restaurant was buzzing with diners and customers .
 I meant the sort of high-level gossip that’s probably pretty near the truth, I said . I didn't mean that .
 The commissionaire opened the door and the light from the street turned her eyes into stars . Her eyes were turned into stars by the light of the street light .
 The poet Byron used to ride his horse in the Bagni Alberoni, where he bathed . Byron's horse was the subject of a series of paintings by the Italian poet .
 You will find me there the day after tomorrow—at three in the afternoon. You will also find me at 3 p.m. ET .
 Bond looked after her thoughtfully, and then turned and got back into the taxi and told the man to take him to the Nazionale . Bond then looked after the woman again, and told him to take her to his hotel .
 Bond caught it by the skin of his teeth after a difficult morning on Station I’s scrambler . Bond, after a morning that was chiefly occupied with difficult talks with his London Headquarters, caught it on the scrambler by the 'skin' Bond .
 The Laguna is a smart, streamlined affair that looks and sounds more luxurious than it is . It's a smart and streamlined affair with a sleek, streamlined design .
 The seats are made for small Italians and the restaurant car staff suffer from the disease that afflicts their brethren in the great trains all over the world . A genuine loathing for the modem traveler and particularly for the foreigner .
 If the seven heavens had been flowing by outside the window he would not have cared . He would have cared if they had been flying by outside of the window .
 He kept his eyes inside the train, read a jerking book, spilled Chianti over the tablecloth and shifted his long, aching legs and cursed the Ferrovie Italiane .
 The Gritti Palace is the most expensive hotel in the world . The hotel is located on the Grand Canal in Florence, Italy .
 James Bond sought to establish to anyone who might be interested that he was what he had wished to appear to the girl . Bond sought, at Harry’s Bar, at Florian's, and finally upstairs in the admirable Quadri, to establish himself as a writer .
 James Bond walked back to the Gritti and had eight hours dreamless sleep . Then, in the temporary state of euphoria that a first night in Venice engenders, he walked back and had 8 hours sleep .
 The glittering scene is kinder to the eyes and there is a freshness in the air that helps one to hammer out those long miles of stone and terrazza that are intolerable to the feet in summer .
 Venice is the one town in the world that can swallow up a hundred thousand tourists as easily as it can a thousand . It is still better to share Venice with the minimum number of packaged tours and Lederhosen . Venice is one of the world's best places to share .
 He visited a couple of churches not to admire their interiors but to discover if anyone came in after him through the main entrance before he left by the side door .
 Bond went to Florian's and had an Americano and listened to a couple of French culture-snobs discussing the imbalance of the containing facade of St Mark’s Square . Bond went on to have Americano at Florian’�s .
 Bond bought a postcard and sent it off to his secretary who had once been with the Georgian Group to Italy and had never allowed Bond to forget it . On an impulse, he bought the postcard from his secretary . Bond's secretary sent it to her secretary who once was with the
 To the Municipal Waterworks this afternoon and then an old Brigitte Bardot at the Scala Cinema . The Scala Cinema will host a screening of the film .
 Bond had an early luncheon and went back to his hotel . Pleased with his inspiration, Bond had a lunch at the end of the day . Bond had been inspired by his inspiration .
 He put up the safe and practised one or two quick draws and put the gun back in the holster . He then put it in the safe again and put it back in his holster .
 He went along to the landing-stage and boarded the twelve-forty vaporetto to Alberoni, out of sight across the mirrored lagoons .
 "I wondered what was going to happen to him. Then he settled down in a seat in the bows and wondered what he would do next . Then he sat down in the bow and wondered if he would survive .
 A mile down the thin neck of land the luxury real estate development has petered out in a scattering of cracked stucco villas and bankrupt housing projects . Here is nothing but the tiny fishing village of Alberoni, a sanatorium for students, a derelict experimental station belonging
 Golf du Lido lies in the centre of the no man’s land in the middle of this thin tongue of land . The brownish undulating fairways meander around the ruins of ancient fortifications .
 Not many people come to Venice to play golf, and the project is kept alive for its snob appeal by the grand hotels of the Lido . The Lido Golf Course is a classic Italian golf course .
 The golf-course is surrounded by a high wire fence hung at intervals, as if it protected something of great value or secrecy, with threatening Vietatos and Prohibos .
 The whole area is strange and melancholy and in extraordinary contrast to the gay carnival world of Venice less than an hour away across the lagoons . Venice is less than a hour away from the city of Venice .
 Bond was sweating slightly by the time he had walked the half-mile across the peninsula to the plage . Bond stood for a moment under the last of the acacia trees to cool off while he got his bearings .
 In front of him was a rickety wooden archway whose central span said BAGNI ALBERONI in faded blue paint . The archway's central span read: Bagni Alberoni in faded Blue paint .
 Beyond were the lines of equally dilapidated wooden cabins, and then the quiet blue glass of the sea . Beyond was the lines . Beyond were a hundred yards of sand and then 100 yards of the sand .
 There were no bathers and the place seemed to be closed, but when he walked through the archway he heard the tinny sound of a radio playing Neapolitan music .
 Deckchairs were stacked against its walls and there were two pedallos and a child’s halfinflated sea-horse . Deckchair was stacked against the walls and a half-inflatable sea horse was also stacked against it .
 The whole establishment looked so derelict that Bond could not imagine it doing business even at the height of the summer season . Bond could have imagined the derelict establishment doing business in the summer .
 He stepped off the narrow duck-boards into the soft, burned sand and moved round behind the huts to the beach . The beach is now a popular tourist destination in the world .
 To the left, until it disappeared in the autumn heat haze, the wide empty sand swept away in a slight curve towards the Lido proper . To the right, the empty sand was swept away by the wind .
 To the right was half a mile of beach terminating in the sea-wall at the tip of the peninsula . To the left was half-a-mile of beach .
 The seawall stretched like a finger out into the silent mirrored sea, and at intervals along its top were the flimsy derricks of the octopus fishermen .
 Behind the beach were the sand-hills and a section of the wire fence surrounding the golf-course . The beach is located on the edge of a beach in the area .
 On the edge of the sand-hills, perhaps five hundred yards away, there was a speck of bright yellow . The speck was a bright yellow speck .
 The rest of her burned cream body in a black bikini on a black and white striped bath-towel was offered to sun .
 Flirtation had gone out of her eyes and they had become attentive, and perhaps a little careful . The eyes of her were now attentive and careful .
 Bond caught her quick glance at his watch . He would not be surprised’ if it had crossed his mind to have me followed here .
 He moved his head so that he could look behind the umbrella and back down the beach . He looked back to the beach and looked at the beach again, looking back down .
 Far down by the bathing-huts, their outlines dancing slightly in the heat haze, were three men in dark clothes . Far down, they were seen in a pool of dark clothes in the sun .
 They were walking purposefully up the beach, their feet keeping step as if they were a squad . It was the first time they had been together in a group of people .
 From there he could double back down the other shore to the village and the safety of people . From there, he would be able to get back down to the shoreline and safety of the village .
 She raised hers in answer and then lay down on the sand and turned over . Perhaps so that her back could now get its toasting, or perhaps because she did not want to watch the man-hunt .
 At the tip of the peninsula, Bond clambered up on to the sea-wall and looked back . At the end of the Peninsula, Bond looked back and looked at the end .
 The men had hardly gained, but now two of them were fanning out to cut round the edge of the golf-course boundary . Two of the men had barely gained, and now two had to cut around the edge .
 They did not seem to mind the danger notices with the skulls and cross-bones . The skulls and crosses-bones were posted around the world .
 Bond, running fast down the wide sea-wall, measured angles and distances . Bond ran fast down and measured angles, distances, distances .
 At intervals along the seawall the breeches of antique cannon had been sunk in the concrete . The cannon breeches were sunk into the concrete in order to sink the cannon's breeches .
 They would be mooring-posts for the fishing-fleets sheltering in the protection of the lagoons before taking to the Adriatic .
 Even his suit was soaked with sweat and the cloth of his trousers was chafing his legs . Now even his suit had been soaked by sweat .
 To his right, dodging among the sand-dunes and converging fast, were the other two . To his left, he was dodging among sand dunes, converging on the others .
 To his left was a twenty-foot slope of masonry to the green tide ripping out into the Adriatic . To his right, he was standing on the edge of a 20-foot masonry slope .
 Bond was planning to slow down to a walk and keep enough breath to try and shoot it out with the three men, when two things happened in quick succession . Bond was hoping to slow to a halt and keep his breath enough to shoot out with three men when the incident happened .
 There were about half a dozen of them in the water and some sunning themselves on the sea-wall .
 Earth and scrub and what might have been bits of a man fountained briefly into the air, and a small shock-wave hit him .
 Suddenly he collapsed on the ground with his arms wrapped round his head . Suddenly, he collapsed with arms wrapped around his head.
 He would not move again until someone came and carried him away from there . He was carried away by someone who had carried him off .
 The man was still coming on despite the spear-fishers, the man still came on . Odd, but despite the witnessing spearfishers he was coming on .
 In the centre of the centre was a big man with a tiny red bathing-slip hanging beneath his stomach . The man was pictured with the slip hanging beneath him .
 Automatically his sweaty hand felt under his coat for the gun and drew it out . Automatically he felt under the coat and drew the gun out of his hand .
 The man in the centre of the arc of pointing harpoons was Enrico Colombo . The man is seen in the image of the moment the harpoons were fired .
 The man who had been coming softly up behind Bond hit him once hard in the base of the skull with the butt of his Luger . Colombo smiled and nodded, and the man who was coming softly behind him hit him hard .
 Even in his wretchedness Bond was aware of two sensations -- he was in a ship at sea, and someone, a man, was wiping his forehead with a cool wet towel and murmuring encouragement in bad English .
 It was a comfortable small cabin with a feminine smell and dainty curtains and colours . The cabin was a small small cabin .
 A sailor in a tattered vest and trousers was bending over him . Bond thought he recognized him as one of the spearfishermen .
 Bond said 'Si' again and the sailor went out of the cabin and closed the door without locking it . Bond said ‘Si’ again and then the sailor closed it . The sailor then went out and left the cabin without locking the door .
 On top of the chest of drawers was a neat pile of personal belongings . On top was a pile of his personal belongings.
 Bond stowed the things away in his pockets, and sat down again on the bunk and smoked and thought . Bond sat down and thought about his future in the next few days .
 From the behaviour of the sailor it did not seem that he was regarded as an enemy . He was being taken for a ride, or rather a sail, but from the behaviour he was not regarded as a foe .
 Colombo’s men had even, though inadvertently, died in the process . Yet a great deal of trouble had been taken to make him prisoner . One of Colombo's men even killed in the . process .
 Perhaps this soft treatment was the preliminary to trying to make a deal with him . Perhaps it was the beginning of the negotiations to try and get a deal .
 At nine o’clock the same sailor came for Bond and led him down a short passage to a small, blowzy saloon, and left him . The same sailor led Bond down a small passage to the saloon .
 There was a table and two chairs in the middle of the room, and beside the table a nickel-plated trolley laden with food and drinks . There was also a trolley loaded with food, drinks and other items .
 There was just enough light to see that the ship was about two hundred tons and might once have been a fishing-vessel .
 "The way the girl picked me up in your restaurant was too childish for words. I warned my chief that something like this might happen," he said .
 I had sent them to fetch you and bring you to my ship, and it would all have been much more friendly. I had been sent them fetching you and bringing you to a ship,’s all would have been better.’
 I have lost a good man and you might easily have had your skull broken. Now I have . Now I . have lost my good man, I have a good friend, I said .
 I like to be friends with everyone, and now I have made two enemies in one afternoon. I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure I've made a lot of enemies in the past few days .
 He cut a thick slice of sausage, impatiently tore the rind off it with his teeth and began to eat . He cut the thick slice with a thin slice of meat with a fork .
 While his mouth was still full he took a glass of champagne and washed it down with it . While still full of the sausage, he washed the sausage down with champagne .
 Colombo threw the remains of the roll on the table and got to his feet, holding Bond’s eyes locked in his . Colombo then got up and sat down with Bond in his arms .
 Bond walked sideways, still gazing fixedly at Bond, to a chest of chest of . drawers, felt for knob of the top drawer, opened it, groped and lifted out what Bond recognized as a tape-recorder playback machine .
 Bond brought the machine over to the table for the first time . Bond looked accusingly at Bond, still looking at him, before he brought it over .
 "All I can say is that if the man tries to destroy me, I will destroy him," he said . "I will destroy me. All I can do is destroy him. He will destroy himself," he added .
 He put his hand in his pocket and threw the silver Freedom medal with the red, white and blue striped ribbon on to the table .
 He reached for the whisky bottle and walked round and poured four fingers into Bond’s glass . The actor then reached out for the bottle and poured it in his own glass .
 He went back to his chair and sat down and put the champagne bottle on the table in front of him . He then put it on the back of his chair .
 "Even if you or someone else had not found reason to kill me, there would have been scandal, ruin," he says . "There would have had been scandal and ruin. Even if you had found reason for killing me," he adds .
 CNN's John Sutter was sent to Italy to find out what the truth was about . Instead he decided to show you the truth -- the truth you were sent there .
 Half the American cigarettes in Italy are brought in by me from Tangier . Half of the American cigarette imports are brought into Italy from the region of Tangier, Italy . Half the cigarettes brought in are brought to Italy by Tangier.
 I have my own purveyor in Beirut with direct lines to Sierra Leone and South Africa . I have his own . Beirut has its own . airmailing purveyors .
 In the old days, when these things were scarce, I also handled aureomycin and penicillin and such medicines . In the 1960s, I handled drugs such as penicill and aureomcin, and other medicines. In the past, I dealt with a
 He even felt a curious liking for this greedy, boisterous pirate who had so nearly been put on the spot by Kristatos . Kristatos was so nearly caught out by Kristato that he felt like him .
 "To keep it up, to keep the protection of American Intelligence and their Narcotics people," he must now and then throw them a victim, he says . He says .
 "If you had spent enough hard currency on buying information, you might have discovered the story of my operations," he says . And it's true that if you had been vigorous in your investigations, you had .
 Each trail towards _me_ would have led you further away from the truth. But each trail towards the truth would've led you closer to the truth, says CNN.com .
 In the end, for I do not underestimate your Service, I would have gone to prison, he said . "I would have went to prison," he said in a bid to keep his job alive .
 In the fraternity of smugglers, we occasionally stumble on a corner of the next man’s business . In this case, we sometimes stumble on corner of next man's business .
 "Not long ago, in this ship, I had a running fight with a small gunboat from Albania," he says . "I had to fight with small gunboats from Albania" he adds .
 I took a chance with the minefields and set him ashore on the coast north of Tirana, Albania . I learnt much, but like a fool I took the chance with minefields, he says .
 Colombo: 'I have one piece of information he does not know of. Fortunately,’ Colombo grinned wolfishly, ‘I have a piece of . information he doesn't know of . Fortunately, he does know of the information .
 We have a rendezvous at a small fishing-port just north of Ancona, Santa Maria, tomorrow morning .
 I need your promise that what I have told you this evening is between you and me and, if necessary, your Chief in London . But I shall need your . promise that it will not be between you . and me . I will need you to promise that this is not between you
 He said awkwardly ‘All right, Colombo,’ and went out of the saloon and along to his cabin . ‘He said awkwardly 'All right,. Colombo’
 Mugs of hot coffee and rum were dished out by Colombo in the saloon .
 Bond smiled to himself at the Treasure Island atmosphere of excitement and conspiracy . A storm lantern was the only light— the ship had been darkened . Bond smiled at the atmosphere of intrigue and conspiracy at Treasure Island .
 They all had Lugers, carried under the jersey inside the trouser-band, and flick-knives in the pocket . They were carried by the players in the team's kit .
 It struck Bond that Colombo had made a good life for himself— a life of adventure and thrill and risk . Bond: Colombo's life was "a life of thrill and thrill"
 There was a whiff of adolescent rascality in the air which somehow changed the colour of the crime from black to white . It was a criminal life—a running fight with the currency laws, the State tobacco monopoly, the Customs, the police .
 He dowsed the lantern and, in the oyster light of dawn, Bond followed him up to the bridge . Bond dows the lantern, dowsing the lantern to find the lantern .
 He found the ship was close to a black, rocky shore which they were following at reduced speed . The ship was following a reduced speed when it was found to be at a low altitude .
 "Round the headland, we will put on full speed and come alongside this ship and board her," says crew member . "We will put in full speed, come alongside and board this ship"
 As Bond said the words, there came a ting on the engine-room telegraph and the deck began to tremble under his feet . Bond said: 'As Bond said, there were ting noises from the engine room telegraph'
 The small ship rounded the headland into the harbour . Making ten knots, the small ship made ten knots .
 From her stern a ramp of wooden planks sloped down towards the dark mouth of a ramshackle corrugated iron warehouse . The warehouse burned feeble electric lights, inside which burned feeble electricity .
 The ship carried a deck cargo of what appeared to be rolls of newsprint . These were being hoisted one by one on to the ramp from the ramp . The rolls rolled down under their own momentum through the mouth of the warehouse .
 Colombo’s craft was fifty yards away from the other ship, and one or two of the men had stopped working and were looking in their direction .
 At the first hard contact, grappling-irons were tossed over the Albanian’s rail fore and aft, and Colombo's men swarmed over the side with Colombo in the lead . At the start of the fight, the two men were on the verge of a
 As soon as his feet landed on the enemy deck, he ran straight across the ship, climbed the far rail and jumped . "As soon as he landed, he jumped," he said. "I jumped, jumped, ran, climbed and jumped"
 It was about twelve feet to the jetty and he landed like a cat, on his hands and toes, and stayed for a moment, crouching, planning his next move . He stayed crouching and crouching as he landed, crouched, planning next move.
 An early shot killed the searchlight and now there was only the grey, luminous light of dawn . The searchlight was the last of the searchlights to come down .
 A body, one of the enemy, crunched to the stone in front of him and lay spread-eagled, motionless . The body crunches to a stone in the front of the man's eyes and crumps to the ground .
 At the same time, from the mouth of the warehouse, a light machine-gun started up, firing short bursts with a highly professional touch . At the time, the warehouse was filled with a large amount of ammunition . The warehouse was full of weapons and ammunition .
 The bullets zipped round Bond, clanged against the iron hull of the ship and whined off into the night . The bullets clanged in Bond's head, clung against the ship's iron hull .
 Bond got to the cover of the sloping ramp of the ramp of boards and dived forward on his stomach . Bond dived to the top of the slope and diversived forward to safety . Bond then dived back to safety, dived into the air and landed on his
 When he had got as close as he could, he would have a choice of breaking cover either to right or left of the boards . He would have had to choose between the right or the left or right of the board .
 One of Colombo’s men must have cut the ropes and sent the whole pile of newsprint rolls down the ramp . The newsprint rolled down a ramp in Colombo .
 Bond would expect the machinegunner to come out firing on the right . Bond would have expected the machine gunner to be waiting for him .
 The machine-gunner was there, crouching up against the wall of the warehouse . The machine gunner was crouched up against a wall of a warehouse . He was crouching in the shadows of the building .
 Bond fired twice in the split second before the bright muzzle of the enemy weapon had swung through its small arc . Bond fired two times before he saw the flash of the weapon's small arc and fired twice .
 Bond was running forward towards the warehouse door when he slipped and fell headlong . Bond was seen running towards the door at the time of the fall . Bond's fall was the first time he had fallen headlong in his career .
 He cursed and got to his hands and knees and made a dash for cover behind a jumble of the big newsprint rolls that had crashed into the wall of the warehouse . He cursed .
 One of them, sliced by a burst from the machine-gun, was leaking black treacle . One of the victims was a woman who had been shot in the head with a machine gun .
 Bond gave his gun-hand a last wipe on the seat of his trousers and leapt for the warehouse door . Bond was on the run from the warehouse when he realised he was in danger . Bond gave the gun hand a final wipe on his trousers .
 He was surprised not to be shot at from the interior as soon as he was silhouetted against the entrance . He said: "I was surprised to be shooting at him from the inside"
 The lights had been turned out, but it was now getting brighter outside . The lights were now turning off, but the light was getting brighter .
 The pale newsprint rolls were stacked in orderly ranks with a space to make a passage-way down the centre . Newsprint rolls are stacked in order to make an orderly way through the room .
 Colombo came running swiftly towards him, his feet close to the ground as fat men run . Colombo's feet were on the ground when he saw Colombo running towards him .
 Without waiting for a response, he sprinted round the corner of the building and down along its side .
 He flattened himself against the corrugated iron wall and took a swift look round . He flattened his face against a corruged iron wall in the hope of finding a new home .
 In his hand was a plunger from which wires ran under the bottom of the door . In the hands of a man, wires ran from the door to the inside of a door . The door was covered in wires from the inside .
 A car, a black Lancia Granturismo convertible with the hood down, stood beside him . The car, which has an engine ticking over softly, was parked in front of him .
 He inched round the corner of the building and fired one shot at the man’s feet . He held his gun in both hands for steadiness, inched swiftly round the building .
 Almost as he saw the dust kick up inches off the target, there was the rumbling crack of an explosion and the tin wall hit him and sent him flying . The tin wall was sent flying and he was hit by the wall .
 It was already twenty yards away, dust fountaining up from the traction on the rear wheels . The car was already 20 yards away from the track .
 At the last shot, at fifty yards, the figure crouched over the wheel jerked backwards . The figure crouching over the car jerked back at the last attempt .
 The right hand remained sticking out as if the dead man was signaling a right-hand turn . The dead man's body was found in a nearby ditch .
 It hurried on along the flat road across the bumed-up plain and the cloud of white dust blew gaily up behind behind . It was the first car to drive along the road in the desert .
 Bond stood and saw it out of sight into the early morning mist that promised a beautiful day . At any moment Bond expected it to veer off the road, but it did not, and Bond stood .
 Bond put his gun on safe and tucked it away in the belt of his trousers . Bond then put it on safe in his trousers and put it in a safe place .
 He came up with Bond and, to Bond’s horror, threw open his arms, clutched Bond to him and kissed him on both cheeks . Bond's horror was that he had been kissed by Bond's father .
 'Me, Enrico Colombo, loves this man and he is not ashamed to say so. But me,’ he hit himself in the chest, ‘me, enrico . Colombo’s love for this man, he said . ‘Me
 "If you had not got the machine-gunner, not one of us would have survived," he says . "Not one of you would have died," he adds .
 Only half a dozen Albanians remain on the feet and they have escaped into the village . But only a dozen of the Albanians are still on their feet and have escaped .
 Flames were beginning to lick out of the shattered warehouse, and there was billowing smoke that smelled of sweet vegetables . Flames began licking out of a shattered warehouse after the explosion .
 They waded across her and climbed on board the Colombina . Bond had to go through some more handshaking and backslapping . The pair then climbed aboard the ship .
 There was a small group of fishermen standing by their boats that lay drawn up on the beach below a huddle of stone cottages . There was also a group of small groups of fishermen .
 When Colombo waved and shouted something in Italian most of them raised a hand in farewell . One of them called back something that made the crew of the Colombina laugh . They made a surly impression .
 He went below and borrowed a razor and clean shirt from one of the crew, and stripped in his cabin and cleaned himself . He borrowed the razor from a crew member and used it to get a razor .
 When he took out his gun and threw it on the bunk, he caught a whiff of cordite from the barrel .
 A sudden delicious scent of frying bacon came down-wind from the galley . The smell of bacon wafts through the air of the ship's cabin .
 Bond pulled the porthole to and dressed and went along to the saloon . Abruptly Bond pulled out of the room and left the ship . Bond then pulled out the door .
 Over a mound of fried eggs and bacon washed down with hot sweet coffee laced with rum, Colombo dotted the i's and crossed the t's .
 It is true that I have such a business in Milan and that it is a convenient depot for some of my wares . I have a business there in Milan, but it is not the only one I have in Milan .
 For all that part of Kristatos’s story, read Kristatos instead of Colombo . For more information, go to CNN.com/Heroes.com .
 It is he who breaks the stuff down into heroin and employs the couriers to take it to London . He is also responsible for transporting it to the UK via couriers .
 Kristatos says the shipment was worth perhaps a million pounds to Kristatos and his men . Kristatos' men say it was a 'million pound' shipment of cocaine .
 The gift of a massive and deadly projectile to be fired into the bowels of England . The gift was the gift of the massive projectile .
 The Russians can supply unlimited quantities of the charge for the projectile . They can also be supplied by unlimited quantities .
 Albania is known for its poppy-fields in the Caucasus, and Albania is a convenient entrepotot . It comes from their poppy fields in the region .
 The man Kristatos created the necessary apparatus, and it is he, on behalf of his masters in Russia, who pulls the trigger . Kristatos is responsible for the deaths of some of the world's most famous people .
 "Today, between us, we have destroyed, in half an hour, the entire conspiracy," he said . "We have destroyed ... the entire conspirators," he added. "They have destroyed"
 You can now go back and tell your people in England that the traffic will cease . You can also go back to tell your friends that the congestion will cease, the BBC says .
 You can also tell them the truth—that Italy was not the origin of this terrible underground weapon of war . Tell them what you know about the origins of the underground weapon .
 Colombo: 'They will send you to Moscow to find out. Perhaps, my dear James,’ Colombo smiled encouragingly, ‘they will send him to Moscow’ He said. ‘Perhaps, perhaps, perhaps they will send me to Moscow, find out
 You will be spending a few more days in Italy writing your report, and no doubt,’ he chuckled, ‘checking on some of the things I have told you.’ He said .
 You will also have an enjoyable half an hour explaining the facts of life to your colleagues in American Intelligence . Perhaps you will also be able to explain the facts to your American Intelligence colleagues .
 In between these duties you will need companionship—someone to show you the beauties of my beloved homeland . In between the duties, someone will be able to show the beauty of your homeland .
 In uncivilized countries, it is the polite custom to offer one of your wives to a man whom you love and wish to honour . It is a polite custom in the UK to offer a man one of his wives to .
 Colombo fished in his trousers pocket and tossed something down with a clang on the table in front of Bond . Bond was in the middle of Bond's first meeting with Colombo .
 Colombo put his hand to his heart and looked seriously into Bond’s eyes . Colombo looked at Bond as he spoke to him in his first interview .
 Sir Roger Moore played Simon Templar in the British Television series The Saint . Prior to taking up this role, he starred in The Saint, which is based on a British television series .
 I rather like the old black and white The Saint series . Sometimes I download an episode or two and watch it at night at night . The Saint is a classic British drama from the 1930s .
 The film For Your Eyes Only is a well written story made up of a number of vignettes written by Fleming . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in October .
 Several stories from the original novel are incorporated in the film script . A few vignettes from other Fleming novels also make their way into the film as well .
 The two vignettes For Your Eyes Only and Risico are used as the main story lines in the film . The film is set to be released in cinemas worldwide on July 26, 2015 .
 Bond avenges the murder of M's closest friends, the Flavelocks, by a group of Cubans . In the short story For Your Eyes Only Bond avenged M's murder of his best friends by killing them in Cuba . Bond's best friend was killed by Cubans in
 Their death is also avenged by the Flavelock daughter, as well as by James Bond who happens upon the Havelock girl just as Bond is about to kill her parent's Cuban assassin using a cross bow .
 In short story there is mention of Greek islands, smugglers and Albanians . In short . story there was mention of . smugglers and . smugglers . Albanians.
 The film in fact begins with a naval mine sinking of a Royal Navy intelligence gathering ship the St. St. Louis .
 Many clandestine operations in both the First and Second World War involved the recovery of top secret materials, including encryption machines and war material . For instance, in the First World War these was recovery of the German Imperial Navy’s code books from the SMS Magdeburg after an engagement with
 Three entire sets of naval codes were captured off the SMS Magdeburg by the Russian Imperial navy . One set shared with the Royal Navy .
 The secret would get out when Winston Churchill wrote about it in his history of the First World War . Winston Churchill would write about it when he wrote about the secret .
 The body of a drowned German under-officer was picked up by the Russians a few hours later . It contained the cypher and signal books of the German Navy and maps of North Sea and Heligoland Bight .
 Russians felt that as the leading naval Power, the British Admiralty ought to have these books and charts . The Russians felt as the . leading naval . Power, they felt that . as . the leading . naval power, the Russians felt . that as well as the British . Admiralty
 If we would send a vessel to Alexandrov, the Russian officers in charge of the books would bring them to England . The books would be brought to England if we sent them .
 The story as to how these documents were used by the Royal Navy in the First World War has been told elsewhere . The story of the documents was told elsewhere.
 During the First World War the RN also sent divers to U-boat wrecks in the English Channel and around the UK to try to recover the ciphers . During the Second World War, divers also sent to wrecks to try and recover U-boats .
 In the Second World War there were greater successes in lifting secret materials from naval wrecks . In the 1940s there were more success in lifting of secret materials .
 The Australian Navy managed to dive on a Japanese submarine early in the war and recover the Imperial Japanese Navy’s JN25 code materials . It is still governed by the Official Secrets Act but I can tell you .
 In the film For Your Eyes Only there is the use of diving equipment and mini-submarines to effect the salvage from the wreck of the St. Mary's . The film is based on the salvage of the ship .
 I will provide more background about Ian Fleming’s role in this clandestine war in the next book in The Best of Ian Fleming series . The next book will look at the novel Thinderball .
 Ian Fleming was involved in a number of clandestine operations to acquire, by hook or by crook, the code and cipher materials of Germany and their Axis allies in Europe . He also acquired materials from the French Armed Forces as well as the material of Axis sympathisers .
 Operation to seize a German Navy weather ship in the North Sea gave allies a three month peek into German Naval messages and allowed the allies to begin to turn back the tide in the battle of the Atlantic .
 The Spaniards ran a spy ring for their German and Japanese allies in North America and in Great Britain during the war .
 Ian Fleming’s area of expertise was in Spain and his OPERATION GOFDENEYE was to keep a close watch on the Spaniards and to keep them out of the war and out of Gibraltar .
 This clandestine operation became public in the middle 1950’s and it has become one of the classic stories of wartime espionage . It has become a classic story of espionage .
 OPERATION MINCEMEAT came from the idea for the program . Of course ... it goes without saying who the idea came from .
 I will provide more background to this operation in a subsequent book of The Best of Ian Fleming series . Ian Fleming's best-selling book, The Best Ian Fleming, will be published in 2015 .
 In the film For Your Eyes Only a vignette from a previous Fleming novel is used when Bond and the heroine are to be towed behind a yacht, drowned and fed to the sharks . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September .
 The vignette is from the final part of the novel Live and Let Die . If you have read the previous Bond novels you will recognize it . The film is based on the novel's final moments in James Bond's life .
 For Your Eyes Only was released in June, 1981 with an international cast . Roger Moore as 007, Carole Bouquet as Melina Havelock, Julian Glover as the arch villain Kristatos, Topol as Columbo, as well as a string of minor .
 Being a reserve Royal Canadian Naval Officer at the time I rather enjoyed the naval character to the film For Your Eyes Only .
 It was one of the retired naval officers I met at a naval mess dinner who told me about the Corfu Channel incident . This being the pre-internet era I had to do a little historical detective work to find the details .
 As it would happen, when I tried to buy my ticket the lovely young lady in the ticket kiosk smiled and gave me a pass into the theater . On the proviso we met for coffee after the show, she gave me the pass .
 We met for coffee and well we enjoyed some summer pleasure walking together and picnicking at Beaconsfield Park in Victoria .
 For Your Eyes Only was one of the Bond films I saw for the first time in the theaters . In terms of the films that came out in the 1980’s for the 1980s For Your eyes Only was .
 Although it is not considered one of the classic Bond films, I have a certain fondness for For Your Eyes Only . The film was released in 1964 .
 Getting Behind the 'Lucy' Myth: The Rote Drei and Rudolph Roessler were the "Lucy" of the Soviet espionage operation in Switzerland during World War 11 . CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM RELEASE IN FULL 22 SEPT 93 SECRET .
 Concern for historical rectitude alone, however, would not justify the expenditure of our time and effort . Concern for history would be not justified the expenditure, says historian .
 The profession of intelligence may owe some duty to Clio, but it cannot be said to be the general one of cleansing all confusions and deliberate disinformation from the public record about intelligence matters . Clio is a former CIA director of operations in the UK .
 Apart from the possible substantive benefits of clearing up the story of the Red Three and its members, there are certain concrete circumstances surrounding it that ought to attract our notice . The Red Three have been accused of corruption in the past but have been cleared up .
 The first is that it continues to be treated as a matter of some contemporary concern in certain interesting quarters . The first thing is that the government continues to treat it as an issue of concern in some interesting quarters.
 The Rote Drei is, as we shall see, regarded with considerable sensitivity elsewhere on the Continent, particularly in Switzerland . For different reasons it is regarded with different reasons .
 Alexander Rado was resident director of the Soviet apparatus in Switzerland while the Rote Drei was operating . Louis Thomas' recent essay on the career of the Hungarian collector of cartographic intelligence, Rado, 1 .
 Rado has publicly indicated the intention to publish a personal memoir that will lay to rest the ""stab in the back"" theory of the Nazi debacle . Rado's personal memoir is due to be published in May 2015 .
 Thomas correctly infers that this curious announcement must have had some direct relationship to thinking in Moscow . Thomas says it must have been made by the Russian government .
 We are surely right to believe that we are to hear more about the Rote Drei, and that we would be wise to equip ourselves in advance with the appropriate intellectual baggage .
 Whatever Rado places on the record is likely to be elaborately confusing . Whatever he places on record will likely be complicated, Rado says .
 Any useful account of the Rote Drei must start with radio traffic exchanged between the Center in Moscow and the network in Switzerland .
 A comparison of these with those in other holdings has shown that 40 appear elsewhere and 89 are unique .
 The 40 matching messages were all transmitted between 3 September and 5 October 1943 . The messages were sent between September and October 1943 and September 1943 .
 There have been a number of claims that the Red Three network was functioning before the war . Lucy, as Rudolf Roessler was called, gave Moscow advance warning of Hitler's attack .
 The traffic proves that Sissy did not establish a clandestine association with Taylor and Lucy until the late summer of 1942 . Sissy's relationship with Lucy and Taylor dates back to 1942 .
 Our best estimate of the life-span of the Rote Drei operation is 33 months . The Swiss net exchanged W/T communications with Moscow from August 1941 to May 1944 .
 This collection, unfortunately, contains only 8 per cent of the presumed total . This collection of photos contains only eight per cent .
 We are obliged to be circumspect when drawing from the traffic any quantitative conclusions. Lor this reason we are obliged . For this reason, we should not be drawn to conclusions .
 The missing 92 per cent of the mystery riddles have been resolved by 8 per cent . The remaining mysteries, or most of them, could be solved with the aid of the missing 90 per cent.
 Supplementary research in classified files has yielded additional information . Supplementary research has also yielded additional details .
 We can present the first account of the Red Three that is not based chiefly on speculation, fantasy, and falsification . Although there are still gaps in our knowledge, we can at least present a first account .
 Of the 55 we can identify 15 with certainty and make educated guesses about 16 more . Of these 55 people, 15 are likely to be identified with certainty .
 We also know the identities of some persons associated with the Rote Drei who do not appear in the traffic . We also also know that some people associated with them don't appear in traffic .
 Digging out the facts and telling the story would have been decidedly easier if so much misinformation had not been published in the past . Digging the facts is easier now than ever before .
 Even the name ""The Red Three,"" a German appellation based on the number of transmitters or operators serving the network, is misleading, because at times there were four or even five . The name "The Red 3" is misleading .
 The story of the Rote Drei begins with Maria Josefovna Poliakova, a highly intelligent Russian Jewess and a dedicated Communist, born about 1910 . Vera and the Beginnings of the Red Three begins with the birth of Vera and Vera .
 When she was 21, she was a very active member of the central committee of the Komsomol . She was a member of her party's central committee when she was young .
 She was recruited at that time by the IVth Department of the Soviet General Staff . She was a member of the IVth Department of the Soviets General Staff.
 In 1936-1937 she headed the Soviet military intelligence network in Switzerland . In 1937 she was head of the Soviet intelligence network . She was a member of the Communist Party of Switzerland .
 She made a quick trip back in 1941, when she ordered changes in the command structure of the Rote Drei . She made the trip back to the U.S. in 1941 .
 She specialized on the Rote Drei operation in Moscow, where she specialized in the war .
 All of the messages from Moscow to Switzerland were signed ""Director,"" an indicator showing that they came from the Center .
 It is probable that Poliakova was the originator of many of these . Her informal, fervent, Marxian style is distinctive, says the author .
 Poliakova, then a major, became chief of the GRU's Spanish section . At the end of 1944, when the Swiss operation had ended, she became a major . She was a major at the time of the operation .
 She also had a brother, Professor Juergin Kuczynski, who introduced Klaus Fuchs to Soviet intelligence officers . She also has a brother who worked with the Soviets .
 Ursula and Rudolf Hamburger were Red Army espionage agents in Shanghai in 1930-35 . Ursula Hamburger worked for the Red Army in Shanghai, China, between 1930 and 1935 .
 In 1939 her position was jeopardized by the arrest of Franz Obermanns, a German Communist with false Finnish documents and a transmitter . In 1939 she was forced to resign from her position .
 Beurton, a veteran of the Spanish Civil War, was recruited for Soviet espionage by Brigette Lewis, who turned him over to her sister Ursula on 13 February 1939 . He was turned over to Ursula in 1939 .
 The marriage to Beurton gave Ursula British citizenship, and she left Switzerland for England in December 1940 .
 Her husband remained in Switzerland, where he trained Edmond Hamel in operating a W/T set . Hamel was trained in Switzerland to operate a set .
 In July 1942, provided with a British passport in the name of Miller and the blessings of the Red Army Staff, Beurton went via Portugal to England and his Ursula .
 A third person of importance in the swaddling days of the Red Three was also a woman, Rachel Duebendorfer . Sissy and Paul were the couple's first children .
 Born on 18 July 1901 in Danzig, she became an active Soviet agent in 1920 . She was born in 1901 .
 On 8 July 1922 she gave birth to a daughter, Tamara, who eventually married a Frenchman . Soon thereafter she married one Curt Caspari, who served as a Rote Drei courier .
 In the late 1930's Rachel contracted a marriage of convenience with a Swiss citizen named Duebendorfer . Rachel was married to a Swiss national in the 1930s .
 She took up residence in Bern, where she lived as the common-law wife of a German Communist named Paul Boettcher, alias Paul, alias Hans Saalbach . She lived in Bern as the wife of the German Communist Paul Boetcher .
 Escaping to Switzerland from Germany after the Nazis came to power, he was twice expelled from Swiss territory, in 1941 and 1944, but managed to survive . Escaping from Nazi Germany, he escaped to Switzerland but was expelled from Switzerland twice .
 Sissy gave him the papers of her Swiss husband, whose identity was assumed . Boettcher assumed the identity of his Swiss wife .
 Boettcher, Duebendorfer, Tamara Vigier , Roessler, Roessler and Christian Schneider were arrested in May 1944 . They were all arrested .
 Boettcher went back to Saxony and became editor of the Leipziger Volkszeitung in 1947 . He went on to be editor of a German newspaper in 1946 . In 1947 he was editor of an edition of the German state-run newspaper in Dresden .
 In our collection of W/T messages Sissy appears 28 times between 8 October 1942 and 28 November 1943 . Sissy appeared 28 times in a single message .
 Sissy is the only one of Rado's sources to whom the Center directed messages by name and through Rado . Rado says Sissy was one of the Center's only sources .
 The second important element in this message is its reference to Taylor as a new source . Taylor is the author of the book, which is published in the U.S.
 As we shall see, Taylor was first recruited by Sissy in the summer of 1942 . Taylor was recruited by the actress in 1942 .
 Moscow received no messages from Lucy and her sub-sources until that time . Lucy reported only through Taylor, this fact means that Moscow had no communication from Lucy .
 Director instructed Dora to have Sissy determine and report the identities of the sources in the Lucy-Taylor group . Director instructed Sissy to report the sources .
 Before this date Sissy had sent her first message in her own code, because the Center answered, ""We greet your first telegram. Sissy's first message, because of the Center's response, because it answered, "We greet Your First telegram"
 Moscow sent its second message in Sissy's code, this one addressed to her and Paul . The message was addressed to both Paul and Sissy, but was not addressed to Sissy or Paul . Moscow sent a second message, addressed to the pair .
 Since the summer of 1942 you have worked with the Taylor-Lucy group, which has provided a great deal of varied material, some of it valuable .
 We send you the title of a new book for your code; buy it; we shall give you instructions about how to work according to the book . We also send you a code to help you understand how to use the code .
 Gisela was one of three code names for Maria Josefovna Poliakova, the other two being Vera and Mildred . The other two were Mildred and Vera .
 Maurice Emile Emile Aenis-Haenslin was born 20 September 1893 in St. Louis, Missouri . It has been suggested that ""Maurice"" was Emil Emile Aenis Haenlin . He was born in 1893 .
 Maurice who knew Sissy may have been someone other than Aenis-Haenslin, who was released from a German concentration camp in Brandenburg in response to a Swiss demand .
 Traffic continued to mention Maurice and to reveal conflicting views about his arrest . At any rate, the traffic continued to include Maurice .
 On 8 July 1943 Poliakova repeated to Sissy, in the latter's code, some of the instructions she had radioed to Dora four days earlier . Sissy repeated the instructions to her sister .
 She directed Sissy to leave Bern and go to Tessin or a spa for two or three months . She directed the actress to leave the Bernese capital for a spa .
 They believe that the man who asked about them came from the Center and just handled himself clumsily . They believe he came from a different part of the Center .
 "You, however, deny this possibility and interpret it as an attempt to take the Taylor group away from you," Taylor says . "You're not going to be able to take this group away," he says .
 You must understand, inasmuch as you assume this position, that you know nothing of the danger which threatens you and Taylor's people, especially those in Germany . You must also understand that you must understand that, especially in Germany, are at risk .
 "We demand that you recognize the seriousness of the situation and place full confidence in our statements. We demand that we recognize the serious seriousness of this situation," the family says .
 I am convinced that much more could be gotten out of the Lucy group . I am myself convinced that . much more than could be got out of Lucy group.
 "Every time that I try to intensify the group's activity I encounter in Sissy and her man 13 a resistance that I do not understand," he says . "I have no direct contact with this group, as you know," he adds .
 Sissy and her man ... say that they cannot transmit criticisms to Taylor and Lucy because both would consider it an insult and would stop working . Lucy and Taylor would consider such a criticism an insult, they say .
 In accordance with your advice, I wrote Lucy a very friendly letter, but Sissy declared that Taylor could not pass it on because Lucy, beyond doubt, is already doing everything that he can .
 Pierre is supposedly a courier or cut-out between Rado and ""Mario" in France . One report identifies Pierre as Roger Vauthey of Lausanne, Switzerland . Pierre is said to have been a courier to Rado .
 Foote, however, said that Pierre and Vita were Pierre Nicole and his wife . Foote said that in a private interview held in 1953, that they were Pierre Nicolas and Vita . In 1953, Foote claimed that Pierre Nicole was Pierre Nicole .
 Pierre Nicole was indeed Pierre Nicole but that Vita was Tamara Vigier . Our own view is that Pierre was actually Pierre Nicole . Vita was actually Tamara .
 Pierre's father, Leon, was born in Montcherend, Vaud, in 1897 . Leon was the head of this party, born in 1897, in Vaud . Pierre's party was founded by Leon in 1897 by Pierre's mother, Pierre .
 He could have been Leon Nicole or any one of several other Swiss Communists . Leon Nicole was a member of the Swiss Communist Party .
 Moscow feared that Rado might be arrested, leaving the Center cut off from Lucy's information . By 5 November 1943 the danger signs had multiplied, and Moscow feared he might arrest .
 Sissy and Jim be placed in direct contact, so that if anything happened to Dora, Jim could still maintain the flow of intelligence . The proposal was repeated by the government .
 Director instructed Dora to tell Sissy and Pakbo to work independently for a time . Director instructed Sissy to tell Dora that they should be allowed to work separately . Sissy was killed in 1943 .
 Moscow did not know that Jim had been arrested eight days earlier . Jim was arrested in Moscow eight days after his arrest .
 The fourth key personality in the Red Three was Alexander Rado, the Hungarian cartographer who took over the direction of the net from Maria Poliakova . Rado assumed contact with Ursula Hamburger's sources after she left Switzerland for England in 1940 .
 Rado's story is wellknown and retold here only in the barest outline . Rado is a well-known figure in the history of the Italian city of San Fransisco .
 It is almost certain that he was already working for Soviet military intelligence when he left Paris for Geneva in 1936 .
 When the Germans occupied France, Moscow ordered Hamburger to make contact with Rado and place the transmitter of her new husband, Leon Charles Beurton, at Rado's disposal . Rado was killed by the Germans in 1944 .
 Hamburger had trained both Foote and Beurton in operating a transmitter . Hamburger also trained the Hamels and Margarete Bolli .
 Moscow resolved a struggle for power by subordinating Duebendorfer to Rado . In 1941 Moscow resolved the struggle by substituting Rado in a power struggle .
 Rado's authority was not absolute, and the fact that the Center gave Duebendorfer a code of her own and sometimes by-passed Rado when communicating with Sissy shows that the Soviets did not intend to let Rado consolidate his position .
 Dora, a simple anagram for Rado, is the sender or recipient of almost all of the Rote Drei messages . Dora is an anagram of Rado .
 The only exceptions are those sent or received directly by Sissy and those sent by Albert or by the Center but mentioning Albert in the text . Sissy will not be allowed to text Albert .
 There is no doubt that Albert, like Dora, is Rado; but efforts to find a pattern or significance in Rado's choice of cover name for a particular message have not been successful . Albert and Dora are both of the same names .
 The shift in names does not indicate a parallel shift in transmitters, because both ""Dora"" and ""Albert"" messages were found at their flat when the Hamels were arrested .
 The possibility that ""Dora"" is Rado as chief of the Rote Drei disintegrates when checked against the traffic . The possibility of ""Albert"" as an individual disintegrates against traffic .
 Flicke postulated a secretary who as Albert signed messages for Rado when be was away . No one else ever heard of such a secretary . Dora and Albert messages were sometimes transmitted on the same day .
 Dora had two other key sources who, like Sissy, provided him with intelligence from sub-sources . Dora was given intelligence by Sissy and Dora's other sources .
 The cut-out between Lucy and Sissy was Taylor, whose true name was Christian Schneider . Sissy's true name is Christian Schneider, who was the real name of Lucy .
 The Center thought highly of Taylor, chiefly because Moscow misunderstood his role . Lucy and Taylor were the center's stars, but Moscow misunderstood them .
 The first reference to him in our holdings is in a message sent by the Director to Dora on 8 October 1942 . The Director sent the message on 8 Oct. 1942 .
 The message terms him a new source, although he was merely a go-between . The message was sent to the White House from a source in Washington, DC .
 The Director told Dora to identify Taylor's sources, not knowing that the sources ""belonged"" to Lucy, not Taylor . Lucy's sources were the sources of the Director, not Lucy's .
 A week later Moscow again asked for the identities of Taylor's sources . A week after the request, the Russian government again asked Taylor to reveal his sources . Moscow also asked Taylor for the identity of the sources .
 In December 1942 and January 1943 the Center began to speak of Taylor and Lucy jointly . The Center first spoke of Lucy and Taylor in December 1942 .
 By February 1943 the Center's follow-up questions were directed to Lucy, with scant mention of Taylor . Lucy was the center's primary survivor of the war .
 A Director-to-Dora message in 1943 suggested that the Lucy-Taylor group might be continued after the war ended . It also promised Taylor an income for life if he agreed .
 Perhaps Sissy misrepresented to Moscow the insignificant role that Taylor actually had, perhaps she merely kept stubbornly silent about such facts . Perhaps she misunderstood the true situation because she was in touch only with Taylor and not with Lucy .
 If Rudolf Roessler had not been living in Switzerland during the second world war, his sources in Germany might have found it troublesome or even impossible to get their reports into Soviet hands .
 In fact, they might not have cared much one way or the other about Soviet reception of their material, as long as it went to the Western allies, as well as the Soviet Union .
 The widely accepted story that Lucy was a master spy is nothing but a myth . But as was pointed out in the recent review of Accoce and Quet, 16, 16 the story is nothing more than a myth. Lucy's story is a myth, says the review .
 The Center tried to eliminate Sissy and put Dora in direct contact with Taylor and Lucy . As we have seen, the center tried to remove Sissy .
 If this maneuver had succeeded, it was likely Dora would have been instructed to pressure Lucy to divulge his sources . Moscow had already requested the identities of its sources, which they had already been requested .
 Lucy was probably not the only source reporting to Sissy . Lucy was not only the only principal agent funneling reports from a network to Rado . Lucy and Sissy were probably not only sources reporting to each other .
 Four persons produced 421/2 percent of the total traffic from Switzerland to Moscow . Yet these four persons produced more than half of all the traffic .
 Werther stood for Wehrmacht, Olga for Oberkommando der Luftwaffe, Anna for the Auswertige Amt . We can, however, dismiss the theory of Foote and some later writers that these cover names merely referred to the source's
 There is nothing in the traffic to support this theory, which seems to be based on speculation only . There is no evidence that this theory is true, and it is only speculation .
 All Rote Drei code names for which true identities have been established were designators of individuals per se, not of types of cover or access . All code names have been used in the past .
 Despite printed assertions to the contrary, Rudolf Roessler did divulge the identity of his sources, or at least of some of them . Roessler divulged his sources to the public .
 Lucy's confidant may have garbled the first identification and may have done the same with the fourth . General Hans Oster Lucy may have been mistaken for Lucy's identity . Lucy was killed by the Nazis in 1944 .
 Hans Oster was a major in the Abwehr at that time, and he remained in the service . He served as the chief of staff and also as the heart of the 20th of July group which conspired to overthrow .
 Hans Bernd Gisevius 19 said that he first met Oster sometime between August 1933 and April 1934 . Hans Oster was a member of the Nazi Party . Oster died in August 1934 .
 The Dutch military attache in Berlin said Germany intended to invade Norway . Sas, the Dutch army attache, said the invasion was a prelude to the invasion . Sas was the first Dutch official to say that Germany was planning to invade the country .
 Abshagen 22 reported that Oster gave Sas this warning on 3 April 1940 for relay to Norway . Oster also told Sas of the invasion of Holland before the event .
 Oster had begun to send specific, factual warnings to the West as early as 1938 . In fact, Oster was sending specific warnings to West as well as 1938.
 He was unswerving in his detestation of German fascism and in his conviction that morality necessitated action . The man who had become a major in 1929, a lieutenant colonel in 1935, a colonel in 1939, and a major general in 1942 .
 Oster became convinced that the plots to eradicate the Nazis through the internal intervention of German armed forces would fail because of the waverings of the German generals . As time passed and Hitler's power grew, Oster believed the plots would fail .
 He recognized Hitler could not be brought down inside the Reich until he had been defeated on the battlefields . He warned the West because he recognized that Hitler couldn't be brought to ailing Hitler .
 Oster was on intimate conspiratorial terms with such persons as General Ludwig Beck . General Beck sent Dr. Oster to the U.S. Army in the 1930s . Oster and Beck were on intimate terms with each other . Dr. Beck and Oster were involved in the
 Josef Mueller to the Vatican for peace negotiations with the British, negotiations at which the Pope presided; . General Georg Thomas, head of the Economics and Armaments Branch of the OKW; . Fritz Thiele and Erich Fellgiebel, respectively chiefs of communications for the Army
 These men were active members of the conspiracy; most of them were executed by the Nazis . These men, and others like them like them, were active . Most of the Nazis were executed .
 Lucy's sources were in a position to have direct access to precisely the kind of information reported by Lucy . And they were able to get the information from Lucy's source . Lucy was in the position to be able to speak directly to her sources .
 He was standing at his desk looking down pensively at the four or five telephones whose secret circuits connected him with the most diverse authorities . He was looking at the phones which he had connected with the world's most famous authorities .
 The timing of Rote Drei messages would have permitted sending almost all of the traffic through Abwehr courier channels from Germany to Switzerland .
 Gisevius had access at least twice and sometimes three times a week to a courier pouch from the Foreign Office in Berlin to the German Embassy in Bern .
 At least every other day Gisevius was also served by an OKW courier as the result of a procedure instituted by Oster . Oster instituted a procedure that allows OKW to send a courier to the city every day .
 For urgent messages Oster or a cohort could safely use an Abwehr telephone . And for urgent messages, Oster could use a phone number . Oster and his cohorts could also use a telephone number for urgent matters .
 The characteristics of the Lucy messages and of their transmission from Germany to Switzerland suggest that Werther and others probably had Abwehr communications channels at their disposal .
 Hans Bernd Gisevius has told much of his own story in To the Bitter End . Like other Germans he stresses the resistance activity of the underground and says little about espionage .
 Gisevius: "We had our spies everywhere" The 20th of July conspiracy took place in the war ministry, the police headquarters, the interior, and especially in the foreign office .
 Gisevius entered the Abwehr in 1939 or 1940; when Paris fell, Canaris and Oster sent him to Zurich with the cover of a vice-consul . He was sent to Zurich in 1940 or 1940 .
 Even before the war started, Gisevius had started to make trips to Switzerland to meet with representatives of Western Allies .
 I was glad of the opportunity to complete my notes on the French crisis, I said . "I was glad to complete the opportunity," he said .
 Gerhard Ritter tells of another, similar meeting which occurred some months later, in February 1940 . Ex-Chancellor Josef Wirth o. Wirth tells of a similar meeting some months after the war .
 Ex-Chancellor of Germany, Josef Wirth, had emigrated to Switzerland and offered to act as an intermediary between the British and the German anti-Fascists . He says that Josef . Wirth had offered to . act as a . intermediary between . the British
 The other man could have been Michel, Freiherr von Godin, or Lucy himself, or any of several other Germans who were living in Lucerne .
 Long absolutely must report clearly about the intent of Rot's group to orient itself toward the Soviet Union, Long says . Long must also tell the truth about the group's intentions, Long writes . Rot's report must be clear about the intention of the group to aim for Soviet Union .
 Six days later the Director asked some questions about the intentions of the OKW, the German High Command . Six days after the raid, the Director was asked about the plans by the German high command .
 Moscow directed that the requirements be levied upon Lucy's group and added, "" ... if feasible, Long should try to get relevant information from the Wirth group" Moscow also directed that Lucy should try and find out what happened to Wirth and Lucy .
 The first fixed day for the German attack on the East Front is 14 June . Bendlerstrasse says the first fixed date for the attack is June 14 . The first German attack was the date of the attack on 14 June, 1941 .
 The General Staff expects the event by the end of April at the earliest; it could snowball . Only operations of modest proportions are planned. Only operations are planned .
 The so-called second echelon of generals [literally, generals in second-best uniforms] has now decided to liquidate Hitler and also his supporters . The second-echelon has already wanted to take action against Hitler in January, says historian .
 Wirth rejects the German Liberation Committee [the reference is to the ""National Committee of Free Germany,"" created by the Russians] in Moscow . Wirth says it hinders instead of hastening the disintegration of the Nazi regime .
 Those who feel partially responsible for the establishment of that regime will cooperate more closely with Nazi leaders . Those who are partially responsible will cooperate with the Nazi leaders, he says .
 Bourgeois German Democrats are prepared to collaborate with German Communists but not under Soviet guidance . Bourgeois Germans are willing to collaborate but not with Soviet guidance but not under .
 Wirth says the German Embassy in Bern is extremely interested in Sokolin . Sokolin is the son of a former Bernese mayor who was assassinated in 2009 .
 It is suggested that Gisevius may have been Rot. Rot .
 Gisevius also knew Wirth, whose link to the 20th of July group had been sanctioned by Generals Oster and Beck . Wirth was sanctioned by Oster, Beck and Beck, who were involved in the group .
 "He obviously knew Carl Goerdeler, one of the most important of the conspirators," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "He was obviously involved in the conspiracy," he says .
 Gisevius was sympathetic toward the Soviet cause, a fact which became more apparent after the war than it was during it .
 He was thoroughly trained in clandestinity as a result of his role in the 20th of July group, his three and a half years as an agent of British intelligence, and his work for OSS .
 Goerdeler and Beck, who favored the Western solution, thought Gisevius felt as they did, thought they shared their views . Goerddeler, Beck, and others who favored a post-war Germany oriented toward the U.S. and the UK .
 Gisevius could have been in clandestine contact with Roessler and Blun, just as many other people . But there may be no real contradiction here, he says .
 Lucy and Sissy succeeded in concealing the identities of the Lucy group from the Russians . The dual role of Gisevius in the Rote Drei, if he did in fact play such a role, would not have been revealed .
 Goerdeler remained a civilian all his life . He was a conservative visionary, a Protestant monarchist and a headstrong philosopher .
 All of the information provided to Moscow by Lucy could have been obtained more readily, more securely, in greater detail, and at a higher level from leading military figures in the resistance than Carl Goerdeler .
 It seems probable that Roessler named him just because he knew him personally, as he knew Gisevius . Roessler's name is likely to be based on his personal relationship with the Roman god .
 Whatever information Goerdeler provided, he must have obtained it from fellow conspirators, not from direct access . Whatever information he provided, it must have been obtained from other conspirators . It's unlikely he would have been able to get the information directly from his colleagues .
 It is not possible to draw any logical inferences about which cover name, if any, referred to Goerdeler . GoerDeler is not known to have been involved in the cover name of Goer deler .
 No record of a general named Boelitz has been found . Unfortunately, no record of the general named .
 Otto Boelitz was born a pastor's son in Wesel in 1876 . He became the Prussian Minister of Art, Science, and Education in 1877 .
 In 1934 he was a Kulturrat and a member of the German Foreign Institute . He was also a Kultureurrat in 1934 and a German Foreign Institution member .
 He was the first director of the Ibero-American Institute in Berlin . He was also the first Director of the Institute of Spanish Literature .
 Boelitz fell into the bad graces of the Nazis and was replaced as head of the Ibero-American Institute . He was replaced by a general named Faupel .
 One report suggests the institute was used by the Nazis in support of espionage and subversion in Fatin America . Thereafter, one report suggests, one . report suggests that the institute . was used in support . of espionage .
 A Colonel Friedrich Boetzel was head of the Germany military intercept office in Munich before 1933 . He was the head of Germany's military intercept operation in Munich .
 He was commanding officer of the intelligence evaluation office of the Southeast Army Group, Athens, where he remained until 1944 . Thereafter he was commanding . He was also commanding officer .
 German first lieutenant of the signal corps, interrogated in April 1945, described Colonel Boetzel as an anti-Nazi .
 Roessler identified by Roessler as having been among his sources during World War Two . We have Oster, Gisevius, Goerdeler, and Boelitz among those identified . Roessler: "We have a lot of material from Roessler's sources"
 Oster seems the likeliest candidate for Werther . We have no basis for matching true and cover names, although Oster is likely to be Oster .
 Rachel Duebendorfer's contacts fell into three categories: "Sissy" and "Rachel" "Rachel's" contacts were based on contacts with Rachel's friends and family members .
 Werther, Teddy, Olga, and Anna, all in Germany, were all in Luey's quartet . The quartet of Werther and Teddy were the most important group .
 Sissy resisted every effort of Moscow and Rado to determine the identities of the members of the Taylor-Lucy team, and it's fair to conjecture that a major reason for her resistance was that had she lost this remarkable asset, she'd have had little enough left .
 The second group was composed of peripheral people probably turned over to Sissy by Vera Poliakova before the War . For the second group, the group was made up of people who had been turned over by Vera .
 Sissy's family was made up of her own family, Paul Goettcher, her daughter and her daughter's husband; and a cousin . The third element was the man with whom she was living, Paul . Sissy was also living with her daughter, Paul, Paul and her
 Georges Blun, code-named Long, was a French journalist whose subsources could not match the production of Lucy's group in quality or quantity, but who was nevertheless a valuable asset for the Soviets .
 The sources who had aliases and who are known to have been members of Long's group were Agnes, Kurz, Grau, Rot, Fanny, and possibly Feld . The sources were known to be members of the Long group .
 With the exception of the last-named, a courier, the members of the group have a certain homogeneous quality . The members of this group of people have a . homogenous quality .
 Werther and Teddy were not military professionals like Werther, Teddy, and the rest . They were not . military professionals . Werther was not military . He was not a soldier .
 Their political views and motivation often seem ambiguous and devious, if not opportunistic . Their views and motives often seem to be ambiguous or devious . Their politics and motivations often seem devious or opportunistic.
 The first of Long's sub-sources, Agnes, was a journalist named Ernst Lemmer . Agnes was a German journalist who was also a journalist .
 Some of Lucy's spy work spanned a long period, including the second, post-war phase of espionage . Some information about his work for Lucy is included not because his WW Two career as a spy was of any particular moment .
 Lemmer represented a Zurich newspaper in Berlin and travelled to Switzerland repeatedly . Lemmer was also represented in Switzerland in the 1960s .
 He first appears in our holdings in a message of 22 October 1941, Dora to Director . He first appeared in our archives in 1941, when Dora became a director .
 Long is listed as the source and Lemmer, who is said to have obtained the information from the Foreign Ministry, as the sub-source . Lemmer is also said to be a sub-Source .
 The dates are 13 August and 18 September 1943, and the messages are merely reports of the lack of morale at the German home front .
 In 1924 he was elected as a DDP representative to the Reichstag and thus became the youngest member of that body . He was also the youngest representative of the DDP in Germany .
 He lost these posts when the Nazis seized power, and he was forbidden to write for any newspaper published in Germany . He was banned from writing for any German newspaper published .
 He became the Berlin correspondent for the Pester Lloyd of Budapest and the Neue Zuercher Zeitungs . He was a reporter in Occupied Belgium for the Brussels Soir .
 Lemmer was accused in West Germany of having collaborated with the Nazis during the war . Lemmer is accused of collaborating with the Nazi regime during the Second World War .
 He settled immediately after the war in the Berlin suburb of Klein-Machnow, in the Soviet sector, where he owned a house .
 Lemmer was vice-chairmanship of the CDU, but was removed by Soviet authorities in 1947 . Lemmer had been in charge of CDU since 1947, ostensibly because of policy conflicts with the Soviet Union .
 He moved to West Berlin in 1949 and became editor of the anti-Communist Berlin Kurier . He was editor of West Berlin's anti-communist newspaper . He later moved to the West Berlin and published a book in Berlin .
 In 1950 he was elected to the five-man executive of the CDU in West Berlin . He was elected in 1950 to the West Berlin CDU executive . He is a former member of the Berlin-based CDU .
 In November 1956 he was appointed Minister of Postal and Telecommunications . He was appointed in November 1956 . He became a minister of postal and telecommunications in 1956 .
 Lemmer was a special representative of Chancellor Erhard in Berlin in 1966 . Lemmer served as a representative of the German Chancellor in 1966. Lemmer is a former member of the West German parliamentarian party .
 He is currently listed as a retired Cabinet Minister who last held public office in 1965 . He last held office in 1964 .
 Lemmer was a source for Lucy during the 1947-1953 period when she worked for Czech intelligence . Lucy and Xaver Schnieper worked for the Czech intelligence during that period . Lucy's name was repeated by same source who repeated identities of four World War II sources .
 Lemmer denied and outrode the charges of collaboration with the Nazis . Lemmer died in 1945 at the hands of a German army officer in Dresden, Dresden .
 Pakbo was of less value to Rado and the Soviets than was Long, just as Long and his group did not measure up to Sissy and her sources . Long and Sissy did not meet up to the Soviets .
 Swiss intelligence service used him as a channel to pass to the Soviets selected items of intelligence . He was in contact with the Swiss military intelligence service, which used him to pass intelligence .
 Dallin has devoted an entire chapter to Puenter, but much of what appears therein is false . Puenter is the author of the novel, "Puenter" Puenter. Puenter: "Much of what is true is false"
 He said that information about the German General Staff which he obtained during World War II came from General Alfred Jodi . He said he obtained the information from Jodi during the war .
 He asserted that he kept in a monastery in Switzerland the entire plan for the German attack upon Stalingrad in October 1942, which he himself encoded before passing it to Rado .
 Austrian radio operator came from Dombim, near the Austro-Swiss border . He wove a complex and fascinating tale about a young radio operator who came from .
 He promised the home folks that he would transmit his location every night, just so that they would know where he was . He had promised to transmit the location of him every night .
 Pakbo was assigned to Hitler's headquarters, with the result that he always knew the Fuehrer's whereabouts .
 The implausibility of this fable is, however, no greater than that inherent in his explanation of his cover name, he says . "I'm not sure what I'm doing," he says, but I'm sure it's not a lie .
 He claimed that he had teams of agents in Pontrezina, Aarau, Kreuzlingen, Bern, and Orselina . He claimed to have teams in the region of Switzerland . The name Pakbo is now Pakbo .
 It's unlikely that he had teams of agents anywhere, and certainly improbable that they would be located at the unimportant places named . Actually, it is unlikely that any of the agents would be found at such locations .
 By his own account, one of his teams was at Feldkich/Dombim, but his cover name contains neither an F nor a D . As a matter of fact, most of his contacts lived in Bern and Geneva .
 Gaullist said he was looking for a contact with Moscow to pass on the information . He said he wanted to find a contact to pass over the information to Moscow .
 Pakbo went to Rado to deliver the story, i.e., the attack was scheduled for 15 June 1941 . Pakbo was in Rado at the time of the attack .
 Rado then decided to get in direct contact with Roessler, and that connection continued . Rado decided to contact Roessler in order to get into contact with him .
 In 1941 neither Lucy nor Pakbo himself had any connection with the Rote Drei . Lucy and Pakbo were not involved in any of the activities .
 Puenter has said in writing that he had never been in contact with Roessler and did not know his true name . Puenter said he had said he did not contact Roessler, who is accused of killing him .
 Lucy did not meet Rado through Puenter for the simple reason that he never met Rado at all, as the traffic shows . Lucy was never given Rado a chance to meet him in Puenter .
 The Soviets seem to have accepted Pakbo's reports as valid and have found them useful . Apart from a challenge on 7 October 1942, the Soviets seemed to accept them .
 Perhaps Pakbo, like Jim, merely tried to exaggerate the importance of his role after the war had ended . Perhaps he was exaggerating his role in Afghanistan .
 Pakbo appears in 22 known messages, but only 6 of these contain any substantive information . Pakbo is believed to have been a member of the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 The Director of the Rote Kapelle in Germany learned something about the arrests in Germany and reported accordingly . On 5 October 1942 the Director asked for more information .
 Moscow said on 8 January 1944 Moscow said, ""As far as we know, we know of Paul. Pakbo has never heard of Paul."
 Louis Suss was born 6 October 1890 in Beblenbeim, Alsace-Lorraine . His chief sub-source was Salter .
 His widow Friedel, nee Kirschbaum, lived in CbeneBourg, Geneva, Switzerland .
 She was observed in 1955 at a meeting with a Soviet representative to the UN who is also a suspected intelligence operative . She was seen in 1955 meeting with the Soviet representative .
 He was in contact with former chancellor Josef Wirth and with British intelligence, he says . He says he had contact with the former chancellor and with Britain's intelligence .
 He also knew Long and Kurz; compartmentalization was often breached in the Rote Drei network . He also worked with Kurz and Long .
 Puenter passed intelligence to Puenter during the war and that he relayed their information to the Soviets . Marc Oltramare, both passed intelligence on Puenter, said he relayed the information .
 Among his associates in 1942 were Jean Vincent, Max Horngacher, and Maurice Ducommun, all of whom were suspected of being Soviet agents .
 One Mario Bodenmann, a Swiss Socialist and journalist, has also been reported as a sub-source for Pakbo .
 A probable Pakbo source was ""Bruder,"" who appears in only two messages, both from Dora to Director, dated 27 January and 10 May 1943 . A probable source was "Bruder"
 Both messages provide information about the production at the Oerlikon arms factory in Switzerland . Both messages were sent from the Swiss arms factory .
 Emil Georg Buehrle was the president of Werkzeugmaschinenfabrik Oerlikon and Co. and Co., was Emil Georg . Emil Georg. Buehle was Emil .
 In middle and late 1943, as Foote has also related, the network was extremely short of funds . Foote: The network was short-stricken in the middle of 1943, and in late 1943. Foote also related to the network's financial situation .
 Pakbo and others solicited funds from Swiss businessmen . They promised profitable post-war commercial orders from the USSR in exchange . Pakbo was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Pakbo approached Buehrle, who did business with the USSR, on this basis . Buebrle contributed 80,000 francs to Pakbo's efforts .
 The Soviets refused to honor the obligations incurred on behalf of the Rote Drei . After the war the Soviets refused the obligations . The Soviets did not honor the obligation .
 Most of the businessmen complained bitterly, and Pakbo has alleged that he made some effort to repay the loans he had personally solicited . Pakbo is accused of personally soliciting the loans that he personally requested .
 Despite published claims to the contrary, there is no reason to believe that a source called ""Lily of the Vatican"" ever existed .
 Foote, like Puenter, grossly exaggerated his wartime importance . Foote's wartime importance was exaggerated, but the truth is that he exaggerated it too much .
 Foote claimed he had sub-sources of his own . Foote's traffic does not bear out his claim that he had Sub-Sourced sources . Traffic does not show Foote had a sub-source .
 Moscow clearly regarded him primarily as a W/T operator, although the most senior member in that category . He was secondarily expected to give Rado help in problems of funding .
 Foote, whose cover name was Jim, appears 20 times in the messages in our possession . Foote's cover name is Jim Foote - his alias was Jim - and Foote is often used in the documents .
 "These messages contain no new information, but they are of value in reducing Jim's self-portrait to its true, minor dimensions," he says .
 Part of the Rote Drei structure has been partially excavated and cleansed of distortions, the outline of the whole can be delineated . Now that part of the structure has already been excavated, it can be defined .
 Alexander Rado is at the apex of the network, having inherited the leader's role from Maria Poliakova and Ursula Beurton . He inherited the role of the leader from both of his predecessors .
 Rachel Duebendorfer, Georges Blun, and Otto Puenter, listed in order of decreasing importance, are listed in decreasing importance .
 Others of Sissy's known contacts, by code name, were Paul, Pierre, Vita, and Mario . Sissy was also known to have known contacts with others, including Pierre and Vita .
 Roessler listed, by name or description, General Hans Oster, Hans Bernd Gisevius, Carl Goerdeler and an unknown man named Boelitz as sub-sources . Roessler also listed names of an unknown general and a German general in his list
 The second principal agent, Georges Blun, alias Long, directed a network which consisted chiefly of Agnes, Kurz, Grau, Rot, Fanny, and perhaps Feld . The network included Agnes Kurz and Kurz .
 Otto Puenter, alias Pakbo, headed a net that included Salter and Bruder, as well as others whose cover names are not known . Puenter was the third principal agent in the net, along with Salter, Bruder and others .
 Alexander Foote, alias Jim, was the most important of the radio operators . Foote was known for his role in the Second World War .
 The others were Edmond and Olga Hamel and Margarete Bolli hater Bolli-Schatz . Margareette Bolli Schatz was also a cover name for Bolli .
 The Red Three network produced intelligence for the Soviet military service . Karel Sedlacek was the leader of the network which produced intelligence . The network was a Soviet intelligence apparatus which produced military intelligence .
 Lucy's information, some or all of the Longs, and probably Pakbo s also went to the West . Lucy's info, some of it, probably went to China, but some or more of it also went West .
 The vital product, Lucy's, reached the Allies through a Czech colonel whose true name was Karel Sedlacek and whose alias was Uncle Tom . Lucy's was sold to the Allies from the Czech Republic in 1944 .
 General Frantisek Moravec had sent Sedlacek to Switzerland in the first place . He was sent to Switzerland by his superior general, who had sent him to Switzerland . He is now in Switzerland for the first time in his life .
 Sedlacek was sent to Prague for a year's training in operating a WJT set, secret writing, and encoding and decoding . His talents and skill caught Moravec's eye, and he was trained in secret writing and encoding .
 Sedlacek left Czechoslovakia in June 1937 as Karl Seltzinger, a correspondent of the Prague newspaper Narodni Listy . Sedlaceki was trained to be a journalist in the Czech Republic . In June 1937, he left the country as a correspondent for the newspaper
 For more than a year he built his cover in Zurich; then, by the fall of 1938, he arrived in Prague . His first reports, military and political, arrived in 1938, and they were published by the Prague Spring .
 By the spring of 1939 Sedlacek had begun to feel uneasy in Zurich, which was swarming with German agents, he says .
 Sedlacek was reporting by W/T to the London Czechs on German OB, movements, weapons, etc. Beginning in September of 1939, he was reporting on German movements, movements and weapons . He died in September 1939 .
 His information came from Hausamann, who got it from Lucy, who in turn decided what information would go to which recipients . Lucy's information was given to the recipient of the information .
 Lucy was arrested on 19 May to 6 September 1944 . She was charged with passing intelligence to the Soviet and British services . Lucy's arrest lasted until 6 September .
 From the date of his arrest, the flow of Lucy's information from Sedlacek to London stopped completely and finally. The flow of information to the UK has since stopped .
 Sedlacek did continue to transmit other information to London until the war ended . But after Lucy's arrest his reporting deteriorated rapidly in quality and quantity .
 How he was instrumental in launching Roessler upon the second phase of his career in espionage is reported below . Roessler is reported to have been in contact with Roessler for years .
 The remark appears in a context chiefly concerned with the Free Germany Committee, conceived in and directed from Moscow . The remark was made in reference to the committee's activities in Moscow .
 Vladimir Sokolin may have been the alias of one Vladimir Shapiro or Schapiro . He may also have been known as Vladimir Shapiro, or Vladimir Shapiro .
 All available information indicates that he was not a part of the Rote Drei . The records which concern him are extensive but have not been summarized here .
 Sokolin was born in Geneva of Jewish parents, the father a White Russian and the mother Scottish . Sokolin became in 1937 the Under Secretary of the USSR's Permanent Delegation to the International Labor Office, League of Nations, Geneva, as well as the Assistant Secretary General of the
 There was a seeming break with Moscow after the USSR was dropped from the League of Nations in December 1939 as a result of the invasion of Finland . There was also a break with the USSR after the war in 1939 .
 It was also reported that through one of these contacts he asked Rado if he could be of service and that Rado relayed the suggestion to Moscow, where it was rejected .
 There are clear indications that Sokolin was engaged in economic espionage for the USSR after the war ended . Sokolin worked for the Soviets in the 1950s and '60s .
 It appears, then, that in this instance as in others, Soviet intelligence tried not to mix their networks . The security of the networks required separation, the security of which required separation .
 Lucy's Post-War Operation would have ended if Karel Sedlacek had not known Xaver Franz Josef Schnieper, a Swiss citizen bom on 6 January 1910 in Emman .
 He had attended the Universities of Koenigsberg, Berlin, and Vienna, majoring in drama and intending to direct plays . But he had to abandon his ambition when the Nazis seized power .
 He first met Rudolf Roessler, who was equally interested in drama, in Berlin in 1933 . He met Roessler in 1933 in Berlin .
 By the beginning of the following year he persuaded Roessler and his wife to move to Lucerne . By the end of the year, he had persuaded the couple to move there .
 Schnieper also went back to Switzerland and found employment in Lucerne as a librarian . He now lives in Switzerland and works as a library librarian in the city .
 Schnieper and Roessler were plagued by financial problems by the time the war ended . He knew that by the end of the war, both the war veterans were plagued with financial problems .
 Schnieper was introduced to the successor of Rudolf Wolf of Czech intelligence . The successor, the successor, introduced him to Captain Wolf of the Czech Republic . Wolf was a major intelligence officer in Czechoslovakia .
 In the summer of 1947 Wolf asked Schnieper to ask Roessler whether he was willing to resume intelligence work . Roessler died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to his head in August 1947 .
 Roessler supplied the Czechs with information, mostly military, on the forces, dispositions, weapons, etc., of the US, England, and France in West Germany . Schnieper served as an intermediary for the Soviets .
 They were sentenced by a Swiss court on 5 November 1953 to a year and nine months respectively . But the time already spent in detention, nine months for each, was counted .
 Lucy's first phase lasted for only a little more than two years, his second for six . Lucy's second phase lasted six years, Lucy's last phase lasted only two years . Lucy is now a permanent resident in the UK and has moved to Australia .
 Roessler and Schnieper delivered valuable classified information to the Soviets, via the Czechs, in the post-war period as well . The second phase lacks the high drama of the first phase, but the fact remains that they delivered valuable information .
 Lucy obviously had human sources for his 1947-1953 reporting, even though his defense stressed the amount of information he had gleaned from the newspapers . Lucy's defense stressed that he had obtained the information from human sources .
 If we can unearth some of these people, we can expect to find links to the sources of 1941-1944 . If we find them, we will be able to find some of the sources .
 Theresa Hildebrand of the staff of Chicago magazine Common Cause called Common Cause . Theresa is a member of the magazine's Common Cause staff . She says she is disappointed with the outcome of the debate .
 Roessler asked the Czechs if they wanted to add 1,500 francs monthly to his pay so he could extend his coverage to the USA through Mrs. Mrs. Roessler . Roessler asks them if they want to add a monthly payment to their pay .
 Roessler said he had merely copied the names of Mrs. Roessler . Indictment: Roessler copied names of Roessler, but said he did not copy names . Roessler was charged with copying Roessler's name .
 Hildebrand and others from Common Cause say they were not implicated . Common Cause says they are not implicated in the case .
 Roessler and Schnieper prepared microfilmed reports for passage to Prague . Part of these had come from the office of Joachim Oster, the son of General Hans Oster .
 Joachim Oster, usually called Achim, was born on 20 February 1914 in Dresden . Oster was born in Dresden, Germany .
 He entered the army in 1933 as an officer candidate with the Second Artillery Regiment . He is now a senior commander in the UK's first major force .
 He was promoted to first lieutenant in 1938, to captain in 1941, to major in 1943 . He became a major in the Army in 1943, and was promoted in 1944 .
 Josef Mueller was a friend of his father and a member of the 20th of July group . Josef's father was also a close friend of Mueller, who died in 2011 .
 Mueller reportedly headed a group which worked for a neutralist, pro-USSR Germany . During this period Mueller reportedly worked for an anti-Russian Germany .
 Other members of the group, besides Mueller and Oster, included Otto John and Georges Blun of the Rote Drei .
 He served as chief of the security section of Amt Blank . He conducted liaison with the British, Americans, and French, as well as other Germans .
 In January 1956 he was transferred to other, presumably less sensitive, duties in the Ministry of Defense . He was transferred in January 1956 .
 About September of 1958 he was posted to Madrid as the military attache . He was stationed in Madrid, Spain, for about six months .
 There he reportedly established contact with the old Spanish Loyalist, Gil Robles . Robles is a former Loyalist who lived in the area .
 Unknown contact of Roessler who reported in 1955 that Goerdeler, Gisevius, ""General Boelitz,"" and ""the predecessor of Canaris"" were World War II sources of Lucy .
 Until 1933 he was chief editor of the Deutsche Republik and Rhein-Mainische Volkszeitung . He was born in Germany, acquired Austrian citizenship through naturalization .
 Josef Wirth as his secretary, probably during Wirth's 1921-1922 period . Wirth was probably the secretary of Wirth, probably in the 1920s .
 From September 1939 to May 1940 he was editor and speaker on the German Freedom Station in Paris . After the Nazis' seizure of power he moved to Paris, where he was a speaker .
 Professor Max Horkheimer was born 14 February 1895 in Stuttgart, Germany . ""Borchheimer" appears to be a garble for Professor Max Horkheimer .
 There are reports that he is or was a fellow-traveller, once closely associated with the Lenin Institute of Moscow; that he has or has had Soviet intelligence ties; and that be had been considered for the position of psychological advisor to the West German Defense Ministry .
 Emile Siegmund Grunberg was the son of Karl Grunenberg, the first director of the Institute for Social Research . Emile was Emile's son, Emile, who was born in Germany .
 He and his brother Karl were translators for the International Labor Organization in Geneva . They worked for the ILO in Geneva, Switzerland .
 Emile and his wife knew Alexander Abramson, alias ""Isaac""; Rachel Duebendorfer, alias "Sissy""; Paul Boettcher; and probably other members of the Rote Drei network . Emile's wife and her husband were friends with many of
 There is a difficulty, a blur in the logic, inherent in the assumption that Josef Wirth, Joachim Oster, possibly Josef Mueller, Ernst Lemmer, Werner Thormann, and Max Horkheimer were Lucy's sources during the period of 1947-19
 The Soviets could have established contact with any of them much more easily and directly than through a procedure whereby they met with Roessler in Germany or Switzerland . Roessler passed reports to Schnieper and thus the Czechs, and the Czech service gave the product to the Soviets .
 Lemmer was far better placed than Roessler to serve as the central collection point . Lemmer, in particular, was better placed to be the central point of the collection .
 Roessler's defense may be one of his major courtroom arguments in his defense . The question may be partly resolved by a major courtroom argument in his own defense . Roessler says Roessler is not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 He maintained that almost everything he sold to the Czechs was compiled from overt sources, chiefly newspapers, and that the information given to him by his German friends was much less important .
 The claim may be true, for people who knew Lucy considered him a truthful man . Lucy was a 'truthful man' according to Lucy's friends and family .
 For these men, Lucy included, were great equivocators, adept, as the German phrase has it, at carrying water on both shoulders . Lucy included: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was a mistake," she says .
 Lucy the Mercenary was motivated chiefly by mercenary considerations . Lucy the mercenary was inspired by her desire to be a mercenary . Lucy was the daughter of Lucy, Lucy's mother and sister .
 "Please tell Lucy in our name that ... his group will surely be paid according to his demands," he writes .
 During the post-war phase Lucy submitted somewhat more than one hundred reports . Lucy submitted more than a hundred reports during the war .
 He and Scbnieper were paid a total sum of between 33,000 and 48,000 Swiss francs .
 His record suggests that he became a Soviet agent of influence in the early 1920’s . His record shows that he was a Russian agent .
 A year or two after the signing of the Treaty of Rapallo he made the first of several trips to the USSR, where he conducted financial negotiations involving forestry rights and the construction of a railroad . A year after the treaty he made a series of visits to the Soviet Union .
 He was pleased that German men and officers were being trained on Russian soil, in evasion of the Versailles Treaty . Even though his own regime was called the ""government of fulfillment"" because it was supposedly carrying out all of its obligations under that treaty .
 Richard Grossmann was also in contact with Walter Schellenberg, through Richard Grossman and perhaps in other ways, as well .
 The answer to the first part of this question is probably yes, but the same cannot be said about the second, at least not with much assurance . It is not clear whether the answer is yes or not, but it is probably the same thing .
 There are clear indications in the record that he envisaged himself as Hitler's successor . There were clear indications that he wanted to be Hitler's next president .
 He once told Canaris that he knew the identities of all the anti-Hitler plotters . He once said he knew perfectly well the identities .
 If Wirth and others were betraying the conspiracy to Schellenberg, they were also being double-crossed by Himmler . The plan to assassinate the Fuehrer would succeed, he says . In short, he said .
 Wirth's major Rote Drei contact appears to have been the French journalist, Georges Blun . Wirth was involved in the creation of the organisation .
 In 1940 he made a trip to Paris in order to inform the French government of the military situation in Germany after the invasion of Norway . In 1940, he travelled to Paris to discuss the situation in France .
 There was some contact, on the record unproductive, with the OSS during the war . And there were some contact unproductive .
 Hans Bernd Gisevius joined the Nazis, worked in the German police and the Ministry of the Interior . Yet he also joined the 20th of July plotters . He was a member of the plotters and worked for the police .
 He supplied intelligence for three and a half years before the war and during its initial phase . He supplied the British with intelligence before and during the war .
 There are only uncertain indications that he was linked to the Rote Drei . There are also uncertain indications he was involved in the death of Rote .
 His ties to the courier Karl Forstmann have been noted earlier in this account . He was a courier for the courier .
 We know that Gisevius had intelligence contacts with the Western Allies . We know he had contacts with Western Allies. We know this .
 There are indications that he knew some members of the Rote Drei net and may himself have been alias ""Rot"" of that group . He may have known some of the group members .
 Some post-war interrogations of German intelligence officers include their comments that Ernst Kaltenbrunner, RSHA chief and Schellenberg's superior, received reports from Gisellenberg as late as April 1945 .
 The record contains other references to links between Gisevius and Heydrich . The record also contains references to Gisegius and Schellenberg, as well .
 When Gisevius went to the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials in 1946 as a witness for Hjalmar Schacht, he became also a highly effective witness for the prosecution, hence doubly unpopular in post-war Germany . He was also a very effective witness in the
 That some denunciations were inspired by rancour therefore seems highly probable . Some denounces are likely to have inspired rancour .
 The Gestapo issued an arrest order for him in August 1944, but he was allowed to remain as an intelligence officer in Switzerland . At first blush it appears odd that he was able to remain a German intelligence officer after the RSHA assimilated the Abwehr .
 Gisevius had intelligence contacts with the Americans, the British, the Swiss, and perhaps the Soviets, but not with Nazi Germany, except for his major role in the resistance .
 This account has said next to nothing about the Swiss role in the drama of the Rote Drei . The Stage and the Actors This account .
 The fact is that certain Swiss officers were very directly a part of the activity of the Rote Drei. The fact that certain . officers were directly . directly involved in the . activities of the Swiss officers was very directly .
 Switzerland has proclaimed for centuries as buckler and breast-plate . It is at odds with that strict neutrality which Switzerland has declared for centuries .
 The traffic traffic, however, reveals Swiss involvement in the attack, CNN says . The traffic record on the site of the attack is obdurate .
 Moscow asked why Rote Drei members in contact with Swiss authorities didn't get more information from them . When arrests were made, Moscow asked if they had more information about them .
 The Swiss General Staff was given the Rote Drei cover name of Luise . Luise was a valuable source of information for the General Staff .
 Lucy's contacts with Swiss military intelligence preceded his work in the Rote Drei . The same is very likely true of Pakbo and certain others, says Lucy .
 Brigadier Colonel Roger Masson, now dead, was the chief of Swiss wartime intelligence . Masson was Swiss intelligence chief during World War II .
 Before World War II began, Hausamann had recognized that Switzerland, already teeming with spies, was itself sadly lacking in military intelligence and in sources to provide it .
 Gallen, be established an unofficial intelligence center, funded actually or nominally by himself and certain friends, he says . Gallen: "Began an unofficially funded intelligence center funded by his friends" Gallen says .
 When war came, this office, known as the ""Bureau Ha,"" was linked to the official Swiss Army intelligence structure . The office was linked with the Swiss Army's official intelligence structure when war came .
 Swiss chieftains did not incorporate the office into the army but left it largely autonomous . Quite deliberately, however, the Swiss army left the office largely autonomous in Switzerland .
 It is reasonable to conjecture that this preservation of unofficial or only semi-official status resulted from the fact that a Bureau Ha outside the official framework could be far freer of the shackles imposed by neutrality than any part of the government could be .
 Only the Swiss know today whether the vital information coming from Germany went first to Lucy and then, via Hausamann, to Masson, or whether the Swiss received the bulk of the information from their sources .
 Switzerland was not just part of the World War II scenery; it had a piece of the action . What we can't be sure of is that Switzerland had a role in the war's most famous battle .
 The story of the Rote Drei in essence is the tale of two firm camps, between which shuttled ambiguous and uncommitted men . The story is the story of two firms, one of the most powerful men in the world .
 There was an East-West schism in their ranks, but they were united and unwavering in their resolve to rid Germany and the world of Hitler . There was a schism, but the West was united against Hitler .
 On the other were the Soviet armed forces and intelligence services, also committed to Hitler's destruction . Hitler had longed for the same domination of the earth that he had long wanted . On the one side, the Soviets were committed to the destruction of Hitler .
 Both groups, the tiny and the vast, were made up for the most part of dedicated activists .
 Wirth, Mueller, Lemmer and Lemmer, Gisevius, Horkheimer, probably Thormann, perhaps Oster . Wirth and Mueller, probably Mueller, perhaps Lemmer . Oster, perhaps Joachim Oster. Wirth. Lemmer.
 These are a different breed from such 20th of July figures as Hans Oster, Goerdeler, and Beck . These are different breed of 20th July figures .
 These were men who posed as arbiters, as intellectuals who had preserved their integrity by being above it all . These were the men . They posed as . arbiters . as intellectuals . They had preserved . integrity by preserving their integrity .
 Roessler, Blun, Lemmer, and the rest could have been replaced by any others willing and able to live well in wartime Switzerland . Their roles were essential, though not very important, but they themselves, as individuals, were not of consequence .
 General Ludwig Beck, suicide; Lawyer Hans von Dohnanyi, hanged; General Erich Fellgiebel, hanged . Dr. Dr. Ludwig Beck also hanged; Dr. Erich Fergiebel was hanged .
 Carl Friedrich Goerdeler, General Friedrich Olbricht, General Hans Oster, General Fritz Thiele, Field Marshall Erwin von Wilzleben, hanged . Field Marshall Erwin von Wernberg, Field Marshal Errol von Wilweneben,
 Only the books and other publications consulted directly during the preparation of this article have been listed in this bibliographical bibliography .
 Gert Buchheit, Der Deutsche Geheimdienst, Geschichte der Militaerischen Abwehr, List Verlag, Munich, 1966 . Buchheit: "Gert Buchhez" was a member of the Deutschland-era-era
 Wilhelm Flicke, Agenten Funken . Nach Moskau, . Agenten . Funken. Nach . Moskauer, . . Agente Funken, Nach. Moszau, was published in . 1957 .
 Alexander Foote, Handbook for Spies, Museum Press Ltd., London, second edition, 1964 . Foote: "Spies are the only people who can be trusted to help spy in the world" Foote's book is published by the Museum of London .
 Rudolf Pechel, Deutsche r Wider stand , Eugen Rentsch Verlag, Erlenback-Zuerich, 1947. Rudolf's book, "Wider stand," was published in 1947 . The book was published by Pecheel, a German
 Gerhard Ritter, The German Resistance, published by George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, 1958 . Ritter was a German Resistance leader in Germany .
 Wilhelm Ritter von Schramm, Verrat im Zweiten Weltkrieg, Econ Verlag, Dusseldorf Vienna, 1967 .
 Hans Oster was a prominent figure in the life of a German politician . Oster died in 1968 at the age of 92 .
 Anonymous, ""Joachim Oster,"" from International Biographical Archiv , 10 June 1967, Lieferung 23/67. Oster died at the age of 50 .
 Tass, International Service in English, 20 February 1968, citing Komsomolskaya Pravda .
 Malcolm Muggeridge, ""The Lucy Mystery,"" The Observer Review, London, 8 January 1967 . Lucy Mystery" is the story of a British mystery .
 Rudolf Strobinger, ""The Man Whom No One Knows,"" Testimony of the Intelligence Service Worker, Prague, Lidova Demokracie, 24 September 1967 . Rudolf Strobinger was a member of the Prague Intelligence Service 
 The portions omitted in this version mainly concern biographical and other details relating to the sources and sub-sources of the principals in the organization . The portions of this version of this article are included in this article .
 Analysis of all traffic presently available has suggested that about two-fifths originated in Moscow . An analysis of all . data presently available suggests that about 2.5% originated in Russia .
 It is suspected that the remaining 6 messages are spurious, the creations of Flicke or someone else . The messages are believed to have been created by someone in the past . It is believed that the other 6 are spurious .
 These messages differ from those known to be authentic in certain minor ways, but consistently . These messages are known to have been authentic in some minor ways .
 All of these messages, if they were genuine, would have been transmitted before the sending date of the earliest authenticated message .
 Hitler's early warning of Hitler's attack was accepted as genuine . Later commentators accepted it was a genuine warning of the attack .
 Foote says of Boettcher, ""I cannot speak for the British, but be certainly was not connected with our network"" Foote is wrong here as at many other points. Foote was wrong .
 Foote was arrested on 6 December 1943 in Moscow . Foote's arrest was the first time he had been arrested in the country since 1942 .
 Marius was Marius Mouttet, a former Socialist Minister . It has also been suggested, however, that he was Moutet .
 None of them appear often in the traffic; none of them reported high-level information . None of the traffic reports are high-profile incidents .
 Hans von Dohnanyi, Josef Mueller, and Dietrich Bonhoeffer were arrested . Oster merely came under initial suspicion, sources have said .
 He was transferred to a reserve status on 19 June 1943 but was not placed under surveillance until March of the following year . He was placed under a surveillance watchlist in March of 1944 .
 The last known message from Dora which cites Werther or any other possible source of Lucy as the source of the message is dated October 1943 .
 The Swiss General Staff was well-informed about the Rote Drei but did not share its insight with the police, for reasons of security . It is more than possible that the General Staff did not tell the police about it .
 He rose early and groomed himself with painstaking care. Because this was no usual morning, he rose early .
 Yuda wondered why her husband had donned his best formal morning clothes instead of the depressing national uniform, the khaki-colored fiber suit .
 A high Tokyo official never discussed his work with anyone, not even his wife perhaps least of all his wife . A high-ranking Japanese official never talked about his work to anyone, even the wife .
 At about eight, he stubbed out his precious ration of rationed cigarette and stepped outside . At about 8:30pm, he was finally allowed to leave the house .
 The morning sun beamed down with the soft glow of autumn . The air was as tartly sweet as the taste of apples .
 From Yuda’s broad, businesslike face peered the eyes of a surgeon searching, diagnostic . Yuda: "I’m looking for a way to get my life back on track. I’ll always be looking for my life again"
 He looked more serious than usual as he strode through the garden to the street . He looked serious as he walked out of the garden with a serious smile .
 No late bloom lifted its head, for the Yudas had long since sacrificed the cherished flower beds to the family’s need for vegetables . The family's beloved flower beds have long since been abandoned by the family .
 The task before him filled the mind, a task he hated, Yuda was on his way to watch two men die . Yuda hated to watch the men die. He hated to see them die .
 Tokko always selected for this duty an officer not directly connected with the case in question . The Tokko is not always directly connected to the case of the case .
 Tamon Yuda was on the list of those eligible to witness the double execution of Sorge and Ozaki . Yuda stood at the top of the list for the execution of both men .
 The coming New Year's Day would see Yuda’s forty-sixth birthday, and he was no stranger to unnatural death . Yuda's death was the result of an accident .
 In the course of his police duties and through the circumstances of war, he had seen death in its most gruesome form . He had also seen death through his own hands in the hands of soldiers .
 The deliberate taking of a man’s life by the process of law set such a death apart from the commons fate of humankind . But something about the deliberate taking . of a . man's life . by the . process of . law set something apart from humankind, it says .
 He opposed the death penalty both on principle and because of the sigh revolted him . The death penalty was opposed on principle, he said .
 He had to remember to watch the crowd at Shinjuka Station and not miss his assistant, Kikiuyasa Akiyama, who would join him there and ride with him the rest of the way to Sugamo Prison .
 Once aboard the train, the two men settled down for the long ride to Sugamo . The two men sat on the train for the first time in Sugamo.
 The prison governor, Ichijima, looked forward to the grim events of the day even less than Yuda, if that was possible . Yuda is a prison in Japan's capital, Tokyo .
 Yuda witnessed the occasional execution; Ichijima had to witness them all . Yuda saw the occasional executions, Ichijama had to watch them all. Yuda watched the executions .
 He endured the ordeal of an execution by doing all possible to convince himself that the victim was an enemy of humankind who had forfeited his right to live . The executioner convinced himself that his victim was a friend of humankind and a traitor .
 Ichijima’s task being to supervise the prison, he had no connection with the investigation of any case and knew nothing about the prisoners committed to Sugamo until the reports came to his office . He had been supervising the prison in Japan .
 Inasmuch as these numbered in the hundreds, he could give each record only a quick reading, unless for some reason it called for special attention . He could give only a brief reading of each record, unless there was something special .
 On that lovely November morning he spent an hour refreshing his memory about the activities of the two condemned men .
 He also attempted to compose himself by withdrawing in solitude to meditate and empty his mind of troubling thoughts .
 Most of the prisoners were strangers to him, but he had come to know Ozaki quite well and Sorge slightly . Ozaki was a prisoner of his own .
 Ichijima kept up the pretense that she did not know an execution was scheduled . Ichijama said she didn't know she was going to be executed .
 Ichijima strictly isolated his home life from the distasteful details of his position . His home life was strictly isolated from his position in Japan .
 He even kept his full-dress uniform in his office so that his wife would never know when some official occasion was at hand . He kept it in so that he didn't know when he was in uniform .
 Ichijima walked to his office after his home lay just outside the prison walls . He was released from prison in Japan's second-largest prison .
 Sorge and Ozaki would have been executed on the morrow . Ordinarily the execution would have taken place on the day of execution .
 Ichijima had until midnight of the eighth to comply with the order . Once signed, the order had to be carried out within five days .
 In ordinary times he would have held off until the last minute, but these were not ordinary times . He would have waited until the end of the day to make his decision .
 Because of the success at Pearl Harbor on December 8, 1941, the eighth of every month carried a special significance . The 8th of the month was the 8th anniversary of the attack on Japan .
 All over the nation dreary little ceremonies harking back to Japan’s hour of greatest glory would be taking place . The ceremonies were taking place all over the country .
 Sorge and Ozaki were sent to their ancestors on the seventh day of the year . The seventh was chosen as a suitable day to send them to their ancestral ancestors .
 November 7 was the Soviet Union’s national holiday, the anniversary of the Bolshevik takeover of Russia in 1917 . For November 7, November 7 is the Soviet holiday .
 The selection of that particular date has led to some peculiar speculations about the date . It is not known why the date was chosen for the ceremony .
 One Karl Kindermann, a wartime interpreter in Japan, used this as a factor to bolster his thesis that the Japanese did not execute Sorge .
 Hotsuki Ozaki accepted that both his half brother and Sorge were executed on November 7 . He produced an equally strange explanation for the execution of his half-brother .
 The Japanese government at the time was negotiating for peace through the Soviet Union and offered Sorge as condition of a peace deal . Sorge was offered as condition by the Japanese government .
 I heard that he was executed on the anniversary of the Soviet Revolution as retaliation for failure of peace negotiations . He was executed as retaliation against failure of the peace negotiations, he said .
 The actual reason was far less outre but, being typically Japanese, might be difficult for a Westerner to understand and appreciate . It might also be difficult to understand .
 Perhaps no other people on earth would have taken such a consideration into account . But perhaps no other person would have thought such a thing was possible .
 The Japanese kept anniversaries reverently and in that spirit chose November 7 to honour the men for their dedication to Russia .
 Ichijima changed into a plain dark uniform with epaulets and brass buttons buckled on his police sword, and laid ready his white gloves and ceremonial hat . Ichijama changed into full dress in his office .
 He wore this costume with a somewhat deprecating air, as if he was more at home with civilian clothes . He wore it with a bit of a lighthearted look at his costume .
 One by one the official party gathered, all in full morning dress except for the prison chaplain, Kato Sensho, in Buddhist robes . The official party was held at the prison in a Buddhist-themed ceremony .
 The Japanese considered no criminal so depraved that his spirit should not be dispatched with all due courtesy . The Japanese were not considered to be depraved enough to shoot him down .
 Ichijima and the others dressed as carefully for Sorge and Ozaki as they would for an imperial reception . Ichijama and others dressed carefully for the imperial reception.
 In addition to Ichijima, Yda, Akiyama, and the Chaplain Sensho, the group included Shoichiro Omata, the prison doctor; Otsubo, Ichijim’s assistant; and his secretary .
 Beyond polite salutations and a few murmured generalities there was no conversation, for these men had not met for a social occasion .
 He rose as usual and washed, washed, and breakfasted on the Spartan prison fare of rice, bean soup and pickles .
 Ozaki was convicted of attempted murder of Eiko’s father in 2010 . Ozaki has been sentenced to life in prison for his role in the death of the mother-of-four .
 At exactly 9, just as he finished the postcard, a key rattled in the lock of his cell . At exactly nine, the key was found in the cell of the convicted murderer . He was sentenced to life in prison for his crimes .
 Ozaki received the notification of his imminent execution with calm dignity . Ozaki's execution was the first time he had been notified of his impending execution .
 With his wish granted, he stripped off his clothes and put on clean undergarments . He stripped off all of his clothes to put clean underwear on him .
 He pulled over his feet a pair of black tabi instead of the customary white ones to symbolize the dark ideal ahead . Then he pulled on his feet instead of wearing a white tabi, symbolizing a dark future .
 Anything ropelike was strictly prohibited to a prisoner, but from somewhere, perhaps a sympathetic guard, Ozaki procured a sash and tied it about his waist . Then he said he was ready. Ozaki said he wanted to be ready.
 The sun caught Ozaki in its golden rays as the three men crossed the prison courtyard . Ozaki was captured by the sun as he crossed the courtyard of the prison .
 High walls concealed from the rest of the prison . Presently they reached the death house, which high walls concealed them from rest of prison .
 In the centre of the room stood a small table and a chair, to which his guards escorted him . The former president was escorted by his guards to a small chair and small table .
 The witnesses who had foreathered in the office were in place, seated about the room so that they formed a hollow square . Opposite Ozaki glowed as he sat in his chair .
 The prisoner gained strength and courage by having a program to follow, by the sight of officialdom clad in its best to honor their common humanity, and by the comfort of his faith . Not only did he thus uphold Japanese decorum, but also .
 Sensho asked Ozaki whether he had a will, what dispositions he wanted made of his effects, what he desired done with his body, and if he had any final statement to make . Ozaki said he wanted to make a statement about his death .
 Ozaki answered all these questions politely, specifying that he wanted his lawyer to receive his remains . Ozaki said he wants his remains to be received by his lawyer .
 Sensho offered Ozaki ceremonial tea and cakes at the end of the ceremony . Sensho also offered ceremonial tea, cakes and tea .
 Ozaki extended his hand as if to accept, then hesitated and refused the refreshment . Ozaki refused to accept the offer of refreshment.
 The two guards moved into place to guide Ozaki into the execution chamber . Ozaki was led to the death chamber by a guard of two .
 The witnesses seated themselves in a single row facing the death trap . The prison personnel on the extreme left, the Ichijima, Yuda, Akiyama and the doctor .
 The last room he entered was not, as morbid imagination might picture, small and dark but fairly large, with plain wooden walls . It was not small or dark but rather large, and the last room was fairly large .
 Ozaki took his place approximately in the centre of the room directly under the rope that would strangle his last breath . Ozaki's last breath was strangled by a rope . The rope was placed under the man's nose .
 This was part of the usual procedure, to ensure that no unseemly struggle marred the occasion, to create the image of disorder or sordidness . The usual procedure was carried out to ensure the occasion was not marked out of the public eye .
 Yuda watched Ozaki’s hands small, articulate hands, hands that had written brilliantly about China, hands now motionless in final resignation . Yuda: Ozaki's hands were motionless as he left the country .
 Four of five executioners stood ready to spring the trap simultaneously, so that no one person should have the death of a fellowman on his conscience . Four of the executioners were ready to pull the trap .
 Yuda could not take his eyes from Ozaki’s hands, which shook as the breath of life struggled out of him . Ozaki's hands shook as he struggled to hold on to life .
 Normally a hanged person required twelve minutes to die, but Ozaki looked as though life had left him . Ozaki appeared to look like he had left his body in a pool of blood .
 The unruffled composure with which Ozaki went to his death sincerely moved Ichijima and the others in attendance . Ozaki's death was the first time a Japanese player has died in Japan since 1995 .
 Witnesses return to the anteroom to take their seats as before . Witnesses return to their seats after execution chamber is removed from chamber .
 Yuda watched with interest this man of whom he had heard so much but never seen . Yuda was fascinated by the man he had never seen in his life .
 His rugged features “looked very calm” and showed no fear or apprehension as he took the seat Ozaki had vacated so recently . Ozaki’s rugged features looked “very calm,” says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Ichijima advised him that in accordance with the orders of the minister of justice, he would be executed on this day . Ichijama told him he would die if he had not been executed on the day .
 Sorge’s expressive brows lifted, and his eyes sprang open like an animal's . But his voice held no tension. Sorge's eyes sprang wide open like he was an animal’�s .
 Sensho asked the questions concerning the prisoner’s final requests . Sensho also asked about the prisoners’ final wishes .
 Sorge scribbled his wishes in a will, which he entrusted to the Procurator’s office . Sorge hastily scribbled a will in his will, and it was entrusted to his office .
 He requested a letter be sent to his mother and sister through the German Embassy . He also requested that a letter was sent to them through the embassy .
 He presented those concerned in his execution with dictionaries and his Leica camera as as tokens of thanks for their consideration .
 Sorge being a European and an atheist, the chaplain had closed the door of the golden shrine before Sorge entered the antechamber . Now Sensho offered him tea and cakes and the opportunity to pray if he wished .
 Ichijima was a compassionate man who had come to like and respect Sorge, says Sorge . Sorge was the son of Ichijama, who was killed in a car crash .
 It was too flippant; it smacked of bravado; it jarred in this awesome hour . It smacked bravado. It jarred, too flippy; it jarsred, but it was too much fun .
 With sincerity he thank Ichijima and the other prison officials for all they had done for him . With sincerity, he said: "With sincerity, I thank them for their kindness"
 Ozaki walked into the bare, sunlit room that had already claimed Ozaki . Then with composure he walked back into the empty room . Ozaki had already lost his life in the hospital .
 Once again, functionaries left the anteroom and took their places in the death chamber . Once again the functionaries took their place in the chamber .
 The attendants bound his arms and legs, then melted into the background . They bound him up, bound him down and melted into a background in the background of the scene .
 "Let him deny there is a God, and he will invest with divinity some force within his understanding," he said . Let him deny God, he said, "and he will invested with divine some force"
 Sorge had set up his own trinity and called upon it in his last hour . Sorge called upon the trinity to save his life in his final hour .
 Sorges’s last words did not well up spontaneously; he had carefully selected them . The last words were carefully selected, he carefully selected .
 He had to be sure that his audience understood, that they would report it correctly, so that all would know he had died in the faith . He said he had to make sure they would do so .
 The dedication with which Sorge uttered them, his whole attitude impressed Yuda to his very soul. The words,the dedication with . which Sorgi uttered them . Sorge, the words,
 Instinctively recognizing the sure moment, the executioner sprang the trap . The executioner sprung the trap, but it was a mistake .
 Yuda's eyes moved irresistibly to Sorge’s hands, hands that quivered in the death struggle . Ozaki's hands were bigger than Sorge's, hands much bigger than Ozaki’�s, hands .
 Sorge’s body had always kept his spirit earthbound; now it clung fiercely to life . Sorge was always earthbound, but now his spirit had come back to life.
 Paris is too big, Istanbul is too Asiatic, and Venice is a cliche. Venice is too cliche, and Paris is a big city, too big and too big for Venice .
 It had crossed my mind to write a joke essay on Venice and discuss the town without ever mentioning the canals, the gondolas, the churches or the piazzas . Venice is one of the world's most famous tourist attractions .
 With a straight face, I would concentrate on the artistic purity of the railway station, the workings of the stock exchange, the intricacies of Venetian municipal finance, the history of the municipal waterworks .
 There is absolutely nothing to say about Venice. But apart from perpetrating what, at the best, would have been a pretty damp squib, there is nothing else to say .
 "It is there, and all that one can tell people is that they should go and see it for themselves," says the author of the book . "It's there. It is there," he says .
 Geneva, clean, tidy and God-fearing, is a model city devoted to good causes . Geneva is the city of Calvin, of the Red Cross, and of the United Nations. It is also a model of Calvin and the Red .
 Geneva, Switzerland, has a Georges Simenon quality, the author says . The city has a hidden turmoil behind the beautiful, bland face of the country, he says .
 In Austria and Bavaria, yodelling is light and airy and gay and mixed up with romance . Yodelling has become a popular form of folk folk folk art .
 In Switzerland, the yodel has deep undertones of melancholy that sometimes descend into an almost primeval ululation akin to the braying moan of the Alpenhorn . An echoing plaint against the straitjacket of Swiss morals, respectability and symmetry .
 Switzerland's solidity is based on a giant conspiracy to keep chaos at bay . Chaos blows in from neighbouring countries, or pollinates within the frontiers, to sweep it under the carpet .
 Switzerland is one great 'Mon Repos' and, to keep this European pension spick and span so that, apart from other considerations, the rates at the lodging-house can remain high .
 This cultivated innocence seems to verge almost into infantilism in Swiss-German cantons . The linguistic use of the diminutive rings almost like baby-talk .
 The diminutive suffix 'li' is everywhere, from Biirli, Madli and Kiihli to the famous Miisli . Dr Bircher-Brenner tried to save the life of Sir Stafford Cripps .
 In many other respects it is a great refreshment to arrive in Switzerland from any other country in Europe . Switzerland is one of the most important countries in the world to visit .
 At last you do not have to lock your car when you leave it on the street . Here at last you don't need to lock it when you walk out of your car .
 The lavatories are spotless and the waiters and shopkeepers have that desire to please that is only genuine in a really thrifty nation . The lavatory is spotless, and the shopkeepers and waiters have a desire for please .
 In exchange for this cleanliness and orderliness, you yourself must, of course, conform by also being clean and orderly . In exchange, you must also conform by being clean, orderly .
 Swiss management and officialdom are extremely managerial and officious . To slip up chaotically by parking your car in the wrong place, leaving the smallest scrap of litter, or failing to have the right kind of ticket on a train may lead to positively magisterial retribution .
 For the thwarted or affronted Swiss readily goes, as the psychologists say, 'into paroxysm', as any member of the British Ski Club who has offended the guard on a Swiss train will agree .
 These states of paroxysm—the reaction of the symmetrist to chaos, are signs of the deep psychosis that results from restraint . These states are signs that result from restraint, the author says . The author's work is published on CNN.com/Heroes .
 Saturday nights in Zurich are made hideous by drunken revelers who bay at the moon with terrible cries from deep down within their frustrated libidos .
 'Mon Repos' is kept tidy in Switzerland for the sake of its 'mon Repos', and other human frailties are kept tidy . Suicide is not mentioned as a cause of death in a Swiss newspaper .
 Extra-marital love, though it may end in the divorce court, is usually managed with great decorum . Extra marital love, for instance, is often managed with good decorum.
 It is understood that the mistress shall not be kept in the home town but established in a neighbouring city which the businessman has reason to visit at frequent intervals . The Swiss businessman has a mistress, but it is also understood that it is not kept in home town .
 Zurich businessman expects his loved one in Berne to earn money in a respectable job, keep their love-nest spick and span . The Zurich businessman also expects his wife to prepare dainty meals for him .
 Abortion is legal in most cantons, though here again the process is respectably formalized . Lurther, to tidy up the whole picture, abortions are legal in Switzerland .
 The G.P. will then recommend her to a gynaecologist who, in turn, will recommend a clinic . The financial reward mounts to between £80 and £100 . The risk and responsibility is spread across the country .
 The Swiss are not great gamblers except on the Stock and Bullion Exchanges . casinos have recently been permitted to operate in most of the large cities on condition that boule only is played and the maximum stake shall be five Swiss francs .
 The Swiss have not wished to push money crimes under the carpet, they say . Money crimes are still a human weakness, but there remain money crimes, the Swiss say .
 The crime against the holy franc to be the most heinous in their whole society. Instead they have elevated the crime against . The crime is not the worst crime in their society, it is the worst in the whole society, says the French .
 A friend of mine who has to listen to the Swiss radio at frequent intervals tells me that there is no bulletin in which francs or Franken do not feature . The Swiss francs and Franken have been a big part of Switzerland's economy for decades .
 The value of money is one of the prime pillars of a child's education in Switzerland . Since the greatest crime in Switzerland is to do something wrong with money .
 If you see a small crowd in the street, it will not be in front of a shop window, but at the window of a bank . Wall Street prices will be given half an hour after the opening and every hour thereafter . All of the prices are based on the opening of a
 The Genevese, Henri Dunant, invented the Red Cross, but let the family business go to pot . Dunant committed the gravest sin that Geneva can conceive of, he squandered capital .
 Years later, living a pauper's life in the canton of Appenzell, he was awarded the first Nobel Peace Prize . Years later he was living in a poverty-stricken Swiss canton .
 His creditors attempted to have the prize seized in settlement of his debt . Immediately, though his bankruptcy was thirty years old, his creditors tried to seize the prize .
 When he died in 1910 he left the prize money to charities rather than let a penny go to his family . Dunant managed to stave them off, and when he died, he left a penny of the prize to charities .
 The thirst for money is, of course, the chief economic strength of a country that is poor in natural resources and that has, broadly speaking, only services to sell . But the thirst for cash is the country's main economic strength .
 Originally the Swiss, who had as ferocious a record for fighting as the Scots, hired out their various cantonal armies as mercenaries . The Swiss Guards at the Vatican are the survivors, but in this century they have turned their attention to sanatoria .
 The great virtue of Swiss banks is that they are not only solid but secret . In the vaults of Zurich, Basle and Geneva lie hidden fortunes worth billions upon billions of pounds .
 In a Swiss bank you may have an account or a safe deposit known only by a number, and this number will be known only to you and by one single director of the bank who may not disclose your identity even to his fellow directors .
 If I Fleming had such an account and a friend were to send £100,000 to my Swiss bank for the credit of I Fleming, the bank would deny all knowledge of me and return the money . If, for instance, I Fleming has such a bank account, it would deny
 Heavy federal penalties were imposed by the law of November 8th, 1934 (just in time to welcome the flood of Jewish and German funds fleeing from Hitler), on any breach of banking security .
 Whosoever intentionally as organ, official, employee of a bank, as accountant or accountant's assistant, violates the duty of absolute silence or the professional secret, will be punished with a fine of up to 20,000 Swiss francs .
 The hidden riches of Switzerland cannot be estimated in millions or billions . Pick's World Currency Report gave a clue in a recent examination of the average per capita gold holding in all countries .
 Switzerland is generous in charitable donations abroad . The Red Cross and the League of the Red Cross are heavily subsidized by Switzerland .
 The emphasis on privacy and security in Switzerland is perhaps as much to attract money, for ever on the hunt for 'Mon Repos', as for the peace and protection of the citizens . It is not surprising that the protection of this national fortune is an obsession with Switzerland .
 The atmosphere of a well-guarded bank-vault is strengthened by the continued maintenance of tank traps, camouflaged redoubts, and demolition chambers, not only along the frontiers but on many bridges and other strategic points throughout the country .
 Military service is compulsory for all between the ages of twenty and sixty . Every soldier-citizen has to keep his rifle with forty rounds at home so as to be ready to go out and fight .
 Every housewife is required to keep in the larder iron rations, consisting of one litre of cooking oil, two kilos of rice and two kilograms of sugar per head of the household .
 These measures, combined with a powerful police force, create a glowing picture of law, order and security in a turbulent world .
 The impression on the foreigner and on foreign capital is little short of paradisal. Combined with the honesty, industry and cleanliness of the Swiss, the impression is little less than paradisal .
 Modern Switzerland has gathered to its bosom a new kind of refugee—the fugitive from punitive taxation . Traditionally a haven for refugees from turmoil and persecution, modern Switzerland is now welcoming a new type of refugee .
 The political refugee still exists in the form of fugitive royal families, Italian, Rumanian, Spanish and Egyptian . A handful of sheikhs are among those who have fled the country .
 Palace Hotels along the shores of Lac Leman hold strictly mediatized tea and bridge parties and are courted by local snobs .
 There are many cranks attached to this fusty world of ex-kings and queens, including, in Lausanne, one bizarre sect, about thirty strong, that worships our queen .
 The sect has set up a 'temple' over a garage and decorated it with bright rainbow coloured draperies and a large red-leather armchair which is to be her throne .
 Members of the sect take it turns to fast for twenty-four hours at a time while awaiting Her Majesty's arrival . Members take it in turns to . fast for . twenty-eight hours at . a time .
 Frederick Bussy is a bearded gentleman in his late forties who wears white robes embroidered with the British royal coat of arms . He records prophecies of the sect on a dictaphone for typing to world leaders .
 Monsieur Bussy is proud that Her Majesty appears to take note of his requests . He is particularly proud that she appears to be taking note of him .
 Charlie Chaplin, Noel Coward, Ingrid Bergman, Richard Burton and Richard Burton among them . The Voltaires, Rousseaus and Mesdames de Stael of today are a host of British and American actors and writers .
 Noel Coward is, besides being a friend, one of my heroes, and I was disgusted by the hullabaloo in the press . Instead of allowing him to go slowly bankrupt, Coward's lawyer persuaded him to reside outside England and stay alive .
 I have a basic alteration to propose in our tax laws which I will call, the Quantum of Solace Clause . I will not weary my readers with the details of his case, but I will propose it in the tax laws .
 Most beneficiaries will, of course, come from the creative arts, but they will also come from sport, politics and medicine . Most of the beneficiaries will come from acting, writing, painting, music, etc .
 Noel Coward arranged a dinner party for us with his neighbour, Charlie Chaplin . It was a dazzling experience to spend a whole evening with the two people who have made me laugh most of my life .
 There is no pretension anywhere except perhaps in the glasses at dinner at dinner . "There are no pretensions anywhere," the author says .
 Much of the success of the evening was due to Oona, his beautiful young wife, the daughter of Eugene O'Neill . Oona was Oona's daughter, and she was the first lady of the night .
 She has borne him seven children in the 17 years of their marriage . She has been married to him for 17 years .
 It is wonderful to see two people bask unaffectedly in each other's love, and the relationship lit up the evening . The couple were married at the end of the night .
 Chaplin talks about Ben Hur, Ben Hur and Caryl Chessman . He was disgusted with Chessman's execution, but said Chessman had achieved more for mankind than any other man since the war . Chaplin said he does not go to films or theatres and does not own
 He was going to make a really great film, it would be a mixture of half a dozen spectaculars —Ben Hur, Anna Karenina, South Pacific and others . It would have been a mix of half-a-dozen spectaculars, including Ben Hur . He said he was
 As the villain came alongside, the hero would nonchalantly hold out a side of ham which the knives on the chariot wheels would cut into thin slices to gain strength . The hero would eat and gain strength so that he would win the race . The villain would eat the ham which
 Chaplin seized the idea and tucked it away. His wife suggested that the theme should be 'the little man who had never had it so good’.
 He next gave a graphic account of being invited by the Duke of Westminster to a boar hunt in France . He had to borrow clothes and his horse had run away with him .
 He works every day from eleven to five and has finished nine hundred pages of his book . He has finished 9,000 pages of the book .
 He complained of being bedevilled by his Swiss secretary who constantly tried to improve his English . He complained that he was plagued by his secretary constantly trying to improve English .
 He said he was not surprised, as he had taught himself the language and suspected that his secretary knew it far better than he did . He hoped that some of what he had actually written would survive the process of editing by his publishers .
 We all, of course urged him to reject any kind of editorial censorship or correction, but his modesty will, one fears, allow Big Brother's blue pencil to wreak its havoc .
 "It is wonderful when one's heroes in the flesh are even better than in the imagination," says the author . "It's wonderful to see your heroes even better in the real world," she says .
 Noel Coward's home in London was the scene of the Narcissus Festival . Tulips, lilac in Vienna, narcissi in Switzerland and bougainvillaea and hibiscus in Naples .
 Genevese is bursting at the seams, with a quarter of its residents foreigners and well over a million tourists every year . Today, its economy bulging with the wealth of countless international organizations and of big foreign businesses, such as Chrysler and Dupont .
 ‘P' has become the most desirable letter of the alphabet . ‘’P’ has been the most sought-after letter in the alphabet for drivers . ’P' is the most popular letter of alphabet .
 Geneva's only hope is for them to build vast parking places out over the famous lake . So far as Geneva is concerned, the only hope for them is for vast parking areas .
 Geneva is home to the highest fountain in the world . The Rhone that thunders through the town is also home to Mont Blanc and Mont Blanc .
 The spirit of Calvin, expressed in the ugly and uncompromising cathedral that dominates the city, seems to brood like a thunderous conscience over the inhabitants of the inhabitants .
 The international set do not penetrate even the fringes of Genevese society . Delegates, staffs of the various organizations and staffs from foreign businesses .
 A booklet has been prepared by the President of the American Women's Club of Geneva and the Chief of the Mental Health Section of the World Health Organization, to prepare Americans coming to work in Geneva for what is called 'Culture Shock'
 The chief trouble is the language problem, closely followed by the business of bringing up children . The main problem is the problem of raising children .
 Swiss children have butter or jam for tea in Geneva, as in the rest of Switzerland . In Geneva, children eat jam or butter or butter for tea .
 Swiss children are not allowed to go to most films until they are eighteen . Even the harmless Danny Kaye is forbidden to children until the age of 16 .
 Swiss mother finds it difficult to make adult conversation to a foreign mother . Only in 1960, and by a narrow majority, did Swiss women obtain the vote, and then only a minority of the cantons .
 The general values and moral judgments of the Swiss have hardly developed since 1914, whereas the foreigners' have been turned inside out by two world wars . Switzerland has hardly developed its moral judgments since 1914 .
 Voltaire endeavoured to dynamite in his constant forays against Calvinism . Voltaire's reserve was this reserve, this holier thanthou attitude, that Voltaire attempted to dynamit .
 The Lord visits Calvinism's present-day disciples with a scandal . The Lord, I have always believed, has little sympathy for Calvinism, visits Calvinists .
 His wife, on returning from a church meeting that night, was shot at and wounded by a man she described as a tall, dark man wearing a dark suit who had dashed out of the house and made his escape on a black bicycle .
 Maitre Pierre Jaccoud arrested a month later on the charge of murder . It was a headline story, but no headlines were black enough for the sensational arrest .
 Jaccoud had gone to Stockholm and had his hair bleached after murder . He also had a mistress, Linda Baud, a secretary at Radio Geneva . He had tried to take poison during the police investigation .
 His wife knew all about it but did nothing for fear of offending the conventions . When it ended, Madame Jaccoud, worn down by those 'meals heavy with silence', took him back and the marriage mended .
 In the summer of 1957, Linda Baud took another lover, a young technician from Radio Geneva called Andre Zumbach, to whom, out of jealousy, Jaccoud wrote anonymous letters . Unfortunately, in the summer, Baud's lover died of a heart attack . Jacc
 I have heard that you are a friend of Linda Baud and feel you should be informed of what is going on . I feel you need to know what's going on. I'm sure you will be able to do so, please contact us .
 After having been the mistress of a barkeeper, then of one of the employees of your organization, not to mention a number of other adventures, she has been mistress of the married man for several years .
 I saw them together on the 17th August and found by chance a most edifying photograph of the way they spend their time . I saw the pair on August 17 and found the photograph of them .
 The photograph was one of Linda Baud naked which, she claimed, Jaccoud had taken of her at pistol point one evening in the grimy little room they had used for their affair .
 Jaccoud had shot the father and, panicking, had also shot the mother . Surprised by the father, the mother had also been shot . The father had been shot by the mother, who had been in the hospital .
 The trial, in March 1960, lasted three weeks and was enlivened by the production of five hundred love-letters from Jaccoud to Linda Baud . The discovery of a dagger, showing traces of blood and liver cells, was also discovered at the scene of the crime
 The Public Prosecutor was a great friend of Jaccoud and they broke out into ‘tu’ in the court . The court where he had so often pleaded was the court where the former president had pleaded . To heighten the drama, the Public Prosecutor broke out .
 The judge also knew the accused, and the defence lawyers were old friends . The judge and defence lawyers also knew each other .
 The Public Prosecutor himself admitted acquaintance with Linda Baud, and the drama was intensified by the appearance of a famous Paris lawyer, Rene Floriot, for the defence, who spread mud around Geneva .
 Jaccoud was convicted and sentenced to seven years, later reduced to three years . Jaccou was sentenced to 7 years, subsequently reduced to 3 years .
 Dubois espionage affair of 1957 was another one . Such cases burst upon the Swiss scene with all the greater impact because, though sordid crimes occur in every other country, they really should not disturb a society that has 'Mon Repos' as its motto .
 Much of what I fear will seem critical of the Swiss and of their surpassingly beautiful country . Much, far too much, I fear, of . what I have written will seem . critical of . the Swiss . I fear it will seem to be critical of Switzerland and of its surpass
 It is not my wish to be critical, but merely to examine, to look beneath the surface of a country that holds so much more mystery than those that wear their hearts and psychoses on their sleeve .
 I am devoted to the country and its people and I would not have them different in any detail. I am dedicated to the people and the country, I said . I would never have had any more details of my life in detail.
 Switzerland has a Simenon quality, an atmosphere of still-water-running-deep, which is a great temptation to the writer of thrillers . But, as I said at the beginning, Switzerland has an atmosphere that is great temptation .
 The mystery writer enjoys seeing the play from back-stage rather than from out front, in the stalls . If I have revealed a wart here and a wen there and poked mild fun at the reserved, rather prim face Switzerland presents .
 Swiss cheese has holes in it because, in the process of making Gruyere and Emmental, carbon dioxide is formed and, as the cheese solidifies, the bubbles remain . The bubbles remain in the Swiss cheese .
 This applies even to winter-time and even to conferences no one has ever heard of, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Richmond and Hotel des Bergues are particularly favoured by visiting high society and statesmen . The newer Hotel du Rhone is more frequently chosen by business magnates and sheikhs .
 The Clos de Sadex is run by English-speaking Mr and Mrs L de Tscherner who have transformed their own home into a first-class residential hotel . They loan their own motor boat for lake excursions .
 Hotel Lamartine is a picturesque but not inexpensive retreat in Geneva itself . The hotel is located in the city of Geneva, Switzerland .
 This is an 'authentic' chalet in its own garden at Champel, chemin des Clochettes . It is mentioned in the Guide Michelin and caters mainly for bed and breakfast customers .
 A limited number of rooms and the inconvenience of Sunday of lunchers who come inter alia for perches du lac, a fresh-water fish speciality, is a problem .
 Le Pere Bise is one of France's three best restaurants, at Talloires, just after Annecy . Geneva is within fifty kilometres of one of the world's best restaurants .
 Inside Geneva the Beam, quai de la Poste, is the uncrowned king of local restaurants . The Beam is located in Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland .
 After that, the choice will be vast and interesting, and advice will be tendered from every side . After that the choice is vast, and it will be interesting, with advice from all sides .
 For fondue bourguignonne, Le Chandelier, 23 Grande Rue, in the old city, is a local speciality . It's a local favourite of fondue boudreau, a French speciality, and a local delicacy .
 This fondue consists of portions of cut-up raw steak which you impale on a stick and cook yourself in boiling oil and butter at the table . You impale the steak and cook it yourself in a bowl of boiling oil .
 Cheese fondue is rarely served in summer and it tastes better in any brasserie than in a restaurant . It tastes better to eat cheese fondue at a brasserie or a restaurant than at home .
 You are automatically served with a fresh portion on the same easily identified plate until you beg for mercy . You're served with the same plate until the end of the meal .
 In Geneva the Cafe du Midi has a cellar, or camotzet, which specializes in raclette . If you can stand the heat, there's a lot of raclette in Geneva . The cafe is round the corner from the Hotel des Bergues .
 Le Bagnard, place du Marche, is located in Carouge, France . It is cooler, less picturesque, and the raclette or fondue is just as good as fondue .
 The word Bagnard comes from Bagne cheese and not from a convict past in the cafe ownership . The word 'Bagnard' comes from the name of the cafe where the cafe is based .
 The Gentilhomme is the only place where it is possible to dine to music and dance . At the other extreme, as a preliminary to night-clubbing, it's the Richmond restaurant .
 Night-clubs are numerous, cheaper than in England and as naughty as those in Paris, hope the Genevese. hope to find them in France .
 The floor show is one reason why German Swiss, less privileged at home, find business visits to Geneva essential .
 A whisky or shared bottle of vin blanc can last you till 2m. at a cost of about 10s. per person . Otherwise a whisky or a shared bottle can last for a few hours at £10s.
 It was probably no bigger than a pin-prick but they sure felt its effect . It was the first time they'd heard the sound of a gunshot .
 Herr Doktor Schrader and his two laboratory technicians began to have trouble standing and even greater difficulty breathing . Almost immediately Herr . Schrader began to be overcome by difficulty standing and breathing .
 In that split second, the professor of organic chemistry had the good sense to run to the door and punch the red emergency button, setting the deafening klaxon blaring . The professor had a split second to punch the emergency button .
 The Herr Doctor was the furthest from the spill, and the most experienced as far as the dangers of the toxin was concerned . He was the closest to the spill and most experienced in the field .
 He had reluctantly accepted the young man as a favour to a family friend, but he had never expected to be forced to employ him in the lab .
 All you could think about at that specific moment was never again will he do a favour for a family friend . All you can think about is that he will never again be able to do the same thing again .
 The whole matter might be a moot point in a mere few minutes . But then again, the whole matter may be moot point for a few minutes.
 The second technician, the senior of the two, knew to put as much distance between the spill and the first technician . The first man began to cough, fight for his next breadth and begin to begin the quick paralysis that would kill him . The second man was killed in the accident .
 The second technician knew not to rush across the room and lend assistance to the technician . The technician was not rushed across to help .
 When he realized what was happening to himself he had started to stagger towards the two of them, screaming madly . When he had realized what had happened to himself, he staggered towards them . The two had been on the run from each other for over two hours .
 The Herr Doktor and the other technician had both yelled at the boy, “stay where you are”, in the process emptying their lungs of their precious breadth . The boy had been in the hospital for two weeks .
 All three men were equal, all three trapped in a paroxysm of death . And now together, the men are equal, they were equal .
 They fell like paper dolls onto the floor, then half folded into the fetal position, an involuntary act as the muscle spasms began to take hold . They fell as they lay on the floor before folding into a fetal position .
 The glare of the clinical fluorescent lamps overhead made the whole scene surreal in its reality . The glare from the clinical lights overhead made it surreal in the reality .
 Farben chemistry lab was an unwelcome stage for the death throes of the men . Farben had been working at the time of his death .
 He had inadvertently poisoned himself a year back while working on an earlier version of the organophosphate molecule that was mortally toxic to the human nervous system .
 It was a derivative of an insecticide he had developed and perfected in 1937 . The insecticide was developed by the chemist in 1937 and died in 1996 .
 After seven long years of development, the human version of the robot is nearly perfected . After seven years of developing, the robot has been released to the public for the first time .
 It would be ironic if its inventor turned out to be one of its first victims . It's ironic if it turns out to have been one of the first victims of the invention of the device .
 There was nothing left for the Herr Doktor to do except turn his dispassionate scientific mind to the problem .
 The first man was foaming at the mouth and asphyxiating in a mixture of paralysis and vomit . The first was foamed at the lips and was ashyxiating . The second man died in the same way .
 The second technician was breathing heavily, the very worst thing to do . The ingested neural toxin was accumulative and triggered by the metabolites of respiration . The technician is breathing heavily .
 His heavy breathing would not buy him the time he would need before help arrived . The man was rushed to hospital in a critical condition but was able to be saved .
 Imagine you were deep under water, drowning and knowing that if you opened your mouth all that would flood in was the thing that would drown you . If you open your mouth, all the things that flood in would be the thing you would say if you open it up .
 In a perverse way this accident, if it didn’t kill him out right, will let him test his theory of diminished toxicity, he says . The accident will allow him to test the theory, he writes .
 As he let the carbon dioxide build in his blood his perception of reality began to alter radically . His perception of the passage of time also began to change, as did his perception .
 Schrader knew that time was quickly running out for him . Between the hypoxia and the paralysis, Schrader said he feared time was running out .
 The second hand of the clock over the door began to slow almost to a stop . The constricting tunnel vision began to form, as wild, psychedelic patterns began to dance on the periphery of his field of view .
 Another 30 seconds perhaps, but another minute for sure, he would be dead . Another thirty seconds perhaps . But another minute would have been sure, and he would have died .
 Hurry ... he heard himself yell, emptying his lungs of their precious air in a garbled spitting of words and froth . Hurry! He heard himself yelling .
 Schrader fought to grab another life giving breath, but he could manage not much more than a small gulp of air, which set him into uncontrollable convulsions . Schrader tried to grab more life-saving breaths, but could only manage a single gulp .
 They looked like giant insects, clad in their protective gear, with two round bug eyes small goggles to see what they were doing . They had shiny stainless steel re-breathers hanging on belts strapped to their hips .
 Three bug like figures quickly made their way over to the Herr Doktor, ignoring the two laboratory technicians altogether . The three bug-like figures were quickly ignored by the two lab technicians, ignoring them altogether .
 They placed an oxygen mask over his face and then jabbed a syringe in his arm . They placed the mask on his face before jabbing the syringe into his arm with a mask .
 Almost immediately the shot of atropine they injected into his arm began to counter the paralysis . Almost immediately, the shot began to reverse the paralysis.
 It was only after the passage of four or five seconds that his diaphragm began to move and much needed oxygen began to flood his starving lungs . He was only able to breathe for the first time when oxygen started to enter his lungs .
 The other two were men long dead, to be added to the growing number of test subjects that had been used to perfect the neural toxin .
 The other hundred of the test subjects had been inmates from several different concentration camp, mostly woman and children, of different ages, weights, heights and cultural heritage . They were far from in good health .
 The researchers rounded out their study in death to include the four corners of Europe . They rounded out the study to include Europe's corners .
 He was fully conscious as they opened all the lab windows and let in the frigid winter air . He is fully conscious when they opened the windows and opened the air .
 The combined shock of the cold water and cold air was almost as potent as the atropine and oxygen . "The combined shock" of the water and air was the most powerful shock of all three stages .
 They wrapped him up in a clean white dressing gown and lifted him on a gurney that had mysteriously appeared . They lifted him up on a gurney that mysteriously appeared on the street .
 He was wheeled out of the lab, down the corridor past the concerned expressions of his colleagues . Then they wheeled him away, past the concerns of colleagues who were close enough to watch .
 He was being wheeled up to the I.G. hospital and the heavenly felt care of Germany’s best doctors and nurses . The hospital is Germany's best hospital in Germany .
 The smaller of the two body bags was carted past him to the service elevator at the end of the hall . Good riddance he thought as he watched the smaller body bag be taken out of the room .
 By the time the hour is out they will have been carved up in the name of medical science . By the end of the hour they will be carved up by medical science.
 Herr Doktor Schrader had written the book on organophosphate nerve gases and their toxicology . By now he knew all the doctors and nurses by their first name .
 Professor Schrader was nearly killed in an accident in his research laboratory . The director of Farben's facility at Dyhemfurth, Germany, telephoned his personal physician to inform him that he had made arrangements for the doctor to fly down in his own private Junkers-52
 As he sat in his office in the ground floor of his old family home in Potsdam, the old physician stared at his reflection off the desktop .
 So nice of you to ask me, the old man thought, looking at his aged and wrinkled face . The old man looked back at his wrinkled and old-looking face .
 In 1941, he lost his son in the first days of Operation Barbarossa . That left him in 1941 when he was killed in World War II . His son was also killed in the same operation .
 He lost his wife in 1943 when a British bomb exploded in Berlin . His wife was visiting her sister who had just lost her husband in North Africa .
 His secretary had packed her bags and went back home in the summer of 1944 when her husband was killed at the battle for the Falaise gap when the allies broke out of Normandy .
 As the number of his older and more distinguished patients began to die or drift away from Potsdam it was only a matter of time before he would be forced to close this down .
 The old physician hated the war, but he didn't hate the British and the Americans, he says . He says he didn’t hate the U.S. and the British, but the Americans .
 He knew them, having fought against them in France in the previous war . He fought them in a previous war in France, having served in France .
 What he hated was the upstart corporal and his thugs, and what they had done to his Germany . He hated what he hated: the corporal, the thugs .
 His Germany was gone, shattered into a million broken bits of memory and tradition . His country was shattered by the loss of his country, his country and his country .
 The old man was too proud to admit he was scared of heights and even more scared of flying . He was afraid to admit that he was afraid of heights .
 There is a plane waiting for you at Templehoff which will leave within the hour . There is also a free flight to Templehoff from Templehoff .
 The tone and temper of their dialogue was not sitting well with the Director, so he ordered the old goat, and you used those exact words over the phone, to either to do what he was told or he would find a new private physician . The tone of their . dialogue was .
 The Director would have perhaps been more severe and fired him on the spot but had it been for the fact that the physician was an old family friend that had brought the director into the world some five decades earlier .
 It had been the old physician that had been there for the boy, when he had the influenza in 1918 that nearly killed him, had nursed him back to health . He grew into an accomplished chemist, then an industrialist and now a director of the biggest chemistry company in Germany .
 The old doctor packed his travel bag, and stood waiting for the car as it drove up ten minutes later than he had been told . So the old doctor was ready to go on his way back to the hospital .
 The Ju-52 waited to fly him south to Templehoff airport, in the centre of bombed out Berlin . Then he set off for Templehoff Airport, Berlin, where he was waiting to fly south . He was the last person to die in the bombing of Berlin .
 Many of the familiar landmarks from his younger days were either damaged or destroyed by the war . Many of those familiar landmarks have been destroyed or damaged by the conflict .
 Napoleon the third had made war with the Germanic provinces . He was born the year that Napoleon the . third had . made war .
 He had gone to medical school when Bismarck reigned over a stable and familiar Germany . He was a medical student at the time of the dictatorship .
 As he drove through the streets of Berlin, past the piles of debris and toppling walls, he did not recognize the city . He said he didn't recognize Berlin from the rubble .
 It was the grey hollowness in the faces of the people, mostly woman, children and old men that were shuffling in the streets . It was also the grey . holliness in the . faces of people that walked the streets.
 When the car arrived at Templehoff airport they were ushered through the gates by the guards . Guards were evidentally expecting them and driven immediately to the foot of the stairs leading up to the tri-engine passenger plane .
 As he stepped out of the car, one by one and the chauffeur retrieved his bag from the boot, the three motors of the Ju-52 sprang to life . One by one, one of the cars was driven by the German Air Force One .
 This was his last chance to turn back, but waiting at the top of the stairs for him was a fine-looking flight attendant . She held her jacket closed against the cold as she waved and ushered him onto the plane .
 A cold rush of air from the prop wash was pushing him over and he was finding it harder and harder to climb the stairs . The actor was pushing himself over and struggling to get up stairs .
 The young lady hurried down the stairs and took his air, shielding him from the prop wash . She hurried to take his air and shield him from being washed .
 In a blur they were both in the plane and he was sitting in his seat . Then in a blur, he was both in a plane and sat in his own seat .
 She strapped him in and had just enough time to strap herself into the seat next to him . She strapped herself in and strapped him into the car next to her .
 He closed his eyes tight and before he knew it the plane started to move and pick up speed . He closed eyes tight as he tried to keep his eyes shut .
 When they were airborne, it was then that he felt the girls’ hand on his arm . He felt them on his way to the airport .
 She got up and went to the front of the plane with a sniffer of Schnapps and a hot water bottle and blanket . She returned in a moment with Schnapps, hot water bottles and a blanket .
 She gave him the Schnapps, placed the hot water bottle on his lap and then covered him in a blanket . She then covered the blanket .
 The old doctor’s blood began to warm, but he didn’t know whether it was the Schnapps, the hot water bottle the blanket or the attractive young woman that was warming his heart .
 She was pleasant and accommodating and sat next to him in the cold and empty airplane as they flew south . She was a pleasant and friendly passenger .
 They chatted about life before the war and what life might be like after the war was over . The pair chatted to each other about their experiences in the war .
 She said she would be there to take him safely back home when it was time for him to return home . Together this made the flight pass quickly and then they were landing and had to make their goodbyes .
 Unlike Berlin that lay in ruins, this little picture postcard Bavarian town was all but untouched by the war, save for the crimson red and black banners . Unlike Berlin, the town was not completely destroyed by the conflict .
 "No matter where they went in Germany, it was not possible to escape this madness," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Chief doctor escorted the old physician up to the patient’s room . After the exchange of a few pleasantries, the chief doctor escorted him up to his room .
 Schrader was sitting in a big plush chair next to the window covered in a layer of several white blanket . When they entered the patient’s room Schrader sat in a large plush chair . Schrader is sitting next to a large white blanket covering the window .
 His eyes were closed and an intravenous drip was hanging from a pedestal and was feeding into his right arm . His eyes had closed and his arm was being fed into his arm . He was taken to the hospital in a critical condition .
 The old physician nodded and took the patients wrist into his hand to take his pulse . He then took his pulse to check his pulse and said he was fine .
 Under the watchful eye of the chief doctor, the old physician did a thorough physical examination of his special patient . The old physician had a thorough examination of the special patient.
 He asked a constant stream of questions, some he could answer and others he could not . "Some of the questions he asked were not answered," he said . "He asked a lot of questions: some he couldn't answer," he added .
 "He did his duty and soldiered on, like he had done in the last war," he said . "But he did his . duty," he added . "I did my duty and selliered . on," the soldier said .
 The patient's liver was fine to the touch but his kidneys were not sensitive . The patient’s liver was not sensitive to touch, but his kidney was fine .
 The younger doctor stood back and tolerated the older physician, merely because the director had told him to do so . The director of the hospital had told the younger doctor to stand back and tolerate him .
 Schrader was treated last year for a similar accidental release of neural toxin . Chief doctor knew Schrader well, having treated him last year . The chief doctor also treated Schrader for the same incident .
 Herr Doktor Schrader appreciated the director’s kind gesture, even in his weakened state the Professor could see that the old and haughty physician just did not fit in well with the young and energetic chief doctor . The patient just sat and cooperated as best as
 Near the end of his physical examination, the old doctor wanted to take blood samples, but the young physician intervened and said that they were handling the matter . The old doctor asked for blood samples .
 He announced that it wasn’t influenza, for the old doctor knew all about the signs of influenza . The old doctor said that it was not influenza, but it was influenza .
 Schrader's physician insisted that he wanted to see Schrader’s medical files . Then he insisted he wanted Schrader to see his medical files, Schrader said . Schrader says Schrader is a good man, not a bad man, but a good guy .
 Schrader's condition was due to special research and his medical files were Streng Geheim top secret . Chief doctor emphatically said he couldn’t because Schrader’s condition was special research . Both the research and medical files are top secret, chief doctor said .
 Doctors realized it was best they continue their consultation outside step out into the hallway . The two doctors realized it best they continued their consultation out of the room .
 The old doctor and the hospital staff went back and forth for several days . The hospital staff and the old doctor were at odds with each other . The doctor and hospital staff are at odds at the time .
 It was only because the Director had granted his visitation rights that the old man was allowed into the ward . The Director granted him visitation rights .
 It took all the hospital staffs patience to tolerate his antiquated and old school ways . And it took them patience, they said .
 He had seen this all before when he had treated gas victims during the last war . He had also treated victims of gas attacks during that war .
 It took all the old physician patience not to read them the Hippocratic oath . And, having guessed what had happened, it took all of the old . physician patience .
 Years before he had treated soldiers from both sides and had watched helplessly as they drowned in their own bodily fluids, their lungs scared beyond repair . The men drowning as sure as if they were sinking in some body of water, except they were sunk in themselves .
 It disgusted him, and it took all his reserve to not turn and yelled this at them, he said . "It took all the reserve of the man, not to turn and yell," he said of the crowd .
 He prescribed fresh vegetables, vitamin C, chicken soup and an electrolyte concoction that stank up the place . The doctor said it was a combination of vegetables and vitamin C .
 They would not let him administer oral medication or injections of any sort, they said . They said they would not be allowed to give him oral medication .
 Poppy seed, chamomile and fennel tea is made from poppy seed and chambomile tea . The patient was told to drink the mix once an hour, on the hour .
 The hospital staff treated the patient with atropine and a cornucopia of other drugs, whether intravenous and oral . Hospital staff, in turn, gave the patient the drugs . The patient was taken to a local hospital, where staff treated her with drugs .
 It did not take the old doctor much to understand why he had been sent for him . The Director had sent him for his work .
 The symptoms were similar to the influenza of 1918, but it was not caused by a virus . The symptoms of the 1918 flu were similar, but not all of them were caused by the flu .
 Schrader treated him and shared his medical experience in the treatment of pulmonary deficiencies with Schrader and the chief doctor . So he treated him . Schrader said Schrader was treated for pulmonary deficiencies in the hospital .
 The old physician snuck back to talk with Schrader in the middle of the night . Then when things had settled down and the night staff were occupied elsewhere, he snuck into the room to talk .
 The old physician gruffly told him to stop what he was doing before it was too late . He told him, "Stop what you do before it's too late. The old doctor gruffledly told me to stop."
 Schrader thanked him for his kindness but told him that it was none of his business . Schrader told the old man that it's not his business. Schrader: "It's not the man's business"
 Although he wasn’t prone to violence, he very much wanted to punch the professor and knock some sense into him . The professor was a student at the University of North Carolina .
 The old physician started out of the room and grabbed the door handle will all his force . He grabbed the handle handle and grabbed it with all the force .
 Without turning back snarled “You first ...” and stormed out of Schrader’s room in revulsion . ‘You first, you first,” he snarls and storms out .
 As he stepped into the hallway, the old physician knew not to slam the door, but closed it gently . The old physician closed the door gently .
 After three days and four nights in Bavaria, the Director’s private physician knew it was time to return to Potsdam .
 She opened the drawer in front of her but could not find an envelope . She stood up and turned her back to him as she walked to the back of the long and narrow room .
 The old physician noticed on the counter next to his left elbow was a small white enamel hospital tray with several small test tubes full of blood samples . It was when her back was turned that he noticed the small tray with a small test tube full of test tubes .
 The old physician grabbed the test tube and put it in his jacket pocket . Before he could stop himself, he grabbed it from his pocket .
 In a fluid motion he removed his pen from the same jacket pocket and unscrewed the top . He then removed the top of the pen from his jacket pocket to unscrew it .
 He signed the note, folded it in two and tucked it into the envelope and sealed it in the envelope .
 The same pretty flight attendant was there for his return flight to Berlin . He was greeted by the same pretty plane attendant as he was on his way home .
 For the first few minutes in the air he had merely stared out the window . For the rest of the time, he had simply stared out of the window. For the next few minutes, he simply looked at the window again .
 'For him to sit and look out the window, it had to be something more distressing. For him to look at the window he had to look out of the window,' he said. 'For me, I'm not sure what happened,' he added .
 To unburden his old and troubled conscience, he told her what he had done . He told her that he had been in a relationship with her .
 She listened compassionately as he told her that while it was his Hippocratic duty to save the patient, what he was doing was monstrous . He could not be party to such an atrocity, she said .
 The director had been both right and wrong to send him to attend to Professor Schrader right to have asked him to save the man’s life, but wrong at the same time to have . have asked . him to . save his life .
 As she listened to him speak of his morals and this dilemma, her face softened and her eyes moistened . Her face softened as he spoke of his dilemma .
 By the time they were on their final approach to Berlin she had realized here was a Prometheus, a tall and wise man amongst midgets .
 By the time they were on their final approach to Berlin he had gathered enough courage to offer her a place as his private secretary . By the end of the trip he had offered her a job as his personal secretary .
 His offer was genuine and so so she accepted his unsolicited offer on the spot . She accepted the offer on a spot and accepted it .
 She was young enough to be his granddaughter, but he was a doctor for god sakes, and one with a fine reputation . She was the daughter of a doctor with a reputation for her reputation .
 They both had no family left, and were worried about their uncertain future and what lay ahead . They were both worried about the uncertain future .
 The director can go to hell with his minion Schrader to show him the way, Schrader says . The director should go the way. Schrader can go hell with Schrader .
 They were all responsible for their actions and he was not going to help them one any more, he said . He said: "He being a moral man was not . He was not helping them one more. They were responsible for . Their actions were their own .
 He was a good man and when this war was finally over they would need good men. He was good man, he said . When this war ended, he was good men, he added .
 The old physician might be an old goat, but he knew the old adage that you don’t butt heads with an old mountain goat . He knew the adage: "You don't butt heads"
 After an awkward tumble down the hill, you’ll end up with nothing more than some bumps on the head and a terrible headache . Otherwise you end up being pushed off the mountain, and after an awkward fall down, you'll end up having a headache .
 He placed his hand onto the small test tube in his jacket pocket . He resolved there and then that he would set things right .
 A Ford Tri-motor bearing Swedish colours and a red cross was making its final approach for landing . As they made their way to the terminal building a car bearing the red cross and Swedish colours was making their final approach .
 The former student's private secretary might enjoy an extended visit to his old student . With his private secretary at hand he might enjoy a visit to the former student .
 He would talk with the Dean, and the Dean would in turn know who to pass the information along to . He would then be able to pass on the information to the Dean .
 The Swedish Ambassador and his wife was one of his patients . Besides the Swedish embassy was just a few blocks over from his mansion in diplomatic row .
 The night after next the Ambassador and his wife were hosting a Christmas reception and they had sent him an invitation . The Ambassador and the Ambassador were hosting the Christmas reception .
 The Obama administration has publicly dismissed the threat as “saber rattling” but also privately informed Tehran that attempting to close the strait would trigger a U.S. military response .
 Mark Fox, commander of the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet, said in a Feb. Feb. interview . Fox: The U.S. Navy's Fifth Fleet is the largest force in the world . Fox says the U.N. has been in contact with the U
 We always have the right and obligation of self-defense and this falls in self-defence . This is the first time this has happened in the U.S. military history .
 International rules allow for peacetime mining of high-seas areas under certain strict conditions .
 Iranian officials have threatened to close the Strait of Hormuz in response to U.S. and international sanctions over its nuclear program . Iranian officials say the move would be a response to United States and other sanctions .
 Iranian Parliament considered a bill demanding the strait be closed . Reuters reported on 15 July the Iranian parliament considered the bill . The Iranian Parliament is considering a bill calling for the closure of a strait .
 The ultimate impact of such an escalation is unclear, but the ultimate impact is unclear . The U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech on Thursday .
 The prospect of a major disruption of maritime traffic in the Strait risks damaging Iranian interests, a report by the Congressional Research Service .
 International straits are completely enclosed by the 12-mile territorial seas of the littoral states and connect two high-seas areas . Such international straits have special protections under UNCLOS regime .
 Since the end of World War II, mines have seriously damaged or sunk four times more U.S. Navy ships than all other means of attack combined .
 The Corfu Channel crisis of 1946 to the Arabian Gulf Tanker War of the 1980s to the Tamil Sea Tigers in 2008 . And that doesn’t include many more ships sunk or damaged by mines, including the MV Invincible of 2008 .
 Iraq and Iran indiscriminately deployed several types of mines during the Tanker War in the Arabian Gulf . The 1908 Russian design contact mine nearly sank the USS Samuel B Roberts in April 1988 .
 U.S. Navy surface warships fell in line abaft of Bridgeton, giving lie to adage that every ship can be a minesweeper... once .
 In 1990 and 1991, Iraq deployed more than 1,300 mines in the northern gulf, including a weapon never before seen in the West . Iraq deployed the weapon in the Gulf in the 1990s and 1991 .
 The USS Tripoli struck an Iraqi contact mine; four hours later, Princeton fell victim to a Manta mine . Princeton took the cruiser out of the war and cost about $100 million to bring her back on line .
 More than two years of intensive mine-countermeasure operations to declare northern gulf mine free . Coalition forces took two years to declare mine free from Iran .
 This underscores the reality of the mine threat and the adage that the best MCM ops are those that prevent mines from being laid in the first place . The mine threat underscores the fact that MCM operations are the key to preventing mines being laid .
 Once in the water, mines are extremely difficult to detect, identify and destroy . They are difficult to identify, destroy or render safe for forensic and intelligence functions .
 U.S. officials say reopening the strait could take the Navy and its allies five to 10 days . It also brings into question the optimism of United States officials that “reopening’s strait” could take them up to five days .
 Fox’s estimate — “a long and difficult process to clear them” seems more likely . Fox: “A long, difficult process” is more likely. Fox: It will be ‘long and difficult’
 The Chinese navy was estimated to have about 100,000 mines . The rising mine could be deployed in waters deeper than 6,000 feet deep .
 All three sell weapons to virtually any navy or terrorist group, anywhere, any time, as do another 17 nations . Another 17 nations sell weapons, weapons to nearly any navy, terrorist group or navy .
 Iran has acquired a stockpile of 3,000 to 6,000 mines, mostly of Soviet/Russian, Chinese or North Korean origin . Iran has also acquired up to six,000 other mines, mainly of Soviet, Chinese, Russian origin .
 Most are unsophisticated but still dangerous bottom-moored buoyant contact mines, like those that damaged Roberts and Tripoli . Most of the world's most dangerous underwater mines are still dangerous .
 Other mines, such as the Manta that struck Princeton, are bottom mines that come to rest on the bottom and wait for a target to satisfy various parameters . Other mines are bottom-of-the-bottom mines .
 Influence mines fire when they are set upon by sophisticated target detection devices . They can detect magnetic, acoustic, seismic, seismic and water pressure, electric-potential signatures .
 To mine the entirety of the Strait of Hormuz effectively would take thousands of mines and several weeks if not longer . It would take several weeks to mine .
 A larger operation would have to involve small craft and possibly commercial vessels, as well .
 In the strait itself, depths can reach 1,000 feet and currents make deploying bottom mines an uncertain tactic . The bottom mines are also an unknown tactic .
 If deployed in deep water, even large-warhead bottom mines would have limited effect on surface traffic . Even large-scale mines would not be able to destroy surface traffic, experts say .
 Libya’s mining of the Red Sea in the summer of 1984 used East German export multiple-influence bottom mines completely unknown in the West . Libya used the mines to mine Red Sea . The mines were used in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Ships detonated mines in deeper water had less damage than those in shallower water . Ships that detonated mines detonated mines had much less damage to them than ships that did so .
 Iran would likely rely on bottom-moored, buoyant contact mines that lurk close to the surface but still remain difficult to detect and defeat . Not that bottom mines wouldn’t be employed where it made operational sense .
 Mines are only one element of Iranian anti-access/area-denial weapons, which include speedboats armed with guns and missiles, small submarines armed with torpedoes, shore-based antiship missiles, and aircraft .
 The Navy deployed four additional Avenger-class MCM ships, for a total of eight Avengers . Two more MH-53E airborne MCM helicopters were added to the two already in-theater .
 Jonathan Greenert told the Senate Armed Services Committee during a Navy budget hearing earlier this year . Greenert said he wants to keep the U.S. armed forces budget in check .
 The Navy quickly refurbished and deployed the USS Ponce to support naval forces in the region . The Ponce is an interim Afloat Forward Staging Base focused on the MCM .
 This, too, has been done before, with the conversion in the mid-1990s of the USS Inchon (LPH/MCS12) as an MCM command-and-control ship .
 The Navy intends to acquire two new-design purpose-built AFSBs, at a cost of approximately $1.1 billion each . The Navy plans to spend $1 billion on two AFSBs .
 One element of the 2012 U.S. MCM response is the deployment of the German-built SeaFox remotely operated vehicle . The SeaFox is deployed with ten other navies, including the Royal Navy .
 SeaFox ROV can conduct mine-sweeping ops to depths approaching 1,000 feet . SeaFox can also be used to conduct mine sweeps to depths of more than 1,500 feet .
 Persian Gulf MCM ‘order of battle’ includes several Royal Navy MCM vessels and Royal Australian Navy assets . MCM capabilities of America’s regional maritime partners .
 The USS Gladiator is one of the Bahrain-based Avenger MCM vessels . Wayne Liebold is the skipper of the USS Gladiator . Liebold says he is proud to be the captain of the vessel .
 The laying of several hundred mines in a matter of days could have a significant, albeit only temporary, effect on commercial and naval mobility . Though easily detectable, the laying of hundreds of mines could be a significant .
 More broadly, however, the impact on world petroleum markets is unclear . The impact on the world petroleum market is unclear, but it's unclear .
 During the Red Sea/Gulf of Suez mine crisis of 1984, commercial and naval traffic continued unabated, despite reports of underwater explosions that did cause a fluctuation in insurance rates .
 ‘Tanker Wars’ between Iran and Iraq in 1980s show a different behavior by the shipping industry, a 2008 Naval War College study says .
 After an initial 25 percent drop, the shipping industry adjusted to the risk and the flow of commerce resumed . The flow of shipping has resumed after an initial drop of 25 percent .
 Even temporary disruptions of tanker traffic could “cause global oil prices to soar and spark widespread economic turmoil” look to be overblown, analysts say .
 Iran’s mines may not be show-stoppers, but they can be speed-bumps that attack strategies, plans and timelines . Still, they can attack strategies and timelines, as well as ships and submarines .