 Commander in Chief Fidel Castro welcomes participants to the October Crisis tripartite conference . Castro expresses Cuba's commitment to adhering strictly to the facts . Castro: "Cuba's commitment is to adhere strictly to facts"
 The president of the Councils of State and Ministers affirmed that everything Cubans might say during the symposium will be free of animosity and ill will . As the first speaker at the opening of the Symposium, he said that all Cubans will say will be 'free of animosity'
 Fidel pointed out the recent efforts of individuals and academic and political historians to increase the knowledge of the events that precipitated the October Crisis . Fidel said the October crisis was a major event in the United States' history .
 Fidel said many documents have been published regarding the events that put the world on the brink of a nuclear hecatomb . Fidel said the events have been documented in many of the world's most recent documents .
 Fidel Castro said that 85 pages of letters between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev were recently made public .
 He mentioned the long hours spent the last few nights in reviewing the letters and documents, which he considers important, before expressing any definite opinions .
 Among the files reviewed, he mentioned the 85 pages of this significant correspondence . The 85 pages were found in the files he reviewed .
 Fidel Castro said he would not express his point of view because he preferred to listen to the opinions expressed in the next few days, answer questions, and later on speak at length . Fidel said he prefers to listen and answer questions rather than speak .
 Cuba declassified five letters between Khrushchev and Fidel to dispel rumors that Cuban authorities had suggested a preemptive attack . Fidel Castro: Much is known about the crisis, and much is known .
 Fidel mentioned that a rectification was made by including Cuba in the analysis of the crisis, because originally the Soviets and the American had planned to conduct the analysis leaving out one of the main protagonists .
 Cuba can contribute to explaining the events in a truly objective and unprejudiced manner, he said . Cuba will continue the effort to completely explain all the facts related to the crisis, he added .
 Fidel mentioned the letters between Khrushchev and Kennedy, some of which Khrushvich had read to him during his trip to Moscow . Fidel expressed his belief that this material should also be declassified to further clarify the events .
 The sessions of the tripartite meeting on the 1962 missile crisis will end on the 12th . The sessions will continue until the end of the month .