 John F Kennedy was fearful that the Eisenhower/Dulles foreign policy of massive retaliation might only lead to nuclear war . Kennedy ran for president in 1960 because he was fearful of nuclear war at the height of the Cold War .
 Your father, Llewellyn Thompson, had been United States ambassador in Moscow during those late 50’s years . Your father was appointed as counselor or maybe Ambassador at Large in the State Department .
 The first of 13 memorable days of 1962 was Oct. 31, 1962 . It was the first of a series of memorable days for the country .
 Historians still call them the 13 most dangerous days in the history of mankind . The 13 most deadly days were also known as the 13 deadliest days of the past .
 A misstep a wrong move could have started a war which would have turned very quickly into a nuclear exchange . Because a misstep could have sparked a nuclear war, a war could have turned quickly into nuclear war .
 Kennedy decided not to convene the National Security Council because of some people he didn't think could keep a secret, or were all that valuable in their advice anyway . But fortunately, Kennedy, on that first day, October 16, decided not convene .
 Llewellyn Thompson called together about a dozen or so men and one of them was Llewyn Thompson . Thompson was one of the men at the center of the story . Thompson died at the age of 92 .
 A blockade of Cuba can be an act of war itself, says President Kennedy . The Cuban blockade was called a quarantine, not food or medicine or gasoline, he says .
 "We were quarantining out military equipment, offensive weapons and so-on," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We're quarantined from military equipment and weapons"
 Some communications and some attempt by the secretary general of the UN to get the two sides to stand still . The two sides have been at odds for more than a week .
 Khrushchev wrote a long, somewhat rambling letter that sounded like it had been written by the Central Committee instead of the 1st one . The next day a second letter came in which was much tougher more direct than the first one .
 "There were some glimmers of hope in that 1st letter, but they were pretty much dashed by the second," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General and I immediately said that we thought that was a good idea . President directed us [Sorensen and RFK] to draft that letter and we did . We did and ignored the second letter except to say that once this crisis was settled, disarm
 The next day, for a variety of reasons, Khrushchev decided to pull out the missiles under UN inspection . The following day, the missiles were pulled out of the Soviet Union . The missiles were under inspection by the United Nations .
 The crisis ended, and I think your father deserves a great deal of the credit for that. And the crisis ended. And I think . I think that .
 I remember him very well, a very wise, prudent man, just like the President of the United States was a wise prudent man who recognized it in others . Had it not been for that peaceful resolution that your father made possible, as I say, maybe none of us would be here
 I am told that today, the cabinet room has a reinforced concrete shelter, it wasn’t then, and if the soviets had so called smart missiles that were as smart as our smart missiles now, well they knew our address . Today, today's cabinet room in the
 You mention in your book that there was more than one blockade, or version of the blockade proposed . The blockade was proposed in the 1960s and '90s .
 I think we misunderstand each other, I don’t think I said there were different blockades,’s no blockades. ‘I think we misunderstood each other. I think it's a problem,' he says. “I don't think there are different block
 I mean different scenarios proposed before deciding which ones to have. "I'm not just saying that I'm going to have different scenarios. I'm trying to think about different scenarios," he said .
 The initial scenario was a bombing attack by the United States on the missiles . The U.S. is believed to be targeting the missiles in Syria .
 "We divided into two groups. And in time during that first week, as other options and pros and cons brought forth, we divided into one group . We were divided by two groups of people who wanted to see more of the project .
 One group stuck with the original, harsh response, which would have been to bomb the missile sites . One was the group that stuck with . The group that would have bombed missile sites is the group .
 The Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons on the island, the U.S. says . They would have responded by using those nuclear weapons if there had been any military attack by the United States .
 Khrushchev had even given them authority to use them on their own, in the event of an attack . The Soviet Union had also given them permission to use the weapons .
 The second group favored the blockade which evolved into the quarantine . So armed to the thing all this is because of the second group of people .
 The first group favored the air strike which was to be followed by an invasion . The second group favored an air strike, followed by a invasion .
 Tommy Thompson was clearly in the blockade/quarantine group, not in the strike group, says CNN's John Sutter . "To the extent that we divided into two groups Tommy Thompson ... was clearly," he says .
 In your book you talk about how you were developing the two different speeches, or asked to develop… Oh yes, that’s a different question,’ he says .
 In the movie they asked me about the second speech and I said I couldn’t write that one . In the film they asked him about the speech he said he couldn't write . "I said I would never write that speech," he said .
 ExComm members also made requirements that they wanted included in it . Did they also want to include requirements that were included in the proposal? Did they want to be included?
 "I went back and the blockade group convened again, and I asked those questions and they were answered," CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: The blockade group convenes again to discuss the blockade .
 I apologize that I don’t remember specific questions or specific answers from members of our group . I apologize for not remembering specific questions from members .
 Ambassador Thompson was one of the most helpful at that session also. But I’m sure that Ambassador . Thompson was also helpful at the session, also. Ambassador Thompson .
 "That was a very difficult note to write. What I did try to write earlier in the week was a message to Khrushchev to be delivered by a high level emissary, warning him that we were going to bomb the missile sites"
 Someone took a note and converted it into a speech just in case Kennedy in the key decision-making meeting of Saturday October 20 if he decided on the airstrike approach he'd need a speech .
 At one point in the decision making in the WH and also through the Hawk’s Cay Conference several people and I think you were quoted as saying that Sovietologists were convinced that the Soviets would not put missiles outside of the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets had never previously put nuclear weapons outside their own borders . The Soviets never previously used nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union .
 Cuba was very dangerous, so no one thought they ever would put missiles outside their borders and certainly not put them on Cuba . Cuba was defiantly close to the United States and run by a man who was to say the least, unpredictable .
 No one thought everyone was astonished and the secret was pretty well kept by Khrushchev and his people. No one was astonished . No one expected everyone to be astonished and no one was surprised .
 Thompson was present in Oval office meeting before Bobby Kennedy went to see Dobrynin . Thompson was in the Oval Office meeting with President Kennedy . Thompson attended the White House meeting with Kennedy .
 The letter had to be approved after the letter had been finished and approved . That’s very, very important because after it was finished, approved, the letter was sent to the White House .
 President Rusk, Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara were in that meeting, so were Bundy and Bundy . Bundy and I I’d forgotten Thompson was in that . meeting, Bundy says . I remember that both the President and . Secretary of . State Rus
 "Bobby was being told to be flexible about the fact that our missiles in Turkey would not be there much longer for the reasons I’ve explained," he said .
 President Kennedy’s decision a year earlier that they come out had been ignored by the defense department or maybe resistance by NATO or the Turk . They were still there in October ’62 only because President Kennedy's decision was ignored by NATO .
 Dobrynin was urged to convey a message to Khrushchev which we hoped he would take seriously, but also some face saving in that kind of resolution . And he was also urged to be very direct and everybody thought he would convey that message .
 "Currents of obstruction" is key to understanding the Cold War, the author says . "We kept running into this theme," he says of current Cold War . "It struck us trying to understand this," he adds .
 At that time, I knew less about those obstructionists than I subsequently learned . I know less about them than I later learned about them, he says .
 May and Zelikow have written a book called the White House Tapes . The book is based on the tapes made by May and Zilikow .
 Kennedy convened with the Joint Chiefs just before he went on the air on the evening of October 22 . Kennedy convened in the same meeting room as the leaders of congress . The transcript of the meeting shows how bitterly opposed LeMay and others were to any kind of peaceful resolution .
 Leaders of both parties thought that the blockade was too soft a response and that we ought to go in there and hit them with everything we had. One leader of Congress said, "Go in there, hit them" CNN's John Sutter says .
 In the Kennedy tapes, in that book actually, we came upon a meeting Kennedy had with Thompson where he asked him to come in and asked him about the fallout from the U-2 affair and the failed Paris summit . Kennedy was wondering if the summit had been intentionally torpedoed .
 It happens to be a section we are currently working on and we are curious if you ever hear JFK speculate on what had gone wrong there .
 I don’t remember that I ever did but you’re going to have a fascinating book. I’m not sure if I did, but you will be a great writer. You’ve got a great idea for a book.
 They want me to speak and write an essay with my recollections of the summit . They are also asking me to write a book about the summit, which will be released on Friday .
 "I am just in the process of finishing that essay now, and I have done zero additional research, just drawing on my own memory and books," she says .
 Thompson said not in his oral history: "I’m certainly glad to hear that because that’s what I'm saying in my essay" Thompson said he was happy to hear his essay was true .
 I'm pointing out that others say that Kennedy was humiliated, and bullied, and that I actually read the transcript. I’m pointing out . Others say that others . say that . others say he was humiliated and bullied and that . I'm actually reading the transcript of the transcript
 I took out the quotation marks because I didn’t think I’d get away with it. And just between you and me, I took it out of quotation marks . And just . I took . out the quotations marks .
 The Kennedy Library A probably has the transcript and B surely would make it available to the daughters of one of the key participants and tell them I said that. Kennedy Library probably has a transcript .
 Berlin was at the top of Khrushchev’s agenda, he says . But he had been very well briefed on Berlin because he did know in advance that that was at top of the agenda .
 Thompson gave his advice to Kennedy at the White House on what he might expect . The cables are likely to be found in the archives somewhere there in are one or more .
 You might also want to check out how to see if he was involved in the proposed debate between Kennedy and Khrushchev they had planned for world Television .
 Pierre Salinger was one of our negotiators in that and might in his memoirs very well talk about it and if you father participated in that, if you have a father who did it, you might in your memoirs talk about that, you can't say if you did it .
 Given Cold War attitudes on both sides at that time, neither the west nor the Soviets would have trusted such a solution . I think that it was an idea that was probably floating around, but I think it was a bit of a joke .
 Adenauer who was then the Chancellor of West Germany would have denounced the U.S. for being unwilling to stand up for freedom . Adenauer would have been outraged .
 So probably the probably the honest answer is that it was not seriously considered . So probably, probably the . honest answer would be that it wasn't seriously considered.
 Kennedy said he received a cable from the embassy Moscow saying that soviets were likely to be impressed by substantial quiet moves that didn’t panic the allies .
 If fact that advice came from Moscow, I think that was Thompson, it was Thompson . Therefore, if in fact that . came from . Moscow, Thompson, says .
 In Thompson’s oral history, he mentions that Thompson went to Hyannis port in ’63 when Maxwell Taylor also happened to be there . Thompson was asked if this was just a social call or was he doing anything else?
 Thompson who never would talk about anything he didn't think should be talked about said that they were just discussing the budget and he wasn’t involved . Thompson said that he wasn't involved .
 Kennedy had to figure out how to get the Joint Chiefs to testify in favor of it and before the Senate armed services committee and a few internal legislative political moves .
 I think the budge may also have been a subject of that meeting at Hyannis port . Although I think it may also be a subject, it was also a topic of discussion .
 None at all Carl Kaysen who was deputy national security advisor was there as the White House representative . Kennedy added a couple of Republican Senators to increase bipartisan credibility of the delegation .
 Secretary of State would have had the final decision on who represented the State Department at that meeting . I don’t know what the relationship was between Thompson and the secretary of State .
 Thompson met with Rusk and demonstrates Thompson was loyal bureaucrat and went through proper channels . I’m sure that Thompson met . Rusk met with Thompson . I'm sure that he met with him .
 Thompson was a lot more valuable in the ExCom meetings than Rusk, says CNN's John Sutter . But he says he'll also be frank to say that Thompson was more valuable to Rusk .
 Kennedy absented himself for a day on Wednesday, the 18th to make a campaign appearance . Also you’ll notice in one or more of my books, when Kennedy absents himself from his campaign appearance, he’s not there .
 Many participants in Excomm were better and franker in their advice which might differ from their senior secretary’s advice when the President wasn’t there . When he came back I said to him that I thought many of the participants in the Excomm would be better .
 I’m sure Thompson was one of those I had told the president that . Thompson was deliberately absent from some of the planning meetings during that first week, he said .
 First draft of speech ran by national security advisor McGeorge Bundy, says Bundy . Bundy brought in a couple of other people in to review it, Bundy says .
 President Obama reviewed it on the long trip back from Hawaii . But after I flew it out to Hawaii and President reviewed it again, President Obama said it was a mistake .
 Kennedy might very well have said except Thompson because he knew he the one person in town who would agree with it . And knowing Kennedy’s high regard he had for Thompson he might well have .
 I don't recall talking to him while it was in preparation and certainly had to time when we got back . But I don’t recall talking with him while he was preparing for the game .
 Yes, he didn’t make it sound as though it was in progress and how much he would have agreed with it . Yes, yes, he made it sound like it was already in progress .
 I’m sure that he had at least an indirect influence on me and the President in the thinking about that speech. ‘I’ve been in touch with him,’ he said. “He had a very strong influence,” he said .
 "I was on my own when the president was on his trip to Hawaii. and that speech more than any other reflects my thinking and where we were at the time," he said .
 "Those are good questions and you ladies are on a very important project for history," she says . "You are on an important project," she adds .
 I do mention other subjects I had less involvement in and don’t know how much Thompson had to do with them . If you think of anything else we should include, please email us at CNN.com/Heroes.com .
 One is the Hot Line and the agreement probably at the United Nations to keep WMDs out of outer space . The other is the agreement at the U.N. to keep them out of space .
 The sale of U.S. wheat to Russia was one of the things he did . Another thing he did have some involvement in was the sale of American wheat to the Russians .
 These are all ‘63 and another was a Kennedy speech to the General Assembly in September of ’63 . In which he in which he thought there were possible cooperation between the U.S. and the soviet union, Kennedy listed a number of areas of interest .