 A critical analysis of Kent’s ‘positivist’ epistemology is necessary to under­ stand some major intelligence failures made by the CIA during the Cold War .
 Hermeneutics is a branch of knowledge that deals with interpretative inquiry . Hermeneutic is a form of knowledge dealing with interpreting and understanding of the world .
 It aims to understand the meaning of people’s intentions and actions from the analysis of a limited collection of clues and evidence . Broadly defined, it aims to be able to understand people's intentions from analysis of limited clues .
 Historian Alain Dewerpe has demonstrated that intelligence analysis, along with police investigations, is a form of cryptic hermeneutics . Intelligence analysis and police investigations are both forms of cryptic art form .
 Hermeneutics not only refers to the recollection of meaning, but also to the systematic practice of suspicion . In both cases, hermeneutic refers to memory of meaning and to systematic suspicion .
 Analysts say no discourse can ever be taken for granted, because ‘real’ political decisions are taken on the ‘backstage’3 of international relations . According to analysts, 'real' political decisions take place on the 'backstage'
 Intelligence analysis, defined as the way of collecting, cross-checking, and interpreting evidence, has rarely been theorized in the past via a rigorous methodology . Yet, intelligence analysis, definition of intelligence analysis as a rigorous method, rarely has been done with rigorous analysis .
 Analysts used to interpret the forms, ways, and means of secret wars by relying on their own experience, intuitions, and mindsets . Analysts are now using their own experiences to interpret secret wars .
 In Western depictions of espionage, a secret agent was presumed to possess a ‘sixth sense’ so as to distinguish real from fake threats, lies from genuine truths, and conspiracies within conspiracies .
 U.S. intelligence agencies were the first to take the initiative to elaborate an epistemological framework for intelligence analysis . United States intelligence agencies first took the initiative .
 The theorization of analysis commenced at the beginning of the Cold War . Analysis of analysis began in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In this respect, neither the USSR, nor the United Kingdom, nor France, nor Japan, established the methodological foundations of intelligence analysis as an enhanced form of cryptic hermeneutics .
 The study of ‘national styles’6 in foreign policy helps us to understand this singularity, i.e., the pervasive inclination of the ‘American mind’ to rely on theory rather than on Classical Humanities for interpreting intelligence .
 U.S. intelligence community running the risk of confining itself within ethnocentric conception of epistemology, which can be too formalistic and out of touch with reality . This element of culture and history can be a plausible explanation .
 This formalistic approach can be a significant obstacle to the understanding of foreign countries’ policymaking, says Andrew Hammond . Hammond argues that formalistic approaches can be significant obstacles to foreign policymaking .
 Two historical episodes mark a major turning point in the scientific theorization of analysis in the U.S. The episodes are part of a series of historical episodes .
 This topic has already been studied in depth from the perspective of historical sociology, even if this investigation did not focus on the practical value of the methodology of analysis .
 Intelligence analysis only publicly acquired its autonomy and its own methodological canons as a discipline starting from the beginning of the Cold War . Intelligence analysis is a discipline that has its own canons and autonomy from the start of its own .
 Sherman Kent’s doctrine of analysis provides substantial material to explore the public ‘birth’ of intelligence's epistemology . Therefore, the study of Sherman Kent's doctrine has substantial material for exploring the public .
 The existing literature on this crucial moment in the history of U.S. intelligence is amply documented . It is not the first time the CIA has been involved in the CIA .
 Kent is known to be the main ‘founding father’ of intelligence analysis . He is known as the main 'founding fathers’ to intelligence analysis. Kent is also known for his work on the CIA .
 He was the chief of the CIA Office of National estimates from 1952 to 1967 . He was also the head of CIA's Office of Estimates from 1952-1967 .
 Former analysts and historians have exposed the main principles of Kent’s methodology of analysis . Kent's methodology has been exposed by historians and analysts . Former analysts have been critical of Kent's methods .
 Few studies have attempted to deconstruct the epistemological value of Kent’s hermeneutical approach . However, few studies have tried to decry the eposcientific value of Kent's hermeneutics .
 The study of Kent’s hermeneutics is necessary to understand some major intelligence failures made by the CIA during the Cold War . I would like to demonstrate why the study is necessary .
 For this purpose, I will draw on a critical discourse analysis approach . I will use this to draw on an analysis of the discourse on the internet .
 Critical discourse analysis methodology aims to ‘reveal the underlying assumptions and presuppositions within the knowledge produced’ by unmasking the ideological dimension of discursive practices . Gunilla Eriksson says this framework ‘underlines the need to embrace a more hermeneutic and
 This approach assumes that people neglect the extent to which their ways of thinking are socially and politically determined and then tries to identify the specific origins of these determinations . More specifically, this approach assumes people .
 Showing the value of discourse analysis for analysts and scholars makes a case for introducing Critical Studies into the study and practice of intelligence on the basis of an eclectic view of intelligence methodology .
 Intelligence analysis should not be limited to a unique methodological framework, but must instead embrace all social sciences practices that could provide more epistemic accuracy and efficiency to the process of investigation . In this regard, intelligence analysis should be more of a social sciences approach to the problem .
 We must insist on the epistemo­ logical value of evidence-based reasoning for intelligence analysis . More specifically, we must insist that we must accept the epistem­logic value of intelligence analysis, he says .
 Recent intelligence failures show that many analysts still ignore the added value of evidence-based techniques of inquiry used by police officers .
 Recent methodological advances in the field of criminal investigation have been accomplished thanks to pragmatist epistemology . In particular, recent methodological advances have been made thanks to the pragmatism .
 Charles Sander Peirce defines pragmatism as a method of inquiry, based on the interpretation of evidence and the critical examination of competing explanatory hypotheses . Charles Sanderspeirce is a philosopher and philosopher of the philosopher of philosophy .
 In a nutshell, pragmatism underlines the practical dimension of every investigative procedure, says the author of the book .
 This essay first presents Kent’s hermeneutical epistemology and its short comings . It notably focuses on the cost of being wrong about concrete issues and the question of knowing ‘how strong the need is to come to a conclusion at all’
 The article concludes that contemporary cryptic hermeneutics in intelligence studies could be enhanced thanks to the evidence-based reasoning methodol­­ ogy of pragmatist epistemology .
 Kent is known for having laid the ‘scientific’ foundations of intelligence analysis . Kent’s historical contribution to the theorization of intelligence .
 The historiography of intelligence has highlighted the unprecedented scope of this theoretical shift . It shows how intelligence analysis was inseparable from strategic thinking, and how strategic intelligence had to overcome the ‘outdated’ practice of military analysis .
 No strategic action can be based on arbitrary factual assumptions, says David Cameron . 'No strategic action based on arbitrary factual assumptions,' he says .
 Every analyst must cross-check ‘raw’ intelligence and must detect deception operations. ‘Raw’ information must be cross-checked,’s analyst says . ‘Every analyst must also detect deception .’
 Only social sciences can collect and verify facts, which constitutes their raison d’être . Secondly, only social sciences are able to verify facts and collect them .
 Although they do not have the same predictive power as the so-called ‘natural’ sciences, they do have a rigorous method .
 Social sciences can inform a critical analysis of several dynamics of major socio-political phenomena affecting the international order . The social sciences can also inform an analysis of key international issues, such as the role of international relations .
 Kent intends to rely on political science, economics, military strategy, and psychology, anthropology, and of course history, to dispel the ‘puzzles’ and ‘mysteries’ inherent to spying .
 The scientific approach is the only intellectual ‘weapon’ through which Western societies can separate true from false propositions . This set of axioms is justified by the fact that the scientific approach to the problem is only .
 "Truth is to be approached, if not attained, through research guided by a systematic method," says the author of the book .
 When the findings of the intelligence arm are regularly ignored by the consumer, he is turning his back on the two instruments by which western man has, since Aristotle, steadily enlarged his horizon of knowledge – the instrument of reason and scientific method .
 The problem is that Kent never gave formal criteria to detect these kinds of conspiratorial operations . The problem was that Kent gave . He never gave . formal criteria .
 Moscow communism represents a bid for a total monopoly of world power and can be met only by a willingness on the part of this country to abandon its passive and defensive posture in international affairs .
 The collection and analysis of a few political signs is not sufficient to prove the existence of a deception . In this respect, the collection of political signs does not prove a deception, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Even if we can warrant some claim that a conspiracy exists, it does not necessarily follow that it is part of the best explanation of some event . Even if there is a conspiracy, it doesn't necessarily lead to an explanation of events .
 Warranting a claim that a conspiracy exists only means that the evidence shows there is there is a conspiracy in existence . Warranting that a claim of a conspiracy is not enough to rule out a conspiracy, it only means there is evidence that there is an existence of conspiracy .
 It does not follow that the conspiracy is the salient cause of some event, it does not lead to some event . The conspiracy is not the only one to blame, it is the conspiracy to blame .
 In order to show this, we need to demonstrate that there is a tight link between the conspiratorial activity and the event in question . We need to show that there are a tight links between the . conspiratorial . activity .
 Reading this extract, we can immediately perceive the risk for intelligence analysts to reverse the burden of proof . The risk is that intelligence analysts can reverse the burdens of proof to prove their innocence .
 In many cases, when disturbing facts are collected and interpreted in favor of a hypothesis, analysts don’t look for evidence that could undermine their own preconceptions, they say . In many of these cases, analysts look for ways to undermine preconceptions .
 The apparent lack of evidence against a claim seems to be a sufficient reason for that claim . On the contrary, the opposite is the case of a claim against a person, it says .
 At the height of the Cold War, there was misunderstanding in the West about the role of the secret services, especially the KGB, in Soviet policymaking .
 Allied fears of Soviet subversion fed this tendency to exaggerate the power of the KGB . Intelligence analysis rests on the goal of ‘decoding’ the ‘raw’ facts that have been collected from available sources .
 According to this approach, Kent’s cryptic hermeneutics presupposes a ‘positivist’ historical hermneutics . According to the approach, this approach is to be consistent with the 'positivism’ of the past . Kent's cryptic her
 "This is the only way to give meaning to all the data that have been collected," says author of the book . The book is published in the U.S. National Geographic Geographic Geographic Society .
 Even Kent, who has been depicted as a ‘naïve positivist’, agreed with this assumption . Even Kent has been portrayed as a 'naive positivist'
 Kent borrowed Ernest Bernheim’s concept of hermeneutics from Bernheim . Kent himself borrowed Bernheim's concept of hermeneutic from Bernheim to develop his theory .
 Kent recognized the need to analyze facts by an interpretive approach . Only a single interpretation can be correct at the end of the process, he said .
 Despite all of Kent’s attempts to describe a system of intelligence analysis, what he advocates relies almost entirely upon a self-defining and self-policing elite . The elite is not to be second-guessed by politicians or anyone else .
 It seems obvious that all thinking involves notions of how and why things happen . But it's not always easy to think about how things happen and why they happen . It's not easy to say why things are going to happen .
 Even the “practical” man who despises theory has assumptions and expectations which lead him to believe that when certain things are done, certain results follow . Even the "practical" man who hates theory has a number of assumptions and . expectations .
 It is this ‘theory’ that helps a problem-solver to select from the mass of facts surrounding him those which he hopes are relevant . Theory is this "theory" that helps solve a problem .
 This reasoning implies not only that a set of facts contains a self-evident answer, but also that it contains only one true answer . It also implies that every problem does, in fact, have an answer, and that there is only one .
 It implies that facts admit of only one interpretation and that any reasonable man cannot help seeing this single meaning if he is forced to look at all the facts . It also implies that . facts admit . only a single interpretation .
 Kent’s hermeneutics of strategic behavior ignores rival interpretations . Kent also ignores rival meanings of the U.S. strategic moves . Kent says he wants to see the world's strategic moves in a new light .
 The other man will act as diagnosed because he is in his right mind or at least he is not demonstrably unhinged . He cannot capriciously make the decision by himself – at a minimum it will have to be discussed with advisers, and in nondictatorial governments it will
 The "other man's" diplomatic missions and intelligence service can observe and report the things he must know prior to his decision, they have done so . To the extent of the “other man’s” diplomatic missions, intelligence services can observe .
 These and other phenomena very considerably narrow the area of a foreign statesman’s choice, and once thus narrowed it is susceptible to fairly sure-footed analysis by studious intelligence types . Once thus narrowed, a foreign stateman's choice is susceptible .
 As long as all the discernible constants in the equation are operative, the estimator can be fairly confident of making a sound judgment . The estimator is confident that he will be able to make a sound judgement .
 The main shortcoming of this view is that no analyst is able to understand the true political behavior of foreign decision makers from the moment his strategy does not fit Kent’s conception of rationality . Nevertheless, this view has a shortcoming, it says, that no one can understand the
 A more complex model of practical reasoning called practical reasoning with several alternative actions may be useful here . The model is based on a simple model of reasoning .
 This more complex model of practical reasoning requires specification or development of criteria by which the alternative means can be compared . It requires specification of criteria for comparison .
 Kent’s historical hermeneutics hinges on an argument from sign, Kent says . Kent: “I’m not sure what I’ve learned from sign.” Kent says, ‘I have no idea what’�s going to be
 Abductive reasoning explains observed facts by the most probable cause that might have produced these facts . Abducted reasoning explains observations by most likely causes .
 Argument from sign is the particular formulation of abductive reasoning . Argument for sign is a form of abduction from sign .
 It occurs when we infer the most likely causes of an event from a set of indicators which derive from it . It is a form of analysis that looks at a number of factors to determine the cause of an occurrence .
 Bear tracks on the snow are good indicators of the probable presence of a bear just near the camp . For instance, bear tracks on snow are a good indicator of the presence of the bear .
 The Germans were using wartime security measures to keep the development of the oil field a secret . The development was kept secret by the Germans during WWII .
 The way it happened was that the Germans had an official freight rate for crude oil . The rate was set up in the 1930s and 1940s . The Germans had official freight rates for crude .
 RAF flew photographic reconnaissance mission to find oil field . When their air pictures were developed, there was an oil field in the area . Air pictures later revealed to be of oil fields .
 Kent never provided clear and sufficient criteria in order to decide which among . explana­ tory hypotheses in competition should be considered as the best one, he says .
 In doing so, Kent did not explore sufficiently the epistemological principles of abductive reasoning, he says . Kent did . In doing .
 When used properly, abductive reasoning can deepen the contribution of hermeneu­­ tical techniques in the field of intelligence analysis, says author .
 This framework provides precise and rigorous criteria to eliminate the least convincing competing hypotheses by a falsifiable process . This framework is rigorous and rigorous .
 The hypothesis that the defendant could have committed the murder is not ruled out, because he has no alibi . The hypothesis could not be ruled out because the defendant has no . alibi, the prosecutor says .
 There is plausible evidence that he had the means, motive, and opportunity to kill his victims . And there is also plausible evidence he had a motive, motive and opportunity for the killing .
 Suppose there is no other nearly so plausible hypothesis that has been investigated and that suggests some other individual was the perpetrator. Suppose there are no other theories that suggest some other person was responsible for the crime. If that is not the case, it would have been the case for the first time
 In such a case the conclusion will seem to follow that the defendant is guilty as the best explanation of all the facts that have been collected . In such an example, the defendant will be found guilty, says the author of the book .
 Intelligence analysts must prove that a deception is convincing not only because it is corroborated by evidence, but also because all rival explanations are either incredible or disproved . To take the above communist example, intelligence analysts must try to prove the hypothesis that a . convincing .
 This essay aims to exemplify the limits of Kent's epistemology by analyzing two important mistakes he made . Reconsidering Kent’s analysis failure regarding Guatemala is an example of his epistemological failure .
 The first mistake relates to the analysis of Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz’s putative communist ideology and strategy, which leads the CIA to contribute to overthrowing his regime . The CIA contributed to the overthrow of the Guatemalan president .
 ‘Cold War ethos’ drove many CIA operators and analysts to overestimate the Communist influence in Guatemala at the beginning of the 1950s .
 Kent thought that Arbenz, who was not initially a Communist, was forced to become a simple ‘pawn’ in Moscow’s Great Game . Kent thought in this respect, Kent thought .
 Although probably not himself himself a Communist, he has found Communist leaders among his ardent and useful supporters . He values accordingly his political alliance with them, and values accordingly .
 Inasmuch as Arbenz has thus far kept personal control of the considerable powers of the Guatemalan Presidency, it is still possible for him to break with the Communists and moderate the policies of his Administration .
 As the situation in Guatemala develops, the political alternatives open to him are steadily reduced . The political alternatives to Guatemala's president are steadily decreasing, he says .
 The Communists have strengthened their control of the pro-Arbenz political parties . The Communists are now in charge of pro- Arbenz parties in the country .
 President Arbenz still exercises personal control of the Administration and of the Army and the Police . He exercises control over the administration and the Army .
 It is still possible for him to break his ties with the Communists and to moderate the policies of his Administration, but it is highly unlikely that he will do so .
 The likelihood of a break between Arbenz and the Communists is even more remote then it was a year ago, says CNN.com . This conclusion remains valid, but it is still valid, and the likelihood of the break is still remote .
 He is too deeply committed, emotionally and politically, to extract himself from himself . He is committed to his country's future, but he is not likely to be released .
 In the early 1950’s, there had been a revolution in Guatemala in which the Communist-leaning President, a man named Arbenz, had been overthrown and replaced by a right-thinking Guatemalan .
 For Kent, there was no doubt that the Guatemalan President was close –e., too close – to Soviet services . Kent: Guatemala's President was democratically elected on a political program of land reform and nationaliza­ tion .
 Many intelligence and political analysts, even among liberals and moderate members of the defense establishment, thought the U.S. was wrong . That opinion, which we know today to be erroneous, was shared by many intelligence and . political analysts .
 The presence of Soviets ‘advisers’ was attested in Guatemala, and due to the fact that Arbenz deployed a virulent anti-American rhetoric, Moscow was definitely going to take control of the Guatemalan state .
 Many times it is impossible to prove legally that a certain individual is a communist, but for cases of this sort I recommend a practical method of detection – the duck test . The duck test is the 'duck test'
 The bird is a duck, whether he’s wearing a label or not . It's not a duck - but it's a duck with a label .
 The pragmatist analysis of Kent’s reasoning helps to understand his mistake, which can be described within the terms of an argument from ignorance . It can also be described as an argument against ignorance .
 Given that Arbenz conveyed anti-American rhetoric and seemed politically ‘too close’ to communist forces, for Kent, no further proof was needed to demonstrate that the Guatemalan President was about to either become a Communist too, or to become a passive asset of Soviet foreign policy
 In this view, the burden of providing evidence belonged to Kent’s putative contradictors and not to himself . In this case, Kent's putative contradictsors should not be held accountable for his actions .
 They had to establish that Arbenz was not the ‘puppet’ of the Kominform . There was a better alternative explanation of his political behavior, they say .
 Kent did not notice that such a hypothesis was conceivable and had to be tested before drawing any conclusion . Yet, Kent did note that such an idea was conceivable . Kent said, "Such a hypothesis is conceivable"
 There was the possibility that Arbenz was only ‘doing politics’, by using communist support to strengthen national self-governance . Actually, there was the . possibility that there was . actually a possibility that he was only . ‘Doing politics”, says
 Kent used a tacit argument from ignorance to argue that he was wrong . Kent was wrong to say that he should not have used the argument to explain his ignorance . But it seems that Kent ignored this explanation .
 It has been known for some time that arguments from ignorance represent an argumentation scheme, but one that is closely tied in with shifts in burden of proof . Argument from ignorance is a scheme that is tied to shifts in the burden of proving .
 It is very hard for someone accused of being a spy to prove he is not a spy, because any evidence concerning such an allegation is secretive . Any evidence concerning an allegation concerning such a claim is secretive, he says .
 Analysts have a strong tendency to infer from an isolated fact a much larger reality upon the basis of tacit preconceptions and prejudices . Analysts often infer from isolated fact that a larger reality is possible .
 A significant literature has been produced about the reasons why CIA analysts missed the secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . CIA analysts have been unable to explain why they missed the deployment of the nuclear missiles .
 Former analysts and scholars have notably pointed out Kent’s role in this failure . Kent has been criticized for his role in the failure of his administration .
 His responsibility derives from his refusal to recognize that the Soviets were deploying such strategic missiles, in opposition to DCI John McCone’s analysis . He refused to recognize the Soviet missile deployment .
 Kent’s analytical errors can be attributed to his own methodology and accordingly to his . own epistemological presuppositions . Kent's analytical errors are attributed to . his own . methodology .
 The estimation process revealed decisive shortcomings that could probably have been avoided at that time . Indeed, the estimation process showed decisive shortcomings, the author says .
 Kent accepted some preconceived premises without proceeding to their critical examination . Kent made a mistake by accepting some preconceptions, he says .
 He took for granted that the implementation of strategic weapons in Cuba was impossible in view of the logics of Soviet foreign policy . Indeed, he said, "It was impossible" to implement such a move .
 He said he saw no reason why this situation might evolve in the near future . And he said he expects no change in the situation .
 In doing so, he wrongly presupposed that the Soviets had never deployed missiles of this type outside their borders, nor even in one of their satellite countries, he said . In doing .
 He assumed that Cuba was comparable to other territories that were controlled by the Soviets . He also assumed that Cuban territory would be similar to other Soviet-controlled territories .
 Soviet aid, supplied to Cuba, had to be similar to that delivered to other allies, he said . From these premises, he reached the conclusion that the Soviet aid had been given to Cuba . He concluded that the aid to Cuba was similar to those delivered to the other allies .
 No 'scientific law' can prove the validity of historical analogy for either explanatory or predictive reasoning . However, no ‘scientific law’ can prove that historical analogy is valid for either explanation or prediction .
 The fact that Stalin would have probably refused to behave in a provocative way near to the U.S. coast did not imply that Khrushchev would have acted in the same manner, says historian John Avlon .
 Inductive reasoning allows for exploring new possibilities of investigation, it cannot decide in favor of one hypothesis against another . inductive reasoning can't decide whether or not one hypothesis is true or not .
 Isaac Ben-Israel's developments shed an edifying light on Kent’s mistake . The developments shed a light on the mistake of Kent Kent, a former congressman .
 We usually accept generalizations as true when they are supported by wide enough statistical samples . But we usually accept that generalizations are true when supported by a wide enough sample sample .
 What seemed to be imprudent risk-taking behavior from his point of view could in fact conceal a daring, bluffing technique, says CNN's John Sutter .
 To put it differently, Kent projected on to his adversaries his own turn of mind . Kent projected his own thoughts on his adversaries .
 No estimating process can't be expected to divine exactly when the enemy is about to make a dramatically wrong decision . No one can't expect to divine when an enemy is making a decision that is wrong .
 The fact that he did suggests that he might do so again, and this in turn suggests that perhaps we do not know some things about Soviet foreign policy decision-making that we should . It also suggests that maybe we don't know some of the things we should.
 Even though Kent tried to apply the principle of interpretative charity to Khrushchev’s behavior, his methodological concept of interpretation had not been sufficiently defined, he says .
 U.S. intelligence had received numerous reports that the Soviet Union was installing offensive missiles in Cuba . The National Security Council requested a National Intelligence Estimate on the subject .
 The estimate stated that it was highly unlikely that the Soviet Union would pursue such a policy of such high risk as the placement of offensive missiles in Cuba .
 The discourse analysis methodology shows to which extent intelligence analysis failures derive from methodological bias . It also highlights the extent these biases come from epistemological preconceptions that are not challenged within intelligence services .
 By deconstructing Kent’s hermeneutics, this article has exposed how critical discourse analysis approach can shed light on tacit presuppositions that shape the process of intelligence analysis .
 Critical discourse analysis approach helps to overcome ethno­ centric and methodological biases that undermine the interpretation of evidence . Critical discourse analyses help to detect and overcome etho­centric and . methodological biases, the authors say .
 Kent’s hermeneuu­ tics might finally be improved by introducing an evidential reasoning approach within intelligence analysis .
 In this view, pragmatist inquiry techniques chal­ lenge the ‘naïve’ hermeneutics by refining the process of interpreting evidence and testing competing hypotheses regarding the understanding of foreign strategic behaviors .
 A research pro­ gram might be opened on this point by enhancing structured analytic techniques and Analysis of Competing Hypotheses . The pragmatist theory of inquiry and analysis of evidence could open the door to more research .
 While theories are explicit, mindsets are unconscious and thus more difficult to detect for analysts . Mindsets are unconscious, so more difficult for analysts to detect, they say .
 Andrew Andrew, For the President’s Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush; and Soutou, Forcade, and Frémeaux, eds. Collected Essays .
 Jones, and Silberzahn, constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001 . See also Jones and Silberg .
 Bex: Arguments, Stories and Criminal Evidence; and Walton, Argument Evaluation and Evidence. Bex, Walton, Bex. Walton, Walton. Walton . Walton: Argument evaluation and evidence. The jury will decide whether to convict Bex .
 Vaïsse and Forcade, eds., Le Renseignement au début de la Guerre froide. “Old and New Challenges”; . “New Challenges’. Old and New challenges”. ‘New Challenges.’
 The United States Invasion of Iraq, Free Markets, and the Twilight of Democracy. The U.S. invasion of Iraq was the first invasion of democracy in the United States. Free markets, free markets and free markets are key to democracy .
 Kent ignored the strong criticism made by the French ‘founding father’ of modern medicine, Claude Bernard, about Bacon’s epistemology, about the idea .
 Richard C. Patterson, Richard C Jr., “Ambassador to Guatemala, 1948–1951,” in Immerman, “Guatemala as Cold War History” 637 .
 See also Jervis, ‘Reports, Politics, and Intelligence Failures, “15–18.”
 Central Intelligence Library – virtual room . Board of National Estimates. Board of Estimates. Central Intelligence . Library .
 Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush. Secret Intelligence . Secret Intelligence. The American Presidency . The American presidency .
 Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001, is CNN.com's new book, "Cassandra" The book explores the CIA's failure to solve the problem of intelligence failures .
 Services de renseignement, États-Unis, 1917-1941 [The Reason for Plotting. 1917-41: The Reason for Planning. Services de Renneignement . 1917-40: The reason for plotting is the reason for planning .