 Prime Minister John Diefenbaker refused a United States request to align the alert status of Canada’s military with that of the USA's . Canada – USA relationship was particularly impacted by the larger crisis . The larger crisis touched off a bilateral crisis .
 Canada’s bifurcated response represents an important puzzle for students of Canadian foreign policy decision-making .
 I argue that a critical part of the answer to this question is located at the substate level, namely in a divergence in the forms of the trust-beliefs held by these two groups . The answer to the question is to be found in the form of the two groups,
 The Canadian military leadership trusted the USA to look out for Canada’s best interests, while the political leadership, which in this case consisted of Diefenbaker, did not . In other words, one cannot understand this bifurcated response without recognizing that the military
 This divergence in trust beliefs was itself largely the product of these two groups’ subscriptions to different narratives concerning Canada – USA relations, and their differential exposure to a set of critical trust-enabling factors . This divergence was largely the result of the two groups' subscriptions to . different narratives
 I provide my definition of trust, summarizes the conceptualization thereof in which it is embedded . I outline a research procedure for evaluating trust-focused explanations .
 Cuban missile crisis provides historical context of events surrounding missile crisis . Second, I add empirical flesh to these theoretical bones by providing historical context .
 Third, I evaluate existing explanations for these events and identify their strengths, while also illuminating the aspects of the aspects which could be improved by the addition of trust .
 Fourth, I present my own analysis and elaborate a trust-focused explanation that supplements existing explanations and fills gaps identified in the third part of the third .
 While it is not possible to fully elaborate this framework here, it is useful to summarize it . The framework is not fully explained here .
 An agent’s specific reasonable belief, held despite irresolvable uncertainty, that: she can accurately predict certain of another agent's intentions; . and that the trustee is in some way obliged to have these intentions . An agent's specific reasonable . belief is held .
 For trust to exist, trust must prevail to the extent that the trustor makes herself vulnerable to betrayal by the trustee by relying on the success of these predictions in the planning and execution of her future actions .
 The interaction of these three elements generates a process called collective identification through which an “ingroup” is produced . The interaction creates a process of collective identification .
 These hypotheses are evaluated through the postulation of a specific trust belief that would justify the acceptance of vulnerability in question, and of a larger narrative context within which this trust belief could plausibly be held .
 The researcher must then evaluate whether evidence supportive of the postulated subscription to this narrative exists . The researcher then assesses whether there is evidence to support the theory .
 The identification and evaluation of this narrative is essential because it is in interrogating its content that the researcher can determine the substantive foundations on which the specific trust belief in question is built, as well as uncover evidence of the third psychological component just mentioned .
 The evaluation of this evidence will be undertaken in the final part of this article . The evaluation will take place in the last part of the article .
 With theoretical scaffolding in place, it is now possible to engage the substance of the historical case . The Cuban missile crisis and its historical context can be discussed .
 I begin by identifying an opportunity for the acceptance of vulnerability between states . I identify an opportunity to identify vulnerability between state and state .
 This is a useful first step because while not all acceptances of vulnerability are the result of trust, their presence is the best empirical indicator that trust may be influencing an agent’s decision-making . This is an example of how trust may influence an agent's decision making .
 Canada's military leadership secretly defy Diefenbaker and effectively acquiesce to this request . Simultaneously, the decision of the Canadian military leadership to secretly defy him represents a contradictory acceptance of vulnerability on Canada’s behalf .
 In this section, I describe the details of these two decisions while also providing the historical context through which they gained their meaning . I also provide a historical context .
 In order to understand the crisis, it is important to understand key features of the Canada – USA relationship that had developed in the half-century that preceded these events . The narratives that evolved and which greatly influenced and defined agents’ decision-making, are key to understanding the crisis .
 The first third of the twentieth century saw the Canada – USA relationship move from hostility toward amity . Canada and the U.S. have been at odds for decades .
 Suspicions are not the only factor influencing perceptions . Nevertheless, suspicions are still the only factors influencing perceptions.
 Urban resulting in significant interactivity between the two societies . Urban resulted in significant interaction between the societies .
 It is from these seeds that what I call the ‘Continentalist’ narrative emerged . The “Continentalists” narrative emerged from the seeds of this narrative, he says .
 U.S. and Canada share a democratic form of government which comes from common sources . Roosevelt argued in the run-up to the Second World War that all parts of the British Empire shared a democratic government .
 "We have adapted these institutions to our own needs, and our special conditions, but fundamentally they are the same," says President Obama . We have adapted them to our needs and conditions, says Obama . "We are not going to change the world," says Obama.
 The events of the Second World War would further strengthen the liberal security community . As will be discussed shortly, the events will further strengthen this liberal community .
 Traditional suspicions that animated what I call the “Loyalist’s narrative had not completely disappeared . Nevertheless, the traditional suspicions that . animated what . I call . the ‘Loyalists’ narrative hadn’t completely disappeared, he says .
 In fact, there had been a number of incidents during the war when U.S. servicemen stationed in Canada had impugned Canadian sovereignty . In the Canadian government’s view, in the Canadian view, a lack of respect for Canada's sovereignty .
 Mackenzie King turned down a free trade agreement with the USA in 1948 . He believed ‘that the long objective of the Americans was to control this Continent.’
 The election of John Kennedy to the White House in 1960 produced a dramatically different relationship . John Kennedy was elected to the presidency in 1960 .
 Much of their mutual dislike stemmed from their second meeting, which took place in 1961 . Much of the mutual dislike stems from their first meeting in 1961, when they met in 1961.
 The memo concerned a number of points on which Kennedy was meant to “push” Diefenbaker . Kennedy was supposed to push the president on those points . The memo was published in the 1980s .
 Kennedy’s response when these events were related to him “was the strongest of them all,” he said . Kennedy's response to the events was ‘strongest of all’, he said. ‘I’m not the president,’
 Peter Haydon suggests that by the time the Cuban missile crisis erupted, the two leaders actively distrusted each other . Haydon says the Cuban leaders were distrustful of each other when the crisis erupted .
 The crisis itself began on 16 October when Kennedy was informed that a number of ballistic missiles were being installed in Cuba by the Soviets . Kennedy was told that the Soviets were installing missiles in Cuba .
 Between 16 and 22 October, Kennedy and his advisors debated their response in secret . The debate was held in secret between October 16 and October 22 . Kennedy's advisors debated the response to the White House's decision .
 Diefenbaker, Howard Green and Douglas Harkness were finally briefed on the crisis by a United States envoy on 22 October, just two hours before the televised address in which Kennedy announced the discovery of missiles .
 Minister of Defence Harkness was inclined to agree to the request, but called on the prime minister for authorization . The request was made by the minister of defence .
 On 23 October, Harkness again proposed raising the alert, this time to the cabinet . The alert was approved by the Cabinet .
 Kennedy called Diefenbaker and, inter alia, again requested that Canadian forces raise their alert status . Later that day, Kennedy called the Prime Minister's office .
 After acrimonious debate, the meeting dissolved with no decision having taken .
 Harkness returned to his office and learned that parts of the U.S. military had raised their alert status to DEFCON 2, meaning that an imminent attack was now expected .
 Diefenbaker’s repeated refusal to grant the United States request represents a refusal to accept vulnerability to the USA . It would have effectively ceded control of the relevant defences . Canada would not have accepted vulnerability to USA because it would have been vulnerable .
 Diefenbaker's view that the USA could not be trusted to protect Canada’s best interests is consistent with adherence to the Loyalist narrative . As just described, this decision was justified at the time by the fact that the U.S. couldn't be trusted .
 The situation was the opposite for the Canadian military leadership, who did trust their U.S. counterparts to look out for their best interests . This was compatible with a Continentalist analysis which saw the defence of the two North American states as indivisible .
 There are two main categories of existing explanations for the actions of Canadian decisionmakers during the Cuban missile crisis . Alternative explanations are possible .
 Diefenbaker's refusal of the United States’s request was remarkable, primarily because of how it defied the will of the U.S. in the midst of the Cold War's most acute crisis . The U.N. was Canada's closest ally, Canada�
 This contradicts predictions that see Canada as subordinate to U.S. hegemony . This contradicts the predictions of the many theories that see the country as subordinate .
 The decisions taken by the military leadership are generally presented as the decisions any reasonable agent would have made in the situation, and not interrogated too closely . By implication, the decisions are presented as those of a reasonable agent .
 Diefenbaker and military leadership responded reasonably to conflicting structural pressures, says Lennox . Lennox argues that the contradictory result an inevitable consequence of Canada’s positioning in the international system . Alternatively, structural explanations, such as the one offered by Lennox, argue that D
 Both of these explanations have important strengths but both also possess flaws . Both explanations are flawed, but both have important flaws .
 I explore how these flaws leave both unable to coherently explain the actions of Canadian decision-makers during the crisis .
 I then proceed to show how the addition of trust would resolve the most important of these flaws, at least in the case of the ‘traditional” explanation . I proceed to talk about how trust is essential to the "traditional" explanation .
 Any explanation of a phenomenon in international politics that postulates an unobservable variable like trust playing an important role must meet a high bar in terms of superior explanatory power to justify the reduced parsimony implied by its inclusion .
 Many theories would predict that Diefenbaker should have cooperated with the USA immediately, given Canada’s reliance on the USA for security . Canada's inability to independently affect the outcome of the crisis would have led to the U.S. involvement .
 First, it is an analytically unsatisfying deus ex machina as it explains Diefenbaker’s actions by suspending the assumption that he was a reasonable actor, without providing any explanation .
 It seems likely that Diefenbaker allowed his prejudices against Kennedy to inform his decision-making . While it seems likely, it is not obvious that his concerns were unwarranted .
 Diefenbaker’s belief that Kennedy recklessly escalated the situation at least partially in an attempt to recover his prestige is not outside the mainstream historiography of the crisis . Additionally, he believes that Kennedy acted recklessly in a bid to recover prestige .
 If we reject the argument that Diefenbaker’s decisions were self-evidently unreasonable, we are forced to delve deeper than do the often overly descriptive traditional explanations of his actions . The argument that Kennedy was making decisions for Canada without undertaking the consultations required by agreements like
 The military leadership's decisions were assumed to be obviously reasonable, but analysis often elided . Doing so also focuses attention on the need to explain the decision-making of the military leadership, he says .
 Lennox argues that because of its position within a USA-dominated hierarchical sub-system, Canada’s foreign policy is driven by an imperative to demonstrate its subservience to the USA . He argues that due to its simultaneous membership in an anarchic international system, it is concurrently
 Lennox’s explanation does not explain how pressures he identifies actually influence agents’ decision-making . Lennox: ‘The key problem with Lennox's explanation is that it doesn’t explain how the pressures he identified actually influence decision making.’
 Lennox cannot explain why Diefenbaker was pushed in one direction and military leadership in the other and not vice versa . Lennox says he can't explain why they were pushed in this instance and not in others .
 Without specifying how structural forces are translated into decisions and how agents are differentially influenced by them, the theory is left indeterminate . The theory is not known if structural forces translate into decisions .
 The traditional explanation can be provided a more rigorous structure while still maintaining its admirable specificity . However, with some modification, the traditional explanation is more rigorous .
 The critical change that must be made is to abandon the dismissive assumption that Diefenbaker was acting unreasonably, and instead inquire into the reasons for his decisions, writes John Avlon .
 The move also requires developing an explanation for the military’s decision-making . As discussed, however, this move .
 In this section, I provide a trust-focused hypothesis that better explains the acceptance of vulnerability than the just evaluated alternative explanations .
 This hypothesis must explain how the trustor in question was able to justify the critical trust-belief, but also explain why there was such a significant divergence in the military and political leaderships held by the military .
 The divergent behavior of the military and political leaderships resulted from the fact that the former trusted the USA to look out for Canada’s best interests while the latter did not . I argue that the answer lies at the sub-state level .
 This divergence was caused by subscription to different narratives concerning Canada – USA relations, and differential exposure of the military and political leaderships to a set of trust-enabling factors . Furthermore, I argue that this divergence was itself caused by different narratives .
 As already discussed, I argue that Canada and the USA established a liberal security community by the late 1920s . Canada and U.S. established liberal security communities in the 1920s.
 This community emerged out of a collective identification based on a shared adherence to liberalism . The community emerged from a shared belief in liberalism, according to the author .
 The same factors that resulted in the advent of liberal trust may also have been pushing Canadians toward other trust-beliefs . One cannot assume that these additional beliefs would automatically obtain .
 Liberalism does require liberals to solve their disputes with other liberals non-violently, it does not require that the members of the liberal community look out for each other’s best interests . The answer to this latter question was critical for Canadian decision-makers between 22 and 24 October
 The key puzzle is why military and political leaders gave such divergent responses . They key puzzle, then, is why they gave different responses .
 Solving this puzzle requires examining how additional narratives, such as the Loyalist and Continentalist narratives, interact with the basic foundation of collective liberal identification in defining agents’ cognitive frameworks .
 Throughout his career, Diefenbaker demonstrated that he subscribed to the Loyalist narrative much more than to the Continentalist one .
 Loyalist narrative carried within it an abiding suspicion that the USA did not genuinely respect Canada’s separate existence as an equal sovereign polity .
 Faced with an expanding Soviet strategic threat, the RCAF and the U.S. Air Force realized that a successful defence of each country could only emerge from an effective partnership .
 The Continentalist logic undergirding this analysis was well articulated in 1962 by Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The Continentalists were critical of the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Diefenbaker and the military leadership differed in their interpretation of the crisis and in their views regarding the correct response thereto . Thus, given these diverging narrative lenses, it is not actually all that surprising that it was not actually surprising .
 Subscription to a narrative conducive to the establishment of trust, while necessary, is not itself psychologically sufficient to establish a trust belief . Importantly, as described earlier, as . necessary to establish trust while necessary is not . sufficient .
 Two additional factors, namely familiarity and positive affect, are also necessary, to be considered .
 In this final section, I examine whether the empirical evidence is consistent with the trust-focused explanation just elaborated . Trust-enabling factors are key to the theory of trust .
 Any explanation that imputes differing levels of trust to different actors needs to be able to demonstrate corresponding differences in the level of exposure of the agents in question to the factors theorized as enabling trust though the generation of familiarity and positive affect .
 Five factors that played the greatest roles in this case have been identified . While I have identified five such factors, limited space forces me to focus only on the three that played a key role in the case .
 This analysis strongly supports the hypothesis that the two groups’ exposure to these five factors was as differentiated as would be expected by my theoretical framework . Nevertheless, this analysis strongly supported the hypothesis . The two groups were exposed to the same five factors .
 The first 60 years of the twentieth century saw the Canada – USA relationship on a trajectory of growing and expanding trust, and much of this correlated with high levels of interactivity between the two states .
 This elevated level of interactivity is similar to the 1910 – 1930 period, when I argue that trust was established between the two states, and significantly higher than in the years before 1910 . The levels of interactionivity during that period are similar to that period .
 These sorts of population-wide measures are useful for setting the analytical stage, but are less useful when identifying influences of particular importance to smaller groups like military and political decision-makers .
 I begin by examining the military leadership for whom interactivity with their U.S. counterparts had intensified significantly during the Second World War . I begin with examining military leaders for whom interaction with their United States counterparts intensified significantly .
 The connections that Canadian Chief of General Staff Charles Foulkes formed with U.S. officials provide a good example of the types and patterns of relationships and interactions that developed .
 In addition to personal connections, Canadian and US officials were constantly meeting to coordinate policies .
 During the postwar period, interactivity and integration between the armed forces more generally increased dramatically . During the post-war period, interaction between the military and civilian forces increased dramatically.
 The establishment of North Atlantic Treaty Organization and its integrated command structure in the early 1950s followed . North Atlantic treaty Organization was established in the 1950s .
 NORAD essentially merged operational control of the two states’ air forces . NORAD was established in 1957 for continental defence purposes .
 Defence Production Sharing Agreement in 1958 effectively created a defence production system rationalized at the continental level . The ratification of the agreement in 1958 created a system of defence production in Europe .
 These agreements institutionalized levels of integration that were unprecedented . Overall, these agreements institutionalize levels of . integration that are unprecedented .
 Diefenbaker was largely unexposed to this high level of military interactivity . He says he was largely uneducated about military interaction with the U.S.
 Between 1935 and 1957, the Conservatives had been shut out of government . Indeed, between 1935 and . 1957, when so much of this cooperation was occurring, . Conservatives had had to .
 Defence Minister Douglas Harkness was likely to be converted to the trusting position of the military due to his inevitable exposure to these structural dynamics in his role as Minister of Defence . This would likely not have been the case for the rest of the government .
 The onset of the Cold War generated strong perceptions of Canada and the U.S. sharing common interests . The Cold War was the start of Canada's relationship with the United States .
 By 1962, the Arctic barrier which had previously protected Canada from the Soviet threat had been obliterated . And indeed, by 1962, Canada had already lost its Arctic barrier .
 RCAF and USAF came to see political constraints imposed by their countries’ separate sovereigntys as an obstacle to their missions’ accomplishment . This realization was probably most influential in the RCA and the USAF .
 Critics felt that the strong identification between the two militaries threatened Canada’s independence and sovereignty . These critics felt that it was traditional concerns of both Diefenbaker and Loyalist narrative .
 Diefenbaker’s lack of interest in, and understanding of, military matters and his distrust of the military brass only exacerbated his concerns, as exemplified by his feud with the military over BOMARC issue .
 Diefenbaker and Kennedy’s poor relationship stemmed partially from an incompatible definition of interests, one that was manifested clearly during the crisis . The two men were seen as having incompatible definitions of interests .
 Kennedy interpreted the Cuban missiles as a threat to the U.S. and indeed the free world . Kennedy interpreted them as a potential threat to America .
 Diefenbaker had already developed a deep distrust for the Canadian military, who subscribed to a similar threat perception as Kennedy . The Canadian military likely only reinforced his assessment .
 I use the term “altercasting” to refer to how agents communicate their understandings of other agents to these others . Altercasting is a term used by agents to communicate understandings to others .
 This case includes some strong instances of altercasting, specifically the ways in which institutional structures can predispose agents embedded in them to hold certain beliefs . This case is an example of how institutional structures predispose people to certain beliefs.
 The DPSA and NORAD have a history of supporting each other as trustworthy partners . For example, by supporting agreements like the 1947 military cooperation agreement, the two militaries altercast each other . NORAD and DPSA have been partners in the past .
 The Canadian military relies heavily on the United States to meet its objectives . The U.S. military says the agreements were put in place in order to meet objectives .
 NORAD always had a U.S. commander and a Canadian deputy commander . NORAD has a United States commander and deputy commander for NORAD . North American NORAD was founded in 1941 .
 Such reliance strongly predisposed agents, even if only to protect their ontological security, to trust the partner on whom they were relying to look out for their interests .
 NORAD's request from NORAD came through, it was unsurprising that the military accepted the request almost without question . The U.S. military responded without question to the request .
 "We see a striking contrast with the political leadership. Again, however, we see a stark contrast with political leadership," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Kennedy spectacularly altercast Diefenbaker as someone not trustworthy enough to trust him . By failing to consult, Kennedy thought Kennedy was required by treaty to do, he did not .
 The Canadian military leadership undermined this decision and effectively accepted this vulnerability on Canada’s behalf . Contrariwise, the Canadian military leaders undermined this .
 This divergence between the Canadian political and military leaderships represents a remarkable puzzle that requires explanation . The Canadian military and political leaderships are at odds with each other .
 Existing theories help to supply such an explanation by pointing to important relational dynamics between decisionmakers and identifying structural pressures that likely influenced them . Theories help supply such a theory by pointing out relational dynamics .
 Overall, these explanations leave important gaps and fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for these events . But, overall, these . explanations leave . important gaps, but overall, they fail to . provide a . satisfactory explanation .
 The modification of what I call the “traditional” explanation of Canada’s actions in the Cuban missile crisis, through the addition of an analysis emphasizing the importance of trust in agents’ decision-making, does a good job of filling these gaps .
 An examination of factors that a trust-focused analysis would emphasize provides important insights into how Diefenbaker’s decision can be rendered more intelligible .
 This is not to say that trust was the only variable at work in this episode . This week's episode is a look at a new series of American Horror Horror Stories .
 As observed, Diefenbaker did reverse his position two days after the initial request, when it appeared that a nuclear war was imminent .
 This does not undermine the importance of the trust explanation as part of a larger multi-causal one . Critically, however, because I have argued that trust is only a part of this explanation, this fact doesn't undermine its importance .
 In extremis Diefenbaker felt Canada’s interests aligned with those of the USA more than those of Soviet Socialist Republics . It simply demonstrates that in extremis, it simply shows that .
 The fact that when one is forced to choose, one chooses the lesser evil, even an untrusted one, does not undermine the fact that that lesser evil is still evil . The fact of choosing the lesser good is still an evil, says the author .
 The important differences between the narratives to which the military and political leaderships adhered, as well as their exposure to the critical trust-enabling factors, provides a strong basis for understanding why such remarkable disagreement existed between the two groups .
 This evidence supports the contention that trust, and a lack thereof, played an important role in structuring the cognitive frameworks of these agents . This is in turn, at a sub-state level, Canada’s schizophrenic response to the Cuban missile crisis .
 This assumption fits into the class of beliefs psychologists call heuristics . This assumption is based on a belief that the world needs to know more .
 Once trust is established, the threshold for repeal is higher than was for its establishment . By “sticky” I mean I mean that once trust has been established, a repeal of the law is higher .
 Heath says explaining actions by ascribing irrationality to irrationality is highly problematic . He says it's a mistake to blame irrationality on the agents in question .
 Diefenbaker's decision to "ratify" Harkness’s decision might render this discussion moot, reviewer says . One reviewer has suggested that .
 Diefenbaker made his decision and stuck with it for a significant length of time in the teeth of the greatest crisis of the Cold War . The decision was made in the wake of the Great Depression in 1945 .
 The heightening of the crisis suggests that it was an additional factor, namely a perceived increase in the seriousness of the Soviet threat, that shifted his position .
 The fact that Diefenbaker chose to align with the USA in no way undermines the argument that he did not trust Kennedy to look out for Canada’s best interests . The U.S. and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics were the two countries that fought for
 Please refer to Urban for an elaboration of the theoretical justification of the indicators I employ .
 Under Diefenbaker both the Permanent Joint Board on Defence and the Cabinet Defence Committee fell into disuse . For example, both the Joint Board of Defence and Cabinet Defence Committees were abolished .
 This campaign included tours of NORAD headquarters for members of the Canadian elite, and the feeding of anti-government stories to journalists .
 Pearson and Canada’s role in nuclear disarmament and arms control negotiations, 1945–1957 . Pearson was president of Canada in the 1950s and 1960s . He was the prime minister of Canada during the Second World War .