 McNamara offers his account of the century just past, as he remembers participating in it . McNamara: The material is designed to be flexible .
 The well as his reflections on its meaning for the lesson plans can build on one another, or be 21st century . The well and reflections on the meaning of the lessons can build up to one another .
 President Kennedy's secretary for presidents Kennedy and Johnson, film or only selections from it . They can be used to learn intensity that marked his years as defense . Students can also learn how to use film and film to learn about the secretary .
 McNamara’s message compels us to pay attention free to duplicate materials for your students to our own roles in and for colleagues who the 21st century . You should feel McNamara's message comports us to . pay attention .
 McNamara: At my age, 85, I’m at age 85 . Although the lessons says in the film is where I can look back are designed for a fifty-year-old .
 My rule has been you may wish to devote man reflecting on his more or less time to own history and the to try to learn, try to understand certain aspects of it .
 The needs of your classroom differ markedly from classroom to classroom . Develop the . encourage you to . adapt to other accounts, lessons and pass them on .
 These lessons will help your students to this guide a provocative and useful way connect the film and its message to 20th to engage your students in a vicarious century history .
 Just War and Proportionality: Proportionalism . 6.15 TEACHING STRATEGIES 6:15 . 15 . 15.15.15 .
 Oral History and the Vietnam Experience . Activities 1, 2 ..............................................................6 7.16 . Activities 2, 3, 4 .
 Activities 3, 4 ........................................................7 8.17 - Activities 3 and 4 . Film as Media   ........................................................................................... Activities 3 ..............................................8.17  - Activities 4, 7.17 .
 On DVD 5.11.04.04: Behind the Scenes—Critical Oral History . What kind of the world do we want for the 21st century? What do you want? Behind the scenes: Critical Oral History and Choices .
 McNamara relives the horrors and triumphs of the War in Cuba, Vietnam, and around the world . McNamara: "It's a war of war. It's the war of the century"
 We are encouraged to experience the 20th century vicariously as what humanity wants for the 21st century . We are of the 20s century as the basis for a discussion about the future of humanity .
 McNamara challenges viewers to confront the role that the experiences of leaders involved in these seminal conflict might play in events .
 Woodrow Wilson’s vision for a world without war is far-reaching and, in an important sense, still unfolding . From the fire-bombing of Japan in World War II to the Cuban missile crisis, this chapter in history is far reaching . The Vietnam War is still
 World War I was a catastrophe of global proportion . The First World War was a disaster of global proportions . World War One was a global catastrophe .
 Nine million people died fighting on battlefields that stretched across Europe, parts of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, and the world’s oceans .
 President Wilson proposed the creation of the League of Nations to enhance international cooperation and to ensure peace . The League was formed in the aftermath of World War II .
 World War II was even more deadly than World War I . Air power was an integral element of the military strategy of both the Allied and Axis sides . Air force was a major factor in the success of Allied forces .
 Millions of civilians died in Europe and the Pacific, especially in Japan, as a result of the war . Millions of people were killed in the war, including millions of civilians, in Japan .
 The bombing culminated in the firebombing of more than sixty Japanese cities . More than 60 Japanese cities were firebombed in the bombing .
 Two nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki marked the introduction of nuclear weapons into warfare . The use of two nuclear bombs in Japan was the first use of such weapons in warfare .
 While East and West were caught in a nuclear stand-off, lethal “proxy’s wars were fought all over the globe . Allies of the United States and allies of the Soviet Union and/or the People's Republic of China were involved .
 The crisis has come to be recognized as the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War . The U.S. and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war in the 1950s .
 Disaster avoided only at last moment when Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles . U.S. President Kennedy agreed not to attack Cuba, and Cuban President Castro agreed to permit the Soviets to remove .
 October 1962 was a moment so frightening and dangerous that its reverberations are still felt today . October 1962 is October 1962 when the U.S. entered the world's most dangerous territory .
 Americans believed this war was an effort to prevent North Vietnam from unifying North and South Vietnam under Communist leadership . Americans were convinced that the fall of South Vietnam to Communism would eventually result in the “fall” of all of Southeast Asia .
 To the combined Communist forces of the North Vietnamese and the National Liberation Front, the war was a sign of U.S. imperial ambitions in the South . The war was fought in Vietnam by North and South Vietnamese Communists .
 The war stretched across several generations and killed more than three million Vietnamese and 58,000 Americans . More than 3 million people were killed in the Vietnam War . The U.S.-Vietnam War was the first major conflict between the two countries .
 There was intense international opposition to the war and widespread protest at home . The war was the first of its kind in Afghanistan .
 The United States loss in Vietnam dealt a profound psychological blow to America . The U.S. lost the war in Vietnam .
 Two nuclear bombs dropped by the U.S. on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 killed more than 150,000 people . The bombs were dropped on two Japanese cities in 1945 .
 By 1946, the atomic bomb was being called “the ultimate weapon’s ultimate weapon,” a force of unprecedented destructiveness . The atomic bomb is now being called the ultimate weapon .
 Today the United States and Russia, while ostensibly allies, still threaten each other with roughly 28,800 of the 30,000 currently known to exist . Each side threatened the other with thousands of nuclear weapons . Today the U.S. and Russia still threaten .
 At least six additional countries now . now . possess nuclear weapons and others are attempting to obtain them . At least 6 additional countries . now have nuclear weapons .
 Write the following key terms on the board and ask students to suggest definitions . Write the key terms and students can suggest definitions for each term .
 Appeasement morality is the key to understanding the terms of war . Then instruct them to take notes on these terms as they view the movie . Take notes of the terms .
 Ask students to read the film’s synopsis and the historical context to familiarize themselves with the content of the film . Read the synopsis and historical context for students . Read a synopsis and a historical context of the movie .
 In-depth discussions of each of the historical topics described are available on the web at www.choices.edu/fogofwar .
 Ask students to recall anything they have learned about Robert McNamara from assignments in history classes or from relatives who might have lived during the time he was Secretary of Defense . Ask students about anything they've learned about McNamara .
 For homework prior to viewing, ask students to research Robert McNamara .
 Suggest that they include one interview with someone who lived through this period . Suggest that one interview should include someone who has lived through the period .
 Ask students to identify at least three similarities and /or differences from the life of 5.5. is built around eleven lessons from life 5.6.5 . Ask students for three similarities or differences .
 Robert of Robert McNamara. Instruct students to select one question or challenge . Choose one question from McNamara that you think will be answered by Robert .
 McNamara presents to us in The Fog of War and be prepared to share this in class . McNamara presented to us this week's class .
 There’s something after VIEWING THE FILM: SUGGESTIONS beyond one's self . There's something after watching the film that you should consider beyond your self .
 Choose one or more of the activities described in this guide to connect the film to topics you may be covering in your classes . Choose one of these activities described as connecting the film with topics in your classroom .
 Refer students to the resources available from the web at www.choices.edu/fogofwar. have to engage in evil. refer students to resources available to students .
 We must try to put ourselves inside their skin and look at us through their eyes, in order to understand the thoughts that lie behind their decisions . “Empathy and Foreign Policy”
 Ask students to think about an enemy—personal, national, international, international . Ask students about their enemies: "Think about your enemy. Think about your country, your country"
 Have them and their actions. construct a description of that person, group, or nation . Have them . construct a . description of their actions . construct them .
 Form groups of three to four students and distribute copies of “Empathy and Foreign Policy” to each student . Form groups to distribute the book to students .
 Instruct the groups to work collectively to develop their responses to the questions and historical events presented in the worksheet . Instruct them to work together to develop responses .
 Analyze and interpret the most important documents of the missile crisis . The case of the Cuban missile crisis will be presented in this book . The film will be shown at 8 p.m. ET on July 28, 2009 .
 At the end we lucked out. "The Khrushchev Letters—How to Respond" At the beginning of the series, the book was "How to respond to"
 Kennedy’s letter to Khrushchev came that close to total destruction of their societies . The letter was written by the then-Krushchev .
 The most significant paragraphs of this article are highlighted for educational purposes . This article includes a selection of excerpts from the most recent edition of The Daily Mail .
 Call on students to EXTRA CHALLENGE – explain the significance of the highlighted paragraphs . Students must also explain significance of highlighted paragraphs in this article .
 Ask students to read Castro’s to discuss how they would advise President Kennedy to respond . Form small groups and ask students to form small groups to form groups .
 Have groups share their letter to Khrushchev outlining responses with the class . Have groups of students share their letters with each other outlining their position .
 In small groups, discuss the questions States would have acted posed on the worksheet . Discuss the questions you would have responded to the questions posed by the States .
 Ask students to assume Khrushchev's perspective in considering differently if it knew and Kennedy’s response . Ask students how they would have reacted differently if they knew .
 Ask students to consider some or all of the bulleted questions posed on the second half of the handout . Consider these questions as a way to help students understand their subjects .
 Analyze the significance of the Tonkin Gulf incident on U.S. policy . Analyze how the incident affected the United States policy on the Gulf .
 President Johnson authorized bombing 1.6 million people in Tonkin Gulf . President Johnson approved bombing 1,000 people in the Gulf of Tonkin .
 Call on students to share with the class their responses to the “Questions for Class wrong, but we had in our minds a Discussion” in the handout that led to that action .
 International efforts to regulate war are defined by the values surrounding international efforts to do so . The book explores the values of international diplomacy in an attempt to regulate international war .
 “Values in a Time of War” LeMay said, “If we’d lost the war, IN THE CLASSROOM we would all have been prosecuted as war 1.1.” “The values in a time of war”
 Ask groups to discuss how their decisions would be affected by the actions of —The Fog of War the enemy . Ask the groups how they would react to the actions .
 Explore a framework for analyzing political violence and war . Explore the framework for analysis of political violence, war . Find out how to analyze political violence in the United States .
 LeMay’s answer would be “Yes” community has established standards for when and how force may be used . Ask them to identify the standards the international LeMay community has set, LeMay says .
 Have them list several examples of political violence, citing either examples from wars or terrorist acts . Have a list of examples from the Fog of War .
 Explore these examples in terms of the decisions to use violence and how violence was employed . Explore the history of violence in the U.S.
 Are the “rules of war” the way they view justifiable force? Ask them if 9/11 has changed? Are the rules of war really changed? If you think they have changed?
 Challenge: Compare the perspective of an average American with that of Robert McNamara . McNamara's perspective is that of the average American .
 In THE CLASSROOM interviewee focusing on 1.1 . Suggest that they develop a magazine for Vietnam veterans .
 Ask students to compare the experiences of veterans with influenced the direction of those of non-veterans . Students should compare veterans' experiences with influenced those of others . Students will also be asked to compare their experiences with those of those who do not .
 Ask students how their own attitudes toward the Vietnam War changed as a result of their between Vietnam War interviews . Ask students if their attitudes about the war have changed .
 Ask students how they think they might have responded to a draft notice during the Vietnam War . Ask students about how they responded to draft notice .
 Documentary explores the role the film’s structure and form play in its meaning . Investigate the role film's structure, form and meaning play in meaning .
 HANDOUTS • “Film as Media” in the classroom . Now I remember exactly the sentence 1. Now I know exactly what it was .
 Ask students to recall some of the striking moments of the film . In the large group of students, ask students to remember some of those moments .
 The Fog of War types of things students noticed. Develop a list on the board of the But you can fix it up some way .
 Distribute the handout and lead a large-group discussion around each of the five topics . Extra challenge is to lead a discussion around the topics .
 The “Eleven Lessons from the each one of the five topics to discuss as a group. Alternatively, you may wish to break your class into five smaller groups and assign The Eleven Lessons to each group .
 Have each group lead a discussion on Life of Robert McNamara” are their topic with the rest of the class not those that McNamara has identified himself . Then have each group led a discussion about McNamara's life .
 Students evaluate the places where they students compare McNamara’s appeared . Students compare their own perspective on the movie with those of the critics .
 McNamara’s lessons are available on the web at www.choices.edu/fogofwar . McNamara's lessons can be found at the university .
 Students are challenged to come to terms with their own views on America’s future role in the world . Students will be challenged to understand their views on the future of the United States .
 McNamara presents in the film to challenge us to think about the 21st century . McNamara's film is a look at the future of technology in the United States .
 I think the human race needs to think more about killing, about conflict. Have students go online to learn more about conflict . I think it's time for students to learn about conflict and death .
 Students will write to Robert McNamara to express their views . Have students frame their response as a statement of support for McNamara .
 A report on student views will be developed and shared with elected officials . A report will be compiled by students to share their views .
 In The Fog of War, McNamara says empathy was present in the Cuban missile crisis but absent in Vietnam . McNamara: "Empathy was not present in Vietnam. It was absent in Cuba."
 In Thompson's mind was this thought: Khrushchev’s gotten himself in a hell of a fix . Consequences: fix . Thompson: "Krushchev's got himself in an awful fix"
 Write a short paragraph where you develop an empathic view of the U.S.’s adversaries, in this case Germany or Japan . Write it as an example of the United States’ adversaries .
 Choose a current conflict in which the U.S. is involved directly or indirectly in the United States' involvement .
 Examples of might include Al Qaeda and the United States, Israel and the Palestinians, or various the Soviets . Examples think we did put ourselves in the skin of might, including Al Qaeda, the U.S. and Israel .
 Write a short empathic view of one or didn’t know them well enough to more of the other parties involved in the story .
 We must try to put ourselves inside their skin and look at us through their eyes, just to understand the thoughts that lie behind their decisions and actions . We must put ourselves in their skin to understand their thoughts and their actions .
 Chairman Khrushchev’s October 26 and October 27 letters to President Kennedy . Compare the styles and the substance of the two letters . The style and substance of each of the letters are different .
 Why did Kennedy and his advisers either drunk or under tremendous stress? Kennedy and advisers were either under stress or drunk? Why did they be under tremendous pressure? Kennedy's advisers must have been under stress?
 Khrushchev would accept Kennedy’s proposal, he says . Then before we could respond, we believe Khrushvic would accept it . Kennedy's proposal would be accepted, he adds. Then before us could respond we could not respond .
 Some ExComm members had a second message that had been seen as evidence of a power struggle within the Kremlin . The second message was seen as a sign of a struggle between hard-liners in Russia .
 McNamara suggests that the leaders in the U.S. disagreed on how to respond to the two letters . McNamara: "So, what to do?" McNamara asks .
 90 tactical nuclear warheads, including 90 tactical warheads, were on Cuba at the time of the crisis, he says . He also recalls that, thirty years later, he learned for the first time that tactical nuclear nuclear warheads were on the island . The U.S. learned that 90 warheads
 Why Khrushchev outlining his had the ExComm not considered the possibility of tactical nuclear weapons as part of the position . Why was not considered by ExComm?
 Compare McNamara’s comments on the Kennedy tapes to his comments about the crisis Castro would have been today . McNamara: Castro would've been today if he were today .
 Rational individuals came that close to total destruction of their societies . The world's most rational individuals came close to destroying their society .
 There were sonar soundings, torpedoes had been detected – other indications of attack from patrol boats . There were also sonar soundsings, and torpedoes were detected, according to reports .
 We spent “Whereas the naval units of the Communist regime in Vietnam, in violation of about ten hours that day’s that day trying to find out the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law, what in the hell had happened. We spent about ten
 Congress approves and supports the determination of the President, as Commander in Chief, to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression . Now therefore, be it “Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
 The U.S. regards as vital to its national interest and the world . Make no mistake about it. The United States regards it as a vital to the national interest .
 The U.S. has declared war on tyranny and aggression in Southeast Asia . The United States is to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its freedom .
 Even congressmen who opposed the war were often wrong, they’re often wrong . Congressmen are reluctant to deny the funds and resources necessary to support the U.S. effort .
 The Fog of War Resolution was repealed by the Senate in June 1970 . The Tonkin Gulf was the first Gulf War resolution to repeal .
 United States involvement in the war continued until January 1973, although no formal declaration of war was ever requested . United States involved in the U.S. involvement ended in 1973 .
 One reason to study history is to make connections, discover recurring patterns, and consider the relevance of our world today . One reason for studying history is that it's important to discover patterns in history .
 He authorized the attack on the assumption it had occurred, and his belief that it was a conscious decision on the part of the North Vietnamese political and military leaders to escalate the conflict, he says .
 "We were wrong, but we had in our minds a mindset that led to that action. We were wrong," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 General William Tecumsehh Sherman surveyed devastation of Georgia in 1865 . Sherman's 60,000 Union troops brought by his troops to Georgia during the closing months of the Civil War .
 When a democratic society goes to war, the decisions made and actions taken are not just the responsibility of those in authority, but are the collective responsibility of the people . The U.S. should not rely on the people to make the decisions and actions of authority .
 Once war has begun, few Americans would question that bringing the conflict to a speedy conclusion is a justifiable goal, or end . Few Americans would say that .
 The moral difficulty comes in deciding which military actions, or means, should be employed to attain a worthy end, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The moral difficulty is to decide which military action should be used to achieve worthy end"
 Your assignment is to consider each of the targets in terms of their military significance and moral implications . Consider each of these targets as an example of the moral implications of each one .
 Your task is to decide whether the means of aerial bombardment are justified by the ends, or goals . Your task was to decide if the means were to be justified .
 LeMay recognized that what he was doing would be thought immoral if his side had lost . LeMay's actions would be considered immoral if he had lost, he said. LeMay: "It's not immoral. It's immoral"
 Throughout history, the world has known political violence and war . Just war and peace are just war and just war, says President Obama .
 For centuries political and religious thinkers from many traditions have wrestled with two key questions: 'What do you think? What do we think about the future of the future?'
 Questions are central to something known as ‘just war’ theory . ‘Just war” theory is based on something called "just war"
 Just war theory underlies much of accepted international law concerning the use of force by states . Today, just war theory is used to explain how states use force in war .
 States may use force in self-defense against an armed attack . For example, states may be able to use force to defend against armed attacks . States may also use force against armed attackers .
 Despite laws and norms, there are those who oppose the use of violence under any circumstances . Despite these laws, there is still a strong opposition to violence .
 Over the years, the international community has been working to better define the rules of war . Over the past decade, the world has been trying to define war rules .
 Geneva Conventions established in the aftermath of World War II introduced new internationally accepted regulations on the conduct of war between states . The Conventions were established after the war and introduced new regulations .
 The rules protect non-combatants, govern the treatment of prisoners of war, prohibit hostage-taking, and respect diplomatic immunity .
 The concept of proportionality, long a part of just war theory, has gained new importance as the weapons of war have become increasingly destructive . In addition to the concept, proportionality has become an important part of war theory .
 Proportionality argues that it is wrong to use more force than necessary to achieve success . It argues that proportionality is not necessary for success .
 Investigate an example of a violation and write about what happened to the leaders . Investigate a violation of the law and write what happened .
 In The Fog of War, Robert McNamara asks the viewer several questions . McNamara's film, The Fog Of War, is about the war in Vietnam .
 Recognize that at times you will have to engage in evil, but minimize it . Recognize the need to engage evil in order to avoid it, so minimize it.
 Robert McNamara was the Secretary of Defense during the Vietnam War . McNamara is the author of a series of books on the subject of national issues .
 He participated at the highest levels, in the decision-making that led to the eventual deployment of over five hundred thousand ground troops . He said: "He was at the top level in decision making"
 As U.S. involvement in Vietnam escalated, he became the subject of increasing controversy . He became the focus of increasing criticism for his actions .
 The Vietnam War years were a period of intense controversy and turmoil in the U.S. The Vietnam war years were an intense period of turmoil and turmoil .
 Of those who did not serve, some worked to support the war from here at home . Others were involved in protesting the war and working to change U.S. policy .
 Their recollections are as much of the history of the Vietnam War as the fighting in Vietnam . Together their experiences and recollections will be as much part of the . history as the . Vietnam War .
 To appreciate the human side of the war, you will be asked to talk with people who lived through this controversial period . You will be able to hear from people who have lived through the war .
 Sensitivity and respect on your part are essential during the interview process . Sensitivity is essential during an interview process.
 Using a tape recorder may help you avoid distractions during the interview . Tape recorder is a good way to avoid distractions from an interview .
 Not all of the questions below are applicable to both those who served and those who did not . The questions are not only applicable to those who have served in the U.S.
 Several of the questions are intended to compare your interviewee’s perspective and memories with those of Robert McNamara .
 Norman Morrison, a Quaker, killed himself on the Pentagon grounds in protest of the Vietnam War . Morrison was a member of the Quaker who protested the war in Vietnam . Morrison killed himself in protest against the war .
 The way a film tells its story can have as much bearing on how we understand the film as the words spoken and the action on the screen . The way we understand a film can have a huge impact on our understanding of it .
 This critically acclaimed movie examines issues of war and peace in the 20th century through the lens of one of the century’s pivotal figures . Errol Morris is a renowned filmmaker and director of the acclaimed film .
 In The Fog of War, Robert McNamara offers his account of the century just passed, as he remembers participating in it . McNamara also offers his reflections on its meaning for the 21st century .
 He delivers his reflections with the conviction and intensity that marked his years as Secretary of Defense for presidents Kennedy and Johnson . He delivers these reflections with conviction, intensity, that marked him .
 The Fog of War is a conversation with Robert McNamara drawn from more than twenty hours of interviews conducted by Errol Morris . McNamara's book is published by CNN.com/Heritage .
 Traditional interview technique would have Errol Morris and Robert McNamara talking together with a camera recording the conversation . Morris and McNamara will appear in a new documentary, "Errol"
 To capture one-on-one conversation without the distance created by the third person he invented the Interrotron . He invented the technology to capture conversations without the need for a third person .
 Morris's image is projected onto the camera, talking directly with his subject . Morris uses a device that allows him to remain in a separate space while projecting his image onto a camera . Morris is the first person to use the device to talk directly with the subject .
 Errol Morris developed the Interrotron not to dilute the intimacy of conversation but to intensify it . Morris: "I'm not afraid to talk. I want to talk to my friends. I'm glad to be able to do so."
 Teletype clicking across the screen, numbers falling from the skies over Japan, declassified documents, and dominoes tumbling across a map . The book is based on the book, "World War II: The Battle of Japan"
 Robert McNamara is the only interviewee in the film—the only person who tells his story . McNamara was the only person interviewed to tell his story of his life .
 Errol Morris has drawn the content of his interview with Robert McNamara from more than twenty hours of tape . Errol has also drawn out the contents of the interview with McNamara . The full transcript of the full interview will be released on Monday .
 We can identify omissions but we can only speculate as to who made the choices and why . We can only guess who was responsible for the omissions and why?
 In The Fog of War, the filmmaker moves back and forth between time periods . He moves between time and time periods in the film .
 We talk with McNamara, a man in his eighties reflecting on his life, on the lessons he’s learned, and on the contributions he can still make to our future as we shape the 21st century . We talk to McNamara about his life and his contributions to
 We witness an earlier McNamara—the small boy on Armistice Day, a college student fascinated by philosophy, a young military man in the Pacific theater in World War II, a successful young leader in the business world . And we witness a younger McNamara, who was Secretary of
 Errol Morris considered several titles for his film before deciding on The Fog of War . McNamara’s lessons THE TITLE with those identified by Errol .
 McNamara’s lessons considered The Fog of War, then The Logic of War and Only the Beginning . The lessons are available on the web at Century, and Wilson's Ghost .
 Robert McNamara’s life has spanned many of the most significant historical events of the 20th century . McNamara has played a major role in some of the biggest moments in the history of the United States .
 Since his retirement from public life, he has devoted much of his energy to reexamining the past – his past . He has devoted most of his time to studying the past - his past - and his future .
 McNamara has met with former adversaries and written extensively about his interpretation of history . McNamara: "I want to be able to tell the truth about what I believe about the world's history" McNamara says he hopes for the future .
 Woodrow Wilson was one of the first leaders of the 20th century to sense that without world today, Wilson said . Wilson said in his first words, "We are the strongest nation in the world" Wilson said the U.S. is the strongest country in world .
 "I do not believe that political change, the human race might destroy itself in catastrophic wars of ever-greater we should ever apply that economic, destructiveness. I do believe that we should never apply that destruction to ourselves," he says .
 The key requirements to avoid such a catastrophe, he believed, were to make a political, and military power unilaterally . The key requirement to avoid a catastrophe was to make an economic and political decision unilaterally .
 If we had followed that moral priority of reducing killing, we wouldn’t have security, he says . We would have had a multilateral approach to issues of international rule in Vietnam, he adds . Vietnam's security is a moral priority, he said .
 Not Japan, not in the Second World War, in the Cold War, and in the numerous conflicts that exist today. Not Japan or the U.S. have been involved in many of the world's most recent conflicts .
 Robert McNamara and James Blight, in their book, Wilson's Ghost, endorse and update Wilson’s Ghost . If we can’t persuade nations with comparable values of the merit moral and multilateral priorities, we will be able to persuade nations to adopt similar values .
 Wilson’s priorities should be priorities, he says, in the wake of the 9/11 tragedy, they add empathy of our cause, we’d better .
 The failure of empathy in the West and among its opponents has been a core reason that the 20th century was the bloodiest in all of human history . They urge that greater effort be made by all sides to grasp reality as reexamine our reasoning .
 We have known for at least fifty years that we, the human race, possess the physical ability to destroy ourselves and the world as we know it in a nuclear war . We are at risk of being destroyed by nuclear war, says Dr. David Cameron .
 We have known for more than forty years, since the Cuban missile crisis, that a lack of empathy between nations can lead us to the brink of a nuclear war and, but for luck, even over the brink into total catastrophe, even catastrophe .
 After 9/11, we can be absolutely certain that people we do not understand, but feel intense hatred toward us, wish to destroy us . Such people are seeking the most efficient available means of carrying out our destruction, that is, with nuclear weapons or other mass destruction .
 In The Fog of War, Robert McNamara addresses his question to all of us regardless of where we launched by the decision of are from and where we live . Is it right and proper that today and Catastrophe in the 21st Century there are 7,500 strategic offensive nuclear warheads
 I think the human race needs to think more about killing, about conflict. I think it needs to be more about conflict, I said . I think we need to think about killing and conflict. We need to be aware of conflict.
 Think about Robert McNamara's challenge to us from your perspective, living in the United States . You can enter your responses to States at the dawn of the new century .
 The results of this online ballot will be tabulated . Use this worksheet to help clarify what concerns you and what is important to you .
 Robert McNamara is a candidate for President Obama's second term . McNamara was elected to the White House in 2008 . He has served more than 100,000 votes since then .
 Think of this as a letter responding to one or more of officials nationwide following the questions or challenges he presents in The Fog of War the 2004 national elections . Think of it as a response to one of the questions he poses in the book .
 A clash of ideologies and political values will fuel conflict and instability in the world, says President Obama . The world is at risk of instability, says Obama .
 The gulf between the developed and developing worlds will widen, making it increasingly difficult to address common problems . Developed and developing countries will be at risk of being at odds with each other's problems .
 The U.S. will act unilaterally and the international community will turn against us, says President Obama . The United States is acting unilaterally, says Obama . Obama's administration has been accused of acting unilaterally in the past .
 Nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons will proliferate and end up in the hands of terrorists, says President Obama . Nuclear weapons are proliferating and will be used by terrorists, he says .
 The United States will drain its resources trying to solve other countries’ problems. The U.S. should not try to solve others' problems. It will drain resources, experts say .
 The United States will lose access to oil and other key resources abroad . The U.S. will lose control of the world's key resources, experts say .
 Events in revelations can indicate that they were mistaken reverse, working our way retrospectively in critical respects, and even that their backward to their supposed causes . At any time, ultimate outcome, yet we’re forced to understand events in revelations .
 To agree to participate creates a profound disconnect between participants and participants . Participants must overcome their fears that experience will overwhelm their fears, says author .
 Caught in the moment, about the effects possible revelations might . have on their reputations . Decision-makers often feel confused, have to think about their reputation .
 The moment of truth occurred at a June scholarly study of decision1997 conference in Hanoi, Vietnam . It was a conference of decision-making experts in Vietnam .
 General Dang Vu Hiep revealed that an The Cuban missile crisis conference, fear, focusing simply on explanations of Havana, January 1992 attack on United States forces in the Central U.S. forces .
 The oral oral history often yields rich and surprising greater share of the burden for the more insights into what it was really like for than three million people killed in that war .
 Robert McNamara’s remarks in The here and now. applicable lessons for decision-making. applicable . The United States had been mistaken, and the yielding more accurate analysis and mistake had tragic consequences. The U.S. had a tragic mistake.
 Hanoi, June 1997 21st Century, by McNamara and James comprehends what they are being told . Reducing the Risk reveal information and perspectives so of Conflict, Killing and Catastrophe in the The Vietnam War conference that participants can scarcely comprehend . Participants can scarcely Hano
 Such a moment occurred at our January 1992 conference in Ghost, McNamara and Blight outline the lessons of Havana on the Cuban missile crisis . In Wilson’s Such a Moment, the lessons were discussed at a conference in 1992 .
 The Soviets had deployed short-range the lessons learned in the critical oral history projects on the tactical nuclear warheads in Cuba . If the expected Cuban missile crisis and Vietnam War that Blight has United States attack and invasion had come, the Soviet directed .
 The renowned filmmaker Errol Morris commander read Wilson’s Ghost, and approached McNamara for Cuban President Fidel Castro . He added that he had a half-hour interview for a cable TV show .
 McNamara told the first five minutes on camera that if the U.S. had lost the war in the. McNamara, literally went pale and temporarily . McNamara said he had no speechless, their eyes wide with disbelief .
 Americans knew that the attack may have been just should have, been tried for crimes against humanity hours away, but they did not know that ships due to their role in the firebombing of more than carrying the invading forces would likely have been sixty Japanese cities .
 Morris was startled by destroyed and any U.S. marines making it to the McNamara’s directness and energy, immediately beaches would have been incinerated . Morris: “Any United States marines ... would have made it to McNamara's directness .”
 Morris and the others present nearly 24 hours of interviews, over three long sessions . McNamara agreed to give Morris the time machine a time machine . The interviews were conducted over three sessions .
 The Fog of War is in essence a conversation replay thirty years later, some of the horror, revulsion and between two Bob McNamara’s. of his experience with violent conflict in the 20th century .
 The program provides a vehicle for secondary school students to grapple with significant international issues . The program encourages a renewal of civic engagement among American youth .
 Choices Program curricular resources involve students in a dynamic conversation between the past and the present . Students are given the tools to make reasoned and informed judgments about the future .
 Each unit focuses on a critical turning point in international public policy . Drawing from both contemporary and historical events, each unit is based on historical and contemporary events .
 Choices Program approach to classroom teaching creates a solid foundation for civic and international education within the core curriculum . Students engage students in critical thinking, shared deliberation, and informed decisionmaking .
 Choices curricular resources are currently used in 6,500 schools nationwide . Choices curriculum resources are used in more than 6,000 schools across the country .
 Considering its place in Cold War History, Considering Its Place in Cold war History, © Choices for the 21st Century Education Program . Considering its Place in . Cold War history, Considering It Place in History, is an important topic for students .
 The United States in Vietnam, © Choices for the 21st Century Education Program . The U.S. in Vietnam is a major source of American education in Vietnam .
 Science, Morality and the Atomic Bomb, © Choices for the 21st Century Education Program . The Atomic Bomb is the subject of a new book, "Science and Morality"
 Challenges for Democracy, © Choices for the 21st Century Education Program, is a free education program . The program is based on challenges for democracy in America .
 Additional resources for use with this Teacher’s Guide are available .