 The evolution of the acoustic sonobuoy followed a number of directions in the decades that followed . The sonoboy was first developed in the 1960s .
 Sonobuoys evolved in capability and tactical deployment in response to the increasingly sophisticated Soviet submarine threat . The AN/CRT-1, the first passive omnidirectional broadband sonobuoy of World War II, the AN/SSQ-53 DIFAR and AN
 The development of the sonobuoy with its improving technology and in its multiple manifestations is described in counterpoint to the developing threat . The sonooy is described as a counter-point to a developing threat that is described by the author .
 The advance of operational concepts from CODAR to Julie and Jezebel to DIFAR are illustrated . The influence of advances in underwater acoustics and the ocean environment upon sonobuoy design are discussed .
 The sonobuoy is shown to be a simple, reliable, inexpensive, technically complex, adaptive, and effective device that has been produced by the millions and used for almost seventy years . It has been used by millions of people in the world for almost 70 years .
 The sonobuoy is an expendable, air-deployed, acoustic sensor to detect submarines . It is expendable and can be used in the air to detect submarine submarines .
 It provided the air platform with the capability to use underwater sound to determine if an enemy submarine is present . The platform also provided the capability of using underwater sound .
 The sonobuoy is a compact, self-contained package of electronics designed to be dropped from an aircraft and enter the water, separate into an underwater acoustic sensor and an on-the-surface radio transmitter . It can be used to detect, locate, and track submarines at sea
 The sonobuoy has changed over the decades, along with the ASW receivers, processors, aircraft, and concepts of operation . Just as the submarine threat has changed, so has the sonoboy .
 U.S. submarines and antisubmarine sensors have been the focus of the Navy's submarine operations in the past . They have been involved in the anti-submarine operations in recent years .
 The Evolution Of The Sonobuoy From World War li To The Cold War 5b. 5b . The evolution of the Sonooy from World War II to the Cold War .
 Report: Navmar Applied Sciences Corporation Warminster, PA 18974 . Navmar applied Sciences Corporation was awarded the title of the report . Report: Report was compiled by Navmar Apparel .
 The expendable sonobuoy was developed during World War II in response to the devastating destruction of Allied shipping in the Atlantic caused by German U-boats . The primary airborne anti-submarine warfare sensor was developed in 1944 .
 The first serious threat from submarines came during World War I when Germany began attacking Allied shipping with U-boats . First serious threat came during WWI when Germany started attacking Allied ships .
 While diesel powered U-boats were equipped with torpedoes, they were essentially surface vessels that could submerge for short periods of time and were forced to surface frequently to recharge batteries .
 The U-boats would only submerge when they were going to attack or were under attack themselves . U.S. submarines would only subside when going to be attacked or under attack . The U.K. would only be submerged when it was under attack or in danger of being
 While on the surface, submarines were vulnerable to being observed and attacked from the air . Submarine submarines could be attacked by air attack from air .
 Wilbur and Orville Wright’s first successful airplane flight in December 1903 . The idea of the flying machine developed quickly after the Wright brothers' first flight .
 In late 1915, the British began flying seaplanes on patrol and introduced aerial ASW by attacking German submarines off the coast of Belgium .
 Eighty percent of aircraft submarine sightings were of surfaced U-boats, with the remaining twenty percent of vessels at periscope depth . The majority of aircraft submarines were found to be surfaced .
 The aircraft could see the submarine from a range of 5 miles . Submarine observers on the submarines could spot the aircraft at twice that distance .
 U-boats needed 2 minutes to submerge, which was not enough time to avoid air attack . The U.S. U-boat was attacked by U.K. forces in the Battle of the Atlantic .
 improved U-boats could submerge in about a minute, making air ASW more difficult . Later, improved U.S. U.boats were able to submerge into a minute . Later U.K. submarines were able of submerging in a minute.
 The German submarine problem continued unabated until the convoy system, using escort ships and aircraft for protection, was introduced . The convoy system was introduced in the 1930s .
 In February 1917, the United States Naval Consulting Board established a Special Problems Committee with a Subcommittee on Submarine Detection by Sound . The committee was headed by Thomas Alva Edison .
 Some attempts have been made to combine air ASW and underwater acoustics by using hydrophones suspended from seaplanes and flying boats . Some attempts to combine ASW with underwater sound have also been made .
 Hydrophones had to be lowered into the water while the airplane sat on the surface . The hydrophones were lowered to the surface while the plane sat in the water .
 Since the aircraft had to shut down its engines to use the hydrophone, there was reluctance to use this method for fear the aircraft engine would not start again . The aircraft was reluctant to use it for fear of the engine not starting again .
 Research in underwater acoustics continued with the introduction of commercial fathometers to determine water depth in 1924 and quartz crystal transducers that led to the first experimental sets of echo-ranging apparatus to be installed on United States Naval vessels in 1928 .
 An electromagnetically activated hydrophone detected explosive detonations using time delay methods to measure range . It relayed the detonations by radio using a time delay method to measure their range .
 On 3 September 1939, England and France declared war on Germany, and the Battle of the Atlantic officially began . World War II officially began on September 3 .
 Based on their experience with submarine attacks in World War I, the British began using the convoy system to escort shipping, augmented by land-based aircraft of the RAF Coastal Command . The convoy system was first used by the British in the 1930s .
 Although limited in range and lacked the weaponry to deliver a decisive attack, the aircraft were effective in spotting and attacking U-boats, causing them to submerge, and preventing their attacks on shipping .
 In 1941, Germany began using wolfpacks for coordinated attacks on Allied ships by multiple U-boats . In that year, 1,118 Allied ships were sunk by wolf-packs .
 Ninety-five percent of the U-boats that were detected by the Allies escaped . The U.S. U.B. boats were found by Allied forces .
 These 60-pound sonobuoys were tested in September 1941, at Barnegat Bay, New Jersey . They were tested at the end of September 1941 .
 The first models were noisy and leaked . They worked well enough to prove the concept, even though the first models leaked .
 Using a radio sonobuoy in aerial ASW was demonstrated on 7 March 1942, in an exercise conducted off New London with the S-20 submarine and the K-5 blimp .
 The buoys detected the sound of the submerged submarine’s propellers at distances up to three miles . The radio reception aboard the blimp was satisfactory up to five miles .
 The outer cylinder for the first buoys was a quarter-inch thick paper tube coated with an alkyd resin to keep it watertight for hours .
 Wooden disks at the ends of the combined electronics and battery compartment were sealed by adhesive tape and flexible pitch, providing watertight integrity . Wooden disks were sealed together with adhesive tape .
 It had a steel monopole antenna and a nickel magnetostriction hydrophone suspended to a depth of 24 feet . The device was suspended at 24 feet and had a metal-to-ground hydrophone .
 Early developmental units were tested by dropping them off high bridges . Originally intended to be dropped manually from blimps, the early development units were dropped manually .
 The rigid antenna was replaced by a stored, self-erecting one . When it was decided to drop them from airplanes, parachutes were added to the buoys . The buoys were dropped from airplanes .
 In June 1942, the first operational passive broadband AN/CRT-1 sonobuoy, shown in Fig.1, was issued . The first active passive broadband sonoboy was issued in June 1942 .
 The operator had to make real-time decisions based on his ability to distinguish underwater sounds . The operator was able to distinguish various underwater sounds in real-world underwater environments .
 The antenna was a 39-inch quarter-wave steel tube, with about 9. inches of the antenna insulated from the water by a watertight sleeve . The antenna is a 39 inch steel tube with 9.6 inches of water by an insulated sleeve .
 One of the parachute shrouds pulled a switch pin to turn on the transmitter . The transmitter was turned on by a parachute covered in parachute shroud .
 In the water, the parachute remained attached and settled around the antenna base . The parachute was attached to the parachute and landed in the water .
 The plate was mounted on four shockproof rubber supports to isolate the circuitry from microphonic noise . Each vacuum tube socket had its own rubber mounting .
 The FM transmitter provided an effective RF antenna radiation of 0.5 wattars per watt . It was used to transmit an FM FM transmitter with an effective FM antenna .
 The key to the AAFAC offensive was the U-boat’s need for frequent surfacing to recharge batteries and ventilate the boat . The U.S. U.K. was one of the most powerful U.N. vessels in existence .
 The U-boat would pursue merchant vessels on the surface, where it could travel much faster than when submerged . The U.S. U.K. submarine would pursue ships in the water, where they could travel faster .
 The U-boat would submerge only to avoid attack after firing its torpedoes . U-boats would only submerge after firing torpedoes in order to avoid attacks .
 The Army Air Corps ordered 6,410 of the AN/CRT-1 sonobuoys . Subsequently, the Navy ordered 1,800 units .
 The anti-submarine “Hunter-Killer’ groups were established by the U.S. Navy to provide convoy protection and to pursue and sink enemy submarines .
 Bogue was the center of a hunter-killer group assigned to escort trans-Atlantic convoys to Europe . Bogue is the first of 17 escort carriers to begin a systematic ASW campaign .
 These carriers were capable of ranges of over 26,000 miles at 15 knots . The carriers were able to reach 26,500 miles at a distance of over 30,000 mph . They were also capable of range of over 15 knots at 15 mph .
 These high frequency transmissions were intercepted by the Allies using Direction Finding techniques . The Allies intercepted the transmissions using the techniques .
 Hunter-Killer Group would pursue the U-boat until they lost or destroyed it . Using HF/DF, visual contacts, and sonar, they would pursue . Using sonar and other sonar technology, the group would destroy or destroy the U.S.
 Sometimes, they were cued to the position of a U-boat by the interception of coded message traffic from the German submarine . Sometimes, the intercepted messages were sent to the U-boats by the British .
 By December 1942, the Allies had cracked the codes and were able to decipher intercepted messages to and from the U-boats . The code was used to decipher messages from the German submarines .
 In February 1943, the design for the AN/CRIT-4, a directional sonobuoy was begun . The design was completed in February 1943 . The sonoboy was designed for the World War II bomber .
 It was a broadband passive buoy with a rotating directional hydrophone . It was the first time a hydrophone could be used in a submarine submarine .
 Larger and heavier than the AN/CRI-1, it measured 6.25 inches in diameter and 52. inches in length and weighed 30 pounds . The AN/CRI-1 was a prototype of the World War II era .
 In December 1943, sonobuoys were assigned to ASW squadrons, and by 1944, the Navy had ordered 59,700 AN/CRT-1A . By 1944, there had been more than 60,000 sonoboooys ordered .
 Each channel corresponded to a color and was received on the AN/ARR-3 receiver . Operator manually tuned in one buoy at a time using the color-coded tuning window to compare the intensity of the sound . The operator manually tuned each buoy in one at a single time .
 By over-flying the purple buoy on each leg of its run, the aircraft could position the other buoys, one per pass, at a distance of 2 miles from it . The aircraft could then position the others, one of which is 2 miles away, at the same distance .
 The usual order was Purple, Orange, Blue, Red, and Yellow, with Green being reserved as a backup . Green was reserved as an emergency .
 Some buoys were modified by strapping on a separate container with extra batteries, as shown in Fig., in order to use long-life barriers . Although they normally had a four-hour battery life, some buoys had a longer battery life .
 The batteries were replaceable in the field with the intent that they would have fresh batteries when they were used . The batteries are replaceable so that they can be used in the future .
 The oldest batteries in storage were often issued first to get rid of them . However, the oldest batteries were often given to storage .
 In June 1944, the USS Bogue used sonobuoys to score a kill against a Japanese submarine in the Atlantic . Even with this handling in the field and the use of unreliable batteries, the sonooys achieved around seventy percent reliability .
 The HIJMS submarine I-52, a Japanese Type C-3 cargo submarine, departed Kure, Japan, on 10 March 1944, for Germany for the exchange of strategic materials and goods in accordance with the Axis Tripartite agreement .
 The I-52 rounded the Cape of Good Hope and was in touch with both Tokyo and Berlin by radio . It was the first time the plane was able to reach the Cape .
 Allied Ultra intercepts of the I-52’s transmissions let them track the submarine, and the Bogue was instructed to hunt it down . The Allied Ultra intercepted the submarine's transmissions and sent it to Bogue .
 The U-530 departed for Trinidad in time to avoid the Grumman TBF Avenger from the Bogue that arrived overhead at 2,340 hours on 23 June . The I-52 was running on the surface at night at night in bad weather .
 The I-52 crash dived to evade the attack . The Avenger dropped a purple-coded sonobuoy, followed by orange, blue, red and yellow buoys .
 The position of the submarine was determined by the relative intensity of the sound emitted by the target . By listening to each sonobuoy in succession, the submarine's position was determined .
 Following detections by sonobuoys, the Avenger released a Mark-24 “Fido’s acoustic homing torpedo . The Avenger was the first to use the Mark-25 Mark-26 Mark-23 Mark-22 Mark-Fido acoustic .
 Other Avengers from the Bogue picked up propeller sounds on the sonobuoys . A second torpedo was launched, followed by a loud explosion .
 An Avenger from the Bogue attacked the U-boat with MK-5 rockets and two MK-54 depth bombs . The attack was the first of its kind in the U.S. Navy .
 The Avenger dropped a purple sonobuoy within 15 seconds of the submergence . The Avenger was submerged in 15 seconds .
 For almost a minute, the sound of a propeller was heard on the sonobuoy . This was followed by hammering sounds, then silence . The sound of the propeller can be heard almost every minute .
 A standard pattern of four additional sonobuoys, blue, red, yellow, and green, was dropped around the purple one as a center . The pattern was created by combining four different colors with one of the most common patterns .
 There was no indication of sound from the submarine, but other aircraft were sent to follow up .
 One aircraft informed that only two sonobuoys were operating, dropped four more buoys . One aircraft dropped the buoys after it was informed only two were operating .
 Once a U-boat was located, sonobuoys were instrumental in determining where it went after submerging and how successful the subsequent attack was . Sonoboys were used to determine the location of the U.S. submarine after it was located .
 At the end of World War II, the OSRD laboratories were dismantled, and NRL absorbed the New London Laboratory . NRL terminated research and development on sonobuoys .
 Allies sank or destroyed most of the remaining German U-boats after World War II . Some were divided among the victors of the war .
 The Soviet Union received 10 of the German U-boats, including 4 of the most advanced Type XXI submarines . The U-boat was the largest submarine in the world .
 By January 1948, the Soviets had produced their own submarine and had 15 Type XXIs in their fleet . The Type XXI submarine was the first to be produced in the Soviet Union .
 In 1950, Bell Labs initiated a crash program for the Office of Naval Research to develop SOSUS . SOSUS was a network of deep ocean long range acoustic sensor arrays to locate, classify, and track Soviet submarines .
 SOSUS concept was based on the deep sound channel, or SOFAR (SOund Fixing And Ranging) channel . SOSUS is based on a concept called the SOSUS .
 Project Jezebel combined the Bell Labs LOFAR equipment with a prototype hydrophone array installed by Western Electric . The low frequency acoustic R&D effort combined the equipment with an array of hydrophone arrays .
 The omnidirectional broadband passive successor to the AN/CRT-1A was the A-size AN/SSQ-2 . The AN/SRT-2 was a broadband passive replacement of the ANCRT1A .
 It had reliability problems largely attributable to the need for Fleet personnel to partially disassemble the buoy, insert batteries, reassemble and peak and tweak it before use .
 The AN/SSQ-1 directional sonobuoy experienced delays in its development until 1954 . Magnavox began working on the design of the one-hour-life sonooy with a 50-foot deep mechanically rotated hydrophone to provide passive bearings .
 VP aircraft became the means of rapidly prosecuting the SOSUS detections, and aircraft-deployed sonobuoys became the principal sensors for tactical search and localization of submarines . Fixed sonar systems as main sensor for submarine surveillance .
 One was to develop a directional hydrophone that could be steered electrically rather than rotated mechanically . The other was to use a technique of correlating signals from two separated omnidirectional hydrophones .
 BTL built special directional sonobuoys with two orthogonal pressure-gradient hydrophones in a single case . BTL used two orth-overtonic pressure- gradient hydrophones .
 Orientation of the hydrophones to the Earth’s magnetic field was provided by attaching a strong Alnico bar magnet .
 This directional sonobuoy had serious self-noise problems below 50 Hz . Bar magnets used in the buoys to align the hydrophones were so powerful that the MAD system in the aircraft could not be used until all the directional buoys aboard had been dropped .
 As a result of these problems, emphasis was shifted to the omnidirectional sonobuoy correlation concept . The concept is now being used in the United States .
 Improvements to the AN/SSQ-2B sonobuoy were initiated by BTL and developed by Magnavox . Improvements to BTL's sonoboy sonobooy are initiated by the BTL .
 In 1956, LOFAR was first introduced in the VP community, and the AN/SSQ-28 passive omnidirectional Jezebel-LOFAR sonobuoy began production in 1960 . LOFar was the successor to the AN SSQ-2,
 The AN/SSQ-28 represented an important breakthrough in reliability with the introduction of factory-installed water-activated batteries . The AN-SSQ28 was introduced in the 1990s .
 The AN/SSQ-28 was an A-size sonobuoy weighing 18 to 20 pounds with a piezoelectric ceramic hydrophone at a depth of 95 feet . The sonoboy was a sonoboo weighing 18-20 pounds . The hydrophone was
 It was the first sonobuoy to use a quartzstabilized transmitter and had sixteen fixed frequency RF channels . It was also the first to use the use of a quartz stabilized transmission to transmit .
 It had a suspension cable with silicone rubber insulated multi-strand conductors wound helically inside a silicone rubber cable . The cable was designed to stretch elastically to reduce the motion of the hydrophone .
 The omnidirectional sonobuoy could sense a submarine within range of its acoustic detection capability with no indication of the target’s range or bearing .
 BTL used a pair of sonobuoys with known spacing between them . The correlation concept was pursued by BTL with a correlation concept .
 Using broadband signals from the two buoys, a time delay was introduced between the two signals until they matched for maximum cross-correlation .
 The signals from the two buoys were multiplied in a correlation circuit and plotted on a display of bearing versus time . The data was created by combining signals from both buoys .
 A LOFAR-CODAR recorder was developed for the aircraft . The recorder has been developed to record the use of CODAR for detection and classification .
 While the correlation technique worked, the time required to place the four buoys often exceeded the time that the submarine was snorkeling . CODAR did not work well when the submarine went quiet .
 A small explosion from a practice depth charge could be set off near the sonobuoy, creating a broadband high energy pulse . The sonobooy would act as the receiver for the echo from the submarine .
 Engineers saw a burlesque dancer named Julie Gibson at a Philadelphia nightclub and noted that her performance could turn passive buoys active . This mode became known as “Julie” in 1955 .
 P2V aircraft were equipped with special Julie amplifiers built to drive the RD-47 MAD dual track pen recorder . Julie was introduced into the Fleet in 1956 .
 Similar designs were used in the Hotel class SSBNs and the Echo Class SSGNs (Nuclear-powered Guided Missile Submarines) built between 1958 and 1968 . Similar design was also used for the Echo class SSGN and Hotel class .
 Each of these so-called HENs had two nuclear reactors, a double hull, and two fast-turning screws . Each of them had two reactor reactors, double hulls, and a double- hull .
 The HENs generated distinctive acoustic signatures based on characteristic tonals (discrete frequency acoustic emissions) arising from their propulsion turbines, their propeller rates, and the ratio of the tonals . Besides producing high acoustic levels of flow noise and cavitation, the HENS generated distinctive
 The P2V-7 Julie/Jezebel configured aircraft had a Dead Reckoning Tracker combined with the ASA-13 Navigation Computer and a pair of overhead circle projectors added .
 Smoke markers were dropped to evaluate wind drift . The ARA-25 Radio Direction Finder was modified to operate in the sonobuoy frequency band to provide an On-Top Position Indicator . Smoke marker was dropped to test the effectiveness of the device .
 Julie’s need for complex aircraft patterns, highly skilled operators, heavy data processing workloads, and air crew explosive-handling safety problems, led to the cancellation of the project .
 The AN/SSQ-15, a range-only B-size sonobuoy, produced an omnidirectional continuous wave signal in the 26 kHz to 38 kHz frequency range . It is the first production active active buoy to produce an active wave signal .
 The AN/SSQ-15 was unpopular at first because of its unwieldy size and weight . Introduced in 1961, it was unpopular due to its size, weight and unwieldiness .
 Barrier patrols with WV-2 aircraft out of Keflavik, Iceland, over Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom Gap . This was extended across Greenland by 1961, and the Navy began barrier patrols with .
 In the late 1960s, Soviet Yankee-class SSBNs began routine patrol sequences through the GIUK gap .
 Beginning in 1963, the WV-2s were given ASW capability . They were modified with a sonobuoy launcher and receiver . The WV2s are now retired .
 Originally designated the P3V-1, it became the P-3A in November 1962, when the Navy revised all aircraft designations . The P3A was the first aircraft to be designated as a P-2A .
 In 1964, the P-3 was improved as the P3B, and in 1968, it was introduced as a P3C . The P-2C was introduced in 1968 as the first version of the aircraft .
 With an endurance of 12 hours, the P-3 1s can perform a 4-hour mission at a range of 1,000 miles and return to base . The P-2 1s are able to perform 4-hours missions at a distance of about 1,500 miles .
 The P-3 is capable of carrying 84 sonobuoys, 48 in the external launch tubes in its fuselage and 36 internally . The aircraft can also carry a total of 84 sonooys, including 36 in the fuselage .
 In 1962, the Soviets produced the Juliett class of diesel electric SSGs with anechoic rubber tiles on the hull and announced that their nuclear submarines had fired ballistic missiles from submerged positions . The Juliett SSGs were produced by the Soviets .
 President Kennedy presented the case to the United Nations and ordered a quarantine to blockade arms shipments into Cuba, stopping and inspecting all approaching ships . President Kennedy also communicated to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev that the missiles and installations had to be removed .
 SOSUS contacts on the Soviet subs were made in the GIUK Gap . No tracks could be established by United States ASW forces .
 Hunter-Killer and VP hold-down tactics forced them to surface for battery recharging . Successful Hunter-Killers tactics forced the VP to surface .
 LOFAR, Jezebel, and Julie sonobuoys, as well as MAD, were used in the detection and tracking of the Soviet submarines . All of the submarines were returned to base without making it to Cuba .
 U.S. ASW forces processed submarine contacts for a total of 2,889 hours over a 23-day period . The United States ASW had processed submarine contact for a time period .
 The crisis was resolved when the Soviets dismantled the installations and removed the missiles from Cuba . The crisis ended when the Soviet Union dismantled the missiles .
 In 1965, the A-size AN/SSQ-41, an improved passive, omnidirectional LOFAR sonobuoy, replaced both the AN/ SSQ-23 Julie and the An/SSq-28 Jezebel . The new passive sonob
 The array provided some discrimination against surface and bottom reverberation in Julie operations . Julie operations were the subject of an array of operations .
 AN/SSQ-48, a Jezebel buoy with a 95-foot-deep hydrophone, was also developed in the early 1960s . The AN/ SSQ-28 was replaced by a single hydrophone in the mid-'60s .
 At this point, most operations were passive, and the hydrophone array was no longer serving any practical purpose . At this time, most of the hydrophones were no longer being used .
 AN/SSQ-41B sonobuoys operated in the 10 to 10,000 or 10 to 20,000 hertz band band . The sonoboooys were sent to the ANSSQ in the early 1960s .
 These sonobuoys were individually calibrated by the manufacturer for precision acoustic measurements . They were used to measure ambient noise in the ocean . They are individually calibrated .
 A selectable 20 dB attenuation pad was incorporated into the 10 to 10,000 Hz sonobuoys . To provide a wider range of dynamic range in noisy environments, a selectable . 20dB attenuation pads were incorporated .
 The AN/SSQ-57A extended the acoustic frequency band from 10 to 20,000 Hz . The AN-SSQ was developed in the 1960s and '60s .
 The buoy canister surface float has been replaced with a CO, inflated urethane-impregnated bag surface float .
 In 1965, development of the AN/SSQ-53 DIFAR passive directional sonobuoy was begun . Hydrophone ee { Long Cable Compliant Suspension Isolation Mass Faired Hydrophone Suspension .
 The directionality of the sensor was obtained by employing two orthogonal horizontally oriented directional sensors, a compass element, and an omnidirectional pressure hydrophone to provide a resultant unambiguous bearing .
 The DIFAR concept multiplexed the compass information and the data from the two directional hydrophones and the omni hydrophone . It used a 7. kHz frequency reference pilot tone and a 15 kHz phase pilot tone . This provided the carrier frequency for the amplitude modulated directional data
 The directional hydrophones that were used in DIFAR sonobuoys consisted of gradient devices which needed to be suspended from an electronics package containing the magnetic compass and maintain their orientation with respect to it . KHz 15 KHz Amplitude Frequency Pilot Phase Pilot Frequency .
 The hydrophone package was suspended below the electronics package by small compliant members . Small compliant members were able to suspend the hydrophone device .
 The directional gradient hydrophones were far more sensitive to movement than omnidirectional pressure hydrophones . They were important to isolate them from extraneous motion, so they could be sensitive to movements .
 A damper disk or a damper bag entraining water was used between the compliant suspension and the lower unit . To provide better attenuation of motion from the surface float .
 These devices used the water itself to provide mass-damping to the spring system, as well as isolation from the vibrations of cable strumming . The water was used to create the sound of a guitar playing in the studio .
 Even after the DIFAR sonobuoy went into production, noise issues remained . The noise issues were never resolved .
 The simple spring system of the suspension did not reduce sufficiently the disturbing vertical motion of the lower unit . The simple suspension system did not stop the movement of the unit .
 Drogues as well as mass-dampers were used just above the hydrophone to reduce this relative motion, as in Fig..50.61. Since the relative flow past the . hydrophone was also of concern, drogues also were used to reduce the relative motion
 Soviet Delta-class SSBNs replaced the Yankee-class on patrol through the GIUK gap in the late 1970s and 1980s . The Cold War of the '70s and '80s saw the Soviets replace the 'Yankee-class' SSBN .
 The United States Navy used passive sonobuoys for six 4-hour sorties per day to maintain 24-hour coverage . The U.S. Navy trailed the Soviet submarines with United States Attack Submarines and ASW Aircraft .
 The United States developed SOSUS and LOFAR and DIFAR sonobuoys to find and track Soviet submarines . The Soviet nuclear submarines were noisy .
 John Walker and Jerry Whitworth made the Soviet military aware of how noisy their submarines were . The efforts to reduce the acoustic profile of the Victor HII and Akula submarines can be traced to intelligence from the Walker spy ring .
 Sources of noises include machinery vibration, flow over the submarine’s hull, and propeller cavitation . The sources of these noises include vibration .
 Electronic active noise cancellation techniques also reduce machinery noise . Noise-cancelling techniques reduce noise noise in machinery .
 The flow noise can be reduced by introducing air bubbles into the flow around the hull surface to interfere with and dampen the flow noise and interrupt the coupling of machinery noise at the interface between the hull and water .
 The design of the propeller and the shape of the hull structure can affect propeller noise . The onset of noisy cavitation can be delayed through the use of large-diameter, low-rpm propellers and through the introduction of high-pressure air bubbles .
 The radiation of machinery-induced noise can also be reduced by sound-absorbing anechoic coatings of composite materials applied to submarine hulls and interior decking .
 Anechoic tiles on submarine hulls reduce radiated noise and absorb energy from active sonar to reduce the echo return . The tiles on sub hulls are designed to reduce noise radiated by sonar .
 The coating material contained voids of various sizes to degrade the reflection of the sonar ping . The coating was made of a coating material that was designed to degrade sonar reflection .
 The challenge in acoustic ASW entered a new phase in the mid-1970s with the quieter third generation Soviet nuclear subs . The Sierra, and Akula classes were the quieter, quieter subs .
 The combined results of these technologies generated a steep drop in the acoustic noise levels of the Soviet submarines . The resulting noise levels were much lower than those of Soviet subs .
 One way to improve detection range was to improve the signal-to-noise ratio . The ratio of the signal to noise ratio is to increase detection range .
 Sonobuoy self-noise had been reduced over the years, but the sensor was still subject to high ambient noise levels .
 Low frequency ambient noise came from distant shipping through convergence zone propagation . The noise was caused by distant shipping signals .
 If the ambient noise level could be attenuated, a higher signal-to-noise ratio for the submarine acoustic emissions could be achieved by maximizing acoustic reception at arrival angles suitable to submarine detection .
 The buoy had the directional capability of a DIFAR hydrophone centrally located in a vertical line array of omnidirectional hydrophones to provide 10 to 15 dB of array gain . The buoy was located in an array of vertical line arrays .
 The array was shaded to form beams and reduce sensitivity in the horizontal direction . The array has been shaded in the shape of beams to reduce sensitivity .
 VLAD was produced as the AN/SSQ-77A in 1981 and improved in 1981 . The ANLAD improved in 1982 with additional hydrophones, selectable depths, and selectable beam patterns .
 With the decrease of detection ranges for passive sonobuoys, more emphasis was placed on localization with active sonar .
 The B-size AN/SSQ-15 was replaced in the late 1960s by the lighter A-size . range-only active sonobuoy . The A-sized AN/ SSQ-47 range only active sonooy produced a free-running continuous wave pulse
 This was also a range-only A-size sensor, but it was not continuously pinging . It pinged when commanded through a UHF radio link with the aircraft .
 Transducer initially deployed to a depth of 60 feet and could be commanded to deploy to a deeper depth of 1,500 feet . The transducer was initially deployed at 60 feet . It could be ordered to deploy as deep as 1,000 feet .
 The 38-pound CASS was available in four fixed sonar frequencies in the 6. kHz to 9. kHz band . The CASS weighs 38 pounds and has a range of sonars .
 Each frequency had different transducer requirements, so the transducers were not interchangeable . Each frequency has different transducers, so transducers could not be interchangeable .
 Similar to the CASS in size, weight, and sonar frequency, the DICASS provided directional capability and added FM sweeps to the CW sonar . Similar to CASS, the sonar adds FM sweeps and adds directional capability to the system .
 Early DICASS buoys had the same transducer problem as the CASS . Later versions had transducers that could accommodate all four selectable acoustic frequencies .
 With selectable 99 RF channels, all DICASS sonobuoys are acoustically identical . All DICAS sonoboooys have 99 channels, with selectable audio capabilities .
 The bridle and fins on the deep unit were to provide verticality to the transducer in ocean current flow and stable descent when the unit was commanded to deeper depths . The device was designed to allow verticality and stability in ocean currents .
 The AN/SSQ-101 ADAR sonobuoy was developed as the receiver for an active source in the early 1990s . ERAPSCO, a joint venture by Magnavox and Sparton, developed the sonoboy in the 1990s.
 ADAR was a selectable frequency band A-size sonobuoy with a 40-element, 5-arm planar array with real-time beamforming . ADAR, shown in Fig.5, was a 40 element, 5 arm array, with real time beamforming
 ASW sonobuoys continue to be developed to counter the proliferating threat of quiet submarines . The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 signaled the end of the Cold War .
 It was made possible by the advances in underwater acoustics, transducer materials, and electronics . Made practicable by the inventiveness and dedication of scientists and engineers .
 The age of aviation was coming into its own, and the airplane became the ASW platform that could span vast areas of the ocean quickly in pursuit of submarines .
 Sonobuoys evolved to keep pace with faster speeds, deeper depth, longer ranges, and quieter emissions . Sonoboys evolved as submarines became more advanced, achieving faster speeds .
 Sonobuoy was initially a passive sensor, divided into two branches, omnidirectional and directional sonobuoys . The sonobooy was first developed in the 1960s .
 The simpler omnidirectional sonobuoys set the standard in size and ease of use, in spite of their ambiguity in determining submarine location . They are the most versatile sonoboyoys in the world, and are often difficult to use .
 Broadband gave way to narrowband and LOFAR, and passive omnidirectional buoys were employed with explosive sources as Julie came into use .
 The quiet threat led to a more sophisticated method of echo ranging and multistatic active sonar . Toward the end of the Cold War, the AN/SSQ-101 ADAR sonobuoys as the receiver .
 Active sonobuoys, had begun to be developed with the B-size AN/SSQ-15 . Meanwhile, active sonoboooys were being developed .
 Active sonobuoy used coherent continuous wave sound and was both source and receiver . As an alternative to explosive sources, it was both a source and a receiver . The active sonoboy was used in the 1960s .
 Once the sound frequency was reduced, the active buoy could be made in A-size . The AN/SSQ-47 and AN/SQ-50 CASS CASS became the active equivalents of the omnidirectional passive buoys .
 ASW sonobuoy has continued to provide the most consistent and reliable means to search for and localize submarines from the air . Other sensors, such as Magnetic Anomaly Detection and Periscope Detection Radar, have also been included in the air ASW arsenal over the years .
 E. McEachern, “The Ears of Air ASW — A History of United States Navy Sonobuoys,” Navmar Applied Sciences Corporation, Warminster, PA, 2008 . The E.S. Navy’s first sonobuoy
 E Klein, “Notes on Underwater Sound Research and Applications Before 1939,” ONR Report ACR-135, Office of Naval Research Arlington, VA, September 1967 . Klein: "Notes on underwater sound research and applications before 1939"
 NADC-AW-6322, Naval Air Development Center, Johnsville, PA, June 1964 Revision A, April 1965. Revision A was April 1965 .
 Russell, “Ultra and the Campaign Against the U-boats in World War II,” U.S. Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, PA, May 1980 . Russell: Ultra and the campaign against the U.boats in WWII . Russell, "Ultra and
 Haney, “Soccer Fields and Submarines in Cuba,” MWCR article, Naval War College Review, Vol. 1 . Haney: ‘Soccer fields and submarines were used in Cuba .
 Tech Manual for Sonobuoys-Basic Intro to Air ASW Acoustic Systems, NAVAIR 28-SSQ-500-4.4. 4. Tech Manual .
 Naval Air Development Center, Johnsville, PA, April 1983. NADC-83012-30, Naval Air . Development Center .
 Sonobuoy Instructional Manual, Naval Air Systems Command, NAVAIR 28-SSQ-500-1, Jan 1988 . Sonobooy instruction manual .
 Sonobuoy Instructional Manual, Naval Air Systems Command, NAVAIR 28-SSQ-500-1, published in 2002 . Sonoboy instruction manual .
 Technical Manual Operation and Installation Instruction Sonobuoy AN/SSQ-77A, 1982 . Sonobooy was designed to be able to communicate with Sonoboy .
 Roger A Holler has over 45 years of experience in acoustic sensor design and analysis . He has been involved in the design of acoustic sensors for more than 45 years . Holler: "It's time for the world to hear the sound of the world"
 He joined Navmar Applied Sciences Corporation in October 1999 as a Senior Acoustics Engineer . He spent more than 32 years as a mechanical engineer with the Naval Air Warfare Center, Patuxent .
 He was the project engineer for the Research on Sonobuoy Configurations program, supporting R&D of new components, subsystems, and techniques for sonobuoys . He contributed significantly to development of both passive and active sonooy systems .
 He has authored over 50 technical papers and reports . He has received 6 patents for underwater deployment and cable suspension designs .