 S a g a n Thecont entsoFor eig nAﬀ ai rsa reco p y rig hte d©2 0 17Co unci lonFor e i gnRel at ions ,Inc.Rel at ion ions,Inc.Al l
 Re product ionanddi st ribu tio not hi sma t eri alispermi tt edo nl ywit ht hee xpr esswri tte nc o nsento Fore ig n Aﬀ a i sVis
 U.S. has failed to prevent North Korea from acquiring nuclear weapons and inter­ continental ballistic missiles that can reach the United States . The Korean Missile Crisis Why Deterrence Is Still the best option?
 North Korea no longer poses a nonproliferation problem; it poses a nuclear deterrence problem . North Korea is now a nuclear deterrent problem, experts say . The U.S. should focus on nuclear disarmament, they say .
 The gravest danger now is that North Korea, South Korea, and the U.S. stumble into a catastrophic war that none of them wants . The United States, North Korea and South Korea need each other to avoid a war that no one wants .
 Truman administration contemplated a preventive strike to keep the Soviet Union from acquiring nuclear weapons . The resulting conflict would resemble World War II in scope and that containment and deterrence were better options . In 1950, the Truman administration decided that a strike was better than a strike .
 In the 1960s, the Kennedy administration feared that Chinese leader Mao Zedong was mentally unstable . The Kennedy administration proposed a joint strike against the nascent Chinese nuclear program to the Soviets .
 U.S. learned to live with a nuclear Russia and a nuclear China . The United States learned to cope with Russia and China's nuclear weapons .
 Accidents, misperceptions, and volatile leaders could all too easily cause disaster . Accidents and misperception can all easily lead to disaster .
 Cold War offers important lessons in how to reduce risks by practicing containment and deterrence wisely . The Cold War offered important lessons how to deal with these risks .
 Any U.S. first strike on North Korea would result in a devastating loss of American and South Korean lives . United States military leaders should make plain to their political superiors and the American public that such a strike would kill Americans and Koreans .
 If the U.S. does well, it can deter Pyongyang until the day that communist North Korea collapses under its own weight . The same approach that prevented nuclear catastrophe during the Cold War can deter North Korea .
 International relations scholar Robert Litwak has described the current standoff with North Korea as “the Cuban missile crisis in slow motion,” and several pundits, politicians, and academics have repeated that analogy . The international relations scholar has described North Korea’s standoff as ‘the
 The current Korean missile crisis is even more dangerous than the Cuban one, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The North Korea missile crisis may be even more serious than its predecessor .
 The Cuban missile crisis did not involve a new country becoming a nuclear power . For one thing, it did not happen to be a new nuclear power. For one reason, it was not a nuclear war .
 In 1962, the Soviet Union was covertly stationing missiles and nuclear warheads in Cuba . U.S. intelligence discovered the operation when it was discovered .
 Castro did not possess any of his own nuclear weapons . Luckily, the Soviet Union maintained control of its nuclear weapons, and Castro didn't possess any . Castro was not on the nuclear trigger .
 U.S. intelligence agencies believe North Korea has as many as 60 nuclear warheads . Kim already presides over an arsenal that intelligence agencies say contains 60 warheads . The North Korean leader is believed to have more than 60 nukes .
 Some uncertainty still exists about whether North Korea can successfully mount those weapons on a missile capable of hitting the continental United States . History cautions against wishful thinking .
 The window of opportunity for a successful U.S. attack to stop the North Korean nuclear program has closed, says President Obama . North Korea has a long-range nuclear program, experts say .
 At the time of the Cuban missile crisis, both the American and the Soviet nuclear war plans were heavily geared toward preemption .
 Each country’s system featured a built-in option to launch nuclear weapons if officials believed that an enemy attack was imminent and unavoidable . Each country's system had an option of launching nuclear weapons .
 U.S. U-2 spy plane accidentally flew into Soviet airspace during the crisis . That fear was why Khrushchev feared the U.2 would fly into Russian airspace .
 North Korea, South Korea, and the U.S. are all poised to launch preemptive strikes . North Korea and South Korea are all set to launch pre-emptive strikes.
 The risk that an accident, a false warning, or a misperceived military exercise could lead to a war is alarmingly high . In such an unstable situation, the risk of a war could be very high .
 The Cuban missile crisis was more dangerous than the Cuban crisis was in the 1960s . The leaders involved in the crisis are responsible for the crisis, experts say .
 In 1962, the standoff included one volatile leader, Castro Castro, who held radical misperceptions of the consequences of a nuclear war . Castro surrounded himself with yes men .
 Both are prone to lash out impulsively at perceived enemies, but also prone to reckless rhetoric and behavior . Yet both are also susceptible to lash-out impulsively .
 This danger is compounded because senior advisers are in a poor position to speak truth to power . This is compounded by their senior advisers being in a bad position .
 Kim clearly tolerates no dissent; he has reportedly executed family members and rivals for offering insufficiently enthusiastic praise . Kim has reportedly killed family members, rivals for expressing insufficient praise .
 For his part, Trump often ignores, ridicules, or fires those who disagree with him . For his own part, he often ignores or ridicules his critics .
 McMaster called McMaster a "pain" for subtly correcting him when he made inaccurate points in meetings . McMaster said McMaster was "a pain" for subtle correcting him in meetings, he said . McMaster has been described as a 'pain' by McMaster .
 The spectacle of secretaries flattering Trump brought to mind the dysfunctional decision-making in dictatorships . And in June, the spectacle of U.S. department secretaries falling over themselves to declare their deep devotion to Trump was reminiscent of dictatorships.
 Any leader who disdains expertise and demands submission and total loyalty from his advisers will not receive candid assessments of alternative courses of action during a crisis, says David Cameron .
 Trump’s poor decision-making process highlights another disturbing contrast with the Cuban missile crisis . Trump's poor decision making process highlights a disturbing contrast to the Cuban crisis .
 In 1962, strong civilian leaders countered the U.S. military’s dangerously hawkish instincts . Strong civilian leaders counter the United States military's dangerous hawkish tendencies .
 Kennedy insisted on the more prudent option of a naval blockade of Cuba . Kim Jong Un in Pyongyang, October 2015 invasion of Cuba, was October 2015 .
 Kennedy’s approach reflected the best kind of cautious crisis management . Kennedy refused to retaliate with an air strike after an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba .
 Senior political leadership in the U.S. has made reckless threats . It has fallen to Secretary of Defense James Mattis and military officers to serve as the voices of prudence .
 By appearing to commit to using nuclear force in response to North Korean threats, he breaks sharply with U.S. deterrence policy . The U.N. had previously warned of military responses only to acts of aggression .
 The phrase may sound less threatening than Trump’s comments, but it still leaves itself open to misinterpretation .
 To some listeners, it just suggests that Washington is considering limited military options . Some listeners say it's just suggesting that Washington may be considering limited options .
 The statement implies that the U.S. is contemplating launching a nuclear first strike, North Korea says . KCNA / REUT E RS: "The statement implies ... that the United States is contemplating a first strike" KCNA: North Korea is considering a possible first strike .
 North Korea has not been able to find out what happened to Kim Jong-Unni, North Korea's leader . North Korea is unlikely to be surprised by the outcome of the situation in Pyongyang .
 The Obama administration made a commitment, in its 2009 Nuclear Posture Review, not to use nuclear weapons against any non-nuclear . The U.S. should weapons state that was in compliance take some military options with its nonpro-proliferation commitments off the table, starting with
 Gates quickly added that “because North Korea and Iran are not in compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, for them, all bets are off” Gates said . “For them, [North Korea] and Iran] all bets were off,” he said
 The U.S. government must convince Kim that an attack on the United States or its allies would spell the end of his regime . The United States must convince the North Korean leader that a strike would end his regime's rule .
 It would be a disaster for the U.S. to start a war, says President Obama . But it's equally important that leaders acknowledge loudly and often that it's not a war . It's also important that the United States acknowledge loudly that it would be the first war .
 If those in the White House do not do so, the Pentagon should more forcefully and publicly make this point .
 The U.S. should take some military options off the table, starting with a preventive nuclear war . The United States should take military options from the table .
 Starting a war to prevent another country from taking future action or acquiring a dangerous capability is rarely justified and arguably contrary to the un Charter . But preventive war, starting a war in advance of another country, rarely justified, is often not justified .
 United States military officers are trained to follow orders from political authorities, unless they are clearly unconstitutional . U.S. military officers have been ordered to comply with political authorities' orders .
 The Constitution says nothing about what to do if a president’s orders are legal but also crazy . The Constitution, however, does not say what it would do if it's legal but crazy .
 The admiral should have said that the hypothetical scenario was ridiculous and left it at that . He should have left that hypothetical scenario at that.
 Trump’s volatility has produced a hidden crisis in U.S. civil-military relations . The president's volatility has led to a crisis in the U.K. military-civil relations with Russia .
 In 1974, during the final days of Richard Nixon’s presidency, Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger told the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General George Brown, that if Nixon gave military orders, General Brown should contact Schlesingers before carrying out them out .
 Schlesinger’s action was extraconstitutional but nonetheless wise, given the extra­ ordinary circumstances . The action was a wise move given the extraordinary circumstances in the U.S. Senate .
 The U.S. government faces similar dangers every day under Trump . The United States faces similar problems under the new president .
 Mattis and senior military leaders should be prepared to ignore belligerent tweets, push back against imprudent policies . They should resist any orders that they believe reflect impetuous or irrational decision-making by the president .
 The Constitution’s 25th Amendment lays out procedures on how to relieve an impaired president of his responsibilities . The 25th amendment lays out how the president can be relieved of duties .
 If senior military leaders believe at any time that Trump is impaired, they have a duty to contact Mattis . Mattis should then call for an emergency cabinet meeting to determine whether Trump is “unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office”
 Americans who think the U.S. should attack North Korea exaggerate the chances of success . Americans underestimate the costs of a war with North Korea, experts say .
 In 1962, the cia and the military assumed that there were no nuclear weapons in Cuba and, on that basis, recommended air strikes and an invasion . The cia, the military and cia assumed that . There were no nukes in Cuba .
 Over 60 nuclear warheads, gravity bombs, and tactical nuclear weapons had already arrived in Cuba . One missile regiment was already operational by the time the Joint Chiefs were advising military action .
 Any attack on Cuba would almost certainly have led to nuclear strikes on the United States and against invading U.S. forces . The attack would have almost certainly led to a nuclear strike on Cuba, which would have been likely to lead to attacks on invading forces .
 It does not know the status of North Korea’s warheads or the locations of its missiles . The North Korean state does not have any of its warheads or locations of missiles .
 North Korea successfully tested an intercontinental ballistic missile in late July . It came as a complete surprise to the United States and demonstrated that North Korea can now build such missiles, store them, take them out of storage, and launch them .
 United States military leaders have failed to pour cold water on the idea of a U.S. first strike . Yet United States leaders have not responded to the idea .
 Dunford insisted that, to the contrary, “it is not unimaginable to have military options to respond to North Korea’s nuclear capability . Dunford: “It's not unimaginable” to have “military options”
 It is also military leaders’ responsibility to offer brutal honesty to political leaders and the public . But it is also a responsibility, military leaders' responsibility to be brutal honesty .
 There are no military options that do not risk starting the most destructive war since 1945, President Obama says . North Korea is the most dangerous region in the world since 1945 .
 Some Trump supporters have argued that a U.S. strike to assassinate Kim is the best solution .
 Any attempt to “decapitate” the regime, however, would be a gamble of epic pro­portions . The regime would be the first regime to be decapitated, but it's a gamble .
 The history of unsuccessful U.S. decapitation attempts, including those launched against Muammar al-Qaddafi in 1986 and Saddam Hussein in 1991, warns against such thinking .
 Kim may well have ordered his generals to launch all available weapons of mass destruction at the enemy if he is killed in a first strike, as did Saddam before the 1990–91 Gulf War . Kim may also have ordered generals to fire at all available WMDs if he was killed in
 There is no reason to think that the North Korean military would fail to carry out such an order . North Korea's military has ordered a strike on North Korea in the past .
 U.S. leaders should resist the temptation to hope that limited, or ‘surgical,” conventional attacks on North Korean missile test sites or storage facilities would end the nuclear threat . United States leaders should also resist the . temptation to think that limited or “surgical
 Proponents of this course believe that the threat of further escalation by the U.S. would deter North Korea from responding militarily to a limited first strike .
 Kim cannot be both so irrational that he cannot be deterred in general and so rational that he could be dissuaded after having been attacked by the U.S. Kim is not so irrational he could have been deterred by the United States, he says .
 The Korean Missile Crisis attack by the United States would appear to North Korea as the beginning of an invasion . Moreover, even a limited 78 f o r e r e i g n a f fa i r s s would appear as an invasion. Even a limited strike by the U.
 No first strike could destroy every North Korean missile and nuclear weapon, the U.S. and its allies would always face the prospect of nuclear retaliation . And because no first strike can destroy all North Korean missiles and nuclear weapons, the United States would always be at risk .
 U.S. should continue to develop and deploy missile defenses because they complicate North Korean military planning . Any missiles that Pyongyang aims at United States or allied military targets are missiles not aimed at American, Japanese, or South Korean cities . The United States should continue developing missile defenses .
 Military leaders should be candid about the limits of U.S. ballistic missile defenses . But military leaders should also be frank about limits of United States ballistic missile defense, they say .
 Most such systems have failed numerous tests, such as the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense, or thaad, system . Even the most effective ones could be overwhelmed if North Korea fired multiple missiles .
 North Korea has been practicing launching several missiles simultaneously . That's why North Korea is practicing launching missiles simultaneously, says Kim Jong-Il .
 U.S. planners should assume that some North Korean nuclear-armed missiles would reach their targets . North Korea has a long history of testing nuclear weapons in the region .
 Even in the best-case scenario, in which only a few North Korean nuclear weapons penetrated U.S. defenses, the consequences would prove catastrophic .
 NUKEMAP uses data from the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings to provide rough estimates of how many people would die in a nuclear strike .
 A weapon of that size detonated over Seoul would kill 362,000 . A weapon over San Francisco would kill 323,000 people . Over San Francisco, the number of people killed by such a weapon would be 323,500 .
 These estimates include only immediate blast fatalities, not the deaths from fires after a nuclear detonation or the longer-term deaths that would result from radioactive fallout . These estimates, however, are not based on immediate blast deaths, but longer term deaths .
 Those secondary effects could easily cause the number of dead to double . The number of people killed in the U.S. is expected to rise .
 Even if a war were limited to the Korean Peninsula, the costs would still be unacceptable . The cost of a war would be unacceptable, even if it was limited to a limited area, experts say .
 North Korea has thousands of conventional artillery pieces along the demilitarized zone that by themselves could inflict 64,000 fatalities in Seoul on the first day of a war . The Nautilus Institute published a detailed study published in 2012 November/December 2017 .
 A major attack on South Korea could also kill many of the roughly 154,000 American civilians and 28,000 U.S. service members living there . South Korea is home to about 154,500 American civilians .
 If the North Korean regime used its large arsenal of chemical and biological weapons, the fatalities would be even higher . North Korea has a large stockpile of biological and chemical weapons, including biological weapons .
 There are a number of nuclear power plants near Busan that could be damaged, spreading radioactive materials in an attack .
 All told, one million people could die on the first day of a second Korean war . One million people are thought to be killed in a second war .
 Even if the U.S. forswore preventive conventional or nuclear strikes, the danger of an accidental war caused by the mutual fear of a surprise attack would remain . The danger of accidental war would remain, even if the United States forswores preventive strikes .
 South Korea increasingly (and quite openly) relies on a strategy of preemption and decapitation . South Korea's strategy is "preempting and decapitating"
 A white paper published by the South Korean Ministry of National Defense in 2016 featured an illustration of several missiles being fired at and a group of commandos attacking the “war command” building in Pyongyang .
 In such a tense environment, one government’s preemptive-war plan can look a lot like a first-strike plan to its enemies . The U.S. government's preemptive war plan may look like a strike plan to enemies, the author says .
 The situation resembles less a Cuban missile crisis in slow motion than an August 1914 crisis at the speed of Twitter . Add in the possibility of an American or a South Korean military aircraft accidentally entering North Korean airspace, or a North Korean nuclear weapon accidentally detonating during transport .
 The fear of a U.S. attack explains why Kim believes he needs a nuclear arsenal . Kim Jong-un: "The fear of an attack on the United States is why I believe I need a nuke"
 Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons development appeals to domestic audience’�s desire for self-sufficiency . North Korean leader Kim Jong-won may be looking to self-sustaining nuclear weapons .
 Kim’s spokespeople have stressed that he will not suffer the fate of Saddam or Qaddafi, both of whom gave up their nuclear programs only to be attacked later by the U.S.
 It is a potent deterrent designed to prevent a U.S. attack or disrupt one that does occur . It is designed to destroy United States air bases and ports through preemption, if possible, but in retaliation if necessary .
 North Korea has vowed to exact revenge by destroying Kim’s enemies’ cities . If all else fails, it is a means for exacting revenge, says North Korean leader .
 Castro recommended just such an attack in 1962, Castro said in 1962 . That may sound implausible, but keep a close eye on it . Castro recommended such a strike in 1962 in a letter .
 Living with a nuclear North Korea does not, in Dr. Kim Jong Jong-ho . Living with the nuclear state of the Korean Peninsula is not a problem .
 On the contrary, it means constantly worrying and addressing every risk . "I'm not worried. I'm worried about my own life," he says. "It's a good thing to be worried and address every risk"
 U.S. policy should aim to convince Kim that starting a war would lead to an unmitigated disaster for North Korea . Kim's own ministers and military advisers may be too frightened of his wrath to make that argument .
 The United States should state clearly and calmly that any attack by North Korea would lead to the swift and violent end of the Kim regime . The U.S. should be clear and calmly about the threat of an attack by the North Korea regime .
 Kim may be under the illusion that if North Korea were to destroy U.S. air bases and kill hundreds of thousands of Americans, Japanese, and South Koreans, the American public would seek peace, he says .
 Kim's regime would likely demand vengeance and an end to Kim’s regime, regardless of the costs . In fact, it would likely also demand an end .
 Such a war would be bloody, but there is no doubt which side would prevail, says CNN's John Defterios . Such a conflict would have been bloody, he says .
 There are few, if any, military targets in North Korea that the U.S. could destroy with advanced conventional weapons in a long war .
 Kim regime cannot ignore the possibility of U.S. nuclear retaliation . Kim regime can't ignore possibility of United States nuclear retaliation against North Korea . U.N. nuclear weapons could be used in retaliation .
 The more difficult challenge will be convincing Kim that the U.S. will not attack him first, he says .
 Reducing the risk of war will therefore require an end to U.S. threats of first-strike regime change, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Reducing war will need to end the United States' threats of regime change .
 In August, Tillerson told reporters that the U.S. did not seek to overthrow Kim unless he were to begin a war . Tillerson said in August that the United States did not want Kim overthrown .
 Unfortunately, the Trump administration’s rhetoric has been anything but consistent . Unfortunately, it has been nothing but consistent.
 Should the U.S. succeed in bringing North Korea back to the negotiating table, it should be prepared to offer changes to military exercises in exchange for limits on North Korean missile tests and the restoration of a hotline .
 The U.S. should continue to extend its nuclear umbrella to South Korea to reduce the incentive for Seoul to acquire its own nuclear arsenal . The United States should also continue to . South Korea .
 Some argue for return of U.S. tactical nuclear weapons to air bases in South Korea . Such weapons would be vulnerable to a North Korean first strike .
 A better option would be to keep nuclearcapable bombers at Guam on ground alert . The U.S. has a better option than to keep bombers on Guam .
 The U.S. could borrow a tactic it used in the Cuban missile crisis . Or the United States could borrow tactics it used to deal with North Korea .
 To assuage Moscow, Washington promised to remove its Jupiter ballistic missiles from Turkey after the crisis . The U.S. will remove the missile from Turkey .
 The U.S. assigned some submarine-based missiles to cover the same retaliatory targets in the Soviet Union that the Jupiter missiles had . But to reassure Ankara, it also assigned some submissile missiles to the same targets . A United States submarine to visit a Turkish port .
 U.S. submarine calls at South Korean harbors could enhance deterrence without provoking North Korea . Today, occasional calls at S. Korean ports can enhance deterrence .
 Kennan outlined a strategy for the “patient but firm and vigilant containment” of the Soviet Union in 1947 . In 1947, the American diplomat George Kennan wrote a strategy to contain the Soviet Russia .
 In the same way, the U.S. has deterred North Korea from invading South Korea or attacking Japan for over 60 years . The United States has also deterred N. Korea from attacking South Korea and attacking Japan since 1950s .
 Kennan’s strategy of containment and deterrence cannot continue to work on North Korea, as it did on the Soviet Union . Despite all the bluster and tension today, there is no reason why Kennan's strategy is not to work .