 Since then, the history of the United States, and indeed the world, has been shaped by the people who have held the nation's most powerful office . This week marks the 50th anniversary of President Obama's inauguration .
 The White House has played host to some of the most iconic individuals in history . From inspirational leaders like Abraham Lincoln to flawed and controversial figures such as Richard Nixon, the White House is filled with icons .
 With detailed features on every president, from Washington to Obama, this book offers a compelling insight into the people that shaped the United States as we know it .
 Articles of Confederation was a formal agreement among the 13 newly formed states that served as its first constitution . It was established to form a link between them, and the 13 states that formed the Articles .
 The Articles of Confederation didn't provide enough power for a centralised government . However, over time it became apparent that it didn't have enough power to centralise government .
 Of course, Congress could form its own determinations and regulations, but it couldn't enforce any laws or taxes upon its citizens . Congress could make its own laws and regulations but it can't enforce them .
 Congress had so little power that state delegates often didn't bother to turn up and vote on key matters . State delegates didn't turn up to vote on some of the most important issues .
 A group of farmers in Massachusetts rebelled against paying off debts in 1786 . Congress lacked the power to do anything about it .
 This resulted in many citizens recognising the need to strengthen the government and give it more power to act in such circumstances . Many citizens recognise the need for the government to strengthen its powers .
 In 1787 the Constitutional Convention convened to strengthen the central government . The result was that the Constitution was written up to create a more perfect union .
 The formation of centralised governments often being settled by all-out war in other countries . The fact that that that Constitution was created under a blanket of calm by all parties concerned felt somewhat unique in world history .
 If delegates fail in what they were trying to achieve, it would send a message that a government couldn't be created with calm debate . Such agreements would always be subject to conflict or pure chance, the delegate says .
 The House of Representatives and Senate are equal partners in the legislative process . Legislation cannot be enacted without the consent of both houses . The Constitution grants each house some unique powers .
 The Senate can ratify treaties and approve presidential appointments . The House of Representatives can initiate bills for raising revenue . For example, the Senate can also approve appointments .
 Members of the House of Representatives serve two-year terms . They represent the people of a single constituency, or 'district' These districts are apportioned to states by population using United States census data .
 Each state has a minimum of one congressional representative and two senators . The latter being elected for six-year terms . Each state is represented by a state legislature .
 President of the United States has the power to convene and adjourn either of both houses of Congress under extraordinary circumstances . He is responsible for dictating the legislative agenda of the party for which they are affiliated .
 The United States Congress is the bicameral legislature of the federal government of the United States . 9 United States Presidents by safeguarding democracy and upholding personal freedoms and rights . 9 U.S. Presidents by .
 On 17 September 1787 the final form of the Constitution was approved at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, then ratified the following June . The Constitution was ratified in June 1787 .
 George Washington was a delegate for Virginia at the time of the Second Continental Congress in 1775 and elected commander-in-chief of the Continental Army . He was unanimously elected president of the United States .
 Washington was always outspoken in his views against British regulations . He acknowledged that the Articles of Confederation was not functioning very well .
 Washington oversaw the creation of a strong, financially astute national government . Washington was elected for a second term, retiring at the end of his second term . Roosevelt was elected to a third term in 1940, when he was re-elected for unprecedented third term .
 43 people have served 44 presidencies (counting Grover Cleveland's two nonconsecutive terms separately) spanning 56 full four-year terms . To date, 43 have been presidents, spanning 44 years .
 The current U.S. President, Barack Obama, was re-elected for a second term in office in November 2012 . Obama is currently serving the 57th term, which is due to end in January 2017 after which he will be sworn in .
 The use of presidential seals began around the 1850s . The origins of the presidential seal are believed to have been discovered in the early 1800s .
 Rutherford B Hayes was the first president to use the Seal of the President of the United States on official White House invitations in 1877 . Hayes was certainly recorded .
 Two extra stars were added in 1959 and 1960 to reflect the admissions of Alaska and Hawaii as states . Alaska was the first state to be admitted to the U.S. Census Bureau in 1959 .
 The shield features 13 stripes to signify the 13 original American colonies . The shield was created in 17th century .
 This is a Latin phrase meaning ‘One out of many’ and it alludes to the union of the states and formation of the federal government .
 The motto was suggested in 1776 by Pierre Eugene du Simitiere to the committee responsible for developing the seal . The motto is the motto of the French Revolution .
 The eagle featured on the seal is clutching an olive branch (to signify peace) in one foot and a cluster of arrows . The eagle is also seen clutching the olive branch to signify the acceptance of the need to protect the country .
 The olive branch features 13 olives and 13 leaves and there are 13 arrows in total, all relating to the original 13 colonies . There are also 13 arrows on the olive branch, 13 of which relate to 13 colonies of the original colonies .
 Look closely and you will find other references to the 13 colonies within the seal .
 There are 13 stars around the eagle's head beneath an arc of 13 clouds . The eagle is surrounded by 13 stars and clouds .
 Following the 20th Amendment, the president's term in office begins at noon on 20 January of the year following the election . President's term begins on January 20, 2015 .
 Known as Inauguration Day, this date marks the beginning of the four-year terms of both the president and the vice president .
 Jamestown in southeast Virginia becomes the first permanent English settlement in America in 1607 . The English invasion of the U.S. was the first of its kind .
 The House of Burgesses, the first legislative assembly of elected representatives in Amercia meets for the first time in Virginia . Virginia is the first state of Amercia .
 This body was created as part of an effort to encourage English craftsmen to settle in North America . It was created in part of a bid to encourage the English craftsman to move to the U.S.
 Around the same time the first African slaves are brought into Jamestown . Around the . same time as the . first African slave brought in Jamestled .
 The Mayflower Compact was the basis of the Mayflower colony's government . Before disembarking from the ship, passengers had to sign the agreement . The agreement was signed by 41 male passengers .
 Townshend Acts were designed to collect revenue from the colonists in America by putting customs duties on the importing of glass, lead, paints, paper and tea . This tax was just one of the Town shend Acts .
 On the morning of 19 April 1775, shots are exchanged between colonial militiamen and British soldiers in the towns of Lexington and Concord .
 This conflict would last until 1783 when the Treaty of Paris was drawn up to bring it to a close . This conflict was the first to end in 1783, when the French-Russian conflict ended .
 The role of president includes being the commanderin-chief of the U.S. Armed Forces (which includes the world's largest nuclear arsenal) and leading the executive branch of the federal government .
 This power also includes the responsibility of appointing federal executive, diplomatic, regulatory and judicial officers . The Senate also has the power to veto foreign treaties with foreign powers .
 The president directs the domestic and foreign policy of the United States . The president also directs the national security of the U.S.
 The duties and responsibilities of the president have increased substantially since the formation of the United States . The duties of the U.S. president have also increased since the creation of the country .
 Congress was established to establish a link between the states . Though the new states were independent of one another, Congress established Congress to establish link between them .
 Congress lacked the power to do much about it, which resulted in a lot of people arguing for the need to strengthen the government and give it more power to act in such circumstances .
 The Articles of Confederation was originally a preamble and seven articles . It was submitted to all 13 states and came into effect when ratified by nine of them .
 The Articles of Confederation, submitted by the committee, provoked much argument over tax and land issues . The resulting document was subsequently revised before being adopted by Congress .
 With peace established, the states began to concentrate on internal affairs . The peace was established, and the states were able to concentrate their affairs .
 In 1791, the first ten amendments to the Constitution, known as the Bill of Rights, are ratified . The first 10 amendments are ratified in 1791 . The Bill of the Rights was ratified by the Supreme Court .
 The enemy was stronger and greater in number but the rebels had got there first . The rebels were stronger than the enemy, but they were able to defeat them .
 First Sullivan fell, then Stirling fell, and the commander could only watch as the lives of his brave men were brutally wiped away .
 Knowing all was lost he ordered his men to retreat before the carnage could reach them . Knowing all had been lost, he decided to retreat .
 He used the cover of darkness to conceal his soldiers as they climbed into every available boat he could get his hands on . As relentless rain pelted down he used the . cover to help conceal his . soldiers .
 As the boat drew away the commander looked back through the thick fog that had descended over the bay . He looked back and said: "I don't want to be seen in this fog again."
 The mist had concealed them from the British, his men were safe, but Brooklyn had been lost . Brooklyn was lost to the British .
 This is not the story of a failed general, forgotten by the history books, but instead that of the most glorified and worshipped president in U.S. history George Washington . Washington was a glorified president in United States .
 Just as his men were hidden by the fog that grim morning in Brooklyn, today Washington himself is cloaked and obscured by layers of myths and legends . Washington's life is shrouded in myth and legend .
 He has become an almost messianic figure in the United States, a legend of justice and freedom, a brilliant commander who led his underdog army to the greatest victory in United States history .
 In his final will, Washington freed all his slaves . Being a brilliant military strategist, Washington actually lost more battles than he won . Far from jut, Washington was a brilliant strategist .
 He was no Alexander or Caesar, but an entirely different kind of hero altogether one who persevered in the face of devastating failure for his men and country . He was a hero, not Alexander or . Caesar . But he was no less than Alexander or Julius Caesar .
 George Washington was the son of a slave-owning tobacco planter . He was born on 22 February 1732, 1732 . Washington was born in 1732.
 George received a mixed education from a variety of tutors . Plans for him to join the British Royal Navy were cut short when his mother objected .
 Washington travelled for two years surveying land in Culpeper, Frederick and Augusta counties . Fate led him to become a surveyor, and he spent two years in the area .
 This position began a lifelong interest in landholdings, and he purchased his first piece of land as soon as his sizable income filled his pockets .
 When his brother died in 1752, Washington inherited his father’s vast lands and the position of major in the Virginia militia . Washington inherited not only his father's vast lands, but also his position in the militia .
 It would not be long until Washington's natural leadership and drive would send him straight into the heat of battle . Washington would be a natural natural leader and would be sent into battle .
 Washington returned with a small force and attacked the French post at Fort Duquesne, killing the commander and nine men and taking the others as prisoners, all in 15 minutes . When they refused, Washington attacked the post and killed the commander, nine men, and took the other as prisoners
 George Washington served as commander-in-chief of the United States Continental Army during the American Revolution . The event had huge international significance .
 He then went on to become the first president of the United States . He served from 1789 to 1797 .
 Today Washington remains an icon of liberty and freedom, and is one of the most 12 George Washington 13 U.S. Presidents Making History .
 He surrendered his role as commander in chief at the end of the Revolutionary War and again when he refused to rule as president for a third term . The Revolutionary War ended in 17th term .
 Washington did not become involved in the hostile arguments and squabbling of political debates, but instead acted as a peacekeeper between the groups . Washington acted as the peacekeepers between the two groups .
 A true nonpartisan, his primary aim was always the betterment of the country, rather than any personal gain, he said . "A true nonpartisan," he said. "I was always a true nonpartisan"
 Washington's determination to persevere in spite of repeated setbacks inspired his soldiers to do the same . Washington was not the most gifted military leader; he suffered multiple losses and personal humiliations .
 Washington became synonymous with three things bravery, daring and recklessness . The name Washington was synonymous with bravery and daring .
 Washington was rewarded for his quick thinking by being appointed commander in chief and colonel of the Virginia Regiment . The Virginia Regiment was the first full-time American military unit . Washington was awarded a posthumous award for his bravery .
 With command of a thousand soldiers, Washington was tasked with defending Virginia’s frontier . Washington demonstrated his resolve and forthright approach as his unit engaged in 20 battles .
 His reckless attitude and inexperience was demonstrated when his unit exchanged friendly fire with another British force, killing 14 men . But his recklessness was demonstrated during the exchange of fire with the British .
 Washington's time commanding an army had taught him many things how to bring the best out of his men, the importance of stamina and bravery, as well as discipline and training . His time with Washington taught Washington many things including stamina, bravery and discipline .
 His struggles in dealing with government officials convinced him that a national government was the only way forward . It had also given him valuable insight into the British military tactics, he says .
 When Washington retired from service in 1758, as far as he was concerned his time on the battlefield was over . However, when Washington retired, as well as he did, he was still at the center of the battle .
 In 1759 Washington married Martha Dandridge Custis and moved to Mount Vernon . Washington and Custis had two children together . Washington died in 1759 .
 Washington was now one of Virginia's wealthiest men . He concentrated on expanding and making the most out of his plantation .
 Little did he know that revolution was bubbling, and soon he would find himself back on the battlefield in what would become the most famous war in American history .
 Washington opposed the Stamp Act of 1765 . During the early stirrings of revolution he was actually opposed to the colonies declaring independence .
 It wasn't until the passing of the Townshend acts of 1767 that he took an active role in the resistance . He took a more active role as a member of the resistance against the British government .
 In an act of r rebellion he encouraged the people of Virginia to boycott English goods until the acts were repealed . He encouraged people to boycotts English goods .
 The Intolerable acts were passed in 1774 . Washington decided that more forthright action needed to be taken . Washington was the first president to take action against the Intolerance acts .
 Passionate and charismatic, Washington was the obvious choice to attend the First Continental Congress . Washington was an obvious choice for the First Congress .
 Delegates appealed to the crown to revoke the intolerable acts, but they didn't even make a dink in the steely British armour . A Second Continental Congress was called the following year .
 A lot had changed in a year, and Washington too had undergone something of a transformation . A lot of a lot of that changed in the last year, says President Obama .
 The French and Indian War was part of a much longer conflict between Great Britain and France, known as the Seven Years War . It formed the Continental Army on 14 June 1775 and it was formed in 1775 .
 The war was fought in the north of North America between the colonies of the two powers . The war ended with France losing its territory in North America .
 Funding the war created a huge national debt in Britain and gave France a good reason to support U.S. independence . The war was funded by the British government and the French .
 Britain also needed a way to pay for its army in North America and decided the colonies should subsidise it . Britain also decided to subsidise the colonies in order to keep its army afloat .
 The Stamp Act forced citizens to pay taxes on documents and paper goods . It was immediately unpopular as it was carried out without any consent .
 Duties placed duties on vital, high-volume imported items such as glass, paints, paper and tea .
 The money raised was intended to pay to keep governors and judges loyal . The money was meant to set a general precedent that the British had the right to tax the colonies .
 The soldiers were arrested for manslaughter but released without charge, which helped foster anti-British sentiment in the colonies . The soldiers' actions helped foster the anti-UK sentiment in colonies .
 In defiance, protestors boarded the ships and threw chests full of tea into Boston Harbour . In defiance of Boston Harbour, protestors threw chests of tea in Boston harbour .
 Parliament responded harshly, by passing the Intolerable Acts, which took away the rights of the state of Massachusetts to govern itself . Parliament responded to the act by passing a series of laws restricting Massachusetts's rights .
 They made plans to refuse to import British goods until their grievances were met . They planned to refuse imports until they were met with their grievances .
 A Second Continental Congress was held the next year to prepare the country for the impending American Revolutionary War . When these efforts proved unsuccessful, the Second Congress held in 17th century to prepare for the coming war .
 Although the British were victorious, the heavy losses suffered by the redcoats led it to be a hollow victory, and it proved the Americans could hold their own against their foes in battle .
 Shortly after the conflict, King George III officially declared the colonies to be in a state of rebellion . George III declared the colony in a 'state of rebellion'
 The crowded wooden huts provide shelter from the biting wind, but the cold passes between the slats, through the slat and nestles in the bones . The cold is the cold, but it passes between slats and through through threadbare shirt and through the cold .
 "I thought that after marching through the snow in bare feet someone would take pity on me but there are no supplies coming," she says . "There is no food or water for the first time," she said .
 For the past week I have only eaten firecake a sticky, bland abomination of water and flour that fills my stomach but leaves the soul ravenous . For the last week I've only eaten a sticky, bland sub-dinner .
 "I shouldn't complain I am one of the lucky few untouched by the diseases that ravage the camp," says Nairobi . "I'm one of a lucky few to be spared by the disease that ravages the camp"
 So many men have been plagued by itchy rashes and blisters or fevers that refuse to calm . So many are plagued by rashes, blisters and fevers . Men are plagued with itchy skin and fever .
 The only relief here are the brave few women who wash and mend our uniforms, or sometimes simply provide a shoulder to men who have no will to go on . Women who wash or mend uniforms are the only relief from the men who need a leader .
 Washington did not see himself as a leader capable of leading such a vitally important force, but for those around him there was no other choice . Washington was reluctant and somewhat modest, but he was determined to succeed .
 Washington was appointed commander in chief of the force that would take on the mightiest nation on Earth . With proven military experience, Washington was a devoted patriot and a strong, commanding presence .
 In early-March 1776, Washington turned the Siege of Boston around by placing artillery on Dorchester Heights, low hills with a good view of Boston and its harbour . The siege of Boston ended in March 1776 .
 Even the critical British papers couldn't deny the skills of the captivating and exciting new leader . The new leader seemed capable of repelling their great empire with ease .
 He had commanded men before, but only a force of a thousand soldiers far from the tens of thousands at his disposal now . He had only commanded a small group of men before .
 He had only fought in frontier warfare, far removed from the open-field battles he now faced . He was only fighting frontier warfare .
 He had never commanded legions of cavalry or artillery . He was constantly learning on the job. He had to learn quickly .
 Washington had to rely on his own intelligence and courage to have any hope of snatching victory from his seasoned, experienced rivals . Washington's courage and intelligence are key to his success .
 The commander suffered a crippling defeat during the Battle of Long Island . This inexperience manifested itself in the crippling defeat the commander suffered .
 Washington was forced to retreat his entire army across the East River under cover of darkness . The British attack was so great was the British attack that it forced Washington to retreat .
 For the self-critical leader it was a swift and brutal reminder of his own inadequacies as a general . He quickly realised this war would not be easily won. Although this feat itself was remarkable .
 Howe fatally underestimated the will of the American troops and their reckless leader . Howe left his Hessian soldiers at Trenton, confident that the war would be won in the next few months . Howe so fatally underestimated his will that he left his troops in Trenton .
 Washington, on the other hand, was acutely aware of the morale of his soldiers . Washington was aware of his troops' morale .
 There were 35,000 continentals in the U.S. with 44,500 militia . The militia is based in the United States . There were 44,000 militia members .
 French allies increased their numbers with 12,000 French soldiers in America and 63,000 at Gibraltar . The French allies also increased their number of French troops in America .
 George Washington was commander in chief and Nathanael Greene served as major general . Washington was the first president of the Revolutionary War . Greene was a major general in the early 1800s .
 When the war began the colonies did not have a professional standing army of any kind, with many colonies only able to supply minutemen who were required to equip themselves with most carrying rifles .
 The army's weapon of choice was the flintlock musket . They also carried bayonets and used flintlocks and bayonet guns .
 They also had to combat a primitive road system, which resulted in regular shortages of food, clothing, ammunition, tents and a host of essential military equipment . The odds were constantly pitching the odds against them .
 The rebels' greatest weapon was the belief in their grand cause fighting for their liberty from the oppressive British Crown . Morale was the strength of the rebels' belief .
 It was this strong morale belief in their cause that encouraged American leaders to push on despite multiple crippling defeats . American leaders knew they were facing a well equipped and disciplined foe .
 There were 56,000 British redcoats in North America along with a combined force of 52,000 loyalists, freed slaves and natives . The Redcoats were the first to take over North America .
 William Howe served as commander in chief, but there were many decorated generals and officers such as Thomas Gage and Henry Clinton . William Howe was the commander in charge of the campaign .
 The redcoats also used cannons to great effect, to the degree that if an American unit was without cannon, they would not face a cannonsupported British troop .
 British soldiers were better equipped than their American counterparts . They were fighting away from home, and supplies could take months to reach destinations .
 Many British had to rely on loyal locals supplying them with food and praying the vital supplies would survive the 4,800km trip across the ocean trip .
 The British believed they could easily steamroll the rebels and this underestimation of their foe cost them dearly . The British underestimated the rebels' strength and their morale .
 For many soldiers struggling in terrible conditions away from home, there was little motivation to fight . For many of the soldiers, there were little motivation for fighting in the war .
 Washington led his soldiers across the perilous and icy Delaware River on Boxing Day in 1776 . The plan was one only Washington could have thought up bold, gutsy and downright dangerous .
 Only 2,400 of his men were able to make it across without turning back, but it was enough .
 Hessians at Trenton were overwhelmed and swiftly defeated by Washington and his men . The Hessians were unprepared for the attack .
 A few days later the commander led a counterattack on a British force sent to attack his army at Princeton, achieving another small but essential American victory .
 British redcoats still believed the rebellion could be stopped like a cork in a bottle . Meanwhile, the British redcoat still believed that the rebellion would be stopped .
 Howe thought that by taking control of key colonial cities, the river of rebellion would turn into a drought and the population would surrender to British rule . Howe hoped that by capturing the key colonial towns, the people would surrender . Howe's plan was to take control of colonial cities and turn the
 Howe set his sights on the revolutionary hub of Philadelphia . Washington rode out to meet him, but was outmatched and Philadelphia fell to the British . Howe's previous victories clouded Washington's judgement .
 British General Burgoyne was forced to surrender his entire army of 6,300 men at the Battle of Saratoga . The colonists' cause received a major boon when the British army was defeated in the battle . The battle took place at the end of the 18th century .
 France openly allied itself with the rebels . It seemed that major world players were finally beginning to believe the Americans had a chance of besting the mighty British Empire .
 General Howe concentrated on capturing key cities, but Washington had a revelation . Howe concentrated his efforts on capturing the key cities . Howe was able to capture key cities in Washington, D.C.
 The key to victory was not military success, but instead his ability to keep the heart of the resistance alive and pumping . Although individual battles were important, it was important to maintain the morale of the entire resistance .
 This spirit of rebellion faced its most challenging obstacle yet over the long winter of 1977 . This year's rebellion faced the most challenging challenge yet .
 For six long months the soldiers at the military camp of Valley Forge suffered thousands of disease-ridden deaths . For six months, the soldiers died from disease-related deaths .
 With starvation rife and supplies low, many feared the army would mutiny . Many feared the horrendous conditions would force the desperate army to mutiny. Many feared it would force them to mutine .
 Washington faced criticism from the American public and Congress, who urged him to hurry the war effort, while behind the scenes anti-Washington movements gained ground . Washington himself faced immense criticism .
 Although the conditions had been testing, the soldiers emerged from the winter in good spirits . The soldiers were returning from their winter break in the UK .
 Washington demonstrated 17 U.S. Presidents that his sting was stronger than ever when his forces attacked the British flank attempting to leave Monmouth Courthouse . Washington demonstrated the sting of the British in the 17th century .
 Washington had finally achieved what he set out to do since the beginning of the war hold his own in a pitched battle . Although the battle ultimately ended in a stalemate, Washington's efforts were not enough .
 24 French ships emerged victorious against 19 British vessels at the Battle of Chesapeake . The battle took place on 5 September 1781 .
 The success prevented the British from reinforcing the troops of Lord Cornwallis, who was blockaded in Yorktown, Virginia . It allowed crucial French troops to pour into the Continental Army, bringing vast supplies of artillery .
 This was exactly the opportunity Washington needed, and he didn't plan to let it go to waste, he says . This is exactly the chance Washington needed. He says. "This was exactly Washington needed."
 With the British army trapped and exposed, Washington led his men out of Williamsburg and surrounded Yorktown . The British army was left exposed, and his own swelling in size .
 From late-September the Continental Army moved steadily closer to the redcoats, forcing them to pull back from their outer defences, which left them open for the Americans and French to use . The Continental Army pulled back from the outer defences leaving them open to the Americans, French and French
 As the colonists began to set up artilleries, the British pelted them with steady fire . The colonists were attacked by the British as they tried to establish their own settlements .
 Washington continued to visit and motivate his men on the front line, and by 5 October the commander was ready to make his move . In spite of this and at some great risk to himself, Washington continued .
 As a vicious storm raged, Washington struck several blows into the dirt that would become the new trench the Americans would use to bombard the British . Washington grasped his pickaxe and struck a new trench that would be used by the Americans .
 By 5pm on 9 October, the Americans were pelting the British with a relentless stream of cannon fire . The British were pelted with cannon fire by the U.S. by 5pm .
 More American trenches were dug as they gained land, and when Washington's men rushed toward the British redoubt, they overwhelmed the surprised redcoats .
 Cornwallis's attempts at escape across the York River were unsuccessful and he finally surrendered . As Washington rained artillery fire down on the town, Cornwallis was unable to escape .
 Little did Washington know that the victory at Yorktown would lead to the ultimate surrender of British hostilities, the end of the war .
 On 3 September 1783 the Treaty of Paris was Siege of Yorktown . On 17 October the British surrender, and by 19 October the men were taken as prisoners of war .
 Cornwallis refuses to meet with Washington, claiming to be ill while his army lay down their weapons . Cornwallis claims he is ill while the army lays down its weapons, a crowd of civilians eagerly watching on .
 Using the French to distract the British attention, the Americans march toward redoubt #10 . The Americans use the distraction of the French as a distraction .
 They chop through the British defences with axes then charge with bayonets . The British army was defeated in the Battle of the Meddine in 1777 .
 Although the redcoats attempt to fight back, they are overwhelmed by the colonists . Redcoats were overwhelmed by colonists in the 17th century .
 The British pull back from their outer defences, which the American and French forces take advantage of . The first attack was the first attack on the British in the First World War .
 George Washington's choice to decline to serve a third term as president became an unwritten rule for all presidents V until 1940 .
 With victory declared, Washington disbanded his army and wished farewell to the men who had valued him not only as a leader, but also a fellow soldier . Washington's army was disbanded and he wished farewell .
 On 23 December 1783, he resigned as commander in chief of the army and humbly returned to his Mount Vernon home .
 With nobody to unite them, states fought and squabbled among themselves over boundaries and taxes on their own citizens . With no one to unite the states squabbles among themselves, they fought over borders .
 The ex-commander watched from afar as the land he had led to freedom struggled to support itself . The land he'd led to free is now struggling to find a way to help itself .
 It wasn't until an armed uprising known as Shays' Rebellion took place in Massachusetts that Washington was finally persuaded to step into the limelight once more .
 Washington quietly attended the Constitution Convention held in Philadelphia in 1787 . Washington attended the convention in Philadelphia .
 There he sat silently and listened silently to the proceedings, speaking only once once .
 Those gathered at the event agreed the national government needed more authority . However, his prestige spoke volumes and those gathered there spoke volumes . Those gathered there agreed that the government needs more authority it needed more .
 He would serve two terms as president from 1789 to 1797 until he would relinquish the power he could easily have exploited . He would then relinquish his position to become president again .
 In the spring of 1797, he returned to his precious Mount Vernon, realising that ultimate power in the land of the free could not lay solely in one man's hands indefinitely .
 Stephen Brumwell is a freelance writer and independent historian living in Amsterdam . He is the author of a book called The Washington Post .
 George Washington was plagued with dental problems from his twenties . By 1789, he had just one of his own teeth remaining .
 Washington's dentures incorporated a variety of materials bone, 'seahorse', or hippopotamus ivory, and human teeth fixed by lead, gold and metal wire .
 The belief that Washington’s false teeth were wooden probably originated in the brown-stained appearance of surviving examples . Surviving examples apparently owing to his fondness for port wine .
 The 'cherry tree story' first surfaced in a biography written after his death by Mason Locke Weems . He cut down a cherry tree and confessed to his father . The story is the best known of all the legends spun around Washington .
 There's no proof that Washington set up illicit liquor stills to make moonshine . Washington was in the forefront of American whiskey production .
 On advice of his Scottish farm manager, James Anderson, he established a distillery at Mount Vernon in 1797 .
 By the year of Washington's death, 1799, this was producing almost 41,6401 of rye and corn whiskey, making it the largest U.S. distillery of its day . Washington's distillery was the largest in the United States .
 Young George Washington was renowned for his strength . He threw a silver dollar across the Potomac River . He was 188cm tall and with a wellmuscled physique .
 Even Washington in his prime would have struggled to hurl a silver dollar across the Potomac River . The river is more than 1.6km wide opposite his Virginian home at Mount Vernon .
 Silver dollars were only introduced in 1794, when Washington was already in his sixties . Also, silver dollars were introduced in the same year as the first silver dollar .
 Washington regularly used the white hair powder that was customary among men of his wealthy social class, especially for formal occasions . This gave the impression of a wig, apparent in many of his portraits . However, Washington often used the powdered hair powder to give him the impression he was wearing .
 John Adams was a formidable figure in the early days of the USA . He was the eldest of three brothers . We get an expert opinion on the myths surrounding John Adams .
 Adams family traced their ancestry back to the first generation of Puritan settlers who came from Wales to land in New England in the early 17th century . The Adams family is a descendent of a Welsh family who came to New England .
 Adams' father, Deacon John Adams, saw education as paramount to his sons’ upbringing . John enrolled at a school in Braintree, England, as a farmer, craftsman and shoemaker .
 Adams began life at Harvard in 1751 and studied for four years . Adams studied for both an undergraduate and a masters in Law . Adams was born in New York, New York City .
 After graduation, the next few years were spent teaching at a grammar school in Worcester while contemplating what to do with his life .
 He married his third cousin Abigail Smith and toyed with the idea of joining the government . Eventually decided to move to Boston and undertake further studies in the hope of being a lawyer .
 While living in Boston, Adams became known as an advocate for the patriot cause . He opposed the 1765 Stamp Act and Townshend Acts of 1767 that George III imposed on his empire's colonies .
 The first act ordered that every American colonist had to pay tax on every piece of paper from legal documents to newspapers . The second act imposed a tariff on glass and tea imported into the colonies .
 His response was to write articles for the Boston Gazette, claiming that the act deprived his people of the right to be taxed by consent . His response to the act was to say that he was not paying his people a tax .
 Adams was defending the British soldiers for their role in the Boston Massacre . Adams defended British soldiers in the event in Boston .
 By 1774 Adams had seemingly calmed his patriotic views and had knuckled down to concentrate on his law studies . Adams had appeared to have calmed down and focused on studying law .
 Later that year he was successfully elected to the Massachusetts Assembly . His dedication paid dividends and he was successful in his election bid for the seat .
 He was chosen as one of the five men to represent the colony at the First Continental Congress on 5 September 1774 .
 Meeting in Philadelphia, men from all colonies except Georgia met to discuss what they saw as ‘intolerable acts’ from the British government towards their homeland . Meeting was held in Philadelphia in 17th century .
 Congress met a second time in 17th century and established Continental Army . The following year the rebellion against British rule stepped up a gear when Congress met for the first time .
 Adams chose George Washington as commander-in-chief of the army as war broke out in 1775 . Adams was now wielding a substantial amount of power .
 Adams’ influence grew further when Congress permitted his idea of each colony taking on an independent government in May 1776 . Congress permitted Adams' idea to each colony to take on independent government .
 George Washington stepped down from presidency in the spring of 1797 . John Adams was voted in to lead the country . Adams was serving on .
 Adams kept the young U.S. out of wars with European powers in the post-Washington era . Adams was narrowly elected over fellow Founding Father Thomas Jefferson . He was elected over Jefferson in 18th century .
 His policies polarised the nation and he lasted exactly three years in the White House . His policies were polarised and polarised, but he lasted three years .
 The President's House in Philadelphia was the official residence of both George Washington and John Adams before the latter moved to the White House in 1800 . It was George Washington's official residence before he moved to Washington's White House .
 13 of British America's colonies rebelled against the Crown in 1775 . The first shot was fired on 19 April 1775 at the battles of Lexington and Concord .
 The French Revolution wasn't the only revolution in Adams' life . Adams wrote about the American Revolution in 17th century .
 The movement began in France in the late 18th Century and culminated in the storming of the Bastille in 1789 and the execution of the King Louis XVI in 1792 . The Bastille was stormed by the French army in 1788 and the death of the king Louis XVI was
 Jacobite Rebellion Bonnie Prince Charlie arrives in the Highlands determined to reclaim the British Crown for the exiled House of Stuart .
 After reaching as far as Derby, British divisions are recalled from the continent and the advance loses momentum . The advance reaches as far south as Derby before being recalled by British divisions .
 The African slave trade triangle began in the 16th Century but by the late 1800s it is declining . The trans-Atlantic slave trade has declined since the 1800s .
 The 1791 Haitian Revolution is a large-scale slave uprising . By 1803 Denmark is the first to ban the slave trade in Denmark .
 Samuel Johnson dictionary published On 15 April 1755 lexicographer Samuel Johnson's Dictionary of the English Language is published .
 Taking over eight years to compile, it lists 40,000 words, each with detailed definitions . Each word has a detailed definition .
 A great scholarly achievement, the French equivalent took 40 scholars 55 years to complete . A great scholar achievement, it took them 55 years .
 Despite its name, this event was more of a street fight . The Boston Massacre was the Boston Massacre . Despite the name of the massacre, it was more than a street brawl .
 In 1770, patriotism was running through the colonies after further taxation from the British Crown . The colonies were experiencing a surge in patriotism .
 An argument broke out between British private Hugh White and a group of patriots outside the Custom House in Boston, Boston .
 A mob of around 50 colonists berated and then attacked the group of British Redcoats . As the spat escalated, the mob berated the British Redcoat .
 The British soldiers were antagonised by the British soldiers . After one was knocked down by a projectile, they began firing . The incident took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 A meeting was called to discuss the events and resulted in the angry locals demanding the trial of the soldiers for murder . The soldiers were killed in the attack .
 A trial was called and John Adams, despite being well known as a staunch patriot, was chosen as the British lawyer . John Adams was well known for his staunch patriotism .
 He defended the British, stating that their lives were potentially in danger . Six were found not guilty of manslaughter and two charged with manslaughter . Two were charged with two manslaughter .
 The Boston Massacre only intensified the American distrust of the British and helped sow the seeds of revolution . The Boston massacre only intensified America's distrust of Britain .
 The Boston Massacre was a key event in Adams' law career and started his apparent pro-British stance that would later dog his presidency . Also known as the 'Incident on King Street', he wrote the prelude to what would become the Declaration of Independence .
 Adams was appointed to draft what would be the final declaration of freedom from the British . Adams drafted the declaration after the movement for freedom from Britain was underway .
 He would complete this job with Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Robert Livingston and Roger Sherman, and it was approved on 4 July .
 Adams was head of the board of war and ordinance in 1777 . He personally supervised the constant development of the Continental Army . Adams was given the title of head of board of the war and ordnance .
 Adams managed to persuade the French to ally with the Americans and use their ships against the Royal Navy . Adams used his negotiating skills to persuade them to ally against the British .
 He didn't know that his old friend had died just hours earlier now the oldest of its kind in the world . Sadly he didn't even know that he had died hours earlier .
 Congress sent Adams back to Europe along with his two sons, John Quincy and Charles . Congress wanted further alliances with France, and sent him back .
 Despite being forced to divert to Spain after a leak, he made it to Paris by land in mid-winter . He was forced to make the rest of the journey to the French capital by land by land .
 French ministers only desired to work with Franklin (whose relationship with Adams had soured with Adams) and not Adams, as he was too forceful in his approach . Sadly the French ministers were only interested in working with Franklin .
 As the war continued to turn in the patriots' favour, the French attitude became warmer to a Franco-American alliance .
 The Peace of Paris in 1783 secured their support and was a triumph of Franklin's diplomacy and Adams' determination . The peace of Paris secured the support of Franklin and Adams .
 Stamp Act debatably initiated mainstream political activism in the American colonies . The Stamp Act was passed by the British in May 1765 .
 John Adams was just one of the colonists who was appalled at the act . Three months later his essay A Dissertation on Cannon and Feudal Law’ appeared in the Boston Gazette .
 Adams argued that the act was unconstitutional . His writings influenced, among others, the Sons of Liberty group .
 Adams was seen by many as not just a lawyer, but as an agitator . Men took to the streets to riot and intimidate tax collectors . Adams was now seen as a lawyer and not a lawyer .
 He is the eldest of three brothers and has ancestry in Wales, from where his Puritan ancestors emigrated in the 1630s . The Puritan family emigrated from Wales to England from Wales, where he was born .
 He eventually graduates in 1755 with both a bachelor’s degree and a masters degree . He eventually graduated with both bachelor and masters .
 The couple end up having five children and stay together happily married for the rest of their lives . They end up have five children .
 Adams is elected to defend the soldiers, and successfully argues for their acquittal . Adams successfully argued for the acquittal of the soldiers . Adams was elected by Adams to defend his soldiers .
 He is instrumental in the creation of the Continental Army a year later . He is also instrumental in creating the British Army .
 Adams was a leading candidate for the presidential election of 1789, the first one in the country's fledgling history . Adams ran for the presidency in 1789 . Adams was the first president of the fledgling nation .
 George Washington was the unanimous choice and successfully gained the presidency . But Adams did take on the vice-presidency as a consolation, ahead of Franklin and Jefferson .
 Adams supported all the major initiatives in the new government, including containing the Whiskey Rebellion of 1794 and passing secretary of the treasury Alexander Hamilton's new financial plan . Adams was the first president of the 17th century .
 Washington didn't seek a third term as president in 1796 and after a hotly contested election against friend and rival Thomas Jefferson . Adams despite accusations of pro-British leanings became the second president of the United States by a narrow margin .
 Federalist Adams tried to get Jefferson on board, but he declined . Jefferson declined to join the federalist Adams .
 The first problem the new president had to address was to pick up the pieces from Washington's tenure . Washington's first problem was to deal with the loss of the nation's first two decades .
 Adams' biggest mistake was to keep the same cabinet that Washington had, Adams said . Adams kept the same Cabinet as Washington had. Adams' cabinet was a cabinet of the same name .
 A federalist almost only by name by name, he was left to deal with what was a faltering Congress . He was a federalist in the 1930s .
 The cabinet turned out to be extremely disloyal to their president and often openly opposed him . The cabinet was extremely loyal to the president, often openly opposing him .
 The Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798 aimed at stiffening national security and ending newspaper libel ended up decreasing his popularity even more . These ideas actually were passed by Congress prior to his presidency .
 France initially favoured good relations with Britain, but it had now broken out into full-scale war . It initially favoured a good relationship with the UK, but now it has now become a full war .
 Many called for war, but Adams was reluctant to drag the United States into yet another conflict . Adams maintained his country's neutrality in the war . Adams refused to participate in any of the wars .
 Despite his best efforts, an undeclared conflict known as the Quasi-War ensued . Despite his efforts, the conflict was declared a quasi war .
 French ordered seizure of American merchant ships after negotiations broke down . The XYZ Affair was the result of a diplomatic episode known as the XYZ .
 The battles were limited to naval attacks . The fledgling U.S. Navy captured many French privateers and vessels .
 Adams is credited with establishing the United States Navy as a force as well as guiding the young USA through a tough post-Washington period . Even though he avoided war, Adams stressed the importance of the armed forces in America .
 In the 1800 election he failed in his re-election campaign to Thomas Jefferson . In 1800 he failed to win a seat in Congress .
 In post-presidential life, the once-determined patriot and American political behemoth lived a quiet existence on his family farm . He lived on the farm with his family .
 He continued to correspond with old friend Jefferson and finally reconciled with him in 1812 . He continued his correspondence with Jefferson .
 The two men both passed away on the same day on 4 July 1826, the 50th anniversary of American independence . Both men died on the day of their deaths .
 John Adams had six children and his son John Quincy became the sixth president of the US . John Adams was born in 17th century and died in 18th Century .
 He was understandably concerned at how the British would react but nevertheless believed action such as this was both inevitable and significant, and so ultimately supported it . He said he was worried about how the UK would react, but was ultimately supportive .
 He felt Britain would not take the colonists’ demands seriously until forced to do so . He felt that Britain would take their demands seriously only if forced .
 XYZ Affair 1798 was a diplomatic incident involving France and the United States . This was a significant moment in Adams’ presidency .
 The French government was struggling to finance its wars and as the USA had now allied with Britain under the terms of the 1794 Jay Treaty, the country decided to attack United States merchant shipping .
 Adams sent three envoys to France but they were unable to meet with foreign ministers and were instead approached by three other ministers who became known as X,Y and Z . An agreement wasn't made until 1800 when an undeclared war, the Quasi-War, raged for two
 Dutch offer a $2 million loan following the American victory at Yorktown . The Dutch offer the American a loan after the victory .
 Adams sees his position as almost pointless, given his lack of practical authority, however he remains in the job until 1797 . Adams sees the position as pointless, but he sees it as pointless . Adams remained in the post until 1796 .
 His death marks the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence . His death comes only a few hours after the death of Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Jefferson .
 Jefferson's earliest memory was when, at the age of two, he was carried in the arms of a black slave to his family's new home a tobacco plantation . T homas Jefferson was carried to his new home by a slave . Jefferson's family moved to a new tobacco plantation in
 During his childhood, it was expected that Thomas would grow up to become a typical Virginian slave owner, just like his father . Thomas was keen to pursue a life beyond the plantation .
 He loved reading and had a keen interest in science, linguistics and natural history . In 1767 he was admitted to the Virginia bar in 1767 . He would first make his mark in law, being admitted to Virginia bar .
 When the American Revolution began in 1775, Jefferson was appointed a Virginian representative in the Continental Congress at Philadelphia . Jefferson served as a member of the Virginia House of Representatives .
 He was hand picked by John Adams to join him on a committee tasked with writing a Declaration of Independence . Adams was a member of the committee that wrote the Declaration . He died at the age of 92 in 1881 .
 He was asked to pen the draft that the committee discussed, and in doing so became the primary author of one of history's most iconic documents .
 The Declaration of Independence was ratified by the Continental Congress on 4 July 1776 . Jefferson returned to Virginia and saw out the rest of the American Revolution in local government .
 He supervised the creation of a state constitution and revised the legal system before becoming governor of Virginia . He was governor of the state from 1973 to 1986 .
 Jefferson was in charge when the British invaded and sacked the state capital, Richmond, in 1781 . Jefferson narrowly escaped being captured by the Redcoats, but was captured by Jefferson .
 Had the author of the Declaration of Independence been imprisoned by the British, it would have been a huge propaganda victory for the colonial masters . Had he been imprisoned, the British would have seen it as a propaganda victory .
 Jefferson was sent as minister to France to solidify relations between the two nations . Jefferson was one of the United States of America's most renowned Founding Fathers . The delegates were building a new country .
 Jefferson spent four years in Paris until he was recalled in September 1789 . He witnessed the storming of the Bastille and witnessed the French Revolution . Jefferson spent the last four years of his time there .
 Jefferson was a firm supporter of the French Revolution and intended to return to France as soon as possible . George Washington asked him to serve as the first secretary of state in Washington .
 Jefferson hoped to influence the future shape of his country . It was here, at the very heart of American politics, where he wanted to influence it .
 Born in Virginia, he would later graduate from the College of William and Mary . He acted as a wartime governor and minister to France .
 His organisation of the Louisiana purchase greatly expanded American territory . He was responsible for the purchase of Louisiana .
 Alexander Hamilton wanted a strong, central, national government . Alexander Hamilton was Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton . Hamilton led the revolution in Washington, DC .
 Jefferson was alarmed by the mounting power of central government . Instead he wanted greater rights for the individual states in the union .
 Like-minded individuals began to gather around him and they collectively became known as the Republicans . The Republicans are now known as Republicans .
 Jefferson was unable to prevent the Federalists from dominating government . Jefferson stepped down in 1793, stating he wanted to return to family life . Jefferson was able to stop Federalists taking over government .
 George Washington declined to stand for a third term as president in 1796 . The new country lost its unifying leader when George Washington did not stand again .
 Jefferson returned to the front line of politics, standing on a Republican platform in the presidential election . Jefferson lost out to his former revolutionary colleague and now Federalist opponent John Adams .
 The rules then in force stated that as he was the candidate with the second-highest number of votes, Jefferson would become vice-president . Jefferson would have been vice-President of the United States in the 1960s .
 Jefferson wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions with James Madison . Jefferson was still unable to prevent Federalist policies from being passed, however .
 Jefferson was actively raising the possibility of rebellion against the government of which he was vicepresident . Jefferson was involved in a revolt against his government . He was actively discussing rebellion against his vice president .
 Had his authorship of resolutions been uncovered, he could conceivably have been impeached for treason .
 Jefferson stood against Adams for a second time in the 1800 presidential election, this time beating him and becoming the third president of the United States of America . Jefferson became the president of America in 1800 .
 Jefferson resided in the White House for two terms, between 1801 and 1809 . Jefferson was a president of the United States from 1801 to 1809, during which the U.S. expanded beyond the original 13 colonies .
 Under the Louisiana Purchase, 828,000 square miles were bought from France for $15 million . The purchase doubled the size of the country . The Louisiana Purchase was made from France in 1881 .
 Jefferson approved the Lewis and Clark expedition to the Pacific coast . Westward expansion also began, with Jefferson approving the Lewis & Clark expedition . Jefferson also approved an expedition to West America .
 Jefferson was finally able to dismantle much of the Federalist system constructed by Alexander Hamilton . Jefferson was able to build on his success in dismantling the system .
 Jefferson named the 'Revolution of 1800' by Jefferson, and helped the Republicans become the pre-eminent force in the land . It was a deliberate strategy, named by Jefferson .
 Jeffersonian Republicans would dominate national politics for the next 25 years under Jefferson and his two successors, James Madison and James Monroe, while the once dominant Federalists faded away . The Federalists would have dominated the Federalist Party .
 Aaron Burr mortally wounded Alexander Hamilton in a personal duel . Burr's first vicepresident, Aaron Burr, was a thorn in his side, going as far as mortally wounding Alexander Hamilton . Burr was the president of the United States from 1881 to 1883 .
 Burr fled west and was embroiled in plots to seize control of U.S. territory . Jefferson wanted Burr to feel the full wrath of the law, but he was acquitted . Jefferson was enraged when Burr was acquitted of charges against him .
 Jefferson's attitude to Native American peoples was a barrier to his dreams of westward expansion . A problem of Jefferson’s own making was his attitude toward Native Americans, he says .
 Jefferson advocated peaceful assimilation with the tribes to the west . He encouraged them to give up their traditional nomadic lifestyle and culture . Jefferson advocated assimilation .
 Jefferson never went as far as waging war against the Native Americans . His ideas signalled a troubling attitude to other races that has been used against him by modern critics .
 It's a similar case in the subject most commonly used to censure Jefferson slavery . Jefferson slavery was the subject of the most commonly censure .
 His original draft of the Declaration of Independence included a passage critical of the slave trade . It was removed by Congress after Congress removed the passage .
 During his presidency, the international slave trade was banned, stopping the importation of new slaves from Africa . Jefferson drafted the Declaration of Independence with help from John Adams and Benjamin Franklin in his career .
 Rumours also abounded that Jefferson was in a long-term relationship with one of his own slaves, Sally Hemings, and had fathered several children by her .
 DNA evidence suggests this claim is likely to be true, although the proof is not conclusive . DNA evidence is still not conclusive, but it is thought to be a good match .
 Hemings' relationship began after the death of Jefferson's wife, when she was just 33 . Hemings travelled with Jefferson's daughter when he was minister to France . The relationship probably began after she died aged just 33, possibly in France .
 He died on 4 July 1826, 50 years to the day that his greatest achievement, the Declaration of Independence was ratified .
 Jefferson was much more than just the author of the world's most famous declaration . However, Jefferson was also a great writer and inventor of the Declaration of Peace .
 He was a key influence in helping to shape the United States as it is today . He helped to win independence for the American colonies .
 Madison was born in Virginia in 1751 and grew up the eldest of 12 children . He led the U.S. into a grizzly war with the British and emerged as a respected statesman . Madison was the 'Father of the Constitution' who led the United States into a war
 Madison displayed an astonishing attention to detail and a strong work ethic . Madison was known also as a quiet, timid individual .
 Princeton student was appointed a colonel in the Orange County militia as Virginia began preparing for the American Revolutionary War . A student of history and government at Princeton .
 In 1776, he participated in the framing of the Virginia Constitution . However, it soon became apparent he wasn't cut out for a military career and turned his attention to a political career .
 During this time, he met Thomas Jefferson, who would later become the third president of the United States . The pair became lifelong friends and became close friends .
 Jefferson helped give Madison's political ideas some credence, particularly those following the colonies’ declaration of independence from Britain in 1776 . Jefferson's ideas were given credence by the colonies following the independence declaration of the United States .
 The Articles of Confederation in essence the first constitution of the United States soon followed, 28 James Madison . Madison's dismay they gave the bulk of power to individual state legislature, meaning states could act like individual countries rather than as part of a union .
 Madison felt this put national Congress in a position of weakness, unable to manage federal debt or a national army . Madison felt that this put him in a weakened position . Madison said Congress was unable to deal with the debt or manage the army .
 He believed that the U.S. needed a strong federal state, where no one government faction had greater power than any other .
 Madison presented his ideas for the first time in May 1787 at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia . Madison's ideas were presented at the convention in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania .
 He envisioned a government with three distinct arms legislative, executive and judicial which would form the basis of the United States Constitution . The U.S. Constitution was the basis for the Constitution .
 Madison found himself at odds with the Federalists on a number of issues . Federalists supported the new Constitution, but after it was sanctioned in 1788 and the new government became functional, Madison then elected to the newly-formed United States House .
 Jefferson, Madison and later, James Monroe, were the only Democratic-Republicans to become presidents . The party split into factions during the 1820s as the party split .
 When Jefferson became president, he appointed Madison as secretary of state . He helped acquire the Louisiana territory from the French in 1803, effectively doubling the size of the United States .
 It proved economically disastrous for American merchants, and was suspended in 1809 when Jefferson left office . Unsurprisingly, it proved economic disastrous for merchants . The suspension of it was suspended after Jefferson's presidency .
 Despite this oversight Madison became the United States' fourth president, he continued to face problems from overseas . Madison was the U.S. fourth president of the 18th century .
 Britain and France continued attacks on American ships following the embargo, impeding United States trade and supporting Native Americans in battles against U.S. settlers .
 The United States was nowhere near ready for such an enormous event . But the U.S. wasn't near ready to cope with such an event .
 Congress didn't have an army, nor did it have the money to procure one, and several states, rallying against 'Mr Madison's War’ made it clear their militia was forbidden from joining the campaign .
 Madison ran for re-election against Federalist candidate DeWitt Clinton, and won . Despite the ongoing trade issues, military campaigns and widespread distrust of his foreign policies, Madison won .
 Madison and other political figures were forced to flee Washington DC in August 1814 . British troops invaded and burned a number of important American buildings, including the White House, Capitol and Library of Congress .
 Britain and the United States negotiated an end to the war in the form of the Treaty of Ghent, signed in December 1814 . The treaty was signed in Ghent .
 Madison left Washington in 1817 hailed for his triumphs, rather than his mistakes . This major victory helped shine a positive light on the controversial war, and after two terms in office, Madison was hailed as a hero .
 The economies of the north and south had been vastly different since the earliest colonial days . North and south economies were vastly different in the early colonial days.
 The climate of the south was conducive to crops and sprawling plantations . The fast-moving rivers of the north powered machinery and gradual industrialisation .
 The average family's home during this period was extremely modest . The average home was a modest affair .
 Most had dirt floors, children would share beds and kitchens were used for both preparing food and warming the house until the invention and patent of the cast-iron stove in the 1830s .
 Life was particularly difficult for children, who from the ages of just six or eight would be expected to be up before dawn to complete tasks necessary for day-to-day life .
 Girls would spend long days cooking, cleaning, sewing and caring for young and elderly family members . Boys would chop wood, make repairs, hunt for food and tend to farm animals . Girls would cook, clean, sew and care for children and elderly .
 The relationship between settlers and Native Americans was tense for many years . Native Americans feared the so-called 'savages', with local authorities placing bounties on them .
 James Monroe was a noted hero of the War of Independence . He presided over an extended period of peace and prosperity for the United States . His attitude towards slaves and Native Americans has somewhat tarnished his reputation since his election .
 His name adorns 17 counties, two U.S. cities, and one foreign capital city . His name is also on the streets of 17 counties and two foreign capitals .
 Monroe was 16 when his father died and he inherited the land and slaves . Monroe inherited the property and slaves from his father . Monroe was a slaveholder .
 He left plantation life to enrol at the College of William and Mary, which was gripped by revolutionary fervour . He was a major student at the college in the revolutionary era of colonial America .
 He gained notoriety when he and a handful of students raided the Virginia Royal Governor's mansion and secured hundreds of rifles to arm the local militia .
 Monroe played a starring role in the Battle of Trenton in the Revolutionary War . Monroe was born in New York City, New York .
 In 1776, the depleted band of revolutionaries led by George Washington had suffered multiple military defeats and was down to 3,000 men . George Washington led the revolutionary revolution in 1776 . The American Revolution was defeated by the British Revolution in 1777 .
 Washington famously ordered the force to cross the Delaware river and march through a nor'easter snowstorm to take on the mercenary Hessians . Washington's force crossed the Delaware River and marched through the snowstorm .
 Monroe and his battalion rushed through artillery fire to disable damaging grapeshot cannons . Monroe's battalion was able to disable damaged grapeshots in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 Monroe took a musket ball to the shoulder and suffered a severed artery in the attack, usually a fatal wound at that time, yet he recovered fully . Monroe recovered fully from the wound .
 James Monroe pursued a degree because he saw it as the best path to wealth and political standing . He was not particularly interested in the profession, 30 James Monroe . He pursued it because he wanted to be a politician .
 George Washington appointed him minister to France in 1794, where he attempted to curry favour with revolutionary France . George Washington was appointed minister to the French in 1793 .
 Monroe was humiliatedly stripped of his post in France . The French sensed that the U.S. was friendlier with the United Kingdom .
 In 1801, President Jefferson again sent Monroe to France to negotiate the Louisiana Purchase . He succeeded in securing the gigantic tract land from Napoleon .
 Monroe brutally suppressed Gabriel’s Rebellion, hanging dozens of suspected rebellious slaves . Later, as governor of Virginia, Monroe suppressed Gabriel's Rebellion, hung dozens suspected rebels . Monroe was governor of the state of Virginia .
 This experience would inform his feelings on sending freedmen back to Africa . This experience was later used to inform his thoughts on sending them home .
 Monroe became America's fifth president in 1817, winning a near-unanimous vote after the opposition Federalist party failed to name a candidate . Monroe won the vote in a near unanimous vote after winning the election .
 Monroe's reputation as a war hero helped him secure the office after the disastrous War of 1812, in which the British burned down both the White House and the United States Capitol .
 He sparked national unity by making political appointments with no regard to party lines . He sparked a time of relative national unity with appointments made without regard for party lines.
 His popularity was unabated even when the U.S. suffered the financial shock of 1819 and when Missouri failed in a bid for statehood .
 An amended proposal later saw Missouri enter the Union as a slave state alongside the free state of Maine . Missouri entered the union with the stipulation that any future states entering the union would be free above latitude 36/30' north .
 This compromise was uneasy, but nevertheless persisted for more than three decades . This compromise has been uneasy but persisted for decades . It was a compromise, but it was uneasy at times, and the compromise is uneasy .
 Monroe courted controversy when he sent General Andrew Jackson to pursue Seminole Indians well into Spanish territory in Florida . Domestically, Monroe sent general Andrew Jackson well into Seminole Indian territory .
 During the war of 1812, the invading British forces armed and trained thousands of Seminoles . The Seminoles were trained by the British forces during the war .
 After the war, the Seminoles continued harassing American sailors, prompting Monroe to retaliate . Monroe retaliated after the war .
 General Jackson interpreted his orders liberally . General Jackson pursued Seminoles deep into Spanish territory .
 Monroe's brutal actions prompted a congressional inquest, but Monroe scuppered the investigation . His brutal actions in crushing the Seminoles prompted an inquest into his actions . Monroe's actions prompted an investigation into his brutal actions .
 Spain agreed to sell Florida to the U.S. Despite the incursion, Spain refused to sell the state .
 Monroe's lasting achievement was his eponymous doctrine . Monroe's doctrine was a resounding statement of American hegemony in the Western Hemisphere . Monroe: Monroe's enduring achievement was the doctrine .
 Secretary of State John Quincy Adams is acknowledged to have been the sole author of the non-colonialisation provision . He was inspired by the latent American isolationism that had underscored the nation's creation .
 Monroe declared that the Americas would be henceforth free of European intervention . Yet Monroe took the initiative to declare that Europe would not intervene .
 He successfully realised his dream of being a large plantation owner, but he never administered it directly . He never administered the plantation .
 His plantation floundered, and his deputies drove slaves harshly to extract money from the land . His deputies drove the slaves harshly, forcing them to extract more money from their land . The slaves were driven from the plantation to extract the money .
 Like Jefferson, he sold slaves rather than freeing them after his death . He suffered from financial difficulties after his retirement owing to his lavish lifestyle .
 One of Monroe's curious projects was his desire to relocate free American blacks to Africa . Monroe wanted to relocate free American black Americans to Africa, but his project was rejected .
 This was not an idea born of benevolence, but rather of a fear that a large population of freemen would inspire slaves to rebel . This was the fear that the population of slaves would inspire them to rebel against the government .
 The American Colonization Society was formed by Quaker and evangelical abolitionists and slave owners who opposed abolition, but saw a benefit in the removal of free blacks . The society was formed in 18th century .
 Monroe was a sponsor and founding member of the society . He lobbied congress to financially support the venture . Monroe was also a founding member .
 He remains the only president to have a foreign capital Monrovia named after him . He remains only president of Liberia .
 Political parties had little effect on U.S. politics for a brief period . Political parties have little impact on American politics since the 1960s .
 Monroe avoided major conflicts and expanded the country peacefully . Monroe's administration is fondly remembered for avoiding major conflicts . Monroe was the first president of the United States .
 The Missouri Compromise provided a simple rule for determining whether an incoming state would be free or slave-owning . The rule was used to determine whether a state was free or owned by a slave . Missouri was the last state to have a slave-owned state .
 The compromise was complicated when westward expansion rendered the fixed latitude system unworkable, but it placated both sides while it lasted .
 James Monroe believed that Native Americans should progress from hunter-gatherer to an agrarian civilisation . But his strategy to assimilate them was derailed when his general Andrew Jackson brutally suppressed the Seminoles in Spanish Florida . Andrew Jackson's general was brutally suppressed by Andrew Jackson .
 U.S. politics is dominated by relations with France and the UK, with each enjoying periodic favour .
 Monroe's friendliness to France caused him to be denounced by opponents as a French agent and a traitor . Monroe was known for his friendship with France, but was denounced as a traitor by opponents .
 As Virginia governor, Monroe was targeted in a gigantic slave rebellion which failed to fully materialise . Monroe was governor of Virginia from 18th century to 18th Century . Fears of slave rebellions never materialised .
 Fear of such an event informed his future thoughts on slaves and his advocacy of the freedmen migration to Liberia . Nevertheless, the fear of such a tragedy informed his views on slavery .
 John Quincy Adams can be remembered as much for his work outside the Oval Office as from within . Adams served as the sixth president of the United States . Adams was Democratic-Republican, 1767-1848 .
 John Quincy grew up a skilled diplomat and forged many U.S. links in Europe . He was raised by his former president father John Quincy .
 John Quincy Adams was arguably the best prepared president in U.S. history . Passing the bar exam in 1791 vvu and then becoming president in 1824 meant that Adams was the first lawyer-president .
 Son of Founding Father and president John Adams, he began his political career as a small child . Adams is the son of John Adams .
 The young John Quincy travelled overseas with his father on a regular basis first to France and then the Netherlands on diplomatic missions . He witnessed first-hand a nation taking its first steps in the world .
 His travels were not over yet, however, and he spent time in Denmark, Finland and Sweden . He became fluent in French and Dutch .
 Upon his return he studied at Harvard and became a practising attorney in Boston . After passing the bar exam in 1791, he passed the bar bar exam .
 Initially a member of the Federalist party like his father, he wasn't always willing to toe the party line . He was initially a Federalist Party member .
 He would vote for policies that he personally supported like the Louisiana Purchase and Jefferson's Embargo Act that the party was against, he says . He would also vote against the party's policies .
 The Monroe Doctrine was created in 1823 by President Monroe in Washington DC . Monroe Doctrine is a key part of the Monroe Doctrine .
 Several countries in Latin America revolted against their former masters and declared independence . After the Napoleonic Wars had ended, several Latin American countries declared independence.
 Monroe Doctrine stated that the U.S. would block any European countries attempting to stop these independence movements . The Monroe Doctrine said that the United States would block European countries trying to stop the independence movement .
 The document was largely disregarded internationally as the US did not have the political or military power to back it up . While the document made large claims, it was largely ignored internationally .
 It fell in line with Britain's larger Pax Britannica to enforce neutrality on the seas . What saved it was that it fell in .
 Monroe Doctrine was to have a long reaching legacy as many in the U.S. have used the document to justify intervention in Latin America during the 19th and 20th centuries . This is a document that was to be used by the United States as a basis for intervention .
 In the election of 1824, despite losing the popular vote to Democrat Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams was elected as president . Despite losing popular vote, he was elected president in 1824 .
 Adams had inherited a lot of his father's temperament, Adams says . Adams' father was a tough guy .
 These traits would not set him in good stead for making political alliances both within his own party and outside of it .
 The odds seemed to be stacked against him as his numerous political opponents were set on making him a one term president . Indeed, the odds were stacked against .
 Adams' proposals were ambitious and far reaching . Adams set out his proposals in a bid to win the White House .
 These included building a network of canals and highways that would connect different sections of the country together; a full survey of the entire United States coastline; the acquisition of public land for conservation efforts .
 Adams believed that these policies would help foster an enterprising spirit of commerce and scientific thought . Adams believed these policies will help foster a spirit of business and science .
 He also proposed solutions to universal problems, such as the establishment of a uniformed system of weights and measures .
 Adams had grand ideas but the reality of Adams' term was very different . Adams was elected president of the United States in 1964 . Adams' office was filled with grand ideas, but he wasn't short of grand ideas . Adams died in 1996 at the age of 92 .
 Many people found his proposals completely unrealistic for a young America to act upon . Many people were disappointed with his proposals .
 His political opponents seized on them to heap scorn and disdain on the new president, sensing that he had pushed for these policies to help grow the power and influence of the Federal Government .
 This led to accusations of elitism and neglect of the common man . This in turn led to criticism of the government's treatment of the poor .
 At the head of the opposition was the slighted Andrew Jackson, who managed to have his allies win majorities in both Houses of Congress . Jackson's allies won both House and Senate majorities .
 Adams failed to pass any of his legislation, and for what little he did get through, the funding supplied fell woefully short . With this in place it was almost impossible for Adams to pass legislation .
 John Quincy Adams was soundly beaten in the 1828 election . Struggling through his four-year term, he was defeated in the election .
 Adams entered the House of Representatives and enjoyed a long political career . Nevertheless, Adams was defeated in his first congressional election .
 He had taken to the floor of the House to argue that veterans who served in the Mexican-American war should be honoured by the government .
 He was against the war but saw the U.S. government as obligated to honour the men who had put their lives on the line .
 Surrounded by his family he uttered his last words; ""This is the last of Earth. This is the final of Earth," he said .
 Adams would put his long-standing anti-slavery sentiment into action throughout his life . Adams was born in New York City, New York, in 1881 .
 He held that slavery was a terrible evil and preached its total abolition . He also called for the abolition of slavery in the Bible .
 His first victory came when he ruled petitions against slavery be heard in the House despite a 'gag rule' saying they could not . He ruled petitions could be heard by the House in spite of the 'gagging rule'
 Adams would champion a case which saw slaves who mutinied against their Spanish masters be freed, which went against the government line of deportation . In later life, Adams championed the case which freed slaves from Spain who mutined against their masters .
 Adams never took a fee for fighting the case and used it as a platform to preach the evils of slavery to a wide audience . As well as winning the men's freedom, Adams used the case to preach about slavery in a wide-reaching way .
 This portrait of John Quincy Adams was created posthumously by GPA Healy around the year 1858 . Slavery was legal in all parts of America and even the Founding Fathers owned at least one slave .
 It was not until the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863 that it became illegal in 1863 . It was only then that it was illegal in the U.S.
 The New World was still calling people from far from far and wide to its shores . A melting pot, the New World still had a place to be called a melting pot .
 You could find people of Dutch, Irish, Scottish, English, French, German and Spanish descent, as well as many other nationalities .
 In the early 19th century, much of the American West was still unclaimed and free . Much of the West was unclaimed, free .
 It would stay this way until the late 1840s when the promise of gold started to lure more and more adventurers into the wild .
 Duelling was a popular way to settle disputes between disenfranchised gentlemen at this time . It was also popular way of settling disputes with disenfranchised men .
 Alexander Hamilton was mortally wounded by a pistol shot in a duel between Aaron Burr and Alexander Hamilton . The duel sparked many sermons moving to have the practice abolished . Hamilton's death was the result of a duel with Aaron Burr .
 The iconic residence and primary work space for the president was completed in 1800 . The White House is located in Washington, D.C.
 The building had to be partially rebuilt in 1814 as British troops set fire to it . Much of the interior was destroyed by the fire of British troops during the 1814 invasion .
 'Old Hickory' was probably the toughest president the U.S. has ever seen . Jackson was born on the western frontier of the Carolinas, the 13 American colonies were still part of the British Empire . He was a crack shot, serial duellist and war hero,
 The War of Independence that began eight years later was to be one of the formative events of his life . The war of Independence was one of his formative years .
 The other major influence on Jackson was his location at the frontier; he was always in a sense a frontiersman, and in time he was the champion and embodiment of all those Americans living at the rough edge of things . Jackson was always a sense of a frontierman; he
 The rest of Jackson's immediate family died during the war, leaving him a tough orphan and veteran at the age of 15 . Jackson was 15 when he joined the Army in World War II .
 He blamed the British for the loss of his family, but that was not the sole cause of his lasting hatred for them . The British were not the only reason for his hatred for the British .
 The fighting in the Carolinas was particularly savage, with guerrilla-style tactics being employed on both sides . Both sides were heavily involved in the fighting, and the fighting was brutal .
 Jackson and one of his brothers were captured while serving with a troop of irregular soldiers . They were too young to serve in the regular army when they were captured . A British officer commanded him to clean his muddy boots and then beat him with a sabre when he refused .
 Jackson reputedly bore the physical scars for the rest of his life, while the emotional effects were evident in his tendency to hold a grudge . Jackson's physical scars are said to have been visible in his life .
 A defining characteristic of Jackson was his ‘with him or against him 1’ attitude . Jackson was known for his 'with him and against him' attitude . His attitude was a key part of his success .
 If you were on his side, he could be a loyal friend and comrade, but if you opposed him, then God help you . "God help you. If you oppose him," he said. "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say."
 By the time Jackson was a young man making his fortune in the new territories west of the Appalachian mountains, his qualities were already obvious, most notably self-reliance, intelligence and deadly determination .
 Nashville, Tennessee, was founded in 1787 and set up in Nashville, then a small town in what was shortly to become the new state of Tennessee . Having studied law, he qualified for the bar in Nashville and quickly set up there .
 Jackson became an unapologetic defender of the American South’s ‘peculiar institution’ throughout his life . Not all of Jackson's new acquisitions were admirable; he became a slave owner .
 It may be that this attitude sat comfortably with his 'us and them' view of the world, although it was not unusual in that time and place . It may also be that it sat comfortably in his 'Us and them', although it's not unusual .
 Jackson met his wife, Rachel Donelson Robards, not long after his arrival in Nashville . Jackson met her in 2010 .
 Rachel was already married when they met and the circumstances of their marriage were to be used to stir up controversy and slander later on, when Jackson fought for the presidency . It was a genuine love match and the couple remained devoted .
 He was one of the original American 'selfmade men', the first 'western' president . He changed the way politics was done in the young republic . He was a 'self-made man' who changed politics .
 Jackson's wife Rachel Donelson died just days after he was elected in 1828 . Jackson supported the principle of United States expansion throughout North America . The term 'Manifest Destiny' wasn't coined until 1845 .
 The notion that it was the duty and destiny of the United States to spread its special republic helped justify ruthless and sometimes brutal territorial growth . The notion of spreading the U.S. was the basis for ruthless territorial expansion .
 The Indian Removal Act of 1830 was part of a move to expel Native Americans from the southeastern United States . It pushed Native Americans westward, pushing them out of the southeastern U.S.
 In 1838, the Cherokee were forcibly removed from their lands in Georgia and, illequipped for a winter journey, thousands died . Thousands of Cherokee died in the process .
 Until Jackson came along, it wasn't the custom to actively campaign for the presidency . Electors were supposed to make a rational choice based on qualifications .
 Even if there was some humbug in this and mudslinging was nothing new, the 1828 election changed how things were done . Even if it was humbug, it was important that the election was held in 1828 .
 New presidents appointed their own people to government posts . The 'spoils system' is still in practice to this day . New presidents replaced office holders appointed by their predecessors .
 The phrase ""to the victor belong the spoils"" was coined in justification of Jackson's appointments . The phrase was coined to justify the appointment of the president .
 The term ‘kitchen cabinet’ was first used to describe Jackson's informal group of advisers, aiding and advising him in parallel to his official cabinet .
 The phrase still used to describe informal or personal government and is still mostly meant critically . The phrase is still used in the U.S. for informal government .
 Economically, it was disastrous for maritime trading states on the seaboard . While not all Americans viewed Britain with hostility, not all viewed it with hostility .
 After the invasion of Canada proved inconclusive and Washington DC and the White House were burned by British troops, enthusiasm for the war ebbed especially in areas affected by the naval blockade .
 The defeat of Napoleon in Europe could only mean more British forces on the way . Napoleon's defeat in Europe means more British troops could be on their way .
 In fact, the Treaty of Ghent was signed late in 1814, ending hostilities . The war that had been a small sideshow in world affairs drew to a close almost . In fact the war was a sideshow, and ended almost .
 From an American perspective, the most significant action was still to come. From the U.S. perspective, it was still significant action . The United States was in the middle of the war in Afghanistan .
 News of the treaty had yet to arrive in the United States and the battle for New Orleans was fought on and off in December 1814 and January 1815 . The main British assault began on 8 January .
 The improbable American victory in the Battle of New Orleans established Jackson as a national figure momentous enough it did much to restore unity and national feeling . Jackson's victory in New Orleans helped restore unity in America .
 Jackson led the American forces at the Battle of New Orleans in 1815 . This caused him particular pain, even if it did not stop his ambitions . Jackson died at the age of 50 in 1818 .
 Jackson's political rise began in earnest as Tennessee’s statehood approached in 1796 . Jackson's rise began as Tennessee became a state of its own .
 In rapid succession, he was a delegate at the state constitutional convention, became the state’s first Congressman and was elected to the Senate . He was elected in rapid succession to become a congressman and a state senator .
 The scholarly, gentlemanly, cliquish politicians in the capital were definitely not 'us' for him, he said . He viewed them with deep suspicion .
 Much of his early legal practice revolved around debt collection, and he won friends and allies among rich creditors . Sometimes this attitude is explained as Jackson's dislike of the wealthy in favour of ordinary people .
 It seems possible that his real dislike was for ’old money’ and the social and intellectual pretensions of the old elite, in some ways unchanged since the revolution .
 Jackson was soon appointed as a judge of the Tennessee Supreme Court, where he served for six years . Jackson was also a judge on the Tennessee State Supreme Court .
 In 1802, he was elected major general of the state militia, which was to open the way to his greater ambitions, turning him into a national figure a decade later . In 1803, he became a major general in the militia, becoming a major figure in the state .
 Many Americans were unhappy when war broke out between the U.S. and Great Britain in 1812, but Jackson was not one of them . Jackson was the president of the United States during his presidency .
 Even before it was declared, he was recruiting new militia volunteers for a future attack on Canada . Even before the declaration of independence, he had been recruiting militia volunteers .
 Jackson survived assassination attempt in 1835 after both his assailant's pistols misfired . Although he never made never regret n Theg on J Sk m Jackson survived an assassination attempt .
 The odds against a double misfire were astronomical . Jackson would certainly never regret how things turned out to Canada .
 Jackson's first action was against the Creek Nation Native Americans, who were allied with the British . The government was slow to call on Jackson and his militia, and his action was his first .
 Battle of Tohopeka (also known as Horseshoe Bend) ended the threat from the Creeks, who V suffered terrible losses . After around five months' campaigning over 1813-14, the decisive and bloody battle ended . V. O'Neill's victory over
 Jackson then moved against the Spanish territory of Florida, without orders . Jackson moved against Spanish territory without orders from the Spanish government .
 The pretext was that Spain was Britain's ally against France in Europe in Europe . It was the pretext for Spain to be an ally with Britain against France .
 His early focus on Canada reflected one of his most important political positions . He believed that there was no room for anywhere but the United States in North America .
 In 1806, Jackson got into a quarrel with Charles Dickinson, another keen duellist and a famously good shot . The British, Defining moment Jackson shoots and is shot in 1806 .
 Jackson was hit in the chest, near the heart, with some ribs broken . Dickinson fired first and hit Jackson first . Dickinson then fired .
 Jackson gathered himself and then coolly shot his opponent, after re-cocking his pistol when it didn't cock fully . Jackson gathered his pistol and re-shot his opponent in the head after the gun didn't fire fully .
 Jackson was allowed to do this according to the rules of engagement, but it was frowned upon . The incident both enhanced and damaged Jackson's reputation as tough but lacking in magnanimity .
 The American Revolutionary War had begun and a year later the Declaration of Independence would be signed . The Declaration was signed a year after the war began in 1777 .
 He and one of his brothers act as couriers and are later captured by the British . He is later captured and is later killed by the Germans .
 Practising law formed the first part of his career, although he would shortly move west to pursue political ambitions .
 Jackson shadowed a British army to New Orleans, where he was to make his name . Jackson was to be known for his role in New Orleans .
 Among the defenders of the city who Jackson assembled were some pirates, which raised a few eyebrows . Jackson probably had more in common with pirates than the Washington stuffed shirts he loathed .
 The decisive factor in the Battle of New Orleans may well have been a British logistical failure the ladders didn't arrive, leaving the soldiers stuck below the ramparts . Jackson took the credit and was instantly a hero .
 In 1822 the Tennessee legislature nominated him as their presidential candidate . Jackson was the military commander of the southern district of southern district .
 This was a new style of politics, with a new power base, populist in the old states and with a strong influence from the new western territories . This is a new way of politics for the new president, says David Cameron . Cameron: "This is a very different style of political
 The previous six presidents had been scholars, philosophers and statesmen from the most prestigious old colonies . They had broad political experience and a grounding in principles of government .
 "They believed that it would and should always be them who guided America," they said . They believed it would always be the case that America guided America .
 Jackson had a vigorous, rambunctious style, used the presidential veto often, and generally expanded the role of the president . Jackson was more direct and rarely quibbled about laws or philosophical principles .
 This was what was to become known as 'Jacksonian Democracy’, and it changed American politics forever . The Jacksonian Democracy is what is now known as Jacksonian democracy .
 Jackson's presidency was to leave an enduring legacy . Even if it was the manner of his presidency, there were notable actions too . Jackson's actions also left a lasting legacy .
 In his first term, Jackson squashed a threat to federal authority from South Carolina, but then failed to enforce a Supreme Court decision against Georgia . Jackson: "I'm not going to let it happen again."
 The state had appropriated nine million acres of Cherokee land that lay within its borders after gold was discovered there . The land was taken by the Cherokee after the discovery of gold in the area .
 Cherokees appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court and won, but then the president refused to act . The Cherokees appeal to the United States Supreme Court, but the president did not act .
 In Jackson's second term he failed to renew the national bank's charter . Jacksonian Democrats were suspicious of old elite vested interests, and the president himself had been affronted by political manoeuvring .
 This almost certainly caused the disastrous 'Panic of 1837', a financial crisis followed by a lengthy recession .
 This decision of Jackson's was a clear failure and discredited his party's anti-central bank stand . Jackson's decision to withdraw from the country's central bank was a failure, he said .
 His retirement was largely quiet and full of honours, with Jackson never losing his popularity . Jackson never lost his popularity and had left office by the time of the financial crash .
 There were certainly qualities to admire in him, but they were mixed with darker elements . There was certainly qualities he admired in him but there was also a darker side to him .
 He had the frontier virtues and vices, r being capable, resourceful and courageous, but casually violent and careless of the rights of Native Americans . He had p the frontier . virtues and . vices .
 The United States forces numbered a little over 3,000, including some Native American allies . The U.S. forces were outnumbered by some Native Americans, including Native Americans .
 Around 1,000 Red Stick warriors were in a strong fortified position . Against them were around 1,00 Red Strikers .
 Jackson had his men surround the fortifications and after an ineffectual preliminary bombardment they mounted a hand-to-hand assault . Jackson's men had their troops surround the Fortifications and had their men surround them .
 Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams (son of second U.S. president, John Adams), William H Crawford and Henry Clay . Henry Clay was the first president of the United States to hold office in Washington, DC .
 House of Representatives had to choose from the three highest-polling candidates . No one received the required majority, the House had to pick three candidates . The House had no majority, having to choose between the candidates .
 Clay was then made secretary of state, leading to accusations of a ""corrupt bargain” from Jackson . Clay was accused of a ‘corrupt deal’ from Jackson, who made him Secretary of State .
 He was no longer president and managed to escape the consequences of his actions . However, he managed to avoid the consequences .
 He was instrumental in the formation of the Democratic party . He served as vice president to Andrew Jackson before being elected as his successor .
 Van Buren, of Dutch descent, was born at the end of 1782 to a family of modest means . He was born in modest circumstances .
 His father's premises were frequently used for local government gatherings, giving Van Buren his first taste of politics . His father was often used for meetings with local officials .
 The family couldn't afford to send him to college, but he managed to get an apprenticeship in a law office . He began studying law independently and is now studying law .
 Small in stature but impeccably well-dressed and presented, Van Buren quickly demonstrated the qualities that would take him to the very top of American politics .
 Van Buren disagreed with the politics of president John Quincy Adams who'd won a contentious election in 1824 . So he helped form a coalition of Jeffersonian Republicans, backing war hero Andrew Jackson in the 1828 election .
 Van Buren resigned as part of a cabinet reshuffle in 1831 . Though he resigned, he became a minister to Britain . He was the first president of the United States .
 Van Buren earned the Democrat's first nomination as vice president in 1832 . He ran with Jackson on a platform that strongly opposed the recharter of the Bank of the U.S. He was elected vice president of the United States .
 Van Buren took office in 1836 . He used his inaugural address to hold the then-prosperous United States up as an example to the rest of the world .
 The Panic of 1837 was the worst financial crisis that the U.S. had ever seen at that point . Just three months later, the country was gripped by the country's financial crisis .
 The 19th century cyclical economy of 'boom and bust' was nothing new, but financial measures implemented by Jackson had put extra strain on the economy's pattern . Jackson's financial measures put extra pressure on the country's economy .
 Having closed the Second Bank of the United States, restrictions on inflationary practices had been removed for some banks . Wild speculation about land based on easy bank credit had swept across the country .
 Jackson issued a Specie Circular in 1836, requiring land to be purchased with hard money . Jackson issued the Circular requiring hard money to buy land .
 His wife died 12 years into their marriage, leaving him four sons to raise . Hundreds of banks and banks have been closed in the wake of his wife's death .
 His business failed, and thousands lost their lands as well . Two went on to become his personal secretaries . Thousands lost their land .
 Van Buren's continuation of Jackson's deflationary money policies did little to help the situation . Thus began five years of the worst depression in U.S. history .
 He proposed the establishment of an independent treasury to handle the federal funds that had been passed to state banks . He also cut off federal expenditures so completely the government was forced to sell the tools it had used on public works .
 Van Buren lost his re-election bid in 1840, and in 1844 he tried and failed to gain the Democratic presidential nomination . Given these challenges, it was little surprise that he lost in 1840 and 1844 .
 He received just 10 per cent of the vote, and failed to win a single state . He was the only candidate to win any state in the US .
 Martin Van Buren spent much of the rest of his days travelling, before returning home to Kinderhook to write his memoirs .
 He died in 1862, aged 79, and while his presidency was troubled, it should not be overshadowed by the considerable contribution he made to American politics .
 Texas was incorporated into the United States in 1845 . Political leaders from both major parties had concerns about introducing the vast slave-holding region into an already volatile political climate .
 Almost the entire country felt the effects of the Panic of 1837 . Financial ruin for many of the country .
 It was considerably faster than carts pulled by animals and cut transport costs significantly . The 1832 presidential election was won by Andrew Jackson .
 After Joseph Smith organised the Church of Latter Day Saints in 1830, he revealed the Second Coming of Christ was near . He urged followers to relocate to a town in Missouri, Missouri . Van Buren was Jackson's running mate .
 Tensions rose between the Mormons and the town's original settlers, and war broke out, killing many . Many of the original settlers were Mormon settlers .
 Around 10,000 Mormons were forced to relocate to Illinois . As a result of the move, around 10,500 Mormons have moved to the state .
 Slavery was a hotly-debated political issue at the time, with southern slave owners at odds with northern abolitionists . The slave owners and abolitionists were at odds over the issue .
 Van Buren made significant strides in anti-slavery legislation during his lifetime . Slavery was outlawed in the U.S. just three years after his death .
 He was eventually elected as president, but his time in office turned out to be the shortest in history . He died just one month after his inauguration .
 His mother Elizabeth descended from one of the Virginia colonies' earliest and most prestigious families . He is descended from a Virginia colony's most prestigious family .
 William was the youngest of seven children with little prospect of inheriting his family's plantation . Benjamin decided that William's future was to become a doctor, and sent him to Pennsylvania to study medicine .
 William's father died in 1791, aged 18, he fulfilled his dream of joining the military . William joined the army after his father's death . William was the youngest son to join the British Army .
 Using family connections to become an ensign officer in the regular infantry, he commandeered around eighty roustabouts from the streets of Philadelphia .
 He enlisted them all and then took them to Fort Washington in the Northwest territory near present-day Cincinnati . He enlisted all of the men and sent them to the fort .
 On 20 August 1794, at the Battle of Fallen Timbers along the Maumee River in Ohio, his legion defeated tribes of Native Americans which had been supported by the British .
 Treaty of Greenville ended Northwest Indian War, gaining much of Ohio for U.S. settlers . This ended the ongoing Northwest Indian war, ending the Northwest Indian conflict . American settlers gained Ohio for American settlers .
 Harrison's forces lost 62 of their 1,000 men to Tenskwatawa's 50 or so men from about 600 . After two hours of fighting Harrison's troops prevailed, having lost 62 .
 The warriors retreated to Prophetstown, refusing Tenskwatawa's encouragements to attack again, and wisely evacuating their families . Harrison showed up and ordered his army to confiscate the town's supplies before putting it and further hopes of peace to the torch . Harrison's army confiscated the
 By 1800, Harrison had left the military and accepted a position from President Adams as governor of the Indiana Territory of the former Northwest Territory . Harrison had been governor of Indiana Territory .
 Harrison exploited tribal chiefs' propensity for poverty, corruption or weakness for alcohol, to push through seven treaties in which they ceded their lands . Harrison exploited the tribal chiefs for their propensity to poverty or corruption . Harrison used seven treaties with tribal chiefs to cede their land .
 The culmination of this came in 1805 when chiefs of the Sac tribes sold the U.S. 51 million acres for one cent per two hundred acres . After hospitable drinks, chiefs sold the United States for $1 per acre .
 As white settlers moved onto these new territories, the Native Americans grew more and more incensed . It surely has been among the meanest deals ever closed in the land of opportunity .
 Harrison offered to buy three million acres for almost two cents per acre in 1809 . The situation began in September 1809 when Harrison tried to buy 3 million acres . Harrison's offer to buy the land was rejected by the British government .
 Tecumseh, a Shawnee chief, began travelling to rally warriors to join him in resisting encroachments by settlers . Tribes named as sole owners of the land were not invited to negotiations, and he started travelling to fight against settlers .
 Tecumseh took the traditional Native American view that all lands were communal, and began threatening chiefs who had signed the treaty . Tecumseeh took a stance against the traditional view of all lands being communal . The treaty was signed in 1883 .
 Harrison met with Harrison and his warrior elite on 15 August 1810 . The drawing of weapons on both sides and harsh words could have sparked a war .
 Battle of Tippecanoe took place on November 7, 1811, in Indiana . Harrison's army was victorious in the battle, but was unable to prevent forces from being rallied .
 Major general Harrison of the Northwest forces defeated the British (as well as killing Tecumseh) at the Battle of the Thames in present day Chatham-Kent, Ontario in October 1813 .
 The boost to American morale, and the nownational reputation of its commander who had scattered the tribes, allowed Harrison to bask in adulation during a banqueting and carousing tour of various northwestern cities . Harrison's visit to the U.S. was a boost to morale,
 This was to be the summit of Harrison's career, either militarily or politically . Unfortunately, this was not the end of his career either .
 Harrison’s life was thereafter an agonisingly drawn-out tragedy magnified by the enduringly poor health of his wife Anna and the death of six of his ten children . Harrison's life was subsequently an agonisedly drawn out tragedy magnifying by his wife's enduringly
 The 41 year old then resigned his commission and settled on a farm near Cincinnati, Ohio . The 41-year-old then settled on the farm with a ""rabid thirst"" as former President John Adams put it .
 Harrison served two terms between 1816 and 1828, latterly as senator . Harrison served as a congressman and a senator from 1816 to 1828 .
 His ambassadorship to Colombia stumbled, and with mounting debts and out of office, he made whiskey . He made whiskey for a short time before renouncing it . With mounting debts, he was forced to withdraw from office .
 Whig candidate for president of 1840 was elected by the Whig Party in 1840 . He was defeated by Martin Van Buren in the presidential election of 1836 .
 The incumbent Van Buren was seen as incompetent and lordly, and despite aristocratic roots, the Democratic press characterised him as an alcoholic yokel in a log cabin .
 From 80 per-cent voter turnout Harrison won a landslide in the electoral college . But only six per cent separated him and Van Buren in the popular vote .
 At 68, he was the oldest person to have been elected president at the time . He was twice the average American lifespan . At 68 he was also twice average American life span .
 His inauguration was in freezing weather on 4 March 1841, during which he spoke for almost two hours without wearing a coat or hat .
 This was then followed by a round of receptions in his wet clothes, which seemed foolish, perhaps showing how Harrison felt obliged to live up to his war hero image .
 Harrison caught a cold which quickly turned into pneumonia and pleurisy . Harrison made executive appointments for a few days afterwards, taking them very seriously, before catching a cold .
 He was the first president to die in office . Feeling ""harassed by the multitude"" of people calling upon him, he died in office.
 William Henry Harrison was the last British subject to become president . Self-declared ‘Child of the Revolution’ was born two years before the American Revolutionary War was ignited .
 After a series of visions that centred on the idea of the Americans as the spawn of an evil sea-dwelling 'Great Serpent' from Algonquian tradition, he became 'The Prophet' His preaching grew more militant as his preaching grew militant .
 The sick president's cure regime included bleeding, purging, doses of calomel containing poisonous mercury, caster oil, snake weed root, crude petroleum, camphor, brandy, opium, and laudanum .
 Some historians have blamed this for hastening Harrison's death . Historians have blamed it for the death of Harrison . Harrison died in 1841 .
 Tenskwatawa supposedly cursed Harrison in the aftermath of the Battle of the Thames in 1813 . Harrison was killed in the battle at the end of the battle in the same year as the death of the last king .
 Every subsequent president elected in a year ending in zero died in office from 1840 until the 1960s, including the four who were assassinated . The four presidents who died in the same year were assassinated were assassinated in 1960s .
 Ronald Reagan broke the chain by surviving an assassination attempt, as did George W Bush . Ronald Reagan survived the assassination attempt . George W. Bush survived a similar assassination attempt in the 1980s .
 Harrison's relevancy is as the predominant soldier and statesman in the emergence of today’s Upper Midwest from the former Northwest Territories . The president who never really was Harrison was Harrison, but he is still a statesman .
 His presidency is mostly relevant for preventing the Whigs from consolidating power as a result of his unexpected death . His presidency was mostly relevant to preventing the congressional Whigs having consolidated power .
 When he unexpectedly became president after the death of William Henry Harrison, his strong independent views led to him being disavowed by the Whig party . He was previously a Whig Party member .
 John Tyler's presidency was something of an accident . Dubbed 'His Accidency' by opponents, Tyler was a president without a party . Tyler achieved several significant political feats without party .
 He assumed office after the death of President William Henry Harrison, who passed away from pneumonia after just a month in the White House . Taken in by the Whig party in a bid to capture southern vote .
 The 10th president was never meant to have an entry in the history books, but he made an indelible mark nonetheless . He was the 10th President of the United States .
 Tyler was born into a prominent family in Charles City County, Virginia . Tyler grew up with eight siblings, all receiving the best education money could buy .
 He studied law, was admitted to the bar in 1809 and used his father's contacts to gain a position in the Virginia House of Delegates aged just 21 . His father became governor of Virginia when he was governor and he gained a seat in the legislature .
 His political career saw him serve in the Virginia legislature from 1811 to 1816 . He also served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1817 to 1821 .
 The politics of the popular Andrew Jackson represented everything Tyler hated . Tyler saw it as such an abuse of federal power that he resigned in disgust . The president tried to restrict slavery in the new states west of Missouri .
 As of 2015, Tyler was the earliest former president with living L grandchildren A M^wiidri, ui„, HC A0 9UARTtSj‘ Washington in 1827, reluctantly supporting Jackson's re-election in 1832 . After undertaking extensive political
 Twice he brazenly condemned the president on the Senate floor for what he considered to be an abuse of power . But it wasn’t long before he became frustrated, and became frustrated .
 The failure of the next president, Martin Van Buren, to clean up Jackson's economic mess gave the Whigs the opportunity for power come the 1840 election . The failure . of the . next president . Martin van Buren's failure to . clean up the economic mess . gave the
 Their presidential candidate William Henry Harrison was portrayed as a humble, salt-ofthe-earth frontiersman . John Tyler was put up for vice-presidency, hoping to garner support from southern states .
 The party used the slogan 'Tippecanoe and Tyler too' implying flag-waving nationalism with a hint of southern sectionalism . As Harrison had fought at the Battle of Tippecaanoe, the slogan was used by the party .
 At 51 years old, John Tyler, henceforth dubbed 'His Accidency’, was younger than any previous president, and his single term in office was far from trouble-free . At 51, he was the youngest president to hold office at 51 .
 Tyler vetoed ills designed to create a new national bank . He kept Harrison's cabinet in place, but all but one resigned after vetoing bill .
 Whigs disavowed by the president in 1843 . Whigs tried but failed to impeach him . The president was disavowed .
 Tyler racked up an impressive list of achievements during his time as president . Despite his unlikely position and the adversity he faced when he got there he racked up a long list of accomplishments .
 In 1841 he signed the Preemption Act, which catalysed western settlement by allowing citizens to stake a claim on public land and buy it from the government . The act was the first act of its kind since 1841 .
 In 1842 he ended the long-running Seminole War in Florida and settled ongoing disputes between the U.S. and Britain over Canadian border issues . Then in 1842, he ended a long-standing Seminole war in Florida .
 In 1844 Tyler oversaw the signing of the Treaty of Wanghia, which gave America access to Asian ports, thus broadening its import and export markets . In 1845 he signed a bill annexing Texas, which he annexed in 1845 .
 On his final day as president, Tyler signed a bill making Florida the 27th state . Tyler signed the bill on his final full day as President .
 Tyler's eventual death in 1862 was not publicly acknowledged by the United States government . Despite his considerable contribution to the U.S. growth and prosperity, Tyler's death was not officially acknowledged . Tyler died in 1862 .
 Tyler voted in favour of Virginia seceding from the United States . With the nation on the brink of civil war, he chaired a peace conference in Washington, DC in an attempt to preserve the Union .
 He was considered a traitor to the Union upon his death, which also served to signal the last gasp of old Virginian aristocracy in the White House .
 Despite his apparent 'luck' in landing the presidency, he was none too humble upon his succession . A leader without followers .
 "I can never consent to being dictated to as to what I shall or shall not do," she says . But she says she can't consent to be dictated to what she wants to do .
 "So long as you see fit to do this, I shall be glad to have you with me," says the Prime Minister .
 Florida becomes the 27th state of the US, officiated by John Tyler on his final full day as president . Florida became the first state of its own in the US .
 At the time almost half of the state's population were enslaved African Americans working on large cotton and sugar plantations . At the same time, almost half the state was enslaved African American .
 The United States saw a large number of pivotal inventions during this period . Morse Code, the electric doorbell, the combine harvester, the lock-stitch sewing machine and the circuit breaker were among the inventions .
 In 1838, the forced removal of the Cherokee Nation from the southeastern United States along the Trail of Tears resulted in more than 4,000 Native American deaths . The forced removal resulted in the deaths of more than four thousand Native Americans .
 The Dorr Rebellion, 1841-1842, was a failed attempt to enforce broader democracy in the United States state of Rhode Island . A small rural elite were in charge of government in the state .
 The rebellion's leader Tomas Dorr was later found guilty of treason against the state . He was sentenced to hard labour and solitary confinement for life in prison .
 From spring 1846 to autumn 1847, the Mexican-American War raged between the U.S. and Mexico . The war was fought between the United States and Mexico between 1846 and 1847 .
 The battle was started by the United States disputing where the border of newly-annexed Texas fell . The battle resulted in Mexico's defeat and the loss of approximately half its national territory .
 His legacy of expansionism divided the country and set the stage for the Civil War . He accomplished all of his goals, yet his legacy divided the U.S.
 His early professional years were spent as a trial attorney, and he would later recruit colleagues from his legal career in his political life .
 He notably elevated his friend Gideon Pillow to brigadier general during the Mexican-American War, who proved an infamously inept commander .
 Polk was elected to the House of Representatives at the young age of 29 . Polk is a member of the Republican caucus in Washington, Washington, D.C. Polk is currently serving in the House .
 During his time in Congress, he gained notoriety for a speech in which he suggested that the president be elected directly by popular vote . He also suggested that he should be the president of the U.S.
 As speaker of the House, he was frequently insulted by political opponents . But notably he never took part in a duel, as was expected in that era . As speaker he was often insulted, but notably he did not take part in duel .
 His nomination for the presidency was a shock he had lost a race for the governor of Tennessee nine months earlier . He lost a presidential race for governor of the state in 2010 .
 Pro-annexation Polk swept into the lead after frontrunners announced opposition to annexing Texas . Polk is expected to be the next presidential candidate .
 In 1845, he was elected president on a platform of radical westward expansion, which would later be dubbed Manifest Destiny . He was elected President of the United States in 1845 on platform of western expansion .
 Polk was not averse to conflict, so when the issue of the Oregon territory arose, he threatened war . Polk threatened war with the United Kingdom over the territory of Oregon .
 Polk took control of a large and mostly unpopulated tract of land that had been jointly governed by the U.S. and the UK for 30 years . Polk took over the land from the UK and the United States . Polk was the first president of Polk's first term .
 Polk agreed to divide the northwest of the U.S. along the 49th parallel . A democratic Congress clamoured for the entire northwest of America . Polk was willing to settle, and he agreed to settle .
 The immense tract of land encompassed 44 James K Polk modern-day Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Idaho and parts of Montana and Wyoming .
 Polk presided over the last chapter in the annexation of Texas . Polk was not satisfied with this expansion, but he presided over this expansion .
 The large territory was governed by four separate entities between 1820 and 1845 . The territory was ruled by four different entities .
 In the 1840s, faced with debts and military harassment from Mexico, Texas sought to join the U.S. The state of Texas joined the United States .
 The proposition bitterly divided Congress, as the northern Whig party feared the effects of admitting a large slave-owning state into the Union . The proposal bitterly divided the Whig Party, as well as the Democratic Party .
 The question of Texas loomed large over the presidential election of 1844 . The election was held in Texas .
 Polk won a nanow victory but he nevertheless interpreted his win as a mandate to pursue an expansionist policy of Manifest Destiny . Polk's victory was a victory for Polk, but he still interpreted his victory as a victory . Polk: "I'm not going to let it be a victory
 Texas was quickly accepted into the Union as a slave state, deepening the rift between the north and the south . Mexico, which believed it to be their sovereign territory, angered the U.S.
 Polk was a radical expansionist, believing in the divine duty of Americans to expand further westward . Polk was born in 1881 . Polk believed in the belief that the U.S. had a divine duty to expand westward.
 He set out to buy California and New Mexico . Envisioning future lucrative maritime trade with the Far East, he bought the states .
 Polk was outraged when Mexico rejected the American overtures . Polk decided to seek an excuse for war . Polk was angered by the rejection of his overtures, and decided to go to war .
 He sent a force of 4,000 troops to march to the Rio Grande, an area that was still disputed between the two nations . The area is still disputed .
 First U.S. war fought on foreign soil saw American troops occupy large swathes of territory, establish a maritime blockade, and march towards Mexico City, facing minimal resistance .
 In 1848, Mexico formed a government capable of negotiating, and agreed to the Treaty of Guadelupe Hidalgo . The Treaty was signed by Mexico's government in 1848 .
 The agreement ceded a gigantic region of the west coast to the US in exchange for a nominal payment . It included all of present-day California, Nevada, Utah, and most of New Mexico .
 Mexico may have been more averse to signing the treaty had they known that significant caches of gold had been discovered in California just days earlier .
 The acquisition reignited the long-running vicious debate over slavery in new states . The debate would rumble on until the Civil War 15 years later .
 Polk is considered one of the most effective presidents in the pre-Civil War era . Polk expanded executive powers, especially with regard to leading the military and negotiating treaties . Polk was one of America's most successful presidents .
 He was ardent in his desire to expand the American state westward, even at the cost of conflicts entered into under false pretences .
 The question of whether slavery would be allowed in the new territories redoubled the existential debate in an already fragmented political environment . And the question of slavery has also raised the issue of slavery .
 Polk, a southern slave owner, had no qualms about admitting Texas as a slave state into the Union . Polk was a slave owner who owned slaves in the South . Polk admitted Texas to the U.S. in 1881 .
 Polk banned music, dancing, and gambling from the White House during his term . Polk was not known for his lively personal life or charisma . Polk banned gambling, gambling, and dancing from White House .
 Polk contracted cholera on a farewell tour on his farewell tour . The stress of the job weighed on Polk heavily, and he contracted the disease on the tour .
 Historians suggest that he was the only President to have died of overwork . His untimely death, very soon after leaving the presidency, led historians to suggest that . Historians have suggested that he may have died from overwork in his career .
 Polk's invasion of Mexico secured the entirety of the American southwest and established the modern-day border with Mexico at the Rio Grande . Polk’s presidency was the defining moment of his presidency . The Mexican-American War secured the entire American southwest of Mexico .
 Polk won a resounding military victory and ignored American calls to annex of Mexico . Polk struck a deal to force a purchase of over half of Mexico’s territory for a nominal sum . Polk refused to annex Mexico, instead striking a deal with the U.S. to purchase half
 GPA Healy's portrait of James K Polk was painted circa 1858, almost a decade after the former president's death . The doctrine that Americans had a divine right to colonise the entire continent dominated politics .
 Nativist sentiment was high at the time and the immigrants suffered from discrimination for decades . The immigrants suffered for decades from discrimination in the U.S.
 The Fugitive Slave Law is passed as part of the compromise governing the status of slaves in newly acquired territories . It allows southern states to pursue escaped slaves in the north, allowing them to pursue them . The law was passed in the late 1800s .
 This would galvanise the north against slavery and deepen the rift which would lead the country down a path to civil war . This would lead to a further divide in the country, leading to a possible civil war.
 The mid 1800s saw the rise of advocacy groups devoted to women's suffrage and the abolition of slavery . Social movements abound in the 1800s .
 Temperance movement would eventually lobby successfully for Prohibition . Temperance would lobby for Prohibition in the 1930s . Prohibition would be a precursor to Prohibition .
 Andrew Jackson and his acolytes promoted universal suffrage for all white males in the first half of the 19th century . A shift to Jacksonian democracy was a major shift in the Jacksonian era .
 Requirements that voters be taxpayers or property owners were dropped by 1850 . Requirements for voters to be a property owner or taxpayers were dropped in 1850 .
 Zachary Taylor distinguished himself in various conflicts throughout the early 19th century . Born into old money, Taylor established himself as a brilliant military mind . President of the Whig.84 -1850
 His nationwide popularity led to him being elected as 12th United States president, but he was ill-suited to the job . His time in office was cut short by his untimely death .
 Other parties came to him, requesting he be their candidate, and for good reason . To be fair, he never sought the presidency . He never sought presidency .
 After his involvement in the MexicanAmerican War, he became a war hero and a celebrity of sorts across the U.S. After his service in the war, he was a hero of sorts .
 Upon his appointment as president he had never registered to vote, amazingly not even for himself . He had never even registered for himself.
 His lack of knowledge and experience in the field showed throughout his presidency . The president has been criticized for his lack of experience in politics .
 Taylor was born on 24 November 1784, on a plantation in Orange County, Virginia . Taylor was also known as a slave trader .
 The slaveholders were well-known slave holders . They would later help him both gain supporters and lose them . The slave owners were also well known slaves .
 Taylor's family moved to Louisville, Kentucky during his childhood . Taylor moved to Kentucky in the early years of his life .
 The family owned 10,000 acres of land throughout the state of California . Zachary Taylor was president of the California Gold Rush .
 Gold nuggets were found in California's Sacramento Valley . Thousands of potential gold miners flocked in from all over the country to get in on the action .
 By 1852, a total of $2 billion worth of precious metals had been extracted from the area . The population increased tenfold and the population grew tenfold . The area's population increased 10fold in 1852 .
 26 slaves in order to cultivate the most developed areas of the state . Fast success from the state became known as the ‘California Dream’
 Taylor's formal education was pretty sporadic . Due to the fact that they lived out of the middle of nowhere, Taylor's education was sporadic .
 On 3 May, 1808, when Taylor was 23, he joined the U.S. Army and received a commission as a first lieutenant of the Seventh Infantry Regiment . Taylor was the first lieutenant in the Seventh Regiment .
 He worked his way up the ranks until he was promoted to captain in 1810 . He was born in 17th century and died in 1831 .
 In his downtime, he followed in his father's footsteps and became a slave-holder . He bought his own plantation in Louisville, Kentucky, for $95,000 .
 In 1811, he was called back into service and sent to the Indiana Territory, where he assumed control of Fort Knox . He managed to restore order to the garrison .
 He was applauded by his superiors, and a long military career followed . He led armies in the War of 1812, the Black Hawk War and the Second Seminole War in 1837 . He was also involved in the Battle of Black Hawk in 1828 .
 Taylor commanded American forces in the Mexican-American War . Then in 1846, Taylor commanded U.S. forces in Mexico . Taylor was killed in the war .
 His victories, especially those where his troops were greatly outnumbered, were the talk of the land and he was branded a war hero . His victories included those where he was greatly outnumbered by his troops .
 The fact that he was a war hero was attractive to voters from the north, and his background in slave-holding meant he appealed to many from the south . He was also attractive to many voters in the north .
 The reconciliation must have worked, as the pair were voted into office, and Taylor became the 12th President of the United States .
 During his military years, Taylor's nickname was Old Rough and Ready, which was attributed to both his enduring fighting spirit and his general slovenly appearance . Taylor was also known for his general appearance .
 President Obama's leadership skills were almost nonexistent in his short time as president . But the astounding leadership skills he displayed to his troops was almost nonexistent during his presidency .
 While he was in office, slavery was a topic hot topic hot on most Americans' minds . Taylor's slave-holding background did little to help him .
 While he didn't work towards making slavery illegal, he was opposed to the creation of new slaves . However, he also opposed to creating slaves .
 On Independence Day, 1850, Taylor attended a joyous and elaborate ceremony marking the erection of the Washington Monument . Taylor is the third shortest-serving President, beaten only by James A Garfield and William Henry Harrison .
 To cool down, he enjoyed a bowl of cherries and a pitcher of cold milk . To cool off, he also enjoyed a  bowl of cherry cherries .
 Within hours of finishing the snack, he started to experience severe stomach pains . The snack was the first time he had eaten a meal since eating it .
 Some believed that he'd suffered from gastroenteritis, aggravated by Washington's open sewers . Others believed that Washington's sewers were to blame for his illness .
 Others wondered if his demise had come as a result of his opposition of new slave land, and the deadly enemies that had made him famous .
 Theories of a possible assassination were concocted and spread, leading many to believe that the cherries and milk he had enjoyed that 4 July had been laced with arsenic . Many believed that the cherry and milk that he'd had enjoyed on 4 July was laced with poison .
 A historian managed to convince Taylor’s descendants to allow his body to be exhumed . Eventually, a historian convinced his descendants to exhume his body . Taylor's body was finally exhumated in 2009 .
 Zachary Taylor rose to the rank of major general before he was elected to serve as president . George Washington was the first president of the United States .
 The French Revolution was the start of the French Revolution in France . The revolution began in France in the 17th century .
 It started with the storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789, witnessed by American ambassador Thomas Jefferson . The Bastille was stormed by the French capital in 1789 .
 Battle of Waterloo was fought in Belgium in 1815 . Napoleon and the French army were finally defeated by two armies of the Seventh Coalition . Duke of Wellington and Gebhard Leberecht von Blucher led the armies .
 Over a century later in 1827, the last of the city's slaves were finally freed . The city's last slaves were freed over a century ago . The last of their slaves was freed in 1828 .
 In May 1844, inventor Samuel FB Morse sent the first ever telegram . Morse sent a telegram on 24 May, 1844 . Morse's telegram was the first telegram to be sent by the inventor . Morse made history when he sent the telegram in 1844.
 Rising tensions between northern and southern states marred his time in office . His presidency is generally viewed unfavourably by modern scholars . Rising tensions in the region marred the president's presidency .
 Fillmore grew up in extreme poverty, enduring all the hardships afforded by life on the frontier . Fillmore was the second of nine children and the eldest son, Fillmore .
 He threw himself into self-taught education, stealing books to enrich his studies . Obsessed with throwing off the shackles of his former poverty, he threw himself in self education .
 He served four terms in Congress, but decided not to run for re-election after 1843 . He was elected to Congress in 1843, serving four terms .
 The pair didn't even meet until after the election, but they could not have been more different in personal politics . A hard-fought election ensued, and they were ultimately successful .
 Taylor pushed Fillmore into the Senate, denying him any real political influence . Fillmore's abolitionist sympathies were denied by Taylor, who was angry with Fillmore .
 Fillmore would leave his mark on slavery . The Senate was beginning to debate several bills addressing slavery . It would be through these bills that Fillmore left his mark .
 When President Taylor died in 1850, Fillmore was left to assume the role of the U.S. 13th president . Fillmore assumed the role as President of the United States in 1850 .
 Fillmore appointed Daniel Webster as secretary of state . Fillmore positioned himself with moderate Whigs who supported legislation designed to quell tensions between slave and free states .
 The Compromise of 1850 would define Fillmore's presidency . Fillmore fell in love with his teacher, Abigail Powers, when he was 19, but refused to marry her until he had properly established himself as a lawyer .
 Fillmore was opposed to slavery personally, but ignored it in states where slavery already existed . He all-but ignored the issue in those states, thinking it better to preserve the union than invite further conflict . Fillmore died of a heart attack in 1881 .
 This coupled with his consistent authorisation of federal force to return fugitive slaves only infuriated northern abolitionists including those in his own party . This led to him authorising the return of fugitive slaves .
 The compromise is generally remembered for prolonging sectional clashes rather than effectively addressing any deeply rooted problems . As such, the compromise is often remembered for not addressing deeply rooted issues .
 Fillmore upset southerners by refusing to back an invasion of Cuba, which would have expanded slavery into the Caribbean . Fillmore's refusal to back a Cuban invasion would have led to an expansion of slavery .
 It was a blow at the time but the party broke down when it became clear the compromise was merely temporary . It was also a blow to the party but it was not a permanent blow .
 Fillmore retired from politics and died in 1874 after suffering a stroke . After finishing third behind James Buchanan and John C Fremont, Fillmore finished third .
 Fillmore was largely remembered for his failure to adequately address sectional conflict . Fillmore played an important role in expanding the U.S. economy .
 He opened trade with Japan, restored diplomatic relations with Mexico and backed a transcontinental railroad . He also opened trade relations with Japan and restored diplomatic ties with Mexico . He was the first president of the United States .
 He also worked tirelessly to keep the Hawaiian Islands out of European hands . The Hawaiian Islands were also kept out of the hands of European powers .
 His ambivalent stance towards more pressing issues, which ultimately cost him his career, cost him a career .
 Historians agree that the Compromise played a major role in postponing the American Civil War for a decade . Some argue that the legislation only made pre-existing sectional divisions more obvious and failed to address the root of the issue .
 By 1860, the northern states had added miles of railroad, steel production and factories . The free economy had more time to industrialise, and by 1860 had added railroad and steel production .
 The southern states, dependent on slave labour and crop production, lacked the ability to industrialise as well as industrialising as well . Southern states were dependent upon slave labour, crop production .
 Come the outbreak of war, the north was considerably better able to supply, equip and man its armed forces . The north was able to recruit, train and equip its forces .
 The Great Famine in Ireland drove hundreds of thousands of Irish immigrants to seek a new life in the United States . Women's lib Amelia Bloomer (creator of the bloomer undergarments) became famous for her women's rights newspaper The Lily .
 The creation of a snack legend is the creation of snack legend . A customer complained that his fried potatoes were too thick and soggy .
 Irish women accounted for 70 to 80 per cent of U.S. domestic servants . Irish women account for 70-80 per cent in America's domestic workers .
 So-called 'lunatic asylums' were popular throughout the U.S. during the 1850s . They were originally intended for stressed-out city dwellers in search of relaxation .
 Asylums soon began opening their doors to more seriously troubled individuals at the request of officials . But jaunts to such establishments were very costly, and asylums began opening doors to those with serious problems .
 Interior design Style in 1850s was very much dominated by European trends . The U.S. Interior design style was much influenced by European design styles .
 Consumers wanted French clothing and English furniture in Victorian fashions . Having not yet established 'American style', consumers wanted French clothes and furniture .
 English furniture was highly sought-after and expensive . Well-made, quality English furniture would be highly sought out .
 He came from proud military family and distinguished himself as an outstanding lawyer . He was a Democrat .
 Franklin Pierce's time in the White House was dogged by poor decision-making, tensions over the issue of slavery, and persistent doubts over his suitability for the office . Pierce was the first president of the Civil War era .
 During the 1852 election Pierce was disparagingly called the 'hero of many a hard-fought bottle' by his Whig opponents . An amiable, pliable nonentity who became president by accidents of circumstance .
 Franklin's father, a county sheriff who had served in the Revolutionary War, fed him then drove him back to school until, when a thunderstorm broke, he ordered Franklin out of the carriage to walk the rest of the way . Upon his return, his father Benjamin, a . county
 Pierce went from a misbehaving pupil to one who worked to improve his grades . Pierce later noted that it was the turning point in his life . Pierce: "It was ""the turning point"
 During childhood, his family entertained war veterans, which may have inspired him to establish a militia company . The militia company performed a drill on the campus of his college in Brunswick, Maine, calling a strike when the college president told them to stop .
 Pierce read law in Massachusetts and New Hampshire, then started a law practice back in his hometown of Hillsborough, Hillsborough . During and after his graduation year he taught, but his father envisaged a career in law, so Pierce went on to study law .
 "Bright and with an amiable presence and a deep voice," he gained fame as an attorney . He followed his father into public service, following him into politics .
 He was elected as Hillsborough town moderator in 1828 . He was also elected to the New Hampshire Legislature the following year . In 1828 he was voted out of office, just as his father was .
 At just 27, he was the youngest speaker of the House in the state's history by 1831 . He was opposing 'unconstitutional' banking expansion and protection for the state militia .
 Pierce's career and personal life ran in happy parallel, for as well as becoming a Democratic representative for New Hampshire 50 Franklin Pierce in the winter of 1832 . Pierce became engaged to Jane Appleton, a minister's daughter, in 1832, and became a Democratic congressional representative . Pierce
 Just over a year later, their first child, Franklin, lived only three days . The couple's first child was born in August 2013 . Franklin was born a month later .
 Already a frail and shy person, Jane's loathing for the Washington political scene only amplified her melancholic predisposition . Jane was already a frail person, but her loathing of the D.C. political scene added to her sadness .
 After having served five terms, they returned to New Hampshire in 1838, but tragically their second son died from typhus two years later .
 A third son, Benjamin upon whom Jane doted after his birth in 1841, gave her a reason to stay robust . Benjamin was Jane's third child, Benjamin .
 After a loss of face in the Mexican-American War, Pierce returned to practising law, doing so superbly . Pierce is best known for his role in the Second World War .
 He allowed friends to campaign for him as the party's presidential nominee . But he was aghast at winning and was left disappointed by the result .
 In the presidential election of 1852, despite division of his party over the question of slavery, Pierce won by a landslide . Pierce was labelled a cowardly alcoholic by his former commander, the Whig candidate Winifred Scott .
 President Pierce implemented civil service examinations and made the Interior Department and Treasury more systematised and averse to fraud .
 By nominating cabinet members from all his party's factions he tried to rectify divisions over the slavery issue that were undermining the Democrats . He nominated Cabinet members from every party's political factions .
 Slavery was banned or regulated in western territories under the Missouri Compromise of 1820 . Slavery in western territory was banned in western states .
 The Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 nullified this agreement by permitting these newly created territories to decide whether to allow slavery . Since more settlers wanted slavery, the act nullified the agreement by allowing slavery to be allowed .
 In the Senate and the country the act was rancorously fought between third-party ‘Freesoilers 1 and abolitionist 'Jayhawkers' and pro-slavery supporters .
 Pierce found the act unappealing and not his responsibility, but in seeing it as a problem of being conciliatory to the southern slave states, he was eventually manipulated into supporting it . Pierce found it an issue of conciliating with the slave states and supported it .
 As antislavery and pro-slavery settlers established their own legislatures in Kansas, violence broke . Violence broke out between the two sides of the frontier .
 Recognising the pro-slavery government at Lecompton, Pierce sent troops to maintain order in Topeka . Ordering the government at Topeka to disband and maintaining order .
 The consequence of the president's miscalculation over the biggest domestic issue he faced alienated him, and was a big stride towards civil war . The president's mistake was the biggest mistake he made in the country's history .
 In overseas matters, Pierce was an expansionist whose small successes were undercut by naive decisions . Pierce's success was undercut by small successes, he says .
 He alienated the British by expelling their ambassador over American enlistments in the United Kingdom's war against Russia . He also expelled the British ambassador over their involvement in the U.K. effort .
 Ad hoc regime set up by the military ‘filibustered William Walker’ was recognised by Pierce by Pierce, until Cornelius Vanderbilt persuaded him to send Navy forces to make Walker surrender .
 The Ostend Manifesto was a justification of the forceful seizure of Cuba from Spain if they refused to sell the island to the United States . Cuba was a situation of benefit to southern slave-traders and owners and owners . It was also a justification for the seizure of the island from
 At next year’s Democratic national convention James Buchanan was chosen as the presidential nominee instead of President Pierce, a unique humiliation . Buchanan was the Democratic presidential nominee .
 Pierce subsequently returned to New Hampshire to speculate in property . Pierce subsequently left the state to pursue a career in real estate .
 While travelling in Europe, he kept his hand in politics . Further eroding his reputation by revealing his support of southern secessionist states .
 Much like his time in office, Pierce's personal life had been riddled with trauma . Pierce had a personal life filled with trauma, including trauma .
 He entered into presidency in mourning, after the tragic death of his last-remaining son, which arguably tainted the future outcome of his presidency .
 Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel Uncle Tom's Cabin was published in the year Franklin Pierce became president . The novel was published during the year that Franklin Pierce was president .
 It was inspired by the life of Josiah Henson, who escaped slavery in 1830 . He founded a settlement and school for other fugitive slaves in Canada before publishing his autobiography .
 In Stowe's novel, Tom's story of escape and recapture is strongly infused with Christianity and abolitionist sentiments . Tom escaped and recaptured in 18th century, escaping from a slave .
 Franklin Pierce became lifelong friends with Nathaniel Hawthorne, who wrote many allegories including The House of Seven Gables and The Scarlet Letter . Pierce was present at Hawthorne's death .
 He befriended the poet and educator Henry Longfellow at the time of his early days . Also befriended Henry Long, who was a friend of the poet .
 Pierce's command of a brigade in the MexicanAmerican War faltered when his horse was shot out from underneath him, giving him a knee injury . Pierce had a reputation of a coward for looking like he had fainted . Pierce was trying to emulate his father, who died in the war
 Horatio Seymour was the Democratic presidential candidate who lost to Ulysses S Grant in 1868 . Seymour was a candidate for President Grant in the 1868 presidential election .
 An Amiable Fellow President Pierce liked to walk alone on the streets of Washington and socialise . Pierce was known for his socialising style .
 The only time that his safety was compromised was when a drunk man threw an egg at him, he said . The only thing that was compromised by the incident was when he was thrown an egg .
 His attitude toward slavery and inability to satisfy the various factions fighting throughout the country would lead directly to civil war . Unfortunately his attitudes toward slavery would lead to a civil war in the U.S. Civil War .
 In 1812, he was admitted to the bar even to the outbreak of civil war . He was admitted in 1812 to the Bar .
 The Dred Scott decision was pivotal legislation that significantly contributed to the worsening of sectional fighting in the period before civil war . Slavery was becoming an increasingly important part of the American Civil War .
 The case was brought to the courts by African American slave Dred Scott, who had lived in the free state of Illinois and the free territory of Wisconsin before moving back to Missouri .
 Chief Justice Roger B Taney declared that blacks had no rights which the white man was bound to respect . Chief Justice Taney said they were not meant to be included in the Declaration of Independence .
 Buchanan helped block the Wilmot Proviso, which proposed banning slavery in any territory acquired from Mexico during the Mexican-American War . Abolitionists were outraged and the decision propelled the issue of slavery even further into the political agenda .
 He also helped draft the 1854 Ostend Manifesto, which outlined plans for America to acquire Cuba from Spain . He also wrote the Ostend Manifesto, outlining plans for Cuba to be acquired .
 The proposal resulted in protests from anti-slavery northerners who feared Cuba would become a slave state . While it was never acted upon, the proposal was not acted upon .
 Buchanan had absolutely no moral objection to slavery . Buchanan had no moral objections to slavery, he said . Buchanan was president of the Confederate States of South Carolina in 1861 .
 In 1854, President Pierce signed the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which made both territories into new territories . The act allowed settlers to decide for themselves whether their state would be a free or slave state .
 Pierce's support for the act meant he was overlooked for renomination in 1856 . In 1856 the Democrats chose James Buchanan as their presidential candidate simply because he had been living abroad at the time of the bill's signing .
 His perceived neutrality was designed to appeal to abolitionists and pro-slavery advocates alike . His perceived neutrality appealed to both sides of the debate .
 Buchanan maintained that slavery was an issue to be decided by individual states and territories . However, the same stance that has cost Pierce his career .
 Buchanan on the back of support from the south won the election . It was likely only because his Republican challenger John Fremont believed that slavery should be banned outright .
 By the time Buchanan came to the White House, debates around slavery had reached unprecedented intensity, with both factions advocating violence and often resorting to it . A number of abolitionists had been murdered in Kansas, and in retaliation, five individuals associated with the pro-slavery party were
 Buchanan is the only president to have remained a bachelor his whole life . Buchanan was a bachelor at the time of his inauguration .
 Buchanan said slavery was a matter for states and territories to decide, not the federal government . He concluded that the matter would be easily resolved both ""speedily and finally'' Historians say he was gay .
 Two days after he was sworn in the U.S. Supreme Court handed down its Dred Scott decision legislation . The legislation was designed to end the debate once and for all . It stated that the federal government had no power to regulate slavery in the territories .
 Buchanan hoped the ruling would put the matter to rest, but it only served to escalate tensions . Northerners applaud the decision and northerners protest it .
 He supported the Lecompton Constitution, which would have allowed Kansas to become a slave state . He further upset the north by supporting the Constitution . He also supported a constitution that would allow Kansas to be a slave .
 When Republicans won a plurality in the House in 1858, every significant bill they passed fell before southern votes in the Senate or a presidential veto . Republicans won the House plurality in 2008 .
 The Federal Government had reached a stalemate, and all Buchanan could do was tell states threatening secession that, while they had no legal right to do so, the government could not prevent them . Buchanan could only tell states threatened secession that while there were no legal rights to do it, the
 President Obama left the White House with the nation on the brink of civil war . He then resorted to a policy of inactivity, largely avoiding the escalating issue until the end of his term .
 Buchanan published a memoir, Mr Buchanan's Administration On The Eve Of Rebellion, in a bid to salvage his reputation . He laid blame for his administration's failures on abolitionists and Republicans .
 The book was ignored, with all eyes by then on Buchanan's successor Abraham Lincoln, who had been left to clear up a frightening political mess . Lincoln's successor was left to clean up the mess .
 Tensions were high during the time of James Buchanan's presidency . Violence between factions was common .
 Abolitionist John Brown tried unsuccessfully to stage a massive slave uprising in Virginia, resulting in his conviction of treason and death by hanging .
 Invented toilet paper and electric stove, toilet paper, electric stove and cleaning items such as the vacuum cleaner and dustpan .
 Telecommunications saw an important milestone with the first trans-Atlantic telegraph cable . The cable was the first to connect the world's largest telegraph network .
 Buchanan inaugurated the creation with an exchange of greeting with Queen Victoria . But a weak signal meant the service was shut down in just a few weeks .
 The Pony Express came into being in 1859, delivering messages, newspapers, mail and packages across the Great Plains, over the Rocky Mountains and from Sierra Nevada to Sacramento by horseback .
 The Panic of 1857 was the first global economic crisis in 1857 . Overexpansion of the domestic economy and a declining international economy plunged the world into the crisis .
 President of a country waging war on itself ought to have failed, yet Abraham Lincoln is revered for his leadership . T he bombardment began at 4.30am.
 Cannon batteries stationed around the harbour at Charleston in South Carolina launched salvo after salvo upon a small island fort . Cannon batteries fired at the island fort in the early hours of the attack .
 Soon after midday, the fort's flagpole was struck, and 'Old Glory', the national flag of the United States, fell . Soon after noon, the Fort's flag pole was struck by the storm .
 Fort Sumter, a stronghold of the Federal Government in the first state to secede from the Union, was attacked by the Civil War . The structure under fire was the first structure to be destroyed in the war .
 The commander of the fort, Major Robert Anderson, refused to surrender it to General PGT Beauregard of the Confederate army . The cannons were lit, and the cannons were fired .
 The besieged fort remained under fire for 34 hours before Anderson surrendered . Anderson surrendered after 34 hours under fire .
 Confederate forces opened fire on the forces of the United States of America . Yet, unmistakably, the Confederate States of . America had opened fire .
 Perhaps it was inevitable given the contradiction between the words in the 1776 Declaration of Independence and the morality of those who wrote them, those who did not .
 Thomas Jefferson and many other signatories were themselves slave owners . Thomas Jefferson was a slave owner, but many others were slaves .
 As many as eight presidents owned slaves while they were in office and many others in government were slaveholders . Many others in the U.S. owned slaves .
 Opponents of slavery were growing on moral, political and religious grounds . Slavery was a major source of slavery in the early 1800s, but slavery was still illegal .
 As the abolition movement grew, inhabitants of the Southern States defended slavery as a 'paternalistic' institution, and a 'positive good' They even used biblical references in their arguments .
 In reality, slavery in the South was the driving force of the region’s economy . Slavery in the Southerners were driving force for the region's economy .
 Plantation owners, particularly in the cotton fields, relied heavily upon slave labour .
 After the war with Mexico ended in 1848, the borders of the American Republic became finalised . The American Republic was formed from the United States of Mexico .
 Expansion into the new territories to the west began, but disputes about whether they should become free or slave states were fierce, and at times violent .
 Speech was made in Springfield, Illinois, in June 1858 . Speech crystallised the problem in a speech on June 16, 1858 in Springfield .
 "I believe this government cannot endure permanently, half slave and half free," says President Obama . "We are half slaves, half free and half slaves," says Obama .
 Lincoln would personally test fire rifle prototypes outside the White House during the Civil War . Lincoln would go on to forge a successful career as a lawyer before eventually becoming one of the most celebrated leaders in United States history .
 As president, he led the Union to victory in the American Civil War, abolishing slavery and reuniting the country . He also led the Confederate Army to victory, ending slavery in 1865 .
 He was famously assassinated by John Wilkes Booth just months after being elected to a second term .
 Frederick Douglass was a significant African-American leader of the 19th century . Born into slavery in 1818, Douglass escaped to become a leading campaigner to end the practice . He was a leader in the abolitionist movement .
 Frederick Douglass was the son of a slave woman and an unknown white man . Frederick took the surname Douglass after a second, and this time successful, escape from bondage .
 He delivered moving lectures on the brutality of his upbringing . Living in New Bedford, Massachusetts, he married and became involved in the abolitionist movement .
 The book revealed he was a fugitive slave, forcing him to flee to England . Encouraged to write his autobiography, he fled to England to escape slavery .
 Supporters 'purchased' his freedom, allowing Douglass to return in 1847 . Douglass was freed from prison in 1846 .
 He quickly set up an antislavery newspaper, which continued under various names until 1863 . He set up the newspaper in 1864 .
 During the civil war, Douglass lobbied for African-Americans to be allowed to fight . He lobbied for black Americans to fight in the Civil War .
 After the Emancipation Proclamation, he recruited for the 54th Massachusetts Infantry, the first regiment of black soldiers . He recruited the first black soldiers in the state .
 At war's end, he turned to campaigning for black rights, going on to hold several government posts before his death in 1895 .
 Lincoln was born in 1809 to a poor Kentucky farming family . Lincoln was raised in a single-room log cabin . Lincoln met with the Union's military leaders at their headquarters in Maryland in 1862 .
 With minimal formal education, he virtually taught himself, later earning a living through various manual jobs . He earned a living by working in manual jobs in the field .
 Lincoln passed the bar exam in Illinois in 1836 . Lincoln's family moved to Illinois, where he learned the law . Lincoln died in 1846 .
 Lincoln made enough of a success of his profession to earn a good living . Lincoln was a success in his profession .
 He married Mary Todd, the daughter of a wealthy Kentucky slaveholder, in 1846 . He later served a single term in the House of Representatives as a Whig party member .
 Republicans opposed the extension of slavery to the newer states appealed to Lincoln . A new grouping, the Republicans, also opposed slavery . Lincoln appealed to a new grouping .
 The pair contested seven debates, which were extensively reported in newspapers across the country . The pair were heavily involved in seven debates .
 Lincoln's proposition of prohibiting the extension of slavery in the new territories frequently forced Douglas on to the back foot . Lincoln's closely argued proposition was frequently forced to be on the back of foot .
 Douglas had adopted in countering Lincoln’s arguments angered his party's members in the Southern States, which later proved costly . However, the positions Douglas adopted in counter-Lincoln's arguments angered many of his party members .
 Despite losing the Senate race, Lincoln won widespread acclaim as an eloquent debater for Republican values . Southern Democrats green, Northern Democrats blue and Constitutional Unionists orange .
 When his party sought a candidate to run for president in 1860, it turned to the poor farmer’s boy from Kentucky .
 The belief was that as a moderate candidate, Lincoln could win in Pennsylvania and the Mid-west States . Lincoln's supporters say he would be a moderate Republican .
 He was not an abolitionist, like some more radical members of his party . He pledged not to interfere with slavery in the Southern States .
 He had always been against slavery, labelling it wrong both morally and politically . Yet he had always called slavery 'wrong both moral and politically' He called it 'wrong' and 'wrong morally'
 His fervent hope was that it would become extinct over time as states moved to reject it . He hopes that it will become extinct as states move away from it .
 He was firm in his opposition to allowing it to spread to the new territories . Crucially, he was not allowed to allow it to be allowed to spread .
 The Democrats split into North and South when choosing a presidential candidate . Meanwhile, as if seeking to test the view that 'a house divided cannot stand’
 Those in the North championed Lincoln's Senate opponent Stephen Douglas . Those in North championed Stephen Douglas, who died in 18th Century .
 Current vice-president John Breckinridge, a staunch pro-slavery man, also stood . Hardening their position, they selected current vice-presidents to stand against the idea .
 Lincoln garnered enough state electoral votes to become the Union's 16th president . Lincoln was elected with slightly less than 40 per cent of the national vote . Lincoln became the president of the Union in 1865 .
 In the Southern States, where his name often didn't even appear on the ballot paper, hardly anyone voted for him . Yet in the Southern United States, he was a popular candidate for Democrats .
 Fuelled by a sense of unfairness, within days of Lincoln's victory South Carolina organised a secession convention .
 Before the new president's inauguration on 4 March 1861, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana and Texas seceded .
 The seven declared themselves a new nation called The Confederate States of America . They declared themselves The Confederate State of America.
 Jefferson Davis was a president in place, before Lincoln had actually taken office . Jefferson Davis even had a president before Lincoln took office .
 The 16th president's inauguration speech set out clearly what was at stake when he spoke .
 Lincoln stated unequivocally that his government would not orchestrate an invasion of the Confederacy, but if Union outposts in it came under attack, he was duty bound as president to act in their defence . Lincoln said he would not have invaded the Confederacy but would act in defence of the Union out
 Four more states Virginia, Arkansas, North Carolina and Tennessee quickly joined the other rebels . The rebels are 11 against the Union's 23, making it 11 states .
 The act of firing upon the flag was seen as treasonous, even by Lincoln's Democrat adversaries like Douglas . After the fall of Old Glory at Fort Sumter, the North now had a reason to go to war .
 The Confederacy was suffering from a much smaller 1 population and was massively weaker in terms of industrial power and financial resources . The Confederacy suffered from a smaller population and a massively weaker economy .
 Taken together, these factors pointed to a war that was going to be a long struggle for the U.S. President Obama .
 Both sides had to call on large numbers of volunteers to form their armies . Both sides needed to call upon large numbers to form armies .
 Leading them were officers from the pre-war U.S. Army Military Academy at West Point . Leading officers from West Point at the time of the war .
 A significant number of the more able were from the South, and many resigned their commissions in order to fight for the Confederate cause .
 His general-in-chief, Winfield Scott, was a 75-year-old veteran on the verge of retirement, and there was no obvious successor . He was replaced by the U.S. Army's most senior commander in the Air Force .
 Lincoln won widespread acclaim as an eloquent debater for Republican values . Antietam was claimed as a Union victory, and Lincoln seized the opportunity to confront the issue of slavery .
 At war's onset, he had maintained its purpose was to save the Union . He pledged to leave the institution of slavery unaffected in the Southern States .
 Lincoln believed he wasn't able to challenge state-sanctioned servitude under the Constitution . The Constitution kept the important border slave states of Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, Maryland and Delaware loyal to the Union . Lincoln believed the Constitution would not allow him to challenge slavery .
 Slavery's effects couldn't be ignored, as they were damaging the Union campaign . However, as the war unfolded, slavery's effects could not be ignored . The Union campaign was hampered by the effects of slavery .
 Slaves were used to construct defences for the Confederate armies . Slave work on farms and plantations kept the South's economy going, allowing more of the white population to fight .
 Lincoln issued the Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation in September 1862 . Determined to affect the balance of the war, Lincoln issued it in September 1863 .
 Lincoln believed only the president, through constitutionally sanctioned war powers, could enforce emancipation . Lincoln himself had already quashed military decree emancipations made by several Union generals . Lincoln had already been forced to quash military decree emancipation .
 He was also anxious about public opinion, fearing that if he moved too soon, not enough people in the North would support him, or that he might lose those important border states .
 Lincoln judged that the time was right to press home the advantage and further undermine the Confederate war effort with the Proclamation . It was knife-edge politics, but Lincoln judged it right to push home the victory at Antietam . The Proclamation was published just five days after the Union
 The document offered terms for rebel states to return to the Union provided they agreed to begin arrangements to end slavery . If they failed to do so by 1 January 1863, all slaves in those states the retreating army was not vigorously pursued .
 Conflicts with his generals were a feature of Lincoln’s early years in the White House . Lincoln's early years were filled with conflicts with generals . Lincoln was assassinated in 1818 .
 He sought to be an involved commander-in-chief, going far beyond visits to troops and military hospitals to raise the moral to advocate strategy on how the war should be fought . The president sought to raise moral issues with the military, raising the moral and raising the issue of the moral
 Lincoln's difficulty was in finding generals who thought like he did in the war's earliest major clash, the First Battle of Bull Run in Virginia . Lincoln had difficulty finding generals with whom he thought the war was beginning to begin .
 Confederate resistance turned it into a humiliating Union defeat . The battle was a confusing conflict between two virtually new armies of limited training .
 General George McClellan was promoted to general-in-chief when Scott retired . With McDowell's star waning, General George McDowell was promoted .
 Arrogant and ambitious, McClellan clashed with his political superiors in Washington . While he trained the army well through the winter, he didn't deliver decisive battlefield victories . He was an ambitious and ambitious leader .
 McClellan's tactical caution was a stark contrast to the aggressive instincts of Confederate commanders like Robert E Lee . The two sides fought in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 McClellan's force outnumbered Lee's by almost two to one . When the pair clashed at the Battle of Antietam in September 1862, the odds were almost two-to-one .
 Lincoln was left frustrated that Lincoln would not be set free forever . The Confederates were driven back to Virginia, but Lincoln was frustrated that Abraham Lincoln would be freed forever .
 As such a move would harm the Confederacy, the president argued it was a legitimate war measure that was both necessary and just . The president argued that such a war measure was necessary and justified .
 Lincoln was able to issue the Final Proclamation on the first day of 1863 . When the rebel states ignored the Preliminary Proclamation, Lincoln issued it . Lincoln's final proclamation was issued in 1863 .
 He was sure, and there was considerable hope in the Union that it would hasten the end of the conflict . The Union hoped that the war would end .
 Lincoln had shifted the aim of the war from being just about preserving the Union to setting people free . Lincoln was always an opponent of slavery on grounds of morality, but was now an opponent on moral grounds .
 Lincoln had hoped to secure support from Europe for the Confederacy . Lincoln was personally important to Lincoln, but this was vital internationally .
 France and the British Empire could not legitimately support a slave-holding republic against a nation embarked on setting slaves free . France and Britain had been outlawed in slavery since 1833 .
 Second, the Proclamation allowed for freedmen to enlist in the Union army . The Proclamation was the first time freedmen were allowed to join the army .
 This, coupled with a surge of African-American volunteers already free in the North, offered a welcome boost in manpower . This was a timely and welcome boost to manpower .
 It paved the way for the United States Colored Troops, which became a significant component of the Union armies . The U.S. Colored troops were a significant part of the Confederate army .
 The Proclamation only freed slaves in the states still outside of the Union . However, the Proclamation freed slaves only in those states outside of Union .
 Lincoln needed the affirmation of a second election victory, but in the first half of 1864, that didn't seem likely . To go further, Lincoln needed to go further in order to win the election .
 The war was costing so many lives on both sides that Republican radicals felt Lincoln and son Tad in the Confederate capital Richmond after its capture . Republican radicals wanted Lincoln and Tad in Richmond after the capture .
 I Grant was promoted to major general after successful raids on forts in Tennessee . Grant was appointed as chief of Union armies in March 1864 .
 He was almost routed at Shiloh but retrieved the S situation, then further distinguished himself T at Vicksburg . He also distinguished himself at the Battle of Vicksburgh .
 He took charge of all Union forces, confronting and finally defeating Lee in Virginia . He led the Union forces to defeat Lee in the battle .
 Despite taking command only days before, Meade defeated Lee at Gettysburg, yet he was heavily criticised for not pursuing the retreating force .
 Guided by Grant, he led the Army of the Potomac successfully in later campaigns . Later earned the rank of major general .
 I kkk Hooker revitalised the army, restoring morale. Major General, Army of the Potomac Appointed: January 1863 .
 After successes prior to his appointment when he was dubbed ‘Fighting Joe’, he endured a chequered career in battle afterwards . He never fully recovered from heavy defeat and retreat at Chancellorsville .
 Although he reorganised the Union army, McClellan was cripplingly cautious on the battlefield . He reorganised his army, turning 4 volunteers into an efficient force, but was cautious .
 Lincoln's failure to exploit advantages frustrated Lincoln, who lost patience and relieved him of command in November 1862 . Lincoln was relieved of his post in November 1863 .
 Sherman was promoted to brigadier general V after the First Battle of Bull Run, but he suffered a nervous breakdown . Sherman was a major general overseeing the i Union's western armies .
 General-inChief of Union armies Appointed: February 1855, retired November 1861 . Aged 75 as the conflict began, Scott was unable to take field command, nevertheless he devised the strategy of blockading the South’s ports .
 Burnside attacked but lost expensively at Fredericksburg . Burnside replaced McClellan in November 1862 .
 He resurfaced to outwit General Longstreet in Tennessee, but failed badly again at the Battle of Crater . Relieved ‘ of command, he resurfaced . But failed again at Crater, he was relieved of command .
 Lee declined the command of Union forces in April 1861, claiming he was unable to fight fellow Virginians . Lee was appointed in February 1865 as General in-Chief of Confederate armies .
 Lee commanded the Army of North Virginia, and later all Confederate forces . Lee was a major commander of the Confederate Army . Lee commanded North Virginia in the early years of his career .
 Lincoln was as skilled a political operator as there has ever been . Aided by stunning speech-making, Lincoln was a skilled political operator . Lincoln was an Arch politician .
 His genius lay in courting different opinions, often at odds with his own, then setting a course, and bringing those of differing views along with him . He said: 'His genius was to courteller different opinions and set a course and bring a course'
 Lincoln set off along a difficult, painful path with an iron resolve . Lincoln set on a difficult path with a difficult but enduring path . Lincoln was assassinated in 1818 .
 He faced criticism and scorn from many quarters but he did not waver . He believed the cause of protecting the Union was a duty he had to accomplish . He faced many quarters of criticism but never wavered .
 Lincoln was an active commander-in-chief during the civil war . Lincoln was a hands-on leader during the Civil War . Lincoln appointed or dismissed generals .
 He was equally busy in attending units of active soldiers to raise moral, or visiting the wounded in hospitals . Furthermore, he was also equally busy raising moral .
 Lincoln acquired the moniker 'Honest Abe' from his days as a young storekeeper . Lincoln was a lawyer and later in the White House . Lincoln had a reputation for honesty .
 "His integrity informed both friend and foe alike exactly where they stood with him," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He told stories, yarns, jokes and anecdotes throughout his life to win over audiences, to illustrate certain points, and sometimes just to lighten the mood before facing up important decisions .
 George Bush Senior's remark was about his inability to articulate ideas to shape the nation . Vices include being a lack of vision and not being able to articulate vision .
 Lincoln clung stubbornly to his political hero Henry Clay's views on racial separation via colonisation . Lincoln's political views on race and colonisation have long been misunderstood .
 For such a practical politician, it was an extraordinarily impractical solution to support . Perhaps the lack of vision contributed, but for such an impractical solution it was impossible to support.
 Lincoln exercised unprecedented executive power at the onset of the war, including suspending habeas corpus and shutting down opposition newspapers . Lincoln was president of the Civil War from 1861 to 1868 .
 His measures drew criticism not only from opponents but also from some supporters, who feared he had exceeded his authority .
 Lincoln shunned the use of bodyguards for fear of assassination plots against him . Lincoln was known for his foolishness with his own safety . Lincoln died of a heart attack in 1877 .
 He escaped injury, though his stovepipe hat was later found holed by a musket ball . His stove pipe hat was also holed up in the attack .
 Lincoln made few close friends with many of the world's most famous politicians . Lincoln was a statesman capable of working with politicians of many different views . Remoteness of Lincoln's life meant he was isolated in the world .
 Wartime Reconstruction And The Crisis Of Reunion, Lincoln's Hundred Days: The Emanmanipation Proclamation And The War For Union, and The Civil War: A Concise History .
 Lincoln is the greatest president not only for what he did defend democracy, preserve the Union, issue the Emancipation Proclamation and lay the foundations for a modernising, industrial USA . But also for the qualities of leadership he exhibited .
 Lincoln was patient, deliberate, a shrewd judge of character, and most important of all willing to change his mind over time . He was patient and deliberate, deliberate and willing to be patient .
 A small Confederate force led by General Jubal Early even launched an audacious attack on Washington, DC, in July .
 Lincoln sought to quell the crisis by visiting fortifications on the edge of the city . Lincoln visited the fortifications to face the crisis with visits to fortifications .
 He was the only wartime commander-in-chief to be directly shot at by the enemy . He came under sniper fire until extolling to climb down .
 Lincoln had a general-inchief he could rely on after he appointed Ulysses S Grant earlier in the year . Lincoln had appointed Grant earlier that year .
 Union strength finally began to show with crucial battlefield successes in August and September, turning the election tide in Lincoln's favour . Lincoln's election tide began to turn in favour of the Union in August .
 He faced his sacked general, McClellan, for the Democrats, who were still split between those wanting a swift peace and pro-war moderates . The Democrats were split between pro-peace moderates and those who wanted a swift war .
 Lincoln moved swiftly to bring the Thirteenth Amendment into being . Vindicated by his election victory, Lincoln moved quickly to bring it to fruition .
 Lincoln convinced outgoing 38th Congress to give it bipartisan support . The amendment was passed on 31 January 1865, 1865 .
 Lincoln also wrestled with the issue of what effect freeing millions of black people would have on race relations in the nation . Lincoln also grappled with what effect freed millions of blacks would have had on nation's race relations .
 Lincoln never spoke publicly about the issue again, leaving historians to debate his motives . This was dropped from the Final Proclamation, and historians have debated Lincoln's motives .
 Some suggest coupling freeing slaves with colonisation was a ploy to help sell emancipation to doubters . Some suggest it was an attempt to sell slavery to doubting the idea of colonisation .
 Others argue that, given Union ranks were set to be swelled by black recruits, he changed his view on the issue . Others say he changed it because of the prospect of black recruits joining the Union .
 Recent evidence has come to light suggesting he never fully abandoned colonisation policy . Both opinions essentially give the president a pass on the policy .
 Lincoln And The Movement For Private Francis Jemison came to represent child soldiers of the war Black Resettlement . Phillip Magness and Sebastian Page discovered evidence that the president was still attempting to make colonisation arrangements long after the Final Proclamation .
 The president hoped to set up colonies in Panama, Haiti and Liberia . He was in extensive secretive discussions with the British government to find suitable lands in the West Indies .
 The authors suggest that Lincoln was actively pursuing the policy far longer than has previously been acknowledged . The authors say Lincoln was active in pushing the policy into 1865, potentially into 1865 .
 The idea of voluntary IA colonisation took shape in |j, 1816 with the formation of the ^ American Colonisation Society .
 Bluntly, the view was that as I slaves had been stolen from V abroad, once emancipated they should be humanely returned W abroad . Once freed, slaves should be returned to their owners, he said .
 One of the society’s founders was Henry Clay, leader of the Whig party and a political hero of Lincoln's .
 Clay's views profoundly influenced the president's ideas, apparently to the extent that on the issue of colonisation, he appears never to have fully revised them . Clay appears to have never fully revised his views on colonisation .
 Nobody knew what a post-civil war, postslavery USA would look like, and nobody knew what it looked like . In his defence, even the best of men are not immune from alighting upon the wrong answer .
 Lincoln, seeking to avoid extensive racial disharmony, thought consented colonisation might offer a solution . Lincoln sought a solution to the problem of slavery and slavery .
 Everything else we know about him tells us he wouldn't have suggested it through malice . While a miscalculated, impractical and embarrassingly paternalistic solution in hindsight in hindsight, everything else . Everything else . tells us .
 Lincoln never got to see post-civil war USA himself . Lincoln never saw post-war USA himself himself .
 Grant’s tactics of attacking across a wide front created advances deep into Confederate territory . Grant's tactics created advances in Confederate territory deep into Grant's control of Confederate territory.
 Once Atlanta fell to General Sherman in September 1864, he pushed on to the coast, slicing Georgia in two . General Sherman pushed on the coast to cut Georgia in half .
 The following April, after a nine-month campaign, Grant’s army pierced Lee's resistance at Petersburg . The following year, after nine months of fighting, Grant's army defeated Lee's .
 Lee's troops exhausted and heavily outnumbered, Lee had no option but to surrender on 9 April 1865 . Lee's forces were outnumbered and outnumbered by his own troops .
 Five nights later, Lincoln visited Ford Theatre in Washington, where he was assassinated . Confederate sympathiser John Wilkes Booth shot Lincoln in the head with a single bullet to the head .
 The civil war was over, though the president who felt compelled to fight it was not alive to construct its peace . "The civil war is over," President Obama said .
 Andrew Johnson headed up the a proactive era of reconstruction as the splintered United States began to unify once more .
 Andrew Johnson was born into a poor family that struggled to survive on meagre earnings . He helped nurture a reconciliation of sorts between the Unionist North and the rebel South . His lack of sympathy for newly freed black citizens would be his undoing .
 His mother apprenticed him off to a local tailor at the age of ten and he worked the trade diligently until he turned 21 . He worked his trade until he was 21 .
 Growing up in a log cabin would later pay dividends in his political career . His humble origins proved to be a boon when appealing to impoverished voters . Growing up was not an easy upbringing .
 Johnson began his first foray into politics in the tailoring business in the 1980s . It was here he began his career as a tailoring executive .
 Johnson was elected mayor of Gainesville, Florida, in 1829 . His shop became a haven for political discussions . His staunch support of working class rights soon him elected as an alderman . He was elected five years later .
 Following the Nat Turner Rebellion of 1831, Tennessee adopted a new state constitution that served to alienate and disenfranchise its free black citizens . The constitution was designed to disenfranchise the free black population .
 Johnson was a staunch traditionalist and supported the concept of slavery . His full support of the provision gained him even more political support from powerful white families .
 Johnson became the first Tennessee Democrat to be elected to the United States Congress . Johnson was elected to Congress in 1964 .
 When Lincoln became president in I860, Tennessee became one of the 11 states to secede from the Union . Johnson became the only Democrat to break away from the state’s decision and remain in the Senate .
 His decision made him a hate figure in his home state and effectively turned Johnson and his family into political pariahs . His decision to run for president effectively turned him into a national figure in the state .
 When Lincoln presented the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863, Johnson initially opposed it . When he managed to negotiate an exemption of sorts for Tennessee he soon backed the law as a practical .
 Lincoln chose Johnson as the vice president during his campaign for re-election in 1864 . Many branded Johnson a gloryhunting traitor, and those critics felt justified .
 Lincoln remained in office after the meeting of two sides worked . Lincoln was the only president of the White House to hold office .
 Lincoln was shot while attending the theatre in Washington, DC and he died the next morning . Lincoln was assassinated on 14 April 1865 .
 Johnson was also a target that night, but his own assassin failed to show . Johnson was killed by his assassin, but he was not killed .
 Johnson is the 17th president of the United States . He is the most powerful man in the country a country still at war with itself . A few hours later, Johnson was sworn into office .
 Lincoln's death helped end the conflict and Johnson now had to head up the ‘Reconstruction Era', the process of reunifying the nation and addressing the fallout .
 A Southerner, and a man skewed by his traditionalist views on race, Johnson unsurprisingly treated the former rebels with a gentle touch .
 Rebels that swore the Oath of Allegiance were immediately granted amnesty . They were able to return to positions of power back in those seceded states .
 Confederates enforced 'black codes' that forced legally free black citizens back into servitude . These confederates then enforced black codes that forced black citizens to return to servience .
 Congress was out of session when Johnson became president, so many of his actions went unhindered . Johnson's actions were largely unaffected by Congress .
 Many Unionists were outraged at the president's soft touch and failure to protect black rights . Congress reconvened eight months later, it passed the Freedmen's Bureau bill and the Civil Rights Act .
 Johnson attempted to veto both pieces of legislation, but Congress swiped his opposition down . Johnson's veto was overruled by Congress .
 Congress passed the Tenure Of Office Act . It removed the president's power to remove officials from office without congressional agreement . The act was passed by Congress .
 The 'black codes' were forcibly disbanded and black rights finally protected at ground level . It then began a phase known ‘military reconstruction' where 'military reconstruction’ was begun .
 All of these changes and more on top of them publicly undermined Johnson's position . All of the changes were publicly undermined by the changes .
 During the congressional elections of 1866, Johnson attended most of them half-drunk and caused irreparable damage to his public persona . During the presidential elections, Johnson conducted a series of public rallies, but he was drunk .
 Johnson was defiant to the end and decided to challenge the Tenure of Office Act head on . His political and public profiles already burning, Johnson decided to be defiant .
 President fired secretary of war Edwin Stanton in August 1867 . House of Representatives was forced to take unprecedented action and impeach the president for bringing disgrace and ridicule on the government .
 Johnson was acquitted by a single vote, but the damage was done . Ultimately, Johnson would be acquitted by one vote .
 By the time he finished his term, Johnson remained opposed to the altered Reconstruction orders . His power and influence as president had evaporated with his impeachment .
 When he eventually returned to Tennessee, Johnson was hailed as something of a homegrown hero . Johnson's return to Tennessee has been hailed as a national hero .
 Andrew Johnson was born into a poor and near illiterate family and didn't learn to write properly until he was 18 . Johnson was successfully elected to the Senate for a second time in 1874 .
 Johnson’s initial beliefs that slaves were not constitutionally 'created equal' gave powerful Southern state landowners all the room they needed to impose 'black codes' that reinstated slavery in all but name .
 The unprecedented violence of the Civil War had ravaged the land . The plantations and holdings held by landowners especially in the South had suffered greatly .
 For those still reeling from the illegality of the slave trade, the ability to harvest and farm was now just as difficult . For those who are still reeling, it's now even more difficult to harvest .
 Following the war, the American economy was in disarray and continued to worsen for many years to come . The American economy continued to be in a state of disarray .
 Sharecropping (smaller groups of farmers working together) became a common practice . Most turned to local merchants rather than big city companies for trade . Sharecrops were common practice in the early years .
 The Unionist North had won the war and wanted the Southern rebel states that had seceded to be punished accordingly . The Confederate states were punished for their actions .
 Virginia would be accepted back into the Union with Republican Francis Pierpont as governor and provided amnesty for all rebels who didn't own considerable holdings . Virginia would become part of the Union in 1881 .
 Johnson did little to act against black suffrage . These acts were approved by the North, even though Johnson did not act against it .
 States in the South began to impose 'black codes' that effectively reinstated slavery . That area would cause the biggest issue as states in the Southerners began imposing black codes .
 The government had to deal with the task of unifying the country once more . Now that the war was over, the government had the task to unify the country again .
 Confederate and Unionist soldiers were slowly reintroduced back into Union . Confederate soldiers fought for the Union in the Battle of Gettysburg . Confederate troops were slowly introduced back into the Union, but the division remained .
 Years before, the United States government had purchased two thirds of the country's land from France . The U.S. government had bought the land from the French .
 Most of the country was uncharted terrain full of unknown regions, countless native peoples and resources such as gold and furs just waiting to be tapped . As a result of the discovery of the continent, most of the land was unknown and untouched .
 Grant was placed in command of all United States armies in 1864 . Grant led the Union to victory against the Confederacy in the Civil War .
 His presidency was rocked by multiple scandals that overshadowed his successes, such as his work for African American citizenship . Although he was dazzling on the battlefield, his presidency was overshadowed by scandals .
 A clerical error caused Grant to change his name the U.S. Military Academy incorrectly listed him . Grant feared rejection if his name did not match 1869 1877 .
 Grant was ordinary but he would change the United States forever . He wasn't naturally gifted, he didn't work his way up from nothing and equally he wasn’t bom into riches . Grant was an ordinary man who would change America forever .
 Grant was the oldest son of tanner Jesse Grant, and his wife Hannah Grant . Grant was born in Point Pleasant, Ohio, and was the son of a tanner .
 Grant was the first of six children . His parents were hardworking, religious people . Grant was born in New Jersey .
 Grant took after his quiet, reserved mother . Grant's father was outgoing and entrepreneurial businessman .
 These qualities caused him to be overlooked, or even deemed 'useless' in his youth . These qualities were often overlooked or deemed unimportant .
 He was not particularly gifted at school, but instead excelled at one skill horsemanship . Horsemanship is a key part of his horsemanship skills .
 Grant honed this skill working on his father's farm . Jesse was keen for his oldest son to take over his tannery business, but he understood that Grant's talents lay elsewhere .
 When Grant was aged 17, his father applied for his son to attend the United States Military Academy at West Point for free, in return for army service upon graduation . Grant was accepted and accepted by the Academy at the age of 17 .
 The timid boy struggled at the school, he had limited education and was deemed unremarkable, save for his skill with horses, which outmatched all his classmates .
 Many Americans experienced prosperity in the period following the war, but what followed was a severe period of recession . With no Ulysses S Grant, the long depression was a long period of depression .
 Jay Cooke and Company fell, it had a knock-on effect on the stock exchange, other banks and eventually cost thousands of people their jobs . Thousands of people lost their jobs after the collapse of the company .
 Railroads failed, families were left destitute and people were looking for someone to blame . Railroads fail and families are looking for a scapegoat for their failure . People are looking to blame for their failures .
 Grant, as president, faced overwhelming criticism from the public who dubbed him and his administration wholly responsible for mishandling the economy . Grant's administration was widely criticized for its handling of the economy in Grant's presidency .
 Grant's depression was not entirely at fault, but the public unrest and loss of trust dented the war hero's armour irrevocably . He decided to serve his four years, then resign .
 It was shortly before this that he met his future life, Julia Dent, forming the most enduring relationship of his life . Shortly before this he met Julia Dent .
 The couple went on to have four children, but due to Grant’s military career he had little interaction with them . Grant's military career left him unable to have any contact with the children .
 Growing bitter about the war, Grant attempted to launch several businesses, which failed horrifically, and rumours about his drinking began to circulate .
 It is believed that an altercation linked to his drinking in 1853 is what prompted him to resign the following year . It is also believed that he resigned after an altercation with his wife .
 Julia's father struggled to make a living by attempting to farm some of the land given to them by Julia's mother . Julia's parents were given the land they had been given to Julia and Julia . Julia struggled to farm the land and struggled to survive .
 He further failed with a real estate venture and found it difficult to find employment elsewhere . He also found it hard to find a job in the U.S.
 With four children to support, he could barely make enough money to keep food on the table . He was forced to return to the tannery business he hated in order to provide for them .
 Grant’s life would change forever when the Civil War broke out . Grant's life would take a different turn when the war broke out in 1861-1861 .
 Grant was appointed to lead a voluntary regiment that others had struggled to train . The North were desperate for experienced officers and Grant was chosen to lead the North .
 Grant used skills he learned during the Mexican-American war to discipline his troops . Grant had the regiment ready for combat in less than a year . Grant was able to discipline the men and earn the respect of them .
 Grant led his regiment to some of the most significant victories of the early years of the war at Fort Henry and Fort Donelson . Grant was promoted to brigadier general as a result of the victories .
 Grant's forces were devastated by a surprise attack at the Battle of Shiloh . Grant was now drawing praise, but many called for his removal from the post .
 Lincoln was convinced in Grant's abilities and said "I can't spare this man" Grant was killed by Grant's assassination attempt . Lincoln said he could not spare Grant .
 The very next day Grant regrouped his men and defeated the Confederates . Grant's men were able to regroup and regroup . Grant was able to defeat his Confederates the next day .
 His victory at Vicksburg, Mississippi, would be most significant in history . However, it was his victory at the hands of President Lincoln Lincoln . Lincoln's victory was the most significant of his presidency .
 Grant's siege of the Mississippi river was a strategic masterpiece by Grant . After 46 days of siege warfare, the enemy surrendered, and the Union gained control of the crucial Mississippi river .
 Grant was in control of the entire Western theatre of the war, winning victory after victory for the Union . By this point Grant had already won the West .
 By 1864 he was named lieutenant general and commander of all Union forces . He was also named commander of the Union forces in 1864 .
 By the end of the Civil War Grant was the United States' military hero, having chased General Lee to defeat and accepting his surrender . Grant's drinking continued to haunt him throughout his military career .
 Grant served as secretary of war in the post-war years . Grant and Johnson were not quite so harmonious . Lincoln and Grant saw eye to eye with Lincoln .
 Grant's achievements in office were remarkable for the time . Grant pushed through ratification of the 15th amendment and established the national parks service . Grant also won passage of the Ku Klux Klan act .
 His successes were overshadowed by scandals involving his elected officials . He had difficulty enforcing the civil rights laws he so passionately believed in .
 Grant was bankrupted when he became a co-owner in a financial firm . His partner secretly embezzled investors' money and Grant was left bankrupt . Grant continued to struggle with civilian life and struggled to cope .
 Grant relied on the one thing that had catapulted him to success his military career . Grant was now dying of throat cancer . He relied on his military skills to survive .
 He recounted tales of his military life to magazines, and when they sold well, struck a deal with Mark Twain to publish his memoirs . Twain's friend, novelist Mark Twain, published the memoirs after he sold well .
 Grant's books were hugely successful, selling 300,000 copies and earning Grant's family $450,000 . The books were sold in the U.S. and sold more than a million copies .
 Grant's memoirs remain a classic of American literature . Grant did not live to see the triumph of his memoirs, but the success provided security to the family he was so devoted to .
 Later years of Grant's life saw a huge migration of Americans from rural areas to the big cities, causing unprecedented growth in urban areas . Future president Grant photographed with his wife and son circa 1864 .
 Almost 40% of U.S. townships have lost population, resulting in air pollution, slums and sanitation issues . Mass migration caused air pollution and slums to increase slums in the United States . This mass migration caused almost 40% townships to lose population .
 Women's movements seeking equal opportunities and the vote gained strength after 1848 . Women take a stand in a bid to gain the right to vote .
 By the second half of the century women's high schools and colleges were founded . Career opportunities in secretarial work, nursing and more opened to women in the 1930s .
 Easier transatlantic transportation and communication exposed more Americans to European life . More Americans made trips to visit, work and even live abroad .
 Wealthy Americans paid a huge amount of money to travel on luxurious steamships . The ships still relied on immigrant trade as their main source of income .
 Although these gangs were most prevalent prior to the Civil War, they experienced a resurgence in the northwest, midwest and American west after the war .
 American journalism and newspapers developed and grew through Grant's life . Grant was a pioneer of journalism and journalism .
 Even smaller towns and cities were swept up by the newspaper craze . Some of the first war correspondents and investigative journalists stepped into the world .
 Hayes served in the first Ohio army unit in which he fought alongside fellow future president McKinley . Hayes entered the White House when an electoral commission awarded him disputed state votes in 1876 .
 He put aside controversial victory to lead the country out of its economic doldrums . He helped to heal post-Civil War divisions in the process .
 Rutherford Birchard Hayes was a rare one-term president . Accused of stealing the election that took him to office . Ironically, by the end of his single term he was widely lauded for his honesty .
 It took a special electoral commission sanctioned by Congress to decide who had won the disputed support of three states .
 Hayes was admired for his fairness and honesty, and had restored the reputation of the office of presidency . Hayes kept a promise made on accepting his party's presidential nomination to serve only a single term .
 Hayes was brought up by his widowed mother and her brother, Sardis, who later became a notable businessman . His father had died before he was born, leaving Hayes to be brought up .
 Hayes studied law at Harvard before setting up a successful legal practice in Cincinnati . Hayes schooled well, going on to study law and set up a legal practice .
 He opposed slavery and found defending escaped slaves accused under the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 to be fulfilling work . He also opposed slavery .
 By the late 1850s, Hayes had married Lucy Webb and was Cincinnati's city solicitor . Hayes was aware of the threat to the nation .
 He initially favoured letting the seceded states go their own way, only to alter his view after Confederate forces attacked Union soldiers at Fort Sumter . He changed his view when he saw Confederate forces attack Union soldiers .
 At almost 40, at almost 40 and with a young family, he had volunteered for the Union army . Within months, at nearly 40, he was almost 40 .
 Hayes was wounded several times and with distinction . Hayes served bravely in the U.S. Army in the early years of his career .
 He had also been voted to the House of Representatives for Cincinnati's Republicans . Despite refusing to leave his unit to campaign, he was voted into the House .
 He briefly retired from office in 1872 but won a third election for governor three years later . In 1872, he briefly retired but won the third election in 1877 .
 Hayes was considered by Ohio Republicans as presidential material . Hayes was a politician with a reputation for integrity and an impressive war record . Hayes served as a senator from Ohio .
 Hayes was far from favourite to receive the nomination at the 1876 Republican National Convention . Hayes secured the prize on the seventh ballot after others failed to command a majority . Hayes won the nomination on the last seven ballots at the Republican National convention .
 No one knew that this would lead to the most bitterly contested presidential election result in history . President Obama's election result was the first to be contested in the country's history .
 The disputed results in Florida, Louisiana and South Carolina were close enough for both parties to claim the state votes . Nevertheless, both parties claim the disputed results .
 The electoral commission formed to decide the outcome originally consisted of seven Republicans, seven Democrats and an independent Supreme Court judge David Davis .
 Davis resigned from the commission to take a seat in the Senate . He was replaced by judge Joseph P Bradley a Republican . Davis was replaced as a judge by Judge Bradley .
 Hayes was awarded all of the contested state votes . The Commission then adjudicated along party lines to give Hayes all the contested votes . Hayes was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 The Democrats only accepted this outcome after informal, unwritten arrangements were agreed, known as the Compromise of 1877 . The Democrats were forced to accept the outcome of the 1877 election .
 Hayes removed troops from former Confederate states, allowing them to return to self-rule . Hayes appointed at least one southern Democrat to his cabinet . The main elements of this were the removal of U.S. troops from Confederate states .
 Within two months of Hayes taking office, all U.S. troops were back in their barracks, and David M Key was made postmaster general .
 The withdrawal of troops effectively ended the post-Civil War period of reconstmction . The withdrawal was the end of the Civil War era of American reconstruction .
 This was a period when the former Confederate states were to be brought back under federal government control . The establishment of civil and voting rights for freedmen was to be established .
 Hayes sought assurances that these would be maintained once troops left, but such promises were quickly forgotten . Hayes wanted assurances that such promises would be kept, but they were soon forgotten. Hayes sought .
 White Southerners sought to regain power and . discriminatory control through violence and intimidation . Freedmen into second-class citizenship with limited rights that endured until mid-1960s .
 Hayes fared better in beginning reforms to the civil service, while his insistence that prosperity would resurface once the dollar properly returned to the gold standard . Hayes' insistence that the government printed 'greenback' dollars that were not redeemable in gold proved conect .
 President Obama's anti-inflation policies helped spur an economic recovery in the last two years of his administration . The president's policies have led to a marked economic recovery, thanks to his policies .
 He remained active after retirement, promoting the causes of equal educational opportunities for all, and for prison reform . He was active in prison reform efforts .
 Hayes was a gradualist rather than a dynamic reformer, Hayes was no flamboyant leader . Hayes was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, D.C.
 His low-key honesty helped heal divisions left over from the War and restored dignity to the White House . Lincoln's assassination, Johnson's impeachment, and scandals of Grant's administration were scandals .
 Rutherford Birchard Hayes was wounded in the Civil War . Hayes was the only one of five presidents to have been wounded during the war . The Bell Telephone Company created in 1877 .
 Use of the device for which Alexander Graham Bell had done so much pioneering work to create grew rapidly . Bell's invention of the Bell Telephone Company was used in the U.S.
 Bell himself fitted a telephone in the White House, and Hayes was the first president to use it . Bell himself was the inventor of the telephone . Hayes was first to use the telephone in Washington .
 Resentment was growing against immigrants, particularly Chinese ones, who had arrived in the U.S. in significant numbers . The immigration issue was the immigration issue .
 Congressional legislation banning further Chinese immigrants was vetoed by Hayes as it contravened an existing treaty . Hayes vetoes legislation banning Chinese immigrants from coming to the U.S. Hayes also vetoed legislation banning more Chinese immigrants .
 He pushed through his own policy, which regulated rather than prohibited future immigration . President Obama pushed through immigration reform in 2010 .
 Belva Lockwood successfully lobbied Congress to allow women to practise before the Supreme Court . Lockwood was one of the country's first female lawyers .
 Hayes signed the legislation after Hayes signed it . She became the first female attorney to do so . Hayes was the first woman attorney to sign the legislation .
 Hayes was the first sitting president to visit the West Coast . Hayes visited the area during his presidency in the early 1900s .
 The journey, mostly by rail but partly by wagon train, involved crossing territory inhabited by outlaws and hostile Native Americans . The journey was largely by rail and wagon train .
 Hayes paternalistically proposed assimilating Indians into American society though he probably never understood the cultural problems that would create . Hayes never understood cultural problems such as cultural problems .
 Business had long sought an Atlantic-Pacific canal . The canal would be the world's longest-running route to the continent .
 French Suez Canal developer Ferdinand De Lesseps began surveying for his Panama Canal in 1880 . Hayes wanted the route under American control, but in 1880, French developer De Lessps started surveying . The canal was built in the 1920s and 1930s .
 The United States bought out the project, completing the canal in 1914 . The canal was completed by the U.S.
 Hayes was one of only three first-time elected presidents who resolved not to seek a second term . Hayes was an advocate of presidents serving a single, six-year period in office . Hayes is one of three presidents who decided not to run for a second time .
 James A Garfield was a teacher, a lay preacher, a lawyer and a lawyer . He was the 20th president of the United States of America . Garfield died in 1881 .
 He had almost two decades of political experience and knew the workings of Congress inside out . But he never imaged that he would actually find himself in office .
 Garfield often described his presidency as a 'bleak mountain' Garfield famously said to his secretary, ""These people would take my very brain, flesh and blood if they could" Garfield often called his presidency a 'blak mountain’
 He was born in a log cabin in Moreland Hills, Ohio, on 19 November, 1831 .
 He was one of five children, and named 'James' after his older brother who died in infancy . He was named after his brother, who died at the age of six .
 Garfield lost his father when he was just two years old . He later looked at religion for guidance after losing his father at two . Garfield was inspired by the teachings of Jesus Christ .
 Garfield started James A Garfield preaching every Sunday until his dedication led to him being ordained as a minister . Garfield was ordained as minister in the Church of the Disciples of Christ . Garfield started his dedication to the church in 1964 .
 As well as being a man of the cloth, Garfield was something of a genius . Garfield was also a genius, and he was a great actor and writer .
 He enrolled at the Western Reserve Eclectic Institute (now named Hiram College) in Ohio and was taken on as a janitor/carpenter in his first year at the school .
 By his second, he was assistant professor of Literature and Ancient Languages . By his third, he had been assistant professor at the college .
 Upon graduating, he put himself through Williams College in Massachusetts, starting as a third-year student .
 He returned to Ohio after graduating and began a teaching career at Hiram . He is now a teacher in Ohio .
 Garfield became the university’s president by the time he was 26 . Garfield was 26 when he became president at the University of Columbia University .
 He married Lucretia Rudolph on 11 November 1958 . He also married his sweetheart (and future first lady) Lucreta Rudolph .
 Garfield couldn't see himself reaching his full potential as a teacher . Garfield was happy as happy as he was, but he was not sure if he could reach his potential .
 Williams had made him politically aware, especially in the college's intensely anti-slavery atmosphere . For the first time he found himself considering a career in politics . His time at Williams made him think about politics .
 He put his name down to read law at a firm in Cleveland and was admitted to the bar in 1861 . He was admitted in 1861 and died in 1881 .
 Garfield's life changed with the lives of many more Americans in 1861, when a civil war broke out between the U.S. and the Confederate States . Garfield died in the Battle of Gettysburg in April, 1861 . Garfield was the first president of the Civil War.
 Garfield had no previous military training, but quickly joined the Union army as a lieutenant colonel . Garfield rose to major general by the time the war ended in 1965 . Garfield was a major general during the Civil War .
 He was elected to Congress, serving in the House of Representatives from Ohio's nineteenth district . He managed to hold the seat for 17 years and nine consecutive terms . He held the seat of Ohio's 19th district .
 James A Garfield was the last of the seven presidents that were born in log cabins . Garfield was born in a log cabin in 1881 . He was the first president to be born in such a log-cabin .
 Grant was opposed by James Blaine of Maine and John Sherman of Ohio . The latter of which asked Garfield to deliver his nominating speech .
 Garfield was so impressive that he was the one who ended up drawing the attention of the crowd . Much to everyone's surprise, Garfield was able to draw attention of everyone .
 On the thirty-fourth ballot of the convention, the Wisconsin delegation announced it was shifting 16 votes to Garfield to the stunned crowd . Garfield's 16 votes were shifted to Garfield . Garfield is the Republican nominee for the Democratic National Committee .
 Against all the odds, Garfield became the 20th president of the U.S. Garfield was born in 1881 . Garfield was the first president to hold office in the United States .
 The shooter was Charles J Guiteau, a fanatic who believed he would be pleasing Conkling by elevating Arthur into office . The shooter is believed to have killed himself in the attack .
 Garfield's assassination attempt appeared to be unsuccessful, but he was alive and under the watchful eyes of many doctors . Garfield was shot in the head by a bullet lodged in his body, but was still alive . Garfield survived his assassination attempt .
 James A Garfield passed away on 19 September, 1881, with his wife by his side . Garfield died in 1881 .
 Towns and cities were soon draped in funeral emblems to mourn their new president . Towns, cities were draped in funerals emblazoned with emblems .
 When he first became involved in politics, he recommended a universal education system funded by the federal government . He believed it could be the key to empowering African Americans and improving their civil rights .
 As a result, he appointed several African Americans to prominent positions, including John M Langston, Robert Elliot and Blanche l< Bruce . Langston appointed several prominent figures in his cabinet .
 James A Garfield was a member of the United States House of Representatives in Ohio's 19th district . Garfield became the second U.S. president to be assassinated, following the death of Abraham Lincoln 16 years earlier .
 The Ku Klux Klan was founded as a secret vigilante group on the Christmas Eve of 1865 in Pulaski, Tennessee . It was founded by six former members of the Confederate army . Six former Confederate soldiers joined the KKK .
 Word of the Klan and its white supremacist agenda spread until racial hate crimes were occurring all across the American South . The Klan was formed in the 1920s and 1930s in the South . It was a white supremacist movement that spread across the country .
 The U.S. got its first ever female doctor on 23 January 1849 . The first doctor in the United States was born in 1849.
 During Garfield's lifetime, 14 U.S. states became officially recognised after admission to the Union . 14 states, including Arkansas, Michigan, Florida, Texas, Iowa, Wisconsin, California, Minnesota, Oregon, Oregon and Kansas .
 The American Red Cross was established in 1881 by pioneering nurse Clara Barton . She had heard word of the Red Cross in Geneva, Switzerland . The Red Cross is the largest humanitarian aid organization in the world .
 Chester A Arthur found himself grappling with immigration, the rights of Native Americans and reform ith the shooting of James A Garfield . The shooting of Garfield prompted Arthur to take up immigration and Native American rights .
 The man who had been vice president for just six months was, quite unexpectedly, about to become the most powerful man in the United States, a role he had never sought . He had been Vice President Barack Obama for six months .
 Success came quickly to the and ambitious young man, who settled on a legal career after sampling teaching .
 In 1859 Arthur married Ellen Herndon, with whom he would have three children . Arthur was married to Ellen and had three children with her in 1859 .
 Arthur impressed everyone with his administrative skills during the Civil War . He was appointed by governor Edwin D Morgan to the militia as a quartermaster . Arthur was the ideal choice to ensure that the northern armies were properly equipped and billeted .
 Chester A Arthur rose quickly though the ranks and was instrumental in enlisting thousands of men . He was offered command of multiple regiments and refused command of several regiments .
 After the war, Arthur returned to civilian life but his role in the militia had given him a taste for politics . Arthur's obvious acumen had made an impact on people in political high places .
 Arthur was removed from the role of collector in 1878, after seven years in the job . In Washington, the patronage system was under fire for corruption .
 Arthur threw his weight into campaigning instead, lending his well-respected name and finely-honed skills to the Stalwarts, his own particular faction of the Republicans . Arthur was a well-known figure in the Republican Party .
 When Ellen died in 1880, her griefstricken widower threw himself into his career . When the chance came to stand as vice president on the ticket of Garfield in 1881, Arthur took it .
 The Republicans were not expected to win the election and yet, with a majority of just over 7000 votes, they did . The Republicans won the election with just over 7,000 votes .
 Garfield, however, never warmed to his Stalwart running mate . Arthur found himself sidelined, his attempts to bring his friends into office frustrated . Garfield was never in touch with his friends .
 Chester A Arthur was sworn in as the 21st President of the United States . Garfield died in his own home on 19 September 1881 . Chester Arthur was the first president of the U.S. to take office .
 One of his first moves was to veto an attempt to funnel a surplus of $145million into government coffers . Instead, he proposed that it should be used to support tax relief .
 This won him huge support among the people, though did little for his popularity in the Senate . This won't have a big impact on his popularity as a senator, but did little to his popularity .
 He signed off on the Immigration Act, excluding criminals, the poor and the mentally disabled from coming into the U.S. That same year he entered more contentious waters when he signed off the act .
 Arthur personally vetoed a bill proposing a 20 year freeze on all immigration from China . Arthur only reluctantly agreed to set a term of 10 years instead of 20 years .
 In 1883, Democrat Senator George H Pendleton introduced a previously rejected bill that would end the system of patronage . Pendleton's bill was rejected in 1883 .
 No more would civil service jobs be awarded based on party affiliation, but instead candidates would be appointed on merit alone . Civil service jobs would be given to candidates only based on merit .
 The party man who owed his career to the Republican machine now turned his back on it. The party he once represented is now turning his back to it.
 Arthur's attempts to intervene in civil rights and oppose segregation and discrimination on racial grounds were less successful . Arthur's attempt to oppose segregation was unsuccessful .
 He presided over increased funding for Native American education and rights . But he presided over increasing funding of Native American schools .
 Arthur was diagnosed with Bright's disease within months of being sworn in . Arthur attempted to keep it a secret but was diagnosed within months .
 Once vibrant man of fashion grew frail as whispers of his illness sounded throughout Washington . The once vibrant fashion designer grew frail in recent years .
 Arthur campaigned without much hope of success, thanks to his refusal to support any particular faction . When he sought re-election, Arthur was not expected to be supported by any party .
 Arthur’s dedication to the whirlwind society scene of the Republican machine was not shared by his wife . Arthur made his name during the American Civil War, when soldiers fought to secure the Union and abolish slavery .
 More than 600,000 soldiers and unknown number of civilians were killed in the war . The war between north and south was brutal and bloody .
 When the North claimed victory, the industry and communities of the South lay in tatters, resulting in an economic imbalance . The imbalance lasted for decades as the opposing sides began the slow process of reconciliation and rebuilding .
 Inventor Thomas Edison was one of the most influential public figures during Arthur s presidency life in the time of Chester A Arthur .
 The Act was intended to remove native Americans from territories that were valuable to settlers . Native Americans were removed from territory that was valuable to the settlers .
 Thousands died during the removals, which became famous as the Trail of Tears . Thousands of people were removed from their homes in the 18th century . Thousands died in the process .
 Beginning in 1848, the California Gold Rush saw hundreds of thousands of treasure hunters known as Forty-Niners flock to California .
 Settlers faced terrible odds to survive and prosper, but the rewards for success could be enormous . Settlers face terrible odds of surviving and prospering, but rewards are enormous .
 Slavery officially abolished by the 13th Amendment in 1865 under President Abraham Lincoln . Slavery was officially abolished  under President Lincoln .
 In the years that followed, light bulbs became a regular fixture in public buildings across the world . Light bulbs are still a popular way of lighting up public buildings .
 In Tombstone, the wild west still held sway . Edison brought electric light to the U.S. in Tombstone . Tombstone still holds sway .
 On 26 October 1881, the infamous shootout that has become known as the Gunfight at the OK Corral saw the name of Wyatt Earp pass into legend . The shootout took place at the Oklahoma Corral in 1881 .
 Cleveland expanded the powers of the executive branch and set the stage for the modern presidency of the 20th century . Known for his steadfast honesty and a hatred for corruption and special interests, Cleveland was known for his honesty .
 America's only double-dip president, Grover Cleveland served two nonconsecutive terms in office, winning the popular vote three times . Cleveland served as sheriff in Erie County, Ohio for two years, personally undertaking the execution of condemned criminals .
 He won the popular vote three times (he was denied by the electoral college once) and served two nonconsecutive terms . He was denied a single term in office by the Electoral College .
 He came into office a bachelor, and married his close friend's daughter, Frances Folsom, 27 years his junior in the White House .
 Folsom had been Cleveland’s ward after her father's death, and he had known her since she was a child . This was a strange arrangement, as she had known Cleveland since her father died . Cleveland was Cleveland's ward after she was orphaned .
 Grover Cleveland was born into penury . He had eight brothers and eight sisters . He was born in penury.
 Cleveland's growing reputation as a man untarnished by any special interests won him the democratic nomination in the 1884 presidential election . Cleveland was the Democratic presidential nominee in 1884 . Cleveland's reputation as untarnish by special interests earned him the Democratic nomination .
 Cleveland broke with tradition by repudiating the spoils system . He instead appointed bureaucrats on a merit basis, regardless of their political affiliation . Cleveland broke tradition by . appointing bureaucrats on merit .
 He set records for presidential 72 Grover Cleveland vetoes and did not propose legislation . The president believed in the presidency as a watchdog rather than an advocate .
 He was passionate about lowering tariffs, which would prove to be his undoing after his first term . He would be the president of the United States if elected .
 He returned to prominence shortly before the 1892 election with a letter criticising his successor's plan to increase the dollar's dependence on silver standard .
 Cleveland's lingering reputation from his first term and opposition to tariffs saw him win the 1892 election handily . Cleveland won the election by a landslide . Cleveland was the first president of the U.S. in 1892 .
 Election muted in part due to the death of the wife of the democratic candidate, Benjamin Harrison, from tuberculosis . Benjamin Harrison's wife died of tuberculosis, which led to his defeat in the election .
 Neither Cleveland nor his opponent campaigned in the final weeks of the race . Cleveland and his opponent did not campaign in the last weeks .
 In 1893, the stock market fell sharply, plunging the country into depression . It marked the end of the dollar’s dependence on silver . The stock market plunged into depression in 1893 .
 During the stock market panic, Cleveland noticed a growth on the roof of his mouth, which proved to be a cancerous tumour . Cleveland noticed the growth in his mouth during the market panic . Cleveland was diagnosed with cancer after his mouth was found to be cancerous .
 Reluctant to disclose his health emergency to the American public and unsettle them further, he arranged to be operated on during a journey on a friends yacht .
 The surgery and the cover-up were successful, although Cleveland was left disfigured . The surgery was successful, but Cleveland's body was disfigured by the surgery . Cleveland is still disfigured, but the surgery was unsuccessful .
 In 1894, over 100,000 railroad workers went on strike, citing low wages and long workdays . In the same year, the strike in 1894 was the largest in the history of the strike .
 Cleveland quicldy dispatched federal troops to disperse the strike and arrest the instigators . This crippled the country's mail, and Cleveland sent federal troops out to disperse it .
 His Democratic party suffered greatly for Cleveland's heavy-handed tactics in dealing with the strikes . Cleveland's tactics were criticized for being harsh and aggressive .
 Cleveland's steadfast opposition to unions and general strikes hardened the attitude of organised labour toward the government . Large corporations empowered large corporations at the expense of the American worker .
 William Taft and Teddy Roosevelt would work to defuse the power of the corporation that Cleveland established, and end the robber baron era . Cleveland's successors would also end the era of robber barons .
 He was a committed isolationist, believing that the U.S. should generally withdraw from global political affairs . He was an isolationist .
 Cleveland opposed the annexation of Hawaii and instead set up diplomatic relations with the Republic of Hawaii . Many in congress wanted to forcefully join the territory with the Union .
 Cleveland intervened in a Venezuelan border dispute with the United Kingdom . However, Cleveland did intervene in a Venezuela border dispute .
 Cleveland decided that the U.S. had an interest in any major dispute in the Western Hemisphere . In an updated reading of the Monroe Doctrine, Cleveland decided to act .
 UI< contested a border between British Guyana and Venezuela . Cleveland rashly threatened war with Britain, although the matter was resolved cordially .
 President Cleveland is remembered chiefly for his steady hand in domestic affairs . Cleveland's overseas involvements were very limited . Cleveland was president of the United States from 1916 to 1918 .
 Cleveland retired quietly to private life, and did not comment on politics often . He retired quietly from politics . Cleveland was a national figure in the 1960s and 1980s .
 His last foray into public affairs came in 1906 when he penned an editorial for The Ladies Home Journal . He insisted that "sensible and responsible women do not want to vote"
 Cleveland is known for his anti-corruption efforts and his belief in the president as a guardian rather than an activist . Cleveland is remembered for his efforts to protect the president from corruption .
 Cleveland never presented a clear vision for the future . Despite strengthening the executive branch and laying the groundwork for Teddy Roosevelt's administration, Cleveland's administration was never clear of a vision for future .
 Taxpayers generally paid their government bills with silver, while overseas creditors demanded to be paid in gold . This was causing a decline in the nation's stocks of gold .
 Worries about deflation prompted demands for more silver currency . Worries also prompted demands about deflation .
 Cleveland stood firm on the gold standard, stalling the debate for the length of his presidency . Cleveland was the first president to stand firm on a gold standard .
 In the late 1800s, women’s suffrage movements were in full swing, with women getting the vote in various states . Cleveland, Ohio, was one of the first cities to vote for women in the U.S. to get the vote .
 Cleveland never spoke against giving women the vote during his presidency . Cleveland was careful not to alienate any supporters .
 Native Americans faced pressure to forcibly relocate to unpalatable reservations or integrate into U.S. society . The last remaining caches of original Native American land were taken over . Native Americans were forced to relocate or integrate with society .
 Cleveland strongly advocated offering federal aid for education and land grants . Cleveland also strongly advocated for land grants and federal aid to education .
 The landmark Plessy v Ferguson Supreme Court decision resoundingly affirmed the constitutionality of state laws enabling segregation in public facilities . The landmark decision was the result of the landmark decision .
 The steps towards legislative equality established during the post-Civil War reconstruction era were erased by the decision . The decision erased the steps towards equality established by the Civil War .
 Ellis Island would accept over 12 million immigrants from 1892 to 1954 . Ellis island would accept more than 12 million people . Ellis Island closed in 1954 .
 Benjamin Harrison was born on 20 August 1833 . He was grandson of the ninth president of the United States William Henry Harrison . Harrison was a former Union colonel in the Civil War .
 Harrison's father was a member of the House of Representatives, so a certain level of achievement was expected of him from an early age . Harrison was expected to achieve a lot from the start of his career . His father was also a former congressman .
 Harrison's early education took place in a decrepit one-room schoolhouse before his parents found the money for a private tutor . Harrison was soon ready to attend Farmer's College near Cincinnati in 1847 .
 He attended college for two years and while there he met his future wife, Caroline Scott . He met her while attending college .
 11 Southern states seceded from the Union, plunging the nation into a state of brutal Civil War . The president's political aspirations were cut short when 11 southern states split the Union .
 He immediately signed up to fight, joining the Union Army . He was a lieutenant in the 70th Indiana Volunteer Infantry Regiment .
 He remained in service until the war’s end in 1865, achieving the rank of brevet brigadier general by the time he returned to civilian life . He was a brevet general in the Civil War .
 He resumed his practice of law and found his political ambitions had waned little in the interim if anything they burned hotter than ever . He immediately began campaigning for president .
 In 1880 he was successfully elected to the United States Senate . He was an unsuccessful candidate for governor in 1872 .
 Harrison represented Indiana in the Senate for seven years . He campaigned ferociously for the rights of homesteaders and Native American tribes who found the expansion of the railroads .
 He also spent time fighting to ensure good pensions for veterans of the Civil War . Eventually lost his seat in 1887 after losing his seat .
 Harrison was nominated as the Republican candidate for the presidency the very next year . However, that loss was soon flipped on its head when he was nominated for president in 2012 .
 His backers believed his honest principles and devout faith would strike a chord with voters . His backers said he would be honest about his principles and his faith .
 Harrison was sworn into office on 4 March 1889 as the 23rd president of the United States . Harrison was elected in 1889 . He was sworn in as president of America .
 The country's economy was in a state of depression, so serious legislation was required to revive it . Serious legislation was needed to revive the country's economic fortunes .
 The McKinley Tariff, a new bill backed by the president, effectively increased tariffs to their highest ever levels . Much of this was compounded by the new bill backing the president .
 Harrison's tenure was an expensive one for the economy, but it was also one that saw progressive legislation in other areas . Legislation tackled currency, monopolies and the expansion of equity .
 Harrison lent his support to the Sherman Antitrust Act, which was designed to stop companies and individuals building a monopoly on certain resources . The act was the first of its kind and indicative of Harrison's growing proactivity when it came to executive powers .
 Action was also required on the state of currency, with a confusion as to whether the dollar should be backed by gold and silver, or gold alone . Action also needed on whether the U.S. should use the dollar as a currency .
 The distinction between the two brought the value of the American dollar into repute, mainly because silver was worth less than gold . The distinction brought the U.S. dollar into . repute .
 Harrison backed the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which required the government to purchase 4. million ounces of silver per month to offset its damaging use . Harrison: "The silver is a problem. It's a problem that we have to deal with. We have to get rid of it."
 Harrison also conducted a great deal of foreign policy, including the issue of Hawaii and its annexation . Harrison also tackled the Civil Rights and the treatment of Native American tribes .
 When Harrison was ousted from office in 1893 (ironically by the man he had defeated four years prior, Grover Cleveland), his popularity had faded .
 Harrison's foreign policies changed the United States' status on the global stage . Harrison's domestic policies were a mixed bag but his foreign policy changed the U.S. status .
 His administration was locked in a battle with Germany and the UK for control of the Samoan Islands . He oversaw the establishment of a three-power protectorate that solidified American interests in the Pacific .
 He pushed through the Meat Inspection Act, which improved exports of U.S. pork, as well as unsuccessfully trying to bring Hawaii into the Union . He also pushed through an unsuccessful bid for Hawaii to join the United States .
 Benjamin Harrison avoided an international incident with Chile when two American sailors were killed while on shore leave . Both Montana and Washington were welcomed back into the Union . North and South Dakota were also welcomed back .
 This integration was actually started by Grover Cleveland during his first term of office . This integration started during Grover's first term as president .
 Known as the Enabling Act, this bill laid out the ground rules needed for these territories to resume the status of state in the Union . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives in 1945 .
 It wouldn't be until 2011 that another bout would be legally conducted . It would be until that year that another fight would be held legally .
 In 1890, Harrison saw through the Dependent and Disability Pension Act . Act was designed to protect the livelihoods of veterans who had suffered life-changing injuries during the Civil War .
 The administration's spending continued to accelerate during the Obama administration . And while it did help to distribute some of the Federal budget, payments for pensions skyrocketed . The administration continued to spend on pensions and spending .
 In 1891, Harrison successfully lobbied the Land Revision Act through Congress . The act kickstarted the process of reclaiming surplus land that had been released into the public domain . Harrison lobbied the bill through Congress to reclaim surplus land .
 Within a month of its enactment, Harrison began establishing the first national forest reserve in Yellowstone Park .
 When Harrison took office, only two naval warships were in service . Harrison took over at the end of his first term .
 The U.S. Navy was founded by the President of the United States in 1881 . He headed up a new construction phase that would see the construction of ten new warships by 1898 .
 Seven of these naval ships were started during Harrison's presidency . Seven of the ships were built during his presidency .
 McKinley served an eventful term as president that was dominated by the SpanishAmerican War . McKinley was a respected lawyer and Civil War veteran .
 Shortly after being elected to a second term, however, he became the last president to be assassinated before John F Kennedy in 1963 . He was assassinated shortly after winning his second term .
 When the secession of the southern states from the Union of the United States ignited the Civil War in June 1861, the 18-year-old McKinley enlisted on the Union side . McKinley was tasked with supplying rations to front-line infantry soldiers as a commissary sergeant .
 Under heavy fire, McKinley drove mule teams over rough ground to supply his compatriots . McKinley was under heavy fire for his role in Afghanistan .
 The following spring, after almost daily contact with enemy guerillas, McKinley's company engaged in a short, savage battle at Cloyd's Mountain, western Virginia .
 At the Battle of Cedar Creek, aided by heavy fog, surprise attacks by Confederates threatened to rout the Union forces . But gallant moves by their commanders, including McKinley, included those of McKinley .
 McKinley's political ethos was defined by protectionism, guarding the nation's trade interests by imposing import tariffs . For this and ""gallant and meritorious services"" in two further battles (Opequan and 76 William McKinley .
 The McKinley Tariff purported to benefit Americans by raising the average duty on foreign imports to almost 50 per cent . While removing duty on some goods, ostensibly to reduce smuggling, it also removes duty on other goods .
 Major McKinley was made a brevet major of volunteers by President Lincoln . McKinley served at Fisher's Hill (Fisher's Hill) in Washington, D.C.
 After the war, the qualities of duty and patriotism that distinguished him as a soldier were channelled into law . He was awarded a posthumous knighthood .
 His advocacy in important county cases at Canton, Ohio was said to have given his clients great confidence . As a plain speaker, eschewing emotional flourishes, he eschewed emotional flourish .
 A statesman-like appearance, along with a whimsical sense of humour, were among the qualities noticed by the daughter of a prominent banker Ida Saxton . On 25 January 1871, they married .
 McKinley’s devotion to his shattered wife manifested in regular breaches of normal protocols for presidential wives through his life . McKinley was married to a woman whose husband died of a gunshot wound .
 McKinley successfully ran his own Republican campaign for Ohio’s 17th congressional district in 1877 . As a protectionist, McKinley ran for the 17th Congress seat in Ohio .
 Despite Democrat gerrymandering, he held his seat until 1882 . He returned to Congress two years later, returning two years after .
 Thwarted in becoming speaker of the House in 1889, he became chairman of the Ways and Means Committee . He was responsible for framing a new tariff bill for the U.S.
 After his term completed, he became Ohio governor and by 1896 had weathered an almost financially-ruinous spell . By 1896 he was positioning to run for president as the Republican nominee .
 His front-porch campaign at home swayed the crucial Midwest states and he was sworn in on 4 March 1897 . He won the presidency in 1897 .
 Following years of despotic colonial rule by the Spanish, the Cubans revolted in 1895 . They revolted against the Spanish rule in 1895 after years of colonial rule .
 When Spain's prime minister was assassinated in 1897 McKinley delivered conciliatory messages to Spain . McKinley's pleas for Spanish concessions were made in 1897 .
 McKinley sent the battleship Maine to protect U.S. citizens in Cuba in 1898 . The battleship was sent to protect the United States citizens of Cuba .
 Politicians on all sides stepped up the pressure on the president to overcome his strong reluctance to declare war . As diplomacy grew exhausted, politicians stepped up .
 Diplomatic relations ended on 21 April, with McKinley announcing a blockade of Cuban ports . McKinley announced the blockade of Cuba's ports .
 On 25 April, following Spain’s declaration of war, U.S. politicians voted to respond in land land .
 McKinley called for volunteers to enlist . A bill was drawn to raise funds for naval warships . McKinley was the first president of the U.S. Navy .
 Spain's Pacific fleet of ten ships in Manila (another theatre of conflict), and their Atlantic fleet off Jamaica and Cuba were destroyed, enabling United States troops to capture both Manila and Puerto Rico . Spain's Atlantic fleet of ships was destroyed .
 McKinley's face was pale and haggard under the strain of thousands of dispatches flowing into his war room next to the Oval Office . McKinley’s face was . pale and . hagard under strain under strain, he said .
 A monthlong stand-off between the U.S. and Spanish fleets off the Cuban coast ended on 3 July with the destruction of the Spanish as they attempted to break out of Santiago Bay .
 Madrid sued for peace, relinquishing almost their entire empire by the time of the Treaty of Paris of 11 April 1899 . Madrid relinquished almost all of its empire in the Treaty .
 The treaty was controversial among 'anti-expansionist' politicians reluctant to preside over an empire . It was signed by the US president in 1945 .
 McKinley ceded Spanish territory to their control in return for payment . The U.S. became inadvertently a world power, for which history credits McKinley . McKinley is credited with ceding Spanish territory in exchange for payment.
 Moments after handing a girl his lucky red carnation, he was shot twice with a revolver . Leon Czolgosz, an unemployed factory worker, held the gun . The victim was shot in the head with a gun held by a man who was unemployed .
 McKinley died eight days later on 14 September . Since the bullets were lodged deep in his abdomen, doctors could do little . McKinley expired eight days after being shot in the abdomen .
 Czolgosz could well have been lynched but for McKinley's intervention . McKinley intervened to save the assassin from lynching .
 In 1876 McKinley helped him receive the party nomination that led to Hayes becoming the 19th president from 1877-1881 . McKinley died in 1881 .
 Republican senator Mark 'Dollar' Hanna prised $3.3 million out of prominent bankers to spend on McKinley's presidential campaign . It was by far the costliest that has ever been run when compared to today's rates .
 Even though McKinley stayed at home, he managed to outspend his opponent by a factor of five to one, chiefly by printing millions of leaflets .
 Several 20th-century scholars have suggested that L Frank Baum's 1900 children's novel may be an allegory of the U.S. when McKinley and Bryan ran for president in 1896 .
 If so, McKinley was portrayed by the titular Wizard; Bryan, the Cowardly Lion . McKinley may have been played by the Wizard himself .
 McKinley was the first U.S. president to be filmed when he and his wife Ida reenacted his receiving of the Republican nomination for president in 1901 . McKinley and Ida were filmed reenacting the receiving of his nomination .
 He was also filmed during his inauguration on the way to and when taking the oath of office .
 He is also the first soundrecorded president for a campaign speech that he gave from his front porch in Canton, Ohio . The speech was recorded from his porch .
 President McKinley commissioned a report into a maritime highway to link the Atlantic and the Pacific across Central America . The Panama Canal would take another 17 years to open and not in Nicaragua as advisors initially recommended .
 The 26th president of the United States led the way in proving that a politician's personality is just as important as his policies . Theodore Roosevelt's childhood was unusual compared to most presidents' .
 Theodore Sr. was a glass businessman and philanthropist . His mother Martha was a socialite . His father, Theodore Sr, was a philanthropist and a glass businessman .
 He was a sickly, delicate child and developed a form of asthma . He had to be homeschooled all through his education as a result of his chronic illness .
 He often experienced sudden and intense asthma attacks during the night which caused the sensation, of being smothered to death . He often felt like he was being smothered to death by his asthma .
 Roosevelt feared for his health, and doctors could find no cure . Roosevelt and his parents feared for their son's health . Roosevelt's illness was so severe that doctors could not find a cure .
 Being homeschooled meant Roosevelt grew closer to his parents, particularly his father . Roosevelt was home schooled in the early years of his presidency .
 It was because of his father that the young boy found the drive to better himself . The young boy was inspired by his father .
 Roosevelt was determined to transform himself in his childhood, and make his body stronger . This piece of advice made him determined to make himself stronger in his youth .
 For a boy of his health and stature, he was extremely energetic . He spent a lot of time outdoors, looking for specimens to fulfil his interest in the natural world . He was also extremely energetic, and spent a great time outdoors .
 Roosevelt's childhood escapades became the beginnings of a lifelong love for zoology and the great outdoors, which would later shape the way he ran the U.S. President . Roosevelt's love of the outdoors grew into a lifelong fascination with zoology .
 Still at a school age, he learnt the rudiments of taxidermy and so could often be found trudging across Oyster Bay, Long Island, looking for specimens .
 He studied organic matter from plants and fungi to insects and animal carcasses . He studied all types of organic matter, from plants to insects .
 His hands would always stink of arsenic and formaldehyde from preserving all his finds . He would always smell of arsenic from his hands .
 After years of being isolated as a result of his homeschooling, he soon found he thrived in the busy college environment . He soon found success in the college environment.
 In the winter of his second year at Harvard, Harvard student's life changed forever . His life at Harvard changed forever after he was killed in a car crash .
 He faced many challenges on the road to presidency, but his progressivism outlook and larger-than-life personality have caused him to be widely considered one of the greatest presidents that the United States has ever seen .
 Between 1890 and 1908, every state in the Deep South adopted a new state constitution to deprive black Americans the right to vote in U.S. elections . The elimination of black voting rights in the South was the result of a state constitution .
 The constitution used various methods, including poll taxes, literacy tests, arbitrary registration practices and felony disenfranchisement, to disenfranchise people .
 Orville and Wilbur Wright made history when Orville piloted the world's first powered aeroplane 20 feet above a North Carolina beach in 1903 .
 San Francisco Earthquake caused 3,000 deaths and over 80 per cent of the city was destroyed in 1906 . The San Francisco earthquake was the largest earthquake in history .
 The San Francisco earthquake is now widely regarded as one of the worst natural disasters in the history of the United States . The earthquake occurred in the city of San Francisco in the early 1900s .
 President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated in Ford's theatre on 14 April 1865 . Lincoln was one of the most influential Americans ever when he was assassinated . Lincoln is defeated in defeat .
 Fie Fie was shot in the head at point-blank range by actor John Wilkes Booth . Booth shot Fie at point blank range in Booth's assassination attempt . Booth was the only person to shoot Fie in Booth’s assassination attempt in the 1800s .
 One in a million shot Roosevelt is often depicted as an extremely tough man . Roosevelt is a tough man, and for good reason. Roosevelt is one of the world's toughest men .
 The adventures he had while scaling mountains, hunting game and exploring jungles seem tepid compared to the time he was shot in the chest while delivering a speech and didn't seek assistance until he was finished .
 He had prepared a 90-minute campaign speech that he planned to deliver outside a Milwaukee hotel . He planned to speak outside a hotel in Milwaukee .
 Before he could get a word out, he was shot in the chest by a local saloon keeper . The incident happened in the early 1900s at a saloon .
 The bullet passed through his breast pocket, which contained a steel eyeglass case, and through his jacket, in which he kept his 50-page speech folded in two . Luckily, the bullet had passed through .
 His father was his best friend, and the greatest man that he ever knew, he says . He says that his father was the best friend and the best man he knew .
 He returned to Harvard and became even more active, determined to get back to leading the strenuous life . Eventually, he returned and became more active .
 He continued his studies and indulged himself in an active student life . He continued to be a student at the University of Cambridge .
 The moment that Roosevelt saw Alice saw Alice he knew that he was going to marry her if she would take him . Roosevelt knew he would marry Alice if she took him . The moment he saw her was the moment he knew he was in love .
 He befriended and charmed half her family before Lee realised that Roosevelt was practically family too . He was very persistent in his wooing technique .
 President Roosevelt and his wife honeymooned in Europe during their honeymoon . They climbed the 15,000-foot Matterhorn in the Alps in the 1930s .
 Roosevelt enrolled at Columbia Law School in December 1880 . Roosevelt enrolled in 1880 at Harvard Law School .
 He dropped out of Columbia shortly after in order to pursue politics full-time . The pull of his new-found passion was too strong, and he dropped out .
 The words stuck with Roosevelt through the years, and caused him to go after politicians he believed to be corrupt . Roosevelt's words were used to attack politicians he thought were corrupt .
 His methods presented severe political risks on his part, but it was always a good fight . The former president's methods presented political risks, but he was always willing to fight .
 On 14 February 1884, Roosevelt was met with the greatest tragedy of his life . Roosevelt was killed by a gunshot wound to the head in 1884 .
 His mother had been battling typhoid fever, while his wife succumbed to kidney failure two days after giving birth to their daughter Alice . His mother died of typhoid and his wife died of kidney failure .
 With his Defining moment The greatest loss 9 February 1878 . During his second year at Harvard, his world is flipped upside-down by the death of his father .
 Before he died, Roosevelt receives an urgent telegram insisting he rush home from college immediately to join his father by his bedside . Roosevelt received the telegram telling him to rush home to join him by the bedside of his father .
 After his father's passing, Roosevelt becomes depressed and listless . He fills the journal he keeps with heartbreaking entries about his overwhelming sadness .
 Upon his return to Harvard, he attempts to force himself back into living the ""strenuous life"" as he calls it . He attempts to return to his Harvard life .
 He grows up a sickly but enthusiastic and intelligent child, and is affectionately known as Teedie' to his family of six .
 September 1876: Roosevelt meets his first true love, Alice Hathaway Lee . He befriends much of her family in a longrunning attempt to woo her . He meets her family and befriends her family .
 Roosevelt was devastated when his mother Martha and wife Alice died on the same day . Martha died of typhoid fever and Alice of kidney failure, days after giving birth to a daughter . Roosevelt was left heartbroken and devastated .
 In 1897, he was appointed United States Navy assistant secretary by President William McKinley . He was appointed by President McKinley in 1897 .
 At the start of the Spanish-American War in 1898, Roosevelt resigned his position in the United States Navy in order to form and equip a volunteer cavalry unit known as the Rough Riders . The Rough Riders were the U.S. Army's most famous cavalry unit .
 He gained fame in the U.S. for his attack up Kettle Hill against heavy fire during the Battle of San Juan Hill . Being the type of man he was, he led the unit into Cuba .
 Roosevelt's efforts helped put an end to the war, and he became a national hero . Roosevelt was a hero for his efforts to end World War II . His efforts helped end the war .
 Two years later, McKinley appointed Roosevelt vice president after his first secondin-command Garret Hobart suddenly died of heart failure . Roosevelt was appointed vice president two years after Hobart died .
 Roosevelt's vice presidency was fairly uneventful . He thrilled supporters with a simple aphorism at the Minnesota State Fair . Roosevelt's Vice President was born in 1924 .
 On 6 September 1901, McKinley was assassinated and Roosevelt became the 26th president of the United States . Roosevelt was assassinated by McKinley in September 1901 .
 Before he entered office, he held the belief that there was too much power in the hands of the corporate powers . That belief showed in the way he led his people, he said .
 President Obama added hundreds of millions of acres to the United States' national forests . He became a champion of the environment, adding hundreds of million acres of forest land .
 Roosevelt’s style appeared to be popular with voters when he was re-elected in his own right in 1904 . Roosevelt's style was a popular style of his own in 1904, but he was elected in 1904.
 Roosevelt continued to make the Roosevelt-magic happen during his second term in office . Roosevelt's second term as president ended in a landslide .
 The highlights included beefing up the U.S. Navy, completing the Panama Canal and negotiating the end of the Russo-Japanese War . The Nobel Peace Prize was awarded for negotiating the peace treaty .
 When Roosevelt's presidency was up in 1909, he dedicated time to exploring the wilderness and living a strenuous life . He started with a twoyear-long African safari with his son with his father .
 Expeditions through jungles, over mountain ranges and down rivers followed . Expanded into jungles over mountains and rivers .
 He also continued a lifelong love of writing and publishing books, articles and journals .
 In 1912, Roosevelt attempted to return to politics, running against President William Taft who he had helped groom for office . Roosevelt ran against Taft in 1912, running for president .
 He was finally laid to rest at Oyster Bay, Long Island, the same place he liked to collect specimens and samples to study in his bedroom .
 Roosevelt visits the ailing president, but reports suggest his condition is improving so he bids him farewell and leaves for the west . Reports suggest he is in a stable condition but his condition has improved .
 McKinley succumbs to his wounds on 14 September, and Roosevelt is sworn into office . Roosevelt was sworn in as president of the United States .
 Roosevelt becomes the first American to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1906 . He helped bring an end to the RussoJapanese War . Roosevelt was the first person to win a Nobel Peace prize .
 Roosevelt cannot attend until his term of presidency is over . The prize-giving ceremony takes place in Oslo, Norway, but he can't attend until he leaves office .
 He sends an ambassador in his place and drops by Norway on a tour of Europe after he has left office for his Nobel lecture . Instead of leaving office for lecture, he sends ambassador to Europe instead .
 He is the first statesman to win the prize, which caused controversy . He is also the first stateman to take the prize .
 Swedish newspapers reported that Alfred Nobel would be turning in his grave . In response to his win, Swedish newspapers said Alfred Nobel's death would be 'turning in grave' The Nobel Prize winner was awarded to Sweden's Nobel Prize Prize for Literature .
 He doesn't take the loss too hard, however, as he marries his childhood sweetheart Edith Carow the following month in London .
 He is finally elected on 8 November the same year and serves until the end of 1990 . He is then elected again in November 1990 .
 He established the United States Forest Service, completed the building of the Panama Canal and negotiates an end to the RussoJapanese War .
 He continues pursuing his passion for the outdoors and nature for another decade . He continues to be politically active .
 Following problems with his breathing, Roosevelt, 60, dies in his sleep at his home at Sagamore Hill . March 1909 Roosevelt's final days include his final days .
 He was laid to rest in Oyster Bay, Long Island, where he spent much of his youth . He was buried in a ceremony at the Long Island cemetery .
 Taft helped shape the presidency as we know it today . Taft was one of the first modern presidents to shape the country's presidency .
 Taft was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, and this was his first, unconscious step towards the presidency . Taft's presidency was the nation's first presidential election in 18 years .
 Ohio dominated national politics in the period after the Civil War . No Republican has been elected president without winning Ohio . No Democrat has managed it since John F Kennedy in 1960, and no Republican has done it since .
 Taft's hard-driving and ambitious father, Alphonso, was comfortably off rather than wealthy, but he was undoubtedly well connected . Taft Junior benefitted from this throughout his early presidency . In the late 19th century, the United States began to acquire territory outside the North American
 The United States still defined itself as anti-imperialist and this caused great unease . The U.S. was still defining itself as an anti-Imperialist .
 When there was a rebellion in the Philippines, with heavy casualties, accusations of atrocities, and a cholera epidemic that killed huge numbers of civilians, there was controversy . Even some military officers criticised the government .
 There were similarities with later controversies in Vietnam and elsewhere . There are similarities with . Later controversies with . later controversies .
 Taft managed to enhance his reputation as governor of the Philippines . Despite all this, Taft was able to continue his successful career .
 Without the Ohio background it is doubtful that William would have risen as quickly and as high as he did . William's Ohio background is a strong influence in his career .
 Taft studied law at Yale and was admitted to the Ohio Bar in 1880 . He went on to flirt briefly with journalism, practise law, serve in some minor administrative offices . Taft was a judge of the Ohio Superior Court in 1887 .
 In 1886 he married Helen Herron, who was reputed to encourage and even direct his political ambitions . She was a strong and sometimes controversial character .
 In 1890 Taft was appointed solicitor general of the United States; at 32, he was the youngest ever to hold the position . Taft became the youngest solicitor general in the country at age 32 . He was also the youngest person to hold a position in the U.S.
 Soon after, he became a judge of the United States Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals . It was a remarkably senior appointment for a man of his age . He was appointed to the Sixth Circuit of Appeals, a remarkable senior appointment .
 Taft’s thoughts began to turn to the United States Supreme Court, which today would be considered absurd and even presumptuous for someone in his position it would certainly be unrealistic . Taft's thoughts would be absurd today, but today would probably be unrealistic. Taft would
 For a respected and well connected Ohioan of his time, it was merely fantastically ambitious, not impossible . For the respected, wellconnected Ohioan, that was not impossible, however, for him .
 Taft assumed that it was about a Supreme Court appointment . Taft was summoned by President McKinley in 1900, but assumed it was over Supreme Court appointments . He assumed that the matter was about the Supreme Court .
 He was asked to join a commission on the occupation of the Philippines, which had been ceded to the U.S. by Spain in 1898 . The Philippines was ceded by Spain to the United States in 1898, but was never occupied .
 Taft resigned his judgeship to become chairman of the Second Philippine Commission, and subsequently the governor of the islands . Taft was initially reluctant to resign, but he resigned to be governor of Philippines .
 Taft won the esteem of those he worked with and became a respected national figure . Despite the ongoing controversy surrounding the Philippines, Taft was a respected figure .
 More than once he was to turn down presidential offers of a coveted place on the Supreme Court, explaining that he felt committed to the Philippines . More than . once he turned down presidential . offers .
 Taft's love of eating opossums sparked a nationwide fad and inspired a toy,‘Billy Possum' r In 1904, Taft returned to the United States to become secretary of war a post his father had held under Ulysses S Grant in Theodore Roosevelt's
 In 1908 he was elected president, assuming office in 1909 . From there it was a short leap to become Roosevelt's nominated successor .
 Taft oversaw few outstanding legislations or foreign policy achievements, and his term of office was characterised by political failure . Taft's term was characterized as a period of political failure, with few outstanding achievements .
 His wife spoke of him ""not knowing or caring about the way the game of politics is played” and he managed to make potentially popular initiatives, such as tariff reform, count against him .
 Taft believed that being a scrupulous administrator was enough, to secure his popularity, but it was not . Taft's popularity was not enough, but he was not. Taft thought that being scrupulous Administrator was enough to secure popularity .
 His famous 'dollar diplomacy' that it was ""far better to use dollars than bullets" also failed . His famous "dollar diplomacy" failed to work .
 In the Far East, it was simply ineffectual, while in Latin America it resulted in accusations of hypocrisy and disguised Yankee imperialism . In Latin America, it resulted from accusations of hypocrites and disguised imperialism .
 Taft's presidency was instead notable for his adjustment to the technologies and practices of the twentieth century . Taft was the president of the United States during the early years of his presidency .
 As part of his programme to modernise government administration, he built the first Oval Office . He built the Oval Office as part of a modernisation of government administration .
 President Roosevelt refused to expand the presidential role beyond the bounds of the constitution . However, he refused to extend the role beyond his predecessor, Roosevelt, and successor, Wilson .
 Taft's campaign for re-election was doomed from the moment his predecessor and one-time friend, patron and ally, Theodore Roosevelt decided to oppose him, first for the Republican nomination and then as an independent presidential candidate . Taft was a friend and patron of Taft .
 Taft came third behind both the victor, Woodrow Wilson, and Roosevelt . Taft failed even to win his home state of Ohio .
 Taft was made Chief Justice of the Supreme Court in 1921 . Taft seemed happier and in his proper element when he was made Supreme Court Chief Justice .
 It seemed that his political career was an interesting detour on the way to his true calling . It seemed to be that he was going to be a politician .
 The first popular and affordable motor car, the Ford Model T, was released in 1908 . Taft purchased the first presidential cars in the time of William Howard Taft .
 In 1909, Taft bought the first presidential cars and built the first White House garage . Taft built the White House's first garage in 1909 .
 In 1909 the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the leading African-American civil rights group, was founded . The group was founded by African-Americans in 1909 .
 Taft abhorred racial prejudice and was a fervent believer in the rule of law, but his policies were often weakened by political concerns . Taft's policies often were weakened by the political pressures of the White House .
 Only two further states (Alaska and Hawaii) have been added since Alaska and Hawaii were added to the original list .
 The early twentieth century was the golden age of arctic exploration . From Pole to Pole, Arctic exploration was a golden era of exploration .
 Taft's claims caused a lively newspaper controversy between Taft and Taft . Their competing claims caused the Taft administration to be embroiled in newspaper controversy .
 The FBI is coming . Shortly before Taft took office, the Bureau of Investigation was formed .
 Thomas Woodrow Wilson's presidency saw a whirlwind of economic and social change . Wilson led the United States through war and helped to create the League of Nations . Wilson achieved a lot in eight years as president .
 Wilson’s family had Scottish heritage and were devout Presbyterians . Wilson was born on 28 December 1856 in Staunton, Virginia .
 Tommy Wilson was the third of four children born to Jessie Janet Woodrow and Joseph Ruggles Wilson . The family moved to Augusta, Georgia with the young Tommy, aged just one .
 His father, a Presbyterian minister, taught at the Columbia Theological Seminary in South Carolina .
 At the age of five, Wilson saw the ravages of war first hand as the U.S. Civil War broke out . Wilson was five when he witnessed the war in his home .
 Living in the South, he was surrounded by supporters of the Confederate cause . The Civil War was a time of war for the South .
 His parents became involved in the conflict with his mother nursing wounded soldiers from the battlefield . His mother nursed wounded soldiers and died in the war . His father was killed in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 The war had a profound effect on the young Wilson, who recalled looking into the face of the defeated General Robert E Lee . Wilson recalled looking at the face as a young man .
 Wilson didn't take to education and initially suffered from poor results . When he first started school, Wilson was not interested in education . Wilson is now studying in a new school in New Zealand .
 Oratory and debating skills from his father who, as a minister, had these talents in abundance . Instead, he acquired the oratory and debate skills from him .
 Scholars believe Wilson may have had some sort of dyslexia that hampered his exam results but helped his discussion skills . This became a kind of passion for Wilson and scholars believe he may have been dyslexic .
 By 1875 he had enrolled at Davison College but before starting his studies, he made a U-turn and moved north to Princeton, which was then known as the College of New Jersey . Either way, by 1875 or 1875, he had already enrolled at the local Dav
 Wilson met Ellen Louise Axon in 1883, who he would go on to have three daughters with . In 1883 he met his third wife, Ellen Axon, and they had three daughters together . Wilson was married to Axon and died in 1903 .
 His education culminated in a thesis entitled ‘Congressional Government’ at Princeton in 1890 . He was later voted the most popular teacher on campus for his caring character .
 Wilson suffered his first stroke in May 1906 . Wilson's marriage was on the rocks after he had an affair while visiting Bermuda . It was while in this job that Wilson suffered first stroke .
 The couple talked things through and remained husband and wife and Wilson's health also stabilised . The couple's relationship has since been described as 'romantic'
 Wilson's experience at university led him to turn his political orientation to a being a social Democrat . Wilson is a former member of the House of Representatives . Wilson was elected to the Senate of Representatives in 2010 .
 His meteoric political rise began in 1910 when he was voted governor of New Jersey . Two years on, his stock had risen even further and he was nominated as Democratic presidential candidate .
 The following year, Wilson became the 28th president of the U.S. Wilson became president after a process that was unusual . Wilson was the only person to be elected president in the United States .
 Japan thrust itself onto the international stage as it exposed the weakness of the Chinese Empire . He ran against Republican Woodrow Wilson and was sworn in as president .
 Tussling over rule in Korea, war was declared in 1894, but within a year the Chinese sued for peace . Within a year, the Chinese sue for peace with the South Korean government .
 Invented by Dr Richard Gatling in 1862, the six-barrelled weapon was the first true rapid fire weapon . Dr Gatling invented the Gatling gun in 1862 and it was the world's first rapid firing weapon .
 The gun was invented during the American Civil War, but only achieved prominence after the war's end . It was invented in 18th century, but came to prominence after end of Civil War .
 The gun was unreliable but was a game changer for the future of warfare . The gun is unreliable but could be a game-changing weapon for future warfare .
 Australia's victory over England in a cricket match in 1882 initiated a long-lasting sporting rivalry . The origin of the Ashes is the origin of Australia's win over England . Australia won the Ashes against England in the first Ashes Test cricket match .
 A London journalist described the shock defeat as the 'death of English cricket' on the return tour of Australia . A pair of wooden bails were burnt and their ashes put into an urn .
 Queen Victoria died aged 81 in 1901 at the age of 81 . Queen Victoria was Britain's second longest-serving monarch . Victoria died in 1901 .
 Her tenure oversaw an industrial revolution in Britain and the continued growth of empire . Her tenure included the industrial revolution and the growth of the empire .
 She had become almost a recluse after the death of her husband, Albert, and several assassination attempts . She became almost almost a recluse after her husband's death .
 Alexander Graham Bell will forever be credited with the invention of the telephone . There was controversy for the rights to the patent patent rights to Bell's invention . Bell is credited with inventing the telephone, but there was controversy .
 Other inventors such as Innocenzo Manzetti, Elisha Gray and Charles Bourseul all claimed to have invented it before Bell but never obtained the official patent .
 He also created the Federal Reserve and gave American women the vote . His legacy includes voting rights, business reform and true attempts at world peace .
 It's easy to forget how bloody and significant the Mexican Revolution was . United States Presidents The Mexican Revolution were born in 1903 .
 A ten-year struggle ended with the fall of a 30-year-long dictatorship that had changed the social climate of the country . The fall of the dictatorship was the end of a decade-long struggle .
 The people had long voiced their discontent towards president Poriririo Diaz, whose policies favoured only the elite . Diaz's policies favoured the elite, according to the people . Diaz was elected president of Mexico in 2009 .
 Revolutionary Francisco Madero was defeated in a rigged election in 1910 . This was the final straw for many as revolt turned to revolution . Madero's defeat in 1910 was the last straw of the revolution .
 Government strongholds were raided by guerrilla leaders and Diaz was out of office within a year . Diaz was ousted from office within one year .
 Madera's regime was doomed from the start and the slow pace of reform dissatisfied other guerrilla leaders . Madera was the first guerrilla leader to try and reform his regime . He was the last guerrilla leader in the country .
 President Wilson declared his support for one of the leaders, Venustiano Carranza . The United States waded into the conflict in 1915 with President Wilson declaring his support . The U.S. joined the war in 1915 .
 This enraged Carranza's new main rival Pancho Villa, who raided towns over the border and murdered 17 U.S. citizens in January 1916 . This enraged the Mexican army, which killed 17 Americans in 1916 .
 Carranza successfully became president but by 1920 he too had fallen from grace . He also became president of Mexico in 1920 .
 Soldier and statesmen Alvaro Obregon guided Mexico into an era of sporadic violence but a more stable leadership . Obregon became leader and guided Mexico through a period of instability but more stable .
 Tax rates were reduced and loans were made more accessible to the average American . The Underwood-Simmons Act was passed in 1996 .
 Small business could compete with elite industrialists throughout the nation . Now, small business could . compete with the elite . industrialists .
 The 1914 Clayton Antitrust Act allowed labour unions to conduct strikes, boycotts and picketing . This was followed by the 1914 Clayton Act that allowed strikes and boycotts to take place .
 The Federal Reserve System was overhauled to regulate the economy . The tax system was altered so the wealthy would be forced to pay a higher amount than the poorer in society . The wealthy would pay higher taxes than the poor .
 All seemed rosy for the new president, but a storm was brewing in the old world . The new president was elected in 2008 .
 Wilson's wife died from kidney disease, leaving him in a daze for days . Wilson's first year turned out to be bittersweet after his wife died of kidney disease .
 He only eventually moved on a few years later when he became romantically involved with widow Edith Bolling Galt .
 Wilson was so trustworthy of his new wife that he even allowed her access to confidential Oval Office documents . They married in December 1915 and Wilson allowed her to access Oval Office files .
 When World War I broke out in 1914, Wilson took action and declared his country neutral . Later adopted the winning campaign slogan 'He kept us out of war 1' during the 1916 election .
 The turning point came in 1917 when the sinking of the Lusitania and continued torpedoing of American ships by unrestricted German submarine warfare, led Wilson to ask Congress to go to war . Wilson: "The turning point in 1917 was that the continued attacks by German submarines led us to
 The United States 'Doughboys' helped turn the war in the favour of Britain and France . The U.S. entered the war as an ‘associated power' in April of that year .
 After Germany’s surrender, Wilson proposed his 'Fourteen Points' ahead of the meeting at Versailles to discuss the creation of the new League of Nations .
 French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau won out with his harsher methods . David Lloyd George wanted to tow a more moderate line with the defeated Germany .
 1912 U.S. election was a three horse race . The 1912 election was one of three horse races in the United States . Another decision went wrong in the 1912 election .
 Current president Taft appealed to the nation's big businesses, while Wilson and Roosevelt had the support of the middle and lower classes . Wilson, Roosevelt and Taft both appealed to big businesses and the middle class .
 Wilson gained the upper hand when he outlined his vision of a president that could inspire the middle classes to take on the country's largest firms . Wilson said the middle class could be inspired by the president's vision of taking on the biggest firms .
 Overall the three men oversaw what was known as the 'Progressive Era' in the U.S. Overall they oversaw the 'progressive era' of American politics .
 The Treaty of Versailles was signed by British and French governments in 1919 . It was the result of a war between Germany and AustriaHungary . The treaty was the first to be signed in 1918 .
 Public anger means Clemenceau's aggressive policies are favoured . Wilson's plea for a 'fair and lasting peace' is ignored .
 The result of the treaty is the Alsace Lorraine being given to France along with the German Saar coalfields . The treaty was the result of a treaty between France and the German Republic .
 The son of a preacher man, he suffers in school years due to what is believed to be dyslexia . He suffers in his school years .
 Wilson's first act was to address the rapidly escalating women's suffrage movement . Wilson’s first act after the Great War was to tackle the growing movement .
 Women having the vote wasn't something Wilson had thought long and hard about . He was initially against the movement when a group of suffragists held a protest outside the White House that turned violent and resulted in several arrests .
 Wilson was initially appalled by their actions but changed tack after hearing of police brutality towards the women, sympathising him to the cause . Wilson was originally appalled by the actions of the police but changed his mind after hearing the brutality of the women .
 In 1918, he endorsed a woman's right to vote as well as personal written appeals to members of Congress . In January 1918, in a speech to the Senate, he ended a personal appeal to Congress members .
 Wilson has been criticised for his allowance of Jim Crow segregation laws and foreign policy . Wilson has also been accused of his initial resistance to women having the vote . Wilson's foreign policy brought mixed results with a foreign policy that brought mixed success .
 His lax attitude towards the treatment of African Americans is a major sticking point in any analysis of his presidency . Wilson was a devastating blow to the African Americans of the U.S. who had been convinced that Wilson would offer an improvement .
 It was completely at odds with Wilson's otherwise democratic and peaceful visions for the world . Wilson's vision for the future was completely different to his otherwise democratic vision .
 A treaty with Columbia formally apologised for American aggression during the 1903 Panama Revolution . The 1912 Panama Canal Act prevented U.S. ships from paying a toll to access the canal .
 Foreign relations took a turn for the worse during the forced occupation of Nicaragua in 1914 and similar events against political rebels in Haiti and the Dominican Republic in the following two years .
 American involvement in the Mexican Revolution was messy . Most prominent though was the messy American involvement with the revolution .
 Wilson struggled to agree with the Republican majority in the Senate . These heavy handed military responses were at odds with Wilson's successful handling of the U.S. role in World War I .
 While campaigning for the USA to join the League of Nations, Wilson fell ill from exhaustion and suffered the second serious stroke of his life . Wilson recovered enough to accept the Nobel Peace Prize in 1920 for his efforts for post-war peace .
 He never recovered fully from his stroke, however, and his wife now had to help him with decision-making . He had to rely on his wife for the first time after his stroke .
 Her help was so frequent that many saw her as the first female U.S. president . Her help often came so often that many people thought she was a first female president .
 The now disabled Wilson left office in 1921 after being physically unable to campaign for another term after his cerebral haemorrhage . Wilson's now disabled body was unable to hold another term in office .
 He moved to a private residence in Washington, DC and retired there until his death on 3 February 1924 . He died in 1924 .
 First proposed by Wilson as part of his Fourteen Points proposal . Headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, it was first proposed in 1964 .
 The League had the power to call on nations to discuss disputes and could dish out economic sanctions against aggressor countries . The League could also dish out sanctions against countries involved in any disputes .
 Germany could act without fear when the Nazi regime came to power . However, this involved countries being a member of the Nazi party . As Germany was not invited, it could act freely without fear and did in Nazi Germany .
 Despite Wilson's pleas, despite his pleas, the USA didn’t join either . Even more humiliating was the fact that, despite Wilson’s pleas for the USA to join either, the United States did not join .
 Woodrow Wilson passes away in his home in Washington DC aged 67 on 3 February . Wilson died at the age of 67 in February .
 President Obama's three years in office were seen as the most corrupt of all time . But when the truth about the administration was later revealed, the truth was revealed, he was seen as a corrupt president .
 Harding's administration is believed to have been the most corrupt of any president . Harding was never directly implicated in the scandals which rocked his administration 1921 1923 . Harding covered up scandal after scandal scandal .
 Harding was the 29th U.S. president and inaugurated in 1921 . Harding was inaugurated as president of the United States . Harding served as president from 1921 to 1926 .
 It was Harding's wife, Florence, rather than the man himself, who dearly wanted Harding to push for office . It was Florence, not Harding, but Florence, who pushed Harding to office .
 Nan Britton, 31 years his junior, wrote a book in which she claimed the pair had a daughter called Elizabeth . The pair had married in 1891 when Harding was 88 years old .
 The President's Daughter, added to the volume of scandal which engulfed Harding in death but also led to Britton being vilified by the American people for offering no concrete proof . Britton was vilified for not offering any concrete proof of the allegations .
 In 2015, descendants of the Harding family approached Britton’s grandson, James Blaesing, and a DNA test was performed . Britton's grandson says he believes Britton may have been alive for more than 100 years .
 Elizabeth Blaesing was 25 and Elizabeth Harding was 31 when she was born . The results proved Elizabeth was Harding's biological child . Harding's grandnephew and grandniece of Harding were second cousins of Elizabeth .
 Florence was said to be energetic and ambitious but whether she had a great influence on him is uncertain . Florence was an ambitious and ambitious woman, but her influence on her husband was uncertain .
 She had been by his side during his days as a publisher in a small town in Ohio . She had helped his four-page weekly Marion Star to flourish .
 Former newspaper reporter bought the paper for $300 time to schmooze with his close business friends, and his many associates in local government . In doing so it allowed the former newspaper reporter who had bought the newspaper for .
 In 1899, he was elected a state senator for Ohio . He became a lieutenant governor in 1903 for a year . He was also a state lieutenant governor .
 He failed to become the governor in 1910 but was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1914 . He served in the United States Senate from 1914 .
 One of the key questions asked of Harding during his presidential campaign was his position on the League of Nations . The body was being set up following the war to help maintain world peace . Harding was asked about his position in the organisation during his campaign .
 He evaded answers until he became president, when he pledged his opposition . President Obama has evaded questions about his relationship with Russia .
 Harding was born on a farm as the eldest of eight children by Phoebe and George Harding . His predecessor, President Woodrow Wilson, had tried to win Senate approval for America's sign-up . Harding's subsequent stance killed all future hope and it was feared that the country would
 He signed the Budget and Accounting Act of 1921 . It provided a national budget system and allowed for an independent audit of government accounts .
 He advocated civil rights for African Americans and wanted equality of education . Taxes were reduced for those in power .
 Harding also signed the Sheppard-Towner Maternity Act which funded child and health centres and sought to look after ill children . Harding signed the act in response to the health and welfare of children .
 He was against racial mixing and the Per Centum Act of 1921 reduced immigration numbers . But he was against race mixing and immigration numbers were reduced .
 Many of Harding's policies sought to reverse those of his predecessor . They lifted spending control which had been put in place during World War I . At the same time, he was a hands-off president in many respects .
 His lack of true control over his administration led to problems, including bribery scandal . Teapot Dome scandal was a bribery scandal known as 'Teapot dome scandal'
 Albert Fall was the secretary of the interior under Harding . He was found to be dishing out cheap drilling licenses on federal land in Wyoming and California to his friends in the oil industry .
 Harding died of a heart attack while in office at the age of 57, meaning that he never witnessed the fallout that so badly tarnished his memory . Harding's memory was tarnished by the scandal, which only came to light after Harding's time as president .
 Fall became the first ex-cabinet member to be jailed for committing a crime during time in office in 1931 . The furore dragged on for years with Fall becoming the first member of the Cabinet jailed for a crime .
 Harding had known there were problems within his administration and he felt betrayed by some of those around him . Harding was loathe to make them public and that was unforgivable in the eyes of U.S. citizens .
 It didn't help that Fall was only one of a few government officials feathering their own nests . Fall was not the only government official feathering his own nest .
 Harding knew Charles Forbes, director of the Veterans Bureau, had illegally sold government medical supplies, for example . Harding knew of a corrupt group called the Ohio Gang, headed by the private secretary of Attorney General Harry Daugherty . Harding was aware of the group headed by Attorney General Daug
 Poll in 1948 would rank him bottom in terms of presidential popularity . Little wonder a poll in 1948 ranked him bottom of the presidential poll .
 In 1964, letters from Harding to a long-term mistress called Carrie Fulton Philips were unearthed . Harding's letters from his mistress were unearthed in 1964 .
 Harding's reputation was tarnished by the letters . They were written before Harding became president, but only serviced to damage his reputation further . Harding was the president of the United States .
 The 1920 election was the first in which women across the United States could vote . Some historians have tried to revise the thinking about Harding's impact on the economy .
 The 1916 election had only allowed women in 30 states to participate rather than the full 48 four years later . The election was a victory for women's suffrage following decades of struggle .
 Prohibition was law throughout Harding's presidency . Alcohol was banned during Harding's administration . Prohibition was also law throughout the Harding administration .
 It forbade anyone from selling, producing, importing or transporting alcoholic beverages . It also led to a rise in organised crime, with Mafia groups organising huge bootlegging operations to satiate a nation's thirst .
 Commercial radio stations began broadcasting on 27 August 1920 in Detroit and Pittsburgh . Commercial radio was first broadcast on August 27, 1920 .
 The following year WBZ in Springfield MA was the first to get a commercial license . By 1922 radio boomed in popularity, opening up communication like never before .
 The Negro National League was formed by Rube Foster for AfricanAmericans in 1920 . Organised sport was segregated and so in baseball in 1920, the league was formed for AfricanAmerican players .
 It grew in the early part of the decade as it expanded into the south . It grew over the early years as it grew into the South .
 The Great Depression caused it to disband in 1931 with the Chicago American Giants having won five of the 12 titles .
 Charlie Chaplin co-founded United Artists in 1919 and his first feature-length movie . Chaplin's first feature film was his first in a long-running feature film .
 The Kid was the second-highest grossing film of 1921 . It is believed to be one of the era's greatest movies . The Kid is thought to have been the second highest grossing movie of that era .
 His status eventually led to vice presidency under Warren G Harding in 1920 . He became president after Harding's sudden death in 1924 .
 Coolidge left office with considerable popularity . Elected in 1924, Coolidge was elected to office in 1924 .
 Calvin Coolidge Jr was born on 4 July 1872 in Plymouth Notch, Vermont . Coolidge became known as ‘Silent Cal’ due to this quiet and sombre personality 1923 -1929 .
 The eldest of two sons, Coolidge grew up in a typical middle-class family of the late 19th century . Coolidge was the first president of the Democratic Party .
 Coolidge name was still a well-distributed one thanks to his father's experience in politics and agriculture . Coolidge was neither poor nor particularly rich, but still had a large family of his .
 Most of his family had a background in learning at an early age, but he soon excelled through his early years . Most of the family had an early interest in learning .
 Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts under his father's insistence and pursued a career in law . Coolidge was a member of the Coolidge family . He was born in 1916 .
 By 1897, he'd trained as a county law lawyer and soon opened his own practice . He was trained in law and became a lawyer in 1897 .
 Known for a quiet demeanour outside the courtroom, but a shrewd and diligent manner within . He was soon elected to the local city council in 1898 . Known for his work in the courts, he was also elected to a city council .
 From there he began a steady ascendance through the world of state politics that brought him to almost every significant seat of office Massachusetts could provide . From there, he went on to become a national figure in Massachusetts politics .
 The BPD's plans to set up an independent union and the government's opposition to such a move . It all centred around the union's plans for a union to be independent .
 Three quarters of Boston's police force went on strike on 9 September, causing riots and civil disobedience across Boston . The leaders of the move to unionise were suspended when leaders were suspended .
 Coolidge called in the National Guard to restore order and personally oversaw remaining BPD officers . Coolidge personally oversaw the remaining officers at the time .
 Coolidge believed the police had a duty to protect the people and therefore did not have the right to strike . Coolidge made a name for himself by refusing to follow the popular vote of his fellow Republicans .
 In 1911, Coolidge ran for State Senator and defeated his Democrat rival by a considerable margin . Coolidge was elected to State Senator in 1911 .
 Coolidge eventually became president of the Senate in 1914 before becoming lieutenant governor two years later . Coolidge served just under three years as Senator .
 Coolidge would garner the attention of the higher powers in the capital . Coolidge was the president of the United States during the Great Depression .
 His calm demeanour in the face of such a widely covered event spoke volumes . His refusal to kowtow to the demands of the strike spoke volumes. His refusal .
 Coolidge was nominated as the Republican candidate for the vice presidency in 1920 . His speeches regarding the need to protect public safety sent his approval rating soaring through the roof .
 Coolidge was being readied for a position in the most powerful office in the nation . Attached to the presidential ticket of popular figure Warren G Harding, Coolidge now was being prepared for the presidency .
 Harding's connection to corrupt officials within government and the military would posthumously erode his popularity . Harding and Coolidge provided the perfect mixture of charm and composure and the duo won the election by a landslide .
 Harding died three years later of a sudden cerebral haemorrhage on 2 August 1923 . Coolidge was sworn in as president a few hours after Harding died .
 Harding won the 1924 presidential election in a decisive victory over his Democrat opponent . Harding's policies of transparency would serve him well, especially in the aftermath of Harding's death .
 Those policies helped foster the cultural and economic boom of the 'Roaring Twenties' Those policies stood in stark contrast to the reserved and sombre man at the helm of the nation's future .
 Spending and lending skyrocketed as Americans embraced excess . Coolidge's high tariffs on imported goods fostered a renewed domestic confidence in the strength of the nation's own products and industries .
 Coolidge announced his desire to leave office at the end of his term at the beginning of 1929 . His popular public image led many to believe he would easily win re-election in the 1928 presidential election . The death of his father and youngest son, coupled with the monumental stress of office
 In October, the U.S. economy's excessive spending sparked the Stock Market Crash . The crash sent the nation spiralling into an era of depression .
 Coolidge failed to aid the depressed agricultural sector and the uneven distribution of wealth caused by his tax cuts accelerated the process . Not entirely those seeds had be sown long before Coolidge took office, but his failure to aid agricultural sector .
 By the time of his death on 5 January 1933, his popularity had largely soured among the American public . Many demonised his policies as the root cause of the country's destitution .
 Coolidge was a man who believed in empowering the people it just so happened that empowerment also led many of them to act irrationally . Coolidge's conservatism and the implosion of the economy bind his American conservatism with the contrasting implosion .
 Under Coolidge, the United States saw a proactive shift away from the economic malaise of Harding’s time in office . Coolidge also saw the first laws designed to regulate radio broadcasts .
 Coolidge shaved a quarter of the country's federal debt . Taxes were cut and only the top 2% of earners paid income tax . Coolidge cut the nation's national debt .
 The national wealth of the United States practically doubled between 1920 and 1929 . The rise in consumer culture was the first time the U.S. had ever experienced a consumer culture .
 National trends in all areas of culture swept cities and towns across the land . From fashion to music and beyond, national trends were all over the country's borders .
 The 19th Amendment, introduced into U.S. law in 1920, finally gave women the right to vote . It was introduced into law in the 1920, and women were allowed to vote in the United States .
 Female citizens enjoyed, to a certain extent, a greater sense of cultural freedom . And while society was still far from equal, female citizens enjoyed greater cultural freedom.
 This also led to the popularisation of the 'flapper' image women who dressed how they wished and said what they wanted . The 'flappers' image was also popularised in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The age of jazz music exploded into life during this period . Blues-infused tones of jazz became the sound of the times .
 Prohibition began with the passing of the 18th Amendment in the 1920s . Prohibition was one of the most famous factors of the Prohibition era . Prohibition began in 1920s with the passage of the First Amendment .
 This drove the sale of alcohol underground and facilitated the rise of gangsters and organised crime . This led to the introduction of organised crime in the 1980s and '90s .
 Herbert Hoover rose to power on a wave of popularity in the early 1900s .
 Hoover found himself shouldering the blame when the Great Depression tore through America in the first years of his reign . Hoover's reputation was ruined for decades after he was forced to resign from office .
 H erbert Hoover became infamous as the his fortunes took a turn for the better . Hoover became famous as the president of the Hoover administration . Hoover died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 Hoover was a mining president who presided over the Great Depression . Hoover travelled the world, making his Depression, and stepped back when name in Australia before moving to China with his country needed him most .
 He was there when the Boxer of the crisis caused his downfall, but was there more to Hoover than the dam and the when U.S. Marines called upon his local knowledge .
 Herbert Hoover's cool head, financial astuteness and gift for organisation proved vital as he took charge of the distribution of money, food, travel documents and anything else that might be required to ensure no Americans were stranded overseas .
 German occupation had resulted in serious food shortages in Belgium . He employed the same approach to ensure relief was distributed where it was most needed .
 President Woodrow Wilson appointed Hoover as head of the U.S. Food Administration in 1917 . Hoover's name was soon known in the highest circles and he was appointed by President Wilson . Hoover died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 Hoover continued his aid efforts both at home and abroad, impressing Wilson and leading him to conclude that Hoover was his natural successor as president . Now firmly enmeshed in U.S. politics, Hoover continued to aid the United States .
 Hoover, never a Democrat, joined the new Republican administration as Secretary of Commerce . Hoover, however, had other ideas; never joined the cabinet . Hoover joined the Republican administration in 1945 .
 He introduced long-term mortgages to ensure people could own their homes outright .
 Hoover's efforts to bring aid to those hit by the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 showed off his credentials as a man of the people . Hoover was the first president of the White House to address the Great Depression .
 With his reputation and profile riding high, when the presidential election rolled around in 1928, he knew that it would be his year . He knew that when he was running for president, he would win .
 He put in place programmes that he believed would improve the lot of all Americans, young or old, rich or poor . He believed that all Americans could benefit from his programmes .
 He envisioned a partnership between private and public bodies in which they fostered one another and strengthened the economy without central intervention . These beliefs would meet their match when the Great Depression shattered the United States .
 Businesses closed, unemployment soared and even banks shut their doors as borrowers defaulted on their loans in their thousands . Even banks were shutting their doors in the wake of the crisis .
 People lost their homes and the ironically-named Hooverville shanty towns began to appear, as the homeless multitude searched desperately for shelter . Hooverville is the name of Hooverville .
 Hoover attempted to put in place financial measures that would help the hardest hit . Hoover tried to put a financial measure in place to help those hardest hit by the recession . Hoover: "It's a good thing for the country, but it's not good for the economy"
 Some thought he had chosen to distance himself at his country's time of need . Still, he maintained that caring for the disenfranchised in a community was not strictly a government responsibility, but a local one .
 Hoover had no serious hope of winning a second term . Hoover had entered with such high hopes had become a poisoned chalice . Hoover grudgingly decided to run for second term, but was unable to win .
 On the campaign trail he was jeered, his train splattered with eggs and his speeches heckled . When the votes were counted, he had lost the presidency to Franklin D Roosevelt .
 He convinced himself that the Democrats had undermined him, driving the country to ruin so that they might ride to the rescue . Bitter and disillusioned, he convinced himself of the Democrats having undermined him .
 His retirement from public life brought a new peace, he took comfort in writing, fishing and philanthropy . He took comfort writing and fishing, and was a great writer and philanthropist .
 He briefly dreamt of running for the presidency again in 1936 and 1940, but in the end his tarnished reputation put paid to the schemes . The former president's reputation was tarnished by his reputation .
 It was the start of the long road that would rebuild his public standing . It was a start of a long road .
 Ill health blighted the former president’s later years, but by the time he died in 1964, his standing was restored . Hoover's standing in the White House was restored after his death .
 The three decades that had passed since Hoover's presidency had done much to rehabilitate this once maligned statesman . Hoover's single term had proved that he was capable of far more than his ill-fated single term suggested . Hoover was one of the world's most maligned presidents
 In 1908, the Model T Ford hit the market and within a decade, it was the most popular car on America’s roads . Hoover's adventurous first lady, Lou, carried a pistol when she lived in China and wasn't afraid to use it .
 The Model T brought the fun of motoring to the working man and became an American icon . Affordable to buy and cheap to run, the Model T was affordable to run and affordable .
 Prohibition in 1920, sale and production of alcohol became illegal in the U.S. The introduction of Prohibition was introduced in 1920 . Alcohol production and sale of alcohol was banned in the United States .
 Bootleggers fed the need for booze, organised crime grew rich on the profits . Speakeasies became the place to meet until prohibition ended in 1933 .
 1927 saw the release of The Jazz Singer, the first talking picture . The film was released in 1927 .
 The film revolutionised the cinema business and as sound became cheaper and more popular audiences began to desert silent movies, some careers were ended for good . Starring Al Jolson, the film was the first silent film to be released in silent cinema .
 The Wall Street Crash shook the American economy in 1929, the Great Depression followed in its wake . The Great Depression was the result of the Wall St. Crash in 1929 .
 In a country rife with debt, where banks had issued loans freely and the public had happily taken them, when manufacturing slowed and businesses began to close, the impact was devastating . In the country's debt, the public has been hit hard by the impact .
 Unemployment rose at an unprecedented rate and when even the banks began to close their doors, homelessness soared . Homelessness soared as the banks closed their doors .
 The Great Depression became a defining moment in modern American history . It captured the imagination of authors and artists . The Depression shook the country for a generation .
 During Hoover's lifetime, three U.S. Presidents were assassinated and five survived attempts on their lives . Hoover was assassinated during his lifetime .
 Hoover escaped a would-be bomber during a 1928 trip to Argentina . Hoover was among the lucky ones to escape a plane crash .
 His captured assassin, an anarchist name Severino Di Giovanni, was executed . He was killed by an anarchist known as Severino di Giovanni .
 Clarence Birdseye launched a new range of frozen vegetables in 1930 . He added meat and fish options to his frozen food offerings .
 Frozen food brought a new, convenient approach to shopping and cooking to the American home and made Birdseye a rich man and a household name that endures .
 Franklin D Roosevelt stepped forward to help the United States through some of its darkest years . FDR won his first presidential election in 1933 he was taking command of a country in crisis .
 He ran on the Democratic ticket with a desire to help the average American citizen . He ran for office in 2008 . He says he wants to help Americans .
 The national average rate for unemployment was one in four, but in some cities and industries that figure is as high as 50 per cent . In some cities it's as high a figure as well as 50% in some industries .
 A staggering 13 million Americans are without work and some are going hungry . Some 13 million people were without work in 2013, according to CNN.com .
 Since the crash on Wall Street 4,000 banks had closed for good, and by 1933 that number rose to more than 9,000, with $2.2 billion in lost deposits . By 1933 the number of banks that closed was more than $2 billion .
 Millions of Americans would lose their savings if they arrived at the bank too late, there would simply be no money to withdraw . This resulted in millions of Americans losing their savings . Millions of people would have to turn up to the bank to withdraw money .
 The panics raised troubling questions about credit value and many started to question capitalism itself . The panic in the 1980s raised questions about the value of credit value .
 Roosevelt and Congress declared a fourday 'bank holiday' and emergency banking acts to help stem the outpouring of the nation's wealth .
 Roosevelt sought to rectify these problems with a range of domestic programs called the New Deal . The New Deal was a series of programs aimed at domestic problems .
 It focused on what were known as the 'three Rs', relief, recovery and reform . The three Rs are known as 'relief, recovery, reform and reform. It is known for the three Rs, relief and recovery, known as relief .
 Relief was immediate action that was taken to halt further economic failure . Relief was the immediate action taken to stop further economic failures .
 Recovery saw temporary programs implemented to restart consumer spending . Reform saw more permanent programmes put in place to avoid another crash and safeguard savings . Recovery saw a rise in consumer spending and a boost in savings .
 The Republicans under Hoover had said the worst was over and only hard work and determination would see the U.S. though, but these had actually turned out to be either dismal lies or woeful predictions . Hoover had predicted the worst would happen in the United States .
 Some of Roosevelt's more conservative supporters felt betrayed by his actions . Roosevelt's actions angered some of his conservative supporters, however .
 Many of those from inside his own party viewed him with disdain, seeing him as rich, spoiled and unwilling to cooperate . Indeed many of those in his own own party saw him as wealthy and spoiled .
 "Here was a man who was taking money away from big business and then reinvesting it into the working man," he said . "Here is a man taking money from big businesses and then investing it into working people," he added .
 Under Roosevelt, a huge federal bureaucracy would grow that was designed to prop up the average American who was down on his luck . The federal government would be designed to help Americans down on their luck .
 This might seem a little surprising considering his childhood and background . This might have been a surprise to many of his friends .
 Franklin D Roosevelt is the only president to have been elected four times, with the support of 36 out of 48 states in the last election before his death . FDR helped the United States transition out of the Great Depression with his revoltionary New Deal .
 He would later oversee his country's entry into World War II following the bombing of Pearl Harbor . He remains one of the most significant figures in American history .
 This would serve as a welcome distraction from the realities of real life . This would be a good distraction from real life. This is not the only thing to worry about .
 FDR was famous for promising the mothers of the U.S. that he would not send their sons to fight in foreign wars . WWII would change that. FDR was known for promising to not send his sons to war .
 After WWI many Americans were in favour of adopting an isolationist policy . The U.S. had become isolationist after WWI .
 Anti-war feelings were strong even as the Axis powers ravaged Europe . Keen to avoid more bloodshed that they had witnessed just a few years earlier, anti-war .
 In just a few short years between the wars, people saw technology jump forward in leaps and bounds . The world was changing in the years before the wars .
 Machines like aeroplanes, which at the turn of the century were little more than a curiosity, would evolve massively in people’s lifetimes to revolutionise global travel, trade and warfare .
 Aid for citizens hit hard by the Great Depression could come from many directions, not just the government . The Great Depression was a devastating economic downturn .
 Notorious gangster Al Capone opened one of the very first soup kitchens in Chicago in 1931 . Capone fed the masses of unemployed who were on the street desperate to find work .
 Eleanor Roosevelt, fifth cousin once removed and wife to Franklin D Roosevelt, was a formidable political figure in American politics . The first lady of the world was the wife of President Roosevelt . She was the fifth cousin of Roosevelt's wife and wife of FDR .
 From her support of FDR through his illness, to her work at the UN she was not someone to live in her husband's shadow . She was also the first lady through her husband through his four terms .
 She had met Franklin on a train in 1902 and from there they had begun a secret correspondence that turned into a romance . Franklin had met her on the train and she had written him a series of letters .
 Franklin's mother disapproved of the match . The pair were married on 17 March 1905 . Franklin was married by Franklin's wife in 1905 .
 He chose to end the relationship but the episode had shown Eleanor that she should pursue her own happiness in public life . The episode showed that Eleanor should pursue herself and her happiness .
 Eleanor became the first chairperson for the United Nations Commission of Human Rights in 1947 . She stayed in the position until 1947 .
 In the 1950s she embarked on an exhaustive touring schedule both at home and abroad on behalf of the UN and the work she did there . She embarked on a tour of the world in 1950s and '60s .
 In 1962 she passed away after a battle with a rare bone marrow disease . She died in 1962 .
 Franklin D Roosevelt was born into an old and above all rich, Dutch family in the Hudson Valley town of Hyde Park . He was born in Hyde Park, New York, in 1920 .
 Being tutored at home from a young age he did not interact with many other children his own age . He was not able to play with other children at home and was tutored from home .
 His mother Sara was a particularly prominent influence throughout his childhood, but he was also close with his father . The family took frequent trips together to Europe .
 While his schooling and higher educational years would bring him little joy, he flourished as a lawyer . He passed the bar exam in 1907 and became a successful lawyer .
 He served as assistant secretary of the navy under Woodrow Wilson . He ran as the vice president on the Democratic ticket for the 1920 election .
 A defining factor in Roosevelt's life, and one that almost made his political aspirations come crashing down, was his battle with polio . Roosevelt's polio battle almost ended his presidential aspirations .
 Diagnosed from 1921 he completely lost the use of his legs and took measures to not appear in public in a wheelchair, feeling self-conscious and thinking that it would make him look weak .
 Although he was never able to recover the use of his legs, he did manage to walk short distances with the help of some crutches and steel braces . Even went so far as to purchase Warm Springs resort in Georgia, which would later be open to other patients .
 His work would help thousands of other sufferers battle the affliction . He would also later later help fund a vaccine .
 From here he had a great opportunity to win the presidential election in 1932 . From here, he would have a great chance to win a presidential election .
 Roosevelt is often praised for his foresight into future events . The most significant example was the rise of Nazi Germany and the danger this posed to democratic countries all over the world . Roosevelt's foresight is often cited as a key factor in the rise in Nazi Germany .
 FDR was diagnosed with polio August 1921 . FDR was in Campobello Island, Canada, when he heard the news . FDR's polio diagnosis was a life-changing moment for FDR . FDR died in 1945 .
 Roosevelt resigns himself to living the life of a patient, but Eleanor persuades him to continue on his career path . Losing the use of his legs dashes his political aspirations .
 He teaches himself to walk short distances with leg braces and a pair of crutches . Although the many forms of treatment he would try would not return his leg function, he teaches himself how to walk .
 For the rest of his life he would be a strong supporter of polio research . He would open a treatment centre for patients at Warm Springs, Georgia, Georgia .
 Roosevelt was the first president to make his inaugural address over the radio . Roosevelt made his inaugural speech on the radio in 1941 .
 FDR was home schooled for years . He was sent to board at Groton School in Massachusetts . FDR's famous speech was broadcast from Groton .
 Due to his privileged upbringing, he found it difficult to fit in and make friends . Due to this, he was found to be struggling to find a way to fit into a community .
 The two would have a marriage complicated by an overbearing mother and Franklin's infidelities . Franklin would have an affair with Franklin's mother . Franklin and Franklin were married at the time .
 April 1913 - Nominated to run as vice president . Roosevelt is named as the Democratic vice presidential candidate alongside James M Cox . But the pair lose the 1920 election to Republicans Warren G Harding and Calvin Coolidge .
 He could not openly help the Allied powers of Europe fight against Germany without risking the wrath of Congress and the American people . He would go on to win a landslide victory and secure his fourth term in office .
 He wanted to ready the country for war without going against U.S. neutrality . He wanted the country ready for war but not against American neutrality .
 In 1940, a peacetime draft called the Selective Training and Service Act was enforced . It was enforced in 1940, and the draft was allowed to be drafted again .
 He promised the parents of the U.S. that he would not send their sons to fight in foreign wars . To quell rising fears from the population he promised to quell fears .
 When the U.S. entered World War II he claimed that it didn't count as a foreign war as it encompassed the globe . This was thought to be a rather Machiavellian move by his critics .
 Roosevelt also began a constant stream of correspondence with British prime minister Winston Churchill . Roosevelt was kept up to date with events across the Atlantic .
 He decided that the U.S. would be the 'Arsenal of Democracy' if the country couldn't openly fight, it could at least supply those that did . Not wanting to wait to take action, he decided to use the country's 'Arsenal' to fight .
 Roosevelt achieved this goal via the lend-lease programme . The U.S. supplied aid in the form of oil, food, war planes, ships, munitions and materials with terms stating that supplies be used until returned or destroyed .
 The aid would have to reach Europe by ship and so began a huge operation where tons of supplies were ferried across the Atlantic . This aid was the first aid aid to arrive in Europe since the fall of Yugoslavia .
 If an American ship was attacked then it would enable him to declare war without fear of a backlash . Roosevelt knew these convoys were tempting targets for prowling German U-boats .
 On 7 December 1941, Japan bombed the inuc. rnnueno erne erne tc . This president was not shy to the fact that he enjoyed a drink . Sometimes credited with popularising the dirty Martini cocktail at Pearl Harbor .
 This single act immediately galvanised the public and put the whole country behind the president when war was declared the following day . War was declared following day. "This single act" galvanised public support for the president .
 After 12 years in the White House, Roosevelt's influence was cemented as the U.S. emerged from the ashes of WWII to establish itself as a world power . Roosevelt was the president of the United States for 12 years .
 His foresight would come to play again as he was instrumental in the construction of the United Nations . He would be instrumental in helping to build the UN .
 He would never see it come to fruition as he died on 12 April 1945 . Unfortunately he died in 1945 .
 During his final years FDR cut a gaunt figure as his health rapidly deteriorated . FDR cut an even more gaunt picture in his final days . FDR's health deteriorated rapidly in his last years .
 He was kept from the public eye so as to not cause panic or lower morale in the war years . His death came just months after the commencement of his unprecedented fourth term in office it shocked the nation .
 This was a man who had taken the reigns during the Great Depression, stood up for the working man and given the country jobs, financial security and most importantly, a future . This was one of the greatest moments of American history .
 Hailed as a hero of the American people, he won the hearts of the population by promising and delivering fast and effective action time and time again . Hailed by the U.S. people as 'hero of the people'
 Roosevelt was elected president of the United States 8 November 1932 . Having a strong political base in the most populated state helped put Roosevelt on good footing for the presidency .
 In his nomination speech, he stated ""This is more than a political campaign. This is a more than political campaign," he said .
 Roosevelt went on to win in all but six states and with 57 per cent of the vote, making him the 32nd president of the United States . With this charged electoritit Roosevelt won in the U.S.
 Pearl Harbor is the date that will live in infamy . The U.S. loses interest in its isolationist policy and rallies behind its president . The attack on the United States naval base of Pearl Harbor by the Empire of Japan is the defining moment in history .
 The United States forgone its neutrality with entering into army conflict . Having already signed the lend-lease to other allied countries, the U.S. forgoneses its neutrality .
 The unprovoked attack on U.S. sovereignty, however, could not be ignored . Whatever dealings that Roosevelt had previously been making under the table were no longer necessary .
 The United States were now fully committed to the war effort and it would be four costly years until the hostilities would cease . The U.S. would be spending millions of dollars in the war against the Nazis .
 A bomb was found addressed to him but was defused before it went off . Some of these bombs have been addressed to the president of the country .
 "It rocks the country to its very foundation and a great sense of loss is felt by every American," says President Obama . "I'm sorry for the loss of my life," says Obama .
 Harry Truman was at house speaker Sam Rayburn's office at 5pm Eastern War Time on 12 April 1945 . Truman was instructed to "come quickly and quietly" at just after 5pm . Truman received a phone call from the White House at 5am on April 12 .
 Truman asked his wife if there was anything he could do for her, Truman said . Truman asked Eleanor what he had to do to help her after her death . Truman died in 1945 .
 At 7pm a group gathered in the cabinet room at the White House for the swearing in of Truman that included his wife Bess and daughter Margaret . Truman was sworn in at 7pm . Truman's family gathered for the ceremony .
 Three hours and 14 minutes after FDR's death, FDR recited the oath of office . FDR died in 1945 at the age of 92 . FDR was the first president to take office in office .
 He had come a long way from his birthplace of Lamar, Missouri, Missouri . His father had gone broke trading in wheat futures in 1901 and later moved the family to Independence .
 Mama 1 Martha Ellen Truman had used the family Bible to teach young Harry to read . Harry's mother used the Bible to read him .
 By the time he was twelve, he had read the entire Bible and all of Mark Twain twice . By the age of 12, he'd read the Bible and Twain twice before he was 12 years old .
 At 16 Harry was living with railroad labour gangs and two years later he was working as a Kansas City bank clerk . Harry was working with railroad gangs and working with bank gangs at 16 . At 16 he was living as a bank clerk and working in Kansas City .
 He returned to run the family farm in 1906, taking over full-time in 1917 . He took over full time in 1917, taking on the farm .
 That same year he embarked for the war in Europe with General John J Pershing’s expeditionary force . The same year, he embarked on the War in Europe .
 He transformed the ill-disciplined Battery D 129th Field Artillery, 60th Brigade, 35th Infantry Division, into one of the most effective units in the army . Elected a first lieutenant in the National Guard, he was a National Guard officer .
 Lieutenant Truman’s men knocked out a German battery during the MueseArgonne offensive of 1918 . Lieutenant Truman and his men were part of the First World War effort to defeat the Germans .
 Truman had also saved a son of one of the Pendergast brothers from an Army court martial . Truman had saved the son of the brothers from a court martial.
 Tom and Mike Pendergast controlled Kansas and much of Missouri's Democrat machine . They controlled much of Kansas and Missouri's Democratic machine . Tom Pendersgast was a Democrat in Kansas .
 Truman ran for a court judgeship after an unsuccessful stint as a haberdasher . Truman's family's influence secured him the chance to run for a judgeship . Truman was elected to a federal bench in 1946 .
 Truman made his name investigating wartime production, exposing waste and production of faulty steel . Truman exposed waste and the production of defective steel .
 By 1944, he had been embroiled in the factional rivalry of the Democratic national convention's vice presidential nomination .
 For the liberal-left, the obvious choice was the vice president Henry Wallace . Wallace was the president of the United States during the Second World War II .
 Truman married Bess Wallace at the age of 35 . Others backed either the war mobilisation director James F Byrnes or Supreme Court Justice William 0 Douglas .
 Truman unexpectedly became president upon the death of FDR in April 1945 . She was the daughter of one of the wealthiest families in Independence, Missouri . Harry S Truman was a Democrat .
 A bookish farm boy from Missouri who had fought in World War I, he had served as a Missouri senator . He had served in the state legislature .
 His administration began on the eve of the Axis defeat in World War II . It ended with the United States committed to a global conflict with communism known as the Cold War . The Cold War ended in the 1950s and '60s .
 Harry S Truman realised that his predecessor had dragged his feet on civil rights . He realised that he had been dragged down by his predecessor . Truman realised he had to change his stance .
 'Dixiecrats' rallied around the governor of South Carolina J Strom Thurmond, a noted conservative and critic of Truman . He appointed a civil rights commission and later legislation provoked a revolt at the 1948 Democratic national convention .
 The House of Un-American Activities went on the warpath in October 1947, determined to stamp out supposed communist subversion in Hollywood . Jack Warner, Louis B Mayer and Walt Disney were among those who backed HUAC efforts .
 Industrial conflict, dormant in the war years, now reignited . Workers and bosses now face each other again in the workplace .
 A steel strike in January 1946 brought 800,000 workers out . It was followed by a coal strike in April and a rail strike in May . The steel strike was the first of three strikes in 1946 .
 Striking strikes contributed to the Democratic mauling in the 1946 midterm elections . Coupled with inflation, strikes contributed with inflation in the election .
 Truman also wanted to follow up FDR’s New Deal with a package of employment, health, education and insurance reforms called the 'Fair Deal 1' in the face of fierce Republican opposition . Truman wanted to continue the 'New Deal' but faced fierce opposition from Republicans .
 Truman’s only alternative to using the atomic bomb would have been a brutal island-by-island invasion of Japan, costing hundreds of thousands of young American lives .
 By spring 1945, Japan was cut off from South East Asia's oil supplies . Its fleets crippled, its seas and skies open to attack and the air force resorted to desperate kamikaze suicide attacks .
 Truman and his advisors had estimated a combined siege and naval blockade together with non-atomic bombings had at least a chance of forcing a Japanese surrender before November . Operation Olympic, the invasion of Kyushu, was the proposed commencement of Operation Olympic .
 Stalin violated the Yalta Agreements by invading Hokkaido, documents reveal . But other declassified documents now reveal that he wanted his rapidly advancing forces to occupy . The Japanese capital was occupied by the Soviet Union in violation of the agreement .
 The Red Army did not stop advancing until the official Japanese surrender on 2 September . Red Army already controlled large parts of Manchuria and Korea . The Japanese surrender was officially accepted by the Red Army .
 The atomic bombings almost certainly represented less the end of WWII as the beginning of the Cold War . The ultimate gesture of U.S. military might was designed to unnerve the Soviets .
 Truman came to favour Truman after being warned by his advisors that he would alienate organised labour and African Americans . Truman was warned by the White House that he was alienating organised labour, African Americans and African American workers .
 Initially, Truman was overshadowed by Roosevelt, lacking charisma and public speaking skills . Initially, he had been overshadowed by the president's charisma .
 American public considered him straight-talking, feisty and honest, characteristics that played to his advantage during the 1948 Presidential election . However, he was considered straight talking and honest .
 Truman oversaw conversion of the American economy from wartime production to one that emphasised consumerism . Truman oversaw the conversion of America's economy from war production to a consumerist economy .
 He protected the New Deal with a rise in the minimum wage in 1949 and expansion of social security in 1949 .
 FDR did not roll back many of FDR’s wartime interventions in the economy, which had included state monopolies, wage and price controls . FDR's wartime interventions included wage, price controls and wage controls .
 The immediate post-war economy was hobbled by high inflation and the shortage of many consumer goods such as cars, housing, refrigerators, sugar and meat .
 During the Truman presidency, the military was desegregated and a federal report on civil rights was commissioned . The report was commissioned during the Truman administration .
 His administration was harried by the Republicans, especially after they captured Congress in the 1946 mid-term elections .
 Rooting out the supposed web of covert spies and saboteurs in the pay of Moscow even reached as far as Hollywood where the future president, Ronald Reagan, as president of the Screen Actors’ Guild, was an enthusiastic scourge of big screen leftism .
 Truman and his secretary of state Dean Acheson were likewise accused by conservative Republicans like Nixon of being ‘soft’ on communism, to their detriment .
 Acheson stood by Alger Hiss, a State Department official, after his 1950 perjury conviction . To the anger of many conservatives, many conservatives had said he stood by Hiss after his conviction .
 Hiss had been named by the senior Time magazine editor Whittaker Chambers as a Soviet spy when he testified before HUAC in August 1948 . Chambers had named Hiss as a spy .
 The fear of espionage was not a baseless one during the Truman era . The fear was not an entirely unfounded one during that era .
 Truman had taken Stalin aside at Potsdam on 24 . The devastation of World War II had left Europe's economies in ruins . Millions facing starvation in Europe .
 The European Recovery Program, aka the Marshall Plan, was proposed by Truman's secretary of state, George Marshall . George Marshall proposed the plan in 1945 .
 In April 1948 freighter John H Quick sailed from Galveston Texas with 9,000 tonnes of wheat . The ship was a freighter from Texas to Texas .
 Hundreds of vessels containing essential raw materials and foodstuffs would follow . The vessels would be filled with food and other supplies .
 America gave or leant 2.3 per cent of its gross national product in 1949 . America gave the nation 2.5 per cent in 1949, according to the UN .
 By 1951, West Europe's industrial production was 43 per cent above pre-war levels . By 1951 the program was in full force .
 Harry Truman was born in Lamar, Missouri, in 1884 . Truman was six when he was born . The Truman family later moves to Independence when he is six .
 He meets his future wife Bess Wallace at the First Presbyterian Sunday School where he met her . He met her at the school .
 He becomes the senator from Missouri in 1934, beating his Republican rival Roscoe C Patterson by 262,000 votes .
 Germany surrenders to the Allied forces on 7 May 1945 . January 1927 – Announces VE Day Germany . January 27 .
 Truman announces the surrender to the American public by radio one day after FDR's death . Truman announced the surrender a little under a month after FDR died . Truman made him 33rd president .
 Years later Stalin would admit he had been an ""innocent idealist"" in the company of Stalin who privately mocked him . Years later he would admit that he was an "innocent ideast"
 Nagasaki is bombed three days later, with the two bombings killing at least 130,000 Japanese civilians . Nagasaki was bombed by the Japanese government three days after the bombing .
 Truman Doctrine was passed and received the support of most Republicans . Truman Doctrine passed in 1945 and was passed by most Republicans in Congress .
 Stalin already knew about the atom bomb, thanks to the British spies Klaus Fuchs and Donald McClean . But Stalin was already aware of the bomb, according to Stalin .
 Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were executed in 1951 for passing atomic secrets to the Soviets . Rosenberg's execution outraged many liberals, including liberals . Rosenbergs were convicted of espionage in 1951 .
 Julius Julius Julius was a Soviet courier . But declassified Soviet cables decades later revealed he was actually a courier . Julius was found to have been a courier for decades .
 Truman's foreign policy, however, was defined by its opposition to Soviet communism . Truman was opposed to the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 He had taken power only a few weeks before the suicide of Adolf Hitler . He took power only weeks before Hitler's suicide .
 By the end of his administration, the United Nations, led by American forces, was locked into a stalemated war against communist forces on the remote Korean peninsula .
 During Truman's first term the Allies accepted the unconditional surrender of the Axis powers . The United Nations Charter was signed by Truman in 1945 .
 In 1947 he introduced the Truman Doctrine to provide aid to Greece and Turkey . The Truman Doctrine sought to prevent them from becoming Soviet supplicants . In 1947 it was introduced to prevent the Soviet invasion .
 That same year, Truman instituted the Marshall Plan to rescue Europe's war-wrecked economies . The Marshall Plan was designed to save Europe from war-wounded economies .
 He initiated an airlift of food and supplies to Western-held areas of Berlin after Soviet forces blocked access . By 1948, he had recognised the State of Israel .
 In 1949 Truman supported the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation . Truman supported an ultimately nuclear-armed military alliance against the Soviet Union and its East European satellites .
 The Far East proved to be a region of far more volatile superpower rivalry . The Cold War lived up to its billing in Europe, with the Far East proving more volatile than Europe .
 Truman administration backed Chiang ICai Shek's corrupt and incompetent Nationalists against the communist guerrillas led by Chairman Mao Zedong . After China's civil war reignited following the Japanese defeat, the Truman administration had backed the Nationalists .
 Truman's handling of the war in Korea dogged his final years . His handling of Korea dogged him in the final years of his presidency .
 The conduct of General MacArthur on the battlefield during the winter of 1950-51 constituted arguably the most serious act of insubordination against an American commander-in-chief in American history . General MacArthur's conduct of the war was arguably the worst serious insubordinate act by an American
 MacArthur was determined to take the war into China itself, overthrowing Mao's communist regime . MacArthur was critical of the administration in press statements .
 He would later reveal in his memoirs that he wanted to use a total of 26 atomic bombs against North Korea and China . He later revealed that he planned to bomb North Korea, China .
 MacArthur’s dismissal by Truman, although well within the presidential prerogative, was highly unpopular . Even so, the dismissal was well within Truman's prerogate, but unpopular .
 Truman was frustrated by the costly war, which killed 35,000 U.S. soldiers and nearly two million Koreans . Truman died at the hands of the Korean War .
 He left office in January 1953 and travelled extensively, publishing his memoirs in a collection titled Mr Citizen .
 By the time of his death twelve years later, it was widely recognised that his administration had profoundly changed the United States and the wider world .
 Truman re-elected for second term despite predicted defeat in 1948 . Chicago Tribune went to press early with 'Dewey Defeats Truman' on its front page .
 Truman's 1948 election victory was one of the great surprises in American political history . Truman's victory in 1948 election was a surprise to many Americans .
 In the latter capacity he had cleared slums, reformed mental hospitals, built new clinics, extended the state infrastructure . But he was still able to cut the state’s tax rates by 50 per cent .
 Truman’s rating were at an abysmal 32 per cent by 1948, kept low by rising inflation, industrial unrest and persistent shortages of certain consumer items .
 The defeat of imperial Japan had left the Korean peninsula partitioned along the 38th parallel of latitude into a Soviet backed North and US-backed South by 1948 .
 In June 1950, North Korea's Kim Il-sung sent his armies storming over the 38th parallel . With the tacit backing of Joseph Stalin, the North Korean dictator's armies stormed over the border .
 For the first twelve months the battlefront ranged from either end of the peninsula . For the past 12 months, it was seen as a war zone on either side of the border .
 MacArthur's forces pushed the North Koreans towards the River Yalu and the Chinese border . The UN held on to the south eastern Pusan perimeter of the border .
 Chairman Mao Zedong sent 300,000 'volunteers’ over the Yalu, attacking UN forces and pushing the frontline below the South Korean capital of Seoul . Then, as the freezing winter broke, he sent 300-000 volunteers .
 The war settled into two years of attrition before an armistice was signed in July 1953 . The war ended in the village of Panmunjom in July .
 This strategy depended on bipartisan support in an ideologically polarised era . This strategy was needed in a polarized era, the White House says .
 Truman calls on Congress to enact an anti-lynching law and legislation to prohibit segregation on interstate trains, buses, planes and in the military . Without prior consultation, Truman calls for the law to be enacted .
 By this time he had instituted a presidential library and published his memoirs during his retirement . He had instituted his presidential library .
 Dwight D Eisenhower would help shape U.S. foreign and military policy . Edgar would then return the favour .
 The 34th president oversaw a period of great growth for America while trying to steer the country away from another world conflict . Dwight D Eisenhower is considered to be one of the greatest presidents in the history of the United States .
 In his time in the army he oversaw some of the most pivotal operations of WWII, such as the allied landings in northern France of Operation Overlord . He was also involved in the Allied landings of the Normandy invasion .
 The West Point graduate would work hard throughout his life to reach that point . He would have to work hard to achieve that goal .
 Dwight moved from Texas to Kansas when he was very young . Dwight enjoyed an active childhood where he would take great pleasure in sports such as baseball and American Football . Dwight was born in Texas but moved to Kansas at the age of 12 .
 Eisenhower was set on the path that would lead to greatness at West Point in 1911 . Eisenhower was a West Point student at the beginning of the Eisenhower era .
 He would graduate a 2nd lieutenant in 1915 and would spend WWI training tank crews . He would earn him a reputation for his excellent organisational skills . Enjoyed the military tradition and active lifestyle .
 Still bitter that he did not get to see combat, Eisenhower continued to climb steadily through the ranks in the interwar . His son, Doud Dwight, died of scarlet fever in 1921 and his son was also killed .
 Dwight D Eisenhower would be a brigadier general when the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor struck . Eisenhower was serving under another great general, Douglas MacArthur, when he was a general .
 He demonstrated great ability in planning Operation Torch, the allied invasion of North Africa, and commanding allied forces in Operation Overlord, including the D-Day landings .
 Eisenhower was made the military governor of the United States occupied zone in Germany after the war . Recognised as a great military mind, Eisenhower was also made the U.S. occupation zone governor of Germany .
 Germany was still reeling from the terrible destruction of the Second World War . Here he would help to rebuild Germany, which was then devastated .
 Eisenhower realised that there could be no long term cooperation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union after WWII . Eisenhower realised in the years just after WWII that there was no long-term cooperation with the Soviet Soviet Union .
 Plans for peaceful cohabitation gave way to a containment policy that would check Soviet expansion . Plans for peace in Russia were put forward by the West .
 Eisenhower would be encouraged by President Truman and others to run in the 1948 elections . Eisenhower would run for the presidency .
 This would be the first step towards becoming the country's 34th president . Although he declined and stated that as a lifelong professional soldier he should abstain from gaining high political office .
 He was pressured to run in the presidential election by president Truman and finally relented . He was forced to run again in order to win the election in 1945 .
 During his presidency, he would continue the domestic policy of Roosevelt's New Deal . His foreign policy would aim to reduce Cold War tensions with Russia through military negotiation .
 This was met with mixed success, as although he was able to reach breakthroughs like the orchestration of a ceasefire on the Korean border . However, incidents like those involving the U2 spy plane would prove embarrassing .
 Ike's brother lost an eye in a childhood accident that had a profound effect on Ike's life . Ike was a member of the U2 spy plane that was operated by the CIA in 1960 . Ike says he was inspired by his brother's tragic accident .
 i V was shot down over Russia during an intelligence gathering mission . It taught him i V to be protective of A those under him .
 The Russians broadcast to the world what they had done, pointing the finger straight at America . The Russians pointed the finger at the U.S. President Obama .
 America claimed the craft was intended for weather research and that it had accidentally flown over Soviet airspace . Uncomfortable with admitting the truth America claimed it was a weather research aircraft .
 Russia announced they had the pilot, alive and well, from the crashed plane in custody in custody . This as all before Russia announced that they had a pilot alive well, in custody of the plane crash victim .
 No longer being able to deny the accusations the Americans were embarrassed on the world stage, a tough blow for any president's leadership . The U.S. has been accused of being embarrassed in the world .
 Ike's presidential landmarks include the White House's White House, Capitol Hill . Ike also had a military base in Washington, D.C. and the Pentagon . Ike was the first president to have a White House residence .
 His Atoms for Peace' speech at the UN in 1953 had far-reaching consequences for both civil and military life . His speech had consequences for the military and civil life in both countries .
 The speech was a landmark in politics as it brought atomic development from secretive government research labs into the public eye . Delivered to the UN .
 This new language of atomic warfare, with its terrible destructive power, placed grave responsibility on the countries involved in the development of these weapons, says the author of the book .
 Eisenhower had been against the use of the atomic bomb on Japan in 1945, but this did not stop his administration raising the number of nuclear warheads the U.S. possessed from 1000 to 20,000 during his time in office .
 Eisenhower retreated from political life and with his wife, known as Mamie, would retire to a farm in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania . Eisenhower retired from politics after reaching the end of his second term .
 Eisenhower passed away from congestive heart failure in March 1969 . Admitted to hospital on 28 March 1969, Eisenhower was admitted to hospital with heart failure .
 Richard Nixon would say, "Some men are considered great because they lead great armies or they lead powerful nations" Eisenhower would say .
 Eisenhower and the CIA had known that the USSR had the capability to launch an object into space nine months before Sputnik was to break the atmosphere . The Space Race begins in the United States .
 USSR made it clear that space was fair game to any nation that wished to claim it . Space was also made clear that it was fair for any nation to claim the space .
 With his blessing, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was founded . Funding for other scientific programs was granted . With his administration's blessing, it was founded and funding was granted.
 Alaska was welcomed for the oil revenue that it would bring to the U.S. Hawaii was instituted by popular demand . Alaska was the first state to have a state of its own .
 These would be the last U.S. territories to be made into states . The territories are the last United States territories to become states .
 In 1957 you could be forgiven in thinking that you were living in a science fiction story . In 1957, the first episode of the series was set in a sci-fi setting .
 The Russians had just fired the first artificial satellite ever into earth's orbit with Sputnik . The launch was the first time the world had seen an artificial satellite in orbit .
 This space age technology would begin the space race that would end with the United States landing men on the moon for the first time in history . This space race would begin with the U.S. landing the moon .
 Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry and Little Richard led the way in the 1950s . Little Richard, Little Richard and Chuck Berry were among the stars of the day .
 Rock and Roll was heavily influenced by the blues, jazz and gospel music . Rock and roll would come to be associated with teenage rebellion and helped influence the music today .
 Mattel's Barbie doll is one of the world's most iconic brands . Mattel launched the iconic doll in 1959 .
 Barbie would captivate America's young children for more than 50 years . Quickly becoming a fashion icon, Barbie became an icon of the day .
 Despite being at the heart of many controversies it has remained a U.S. household name .
 We can't imagine a world where TV sitcoms don't exist but in the 1950s they were a revelation . Watching the stories was a revelation to the world .
 Shows like Father Knows Best, The Adventures ofOzzie and Harriet, and / Love Lucy captivated audiences across the country . Shows like the Adventures of Ozzie & Harriet and Love Lucy will be remembered .
 Running from 1951-57, I Love Lucy was one of the most watched shows in the U.S. Running in the 1950s and '60s, the show ran from 1951 to 1959 .
 'JFK' remains a fascinating figure years after his untimely death . An iconic leader whose time in office was fraught with Cold War tension .
 The loss of the Midwest and the Rocky Mountain states came through on the broadcast . After winning the industrial cities of the Northeast, the Northeast won the election .
 Richard Nixon was more experienced, had more supporters in the allimportant south . His opponent, Richard Nixon, had been endorsed by the current president, Dwight Eisenhower .
 He was the safe vote, while Kennedy was the young, energetic pretender . Kennedy was a safe vote for Obama, while Obama was the youthful, energetic challenger .
 He gave the U.S. a renewed self-confidence through his tough reputation abroad . After his assassination in Dallas his legacy would live on .
 It was true that Kennedy had his critics, but it was his deep connection with the media, getting his name in the public domain . Kennedy was born into a rich Irish-American Catholic family from Brookline, Massachusetts .
 Born in 1888, Joe grew up in a well-established Catholic family from Boston . Joe was born in 1888 and raised in Boston .
 Jack was none of these things, outgrowing Joe's outdated beliefs . that through his family connections it stayed out there in the best possible light, that made his political campaigns in the Fifties a success .
 This assertion was put to the test when he was nominated as the Democratic candidate for the presidency . This assertion has been put to a test .
 He knew he would need something more than his easy smile, good looks and friends in the print media . These alone would not be enough to go up against a seasoned politician like Nixon . He would need to reach millions and captivate them with his personality .
 Kennedy received coaching from consultants to allow him to practice rebuking Nixon's comment while maintaining eye contact with audience .
 The presidential election of 1960 was one of the closest in American history . Kennedy and Nixon faced off in the first televised debate in 1960 .
 Kennedy had to have the right policies to fully tap into the pool of voters . But of course, looking right was only part of the story . Kennedy's policies were also important to his success, he says .
 He invited King and his inner circle to the White House, offering refreshments and a promise to get things moving where he could on civil rights . King's inner circle was invited by the president, who invited them to a White House meeting .
 'Communism was not only objectionable to Kennedy, but a moral evil' Nixon would later call the 'silent majority' behind the civil rights movement .
 Ted Kennedy was the youngest brother of the Kennedy family . Ted was a key voice of support for the Kennedy political machine though Jack's presidency and Bobby's bid for the presidential nomination .
 Sam Giancana was the head of the main crime family in Chicago . He was connected to the Kennedys through Frank Sinatra and Judith Campbell . Sam was a mob boss and head of a Chicago mob .
 It is alleged that the CIA employed his associates to kill Fidel Castro . It was alleged that he was involved in the CIA's alleged assassination of Castro .
 William King Harvey Harvey was a CIA spook who reportedly recruited Mafia kingpins Roselli and Giancana to kill Castro with the quiet blessing of Bobby Kennedy . Harvey was reportedly recruited by the Mafia kingpin with Bobby Kennedy's blessing .
 Joe Kennedy was one of the main routes into politics for Jack, and maintained links with Hollywood . Joe was a major hub in the Kennedy connection .
 William Tuohy was the chief judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County Illinois . He provided Joe with a link to Sam Giancana who, rumoured, helped Joe and Jack gain Mafia support for the key electoral battleground .
 John Vernou Bouvier III was a key link for the Kennedys into the world of business and high society . Bouvier was also a key member of the family of the late King Edward VII VII VII .
 His nickname 'Black Jack' was acquired through his love of gambling and drinking . He was nicknamed for his drinking and gambling love .
 George Skakel is father-in-law to Bobby Kennedy and founder of the Great Lakes Carbon Corporation . He was the father-of-one of the Kennedy family members .
 Jackie Kennedy provided the Kennedy family with one of many links into the upper echelons of American society . Jackie Kennedy was the wife of the president and wife of President Kennedy .
 Her family, through her father’s business concerns, were extremely wealthy . Her family was extremely wealthy and she was an extremely popular socialite .
 Peter Lawford was a member of the Kennedy family through marriage . Also part of the 'rat pack' with Mafia connections, and a dose friend to Frank Sinatra .
 He was also linked with Marilyn Monroe, and arranged meetings with her for the President . He arranged to meet her for President .
 Patricia Lawford is sister to Jack and husband to the A-list celebrity actor Peter . She is a strong link from the White House to Hollywood and the California celebrity scene .
 Marilyn Monroe Kennedy's relationship with Marilyn Monroe is steeped in mystery . Kennedy and Monroe were married at the time of Monroe's death . Kennedy was married to Marilyn Monroe in 1945 .
 Unconfirmed reports suggest that the two shared a sexual relationship, although this was never fully proven . Unconfirmed rumours suggest that this was not true .
 Frank Sinatra knew many members of the Kennedy family, most notably Joe and Bobby Kennedy and the President himself . Sinatra was a close friend of the President's .
 He acted as a go-between for the three men, allowing them to meet famous celebrities like Marilyn Monroe, who he was having an affair with . The three men met famous celebrities including Marilyn Monroe .
 He also provided the Kennedys with links to the Mafia, and set up dates for them with women when their wives were away . He also arranged to arrange dates for men to meet women while their wives are away .
 He reportedly slept with Judith Campbell during the period when she was having an affair with the President . He was reportedly sleeping with her during that period .
 The failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion did not temper the attitudes of the president or his closest advisors . The president and his closest advisers were not dissuaded by the failure, they say .
 The Marilyn Monroe affair was probably the most infamous of Kennedy's relationships during his time in government . The other women were the other women .
 The Von Post affair started just after Kennedy was married . Gunilla Von Post had an affair with Kennedy .
 He publicly endorsed the Diem regime in South Vietnam led by Ngo Dinh Diem . Despite private reservations about their effectiveness and cruelty to their own people, he publicly endorsed them .
 No future president would dare look weak in front of the Communist, prompting a military invasion of Vietnam by Johnson . Johnson's military invasion prompted a perception that any failure to contain Communism was a de-facto failure .
 Debates about whether the Vietnam War would have been conducted differently if Kennedy had been at the helm endure . Debates over whether the war was conducted differently in Vietnam endure .
 His image as young, energetic and tough chimed well with the mood of a U.S. that wanted an assertive nation . His image was youthful and energetic and popular with Americans .
 It is unlikely Kennedy would have ordered a full withdrawal at Vietnam, but part of his enduring persona has created a myth that things would have been very different and a lot better had he survived .
 Eunice was a strong advocate for the Democratic party . She married Robert Sargent Shiver Jr, who became the U.S. Ambassador to France and Democratic Vice Presidential candidate .
 She was a vocal supporter of pro-life views . Her daughter Maria would marry actor turned Governor of California Arnold Schwarzenegger .
 Rosemary Rosemary suffered from violent mood swings, and was not as academically talented as her siblings . Rosemary was not academically gifted as she was her siblings, and suffered mood swings .
 She was said to be beautiful and happy during her teenage years, but her apparent slowness grated on her father . Her father said she was 'beautiful and happy' when she was a teenager .
 In 1941, at the age of 23, he decided that she should have a lobotomy to calm her mood swings . The lobotomy caused irreversible damage to her brain, causing irreversible brain damage .
 Joe fought his entire life to ensure his family remained at the top of American political life . Ambitious, tenacious and at times cruel, Joe fought for his family to remain in the U.S. political life. Joe fought to ensure that his family was at the very top of
 When he finally achieved his main goal getting one of his sons in the presidency, he suffered a debilitating stroke that left him paralysed and with impaired speech . He suffered a stroke that caused him to suffer from a severe paralysis .
 Ted Kennedy won John's Senate seat in 1962 aged just 30 the youngest age allowed . Ted was the youngest of the male siblings in the Kennedy family . Ted won his Senate seat aged 30, the youngest allowed to be a senator in the US .
 He looked set to follow his older sibling into the White House when he was involved in a car crash that killed a young woman after a party in 1969 .
 He fled the scene and only called the police the next morning, hours after the incident by which time the woman's body had already been discovered . The man only called police the following morning after the woman was discovered .
 He remained in politics and became one of the longest-serving Senators in American history .
 Joseph P Jr. Joe Jr was being groomed as the first Irish-Catholic president of the United States . Joe Jr is being groom for the presidency of the U.S. Joseph Jr.
 He served in the United States Navy as a pilot during the war, flying B-24 bombers . He died on duty in a plane explosion over Suffolk .
 Kathleen Kathleen married into English aristocracy after spending time in England when her father was Ambassador to Britain in the Forties . Kathleen Kathleen was born Kathleen Kathleen, a daughter of former Ambassador to the UK .
 She became a journalist and volunteered her time in the British Red Cross . She died in a plane crash in 1948 .
 Robert Robert followed Jack into politics, becoming Attorney General during the Kennedy administration and promoting civil rights . Robert Robert became Attorney General in Kennedy administration . Robert followed Robert into politics .
 He was assassinated during election season for the Democratic nomination in 1968 . His assassination came during the Democratic presidential campaign .
 Jean Jean was exceptionally gifted academically, and entered politics as a Democrat . She was the U.S. ambassador to Ireland during the Clinton administration . Jean Jean entered politics in the 1990s .
 She was a key politician during the run-up to the IRA ceasefire and the Good Friday Agreement of the Nineties .
 John F John ascended to the presidency in 1961, before being brutally assassinated in 1963 . He ascended to power in 1961 and was brutally assassinated by the White House in 1963.
 His politics and ideals changed both the U.S. and the world, with his legacy dwarfing his short lifespan .
 Jackie Kennedy described by Jackie Kennedy as a Hollywood movie stars ""thoroughbred"" who did ""everything to put one at including Marilyn Monroe" Despite all of this, the English actor connected she was dedicated to her family and their wellto the 'rat pack’ and various being .
 In just over five years he would retire from the White House as one of the most unpopular presidents in United States history . He had support from a wide portion of the American people .
 Historians continue to argue over his ground-breaking policies and how one man could be such a force for good, but also responsible for one of the darkest periods in American history .
 Johnson family was so ingrained in Texas that Johnson City in the state was named after Johnson's own cousin . Johnson City, Texas, was named in honor of Johnson's cousin .
 The Johnson family had fought for the Confederacy in the Civil War . They had lived in the area as farmers and ranchers for years .
 Lyndon Johnson's father amassed huge debts and lost the family farm in his early years . Lyndon's father had been a gifted politician himself, but he also amassed debts .
 There is no doubting that this brush with poverty had a striking effect on Johnson . Johnson's brushes with poverty left him a striking impression on the actor .
 Johnson was the first president to be sworn in aboard an aircraft . He was also the first to be sworn in by a woman team . In high school he was elected class president and was a keen member of debate .
 He was not particularly gifted at school and, amidst pressure from his parents, struggled to get into college . However, he was able to get to college despite his parents' pressure .
 He moved to California in an effort to find a college that would enrol him . He supported himself by picking grapes and picking grapes in California .
 Johnson took time out to teach at a school for disadvantaged Mexican-American students . Despite enrolling in college, Johnson still struggled to support himself financially .
 Johnson's experience at the center of poverty and racial discrimination had a profound effect on the young man . Johnson was inspired by the experiences of those facing extreme poverty .
 The desire to fix these two problems would prove to be his driving force through the rest of his life . The desire for fixing these two particular problems would be the driving force for him .
 Johnson's political ambitions were already starting to form, and in 1931 he became a legislative secretary to Congressman Richard M Kleberg . Johnson was a member of the House of Representatives .
 Johnson was thrust headfirst into the web of politics . He met many influential people, congressmen, newspapermen and lobbyists . He began to refine his own political skills .
 Charming and intelligent, she was the perfect complement to the coarse and passionate Johnson . "Charming" and "intelligent" she was a perfect match for Johnson .
 Born in a small farmhouse in Stonewall, Texas, Johnson rose out of poverty to become the 36th president of the United States . In just three months they were married .
 While serving as president he oversaw one of the most progressive periods in the country's history . He declared war on poverty and racial discrimination .
 Johnson escalated the USA’s role in the Vietnam war and bred a nation of disillusioned youth . However, he escalated the U.S. role in Vietnam war .
 Dust storms forced farmers to abandon their farms in the heartland due to dust storms . Thousands of people were forced to leave their farms due to the dust storm .
 The Second World War was hugely costly to the United States . It affected not only those fighting abroad, but those on the home front .
 Women rapidly entered the workforce, many for the first time, and the number of high school drop-outs increased . People struggled on the border of starvation due to shortages of food, hospital beds and housing .
 In the post-war years the United States boasted the strongest military and economy in the world . The U.S. still has the most of the world's strongest military, economy .
 For its citizens this meant they could enjoy a wealth of consumer goods such as cars and televisions, which were available to more people than ever . For many, this means they were able to enjoy a wide range of goods, including cars .
 The United States also experienced a baby boom, with approximately four million babies born each year during the 1950s . The U.S. experienced a boom of 4 million babies a year during that period .
 Americans are moving to small, inexpensive houses in the suburbs . So many new families are being created, there was a huge increase of Americans moving to the suburbs.
 The idealised suburban life of a white picket fence wasn't quite what it seemed . However, the idealised life of suburban life was revealed in a new documentary .
 Many American women felt trapped and dissatisfied with a life of quietly rearing children behind closed doors . Many felt trapped, dissatisfied with life of quiet rearing .
 Disillusioned with the mounting war in Vietnam, many young Americans chose to reject traditional values in every way they could . The youth rebel is the son of Vietnam War hero, who was killed in 1968 .
 They protested, wore their hair long, listened to artists such as Bob Dylan and gathered at Hippie rock festivals . They wore long hair and listened to Bob Dylan . They gathered at festivals and protested against the government .
 One of the most significant and controversial relationships in Johnson's life was with the civil rights trailblazer Martin Luther King Jr. Johnson's relationship with the King was controversial .
 Some claim that Johnson was reluctant to help King achieve equal voting rights for black Americans . Their complicated partnership has filled books and inspired films, with some claiming he was reluctant .
 Others have stated that the partnership between the two charismatic men was one of the most consequential in American history . However, others have said that it was a pivotal partnership .
 Those who worked with Johnson insist that he was supportive and enthusiastic about voting rights . He urged King to organise rallies and protests, urging people to vote for the first time .
 King himself wrote that the two of them did 'differ concerning the tempo' but that he had genuine involvement in the issues . King himself said that he did not agree with the tempo of the tempo .
 Johnson had been pressuring the Justice Department for some time to develop voting right legislation . Taped interviews of the meetings between the men indicate that he had been pressured to develop the legislation .
 The president was hesitant for the public to view him as close to the civil rights leader . However, they also reveal that he was hesitant to say he was close to civil rights icon .
 The two remarkable men both played a part in the ultimate Civil Rights Act . Regardless of whether Johnson did prioritise King's aims or not, the two men played a key role in the US civil rights movement .
 Timeline "" seized the chance to use Kennedy's memory to power his own goals"" Johnson’s most trusted aide . Timeline . Timeline: Timeline .
 The money and Johnson’s abilities secured him a place in Congress aged at 28 years old . Johnson was elected to Congress in 1996 .
 He was smart, hardworking, and won allies quickly, including President Roosevelt . President Roosevelt was smart and hardworking . He won allies, including Roosevelt, and he was smart .
 He was the first member of Congress to volunteer for active duty as a navy lieutenant commander in 1941 . However, he failed to win a Senate seat and in 1941 fate and war led him elsewhere . He became the first politician to volunteer to active duty .
 His stint in the navy was brief, but he won a Silver Star before he and all serving members of Congress were ordered to leave active service . He won the Silver Star in the Navy .
 John F Kennedy snatched the role of Democratic candidate from under Johnson’s nose . Kennedy wooed and impressed his fellow Democrats and impressed their fellow Democrats .
 The two men didn’t get on, but Johnson needed Kennedy's newfound power, and Kennedy needed Johnson's popularity in the southern states and the iuty heade on .
 LBJ was ill-suited to the vice presidency . Kennedy and the majority of his administration placed no great trust in him . LBJ found himself locked out of the president's inner circle .
 Johnson headed the space program and worked on pushing through civil rights legislation . Despite this, Johnson did make some waves, he still made some waves . He headed NASA and pushed for civil rights reform .
 Johnson, however, remained frustrated by his lack of influence, but wouldn't have to wait to take centre stage . Johnson's grand dreams of curing America of poverty remained frustrated, but he would soon be a success .
 On 22 November 1963, three years into his presidency, Kennedy was assassinated . Kennedy was killed in 1963 .
 Kennedy's Economic Opportunity Act is designed to tackle local poverty . The act was sent to Congress as quicldy as possible .
 He pushed through with a combination of great political manoeuvring and sheer force of will, the 1964 Civil Rights Bill . He also pushed through the 1964 civil rights bill .
 Johnson enjoyed success at the Senate and was a prime contender for the Democratic presidential candidacy . Kennedy vs. Johnson was the defining moment of the 1960s presidential race .
 The only other real competition was the ambitious young man called John F Kennedy . Kennedy was the only real competition .
 Johnson chose to delay his campaign, believing Kennedy would cause a division in the party, but instead this gave the charismatic man a lead . Johnson chose not to run for president .
 Johnson underestimated Kennedy's charm and formed a ‘Stop Kennedy' coalition, which was unsuccessful . Johnson completely underestimated his charm and, in a mad fear of failure, formed a 'Stop Kennedy coalition'
 Kennedy offered the vice-presidential nomination to Johnson, who then accepted . It was with shock then, that Kennedy offered to Johnson's nomination . Kennedy then accepted the nomination for Johnson .
 Kennedy’s actions would profoundly affect the future of the United States in ways he could never have comprehended . Whether it was in an effort to win, or simply an act of courtesy, Kennedy's actions would affect the U.S. future .
 He becomes very involved in school activities, including editing the newspaper and participating in various college debates .
 It has a profound effect on him, as he realises that entry to college would be impossible to almost all of them . It has been a profound experience for him as a student, he says .
 President Obama decided to create a nation where the door to knowledge is open to all Americans . He decides to create an open-minded nation of knowledge .
 The experience has a profound effect on him, however, and he will quickly climb the ranks . The experience will be an important part of his career, however .
 Lynda Bird, born in 1944, and Luci Baines, was born in 1947 . They will go on to have two daughters, all with LBJ initials Lynda and Lynda .
 Kennedy had been liked, but without him, Johnson was more popular than ever . Without him, Kennedy had become a popular force in America . Kennedy was a popular figure .
 "This legislative agenda would become one of the most impactful and far-reaching programs in the country's history," says President Obama . This legislative agenda is one of America's most ambitious programs ever .
 Johnson orchestrated passage of Medicare, pushed through three civil rights bills . Johnson orchestrated the passage of the Medicare bill . He pushed through legislation that outlawed discrimination in housing, voting and commerce .
 He poured money into urban renewal, championed the arts and education . He also targeted crime and targeted crime . He spent money on urban renewal .
 Johnson had dreamed of doing everything he'd dreamed of teaching since teaching decades ago . It was everything he had dreamed about since teaching in that classroom .
 President Barack Obama has been in the midst of a war of his own . The president is expected to return to the U.S. for the first time in his presidency .
 Johnson was determined to prevent the spread of communism, just like the men who had sat in the White House before him . He believed the only way to do that was to stop the Viet Cong from taking South Vietnam .
 Johnson poured money and men into Vietnam, with troop numbers soaring from 16,000 to more than 500,000 in five years . Troops numbers soared by more than 700,000 during the war, including more than 100,000 troops .
 This inevitably meant American casualties sky-rocketed, and many Americans took a stand against the war . Many Americans took to the streets to protest the war in Iraq and Afghanistan . U.S. troops died in the war, but many Americans were killed .
 Anti-war campaigns gained support across the country, and when some ended in tragedy, Johnson's popularity drifted downwards .
 He wasn't the sort of man to admit defeat, and he had already poured countless funds into winning what was now so obviously an unwinnable war . He had already spent countless funds to win the war .
 His bombing campaigns did nothing but produce horrific images to fill the pages of newspapers . The bombing campaigns produced nothing but horrific images of the victims .
 Like it or not, Johnson was already losing everything before the war was lost . The war was already lost before it was over .
 In just four short years the record-breaking winner had become one of America’s most unpopular presidents of all time . His approval rating had plummeted .
 Despite his low approval rating, Johnson announced he would not seek or accept a nomination as the Democrats' candidate in 1968 . The country was shocked when he announced he wouldn't run for president in 1968.
 He had lost control of his own party, which is now split into four rival factions . But in reality he had lost his control of the party, according to reports .
 Johnson vacated the running race, and with his party in tatters, the White House doors were open for the Republican candidate, Richard Nixon to walk in . Nixon's party was tatters and he was able to walk into the presidency . Nixon was the Republican presidential candidate in 1972 .
 Johnson, meanwhile, returned home to his ranch in Stonewall, Texas to work on his memoirs . Johnson, perhaps aware of how little time remained .
 In 1970 Johnson suffered an attack of angina, the following year he had a heart attack . Johnson suffered from angina and angina attacks in the 1970s and 1980s .
 His condition rapidly worsened and he was rushed to hospital for surgery . His condition quickly deteriorated and he had to undergo surgery .
 His condition was too severe to operate and he was diagnosed as terminal . However, his condition was so severe that he was unable to be operated on .
 The ex-president died on 22 January 1973, two days after Nixon's inauguration .
 Johnson was honoured with a state funeral and buried in his family cemetery . Johnson was buried in a family cemetery in his honour .
 President Johnson remains one of the most controversial and divisive presidents of all time . Johnson was torn asunder by fighting an unwinnable war .
 The 'Great Society' was seen as the elimination of racial injustice and poverty . 1964-1965 was the central driving factor in President Johnson's presidency . The ‘Great Society’ was the creation of the Great Society .
 Johnson combated racial injustice with the Civil Rights Act in 1964 and 1968 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . Johnson pursued these aims tirelessly .
 He introduced Medicare and Medicaid, providing free medical care to needy Americans . The Food Stamp Act of 1964, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act and the Economic Opportunity Act also introduced .
 Johnson's War on Poverty enabled millions of Americans to rise above the poverty line . Johnson's war on poverty enabled millions to rise from poverty to prosperity .
 America's involvement in Vietnam dramatically changed when Johnson became president . The Vietnam War was one of the defining moments of the war .
 President Obama reversed Kennedy's order to withdraw military personnel . He instead chose to expand the U.S. military numbers in the conflict .
 When this proved ineffective he launched a systematic bombing campaign to grasp victory from defeat . When that proved ineffective, he started a systematic campaign of bombing campaigns .
 By the end of October 1965 American troops in Vietnam numbered 200,000 . However, when this failed to result in the desired outcome he poured more men and money into the conflict .
 In the following years this number grew and grew, and faith in the president plummeted . In the years following years, the number of people who had faith in Obama's government plummeted .
 The Tet Offensive in 1968 was the final nail in Johnson's coffin, turning popular opinion against the war, and against the president .
 There are immediate fears that he could be the next target in a conspiracy against the government . There are also fears that the government is being targeted .
 Johnson wins the election with 61 per cent the widest popular margin in American history . Despite early indication that Goldwater may win, Johnson wins with 61% of the popular vote .
 The Voting Rights Act prohibits racial discrimination in voting . It became effective on 6 August 1965, becoming effective in August 1965 . The act was passed in 1965 .
 He is buried in his family cemetery, only a few yards from the house of his birth .
 The White House is embroiled in a scandal that has spread like wildfire through the White House . That the leader of the world's foremost superpower is forced to make such an astonishing statement .
 It will lead to the first and only resignation of an incumbent president to date and become the defining political misdemeanour of the 20th century . It will be the first time incumbent president has resigned from office .
 Watergate is so seismic that the last syllable will be added as a suffix to any public series of events deemed scandalous . The origins of Watergate are seemingly small-fry in comparison to many political controversies a burglary at the Watergate Hotel .
 Richard Nixon delivers the quote late in 1973, when walls are beginning to close around him . It will take almost another year for the president to tender his resignation following a 'death by a thousand cuts' that sees allies and aides resigning or cast aside .
 Henry Kissinger consults with Nixon days before he quits . Nixon consults Kissinger on his options . Kissinger advises Nixon on how to deal with Nixon . Kissinger is Kissinger's former secretary of state .
 Kissinger tries to console Nixon at the prospect of only the second presidential impeachment and a potential criminal trial . Kissinger even accedes to his request that the pair of them get down on their knees and pray . Nixon's impeachment is the second of two presidential impeachment hearings .
 A security guard noticed that a number of doors have been taped open to prevent them from locking . The security guard called the police after noticing the taped doors were taped open .
 Nixon is a familiar face, having been a vice president to Dwight Eisenhower between 1952 and 1960 . He previously unsuccessfully fought John F Kennedy for the White House .
 During a debate, the future president falls foul of a relatively new medium in political campaigning . Voters listening on the radio believe that Nixon has triumphed . TV viewers are won over by JFK's good looks and charm .
 Nixon narrowly won the presidency in 1968 but won by a landslide in 1972 . He enjoys approval ratings of more than 70 per cent almost unheard of for a president in his second term .
 Nixon deploys an array of dubious techniques to smear opponents . However, Nixon deployed a range of dubious tactics to smear his opponents .
 A student of law who served in the U.S. Navy during World War Two, he was House Minority Leader from 1965 and 1973 . Became president when Richard Nixon resigned over the Watergate scandal .
 His administration was dogged by a stagnating economy . He signed an arms agreement with the Soviet Union and oversaw the withdrawal of Vietnam .
 Watergate burglaries remained shrouded in mystery for decades because of conflicting reports from the various parties involved . The burglaries were the result of a series of bungled burglaries in the early 1970s .
 Those involved in the burglaries included prominent members of the White House Plumbers, a covert intelligence group acting with the tacit approval of Nixon . Whether the president was aware of the specific activities or not, the group was working for Nixon .
 That Nixon learned about Watergate and sought a cover-up is beyond dispute . Nixon learned that Watergate was part of Watergate, and sought to cover it up . Watergate was beyond dispute, but it's beyond dispute.
 What may have been an attempt to prevent classified documents being leaked to the press degenerated into a dirty-tricks campaign against political opponents that was as widespread as it was inept .
 No definitive motive has ever come to light, with even those involved seemingly evasive or confused perhaps due to the passage of time, the desire to paint their own motives as righteous or contemporaneous misinformation .
 The President's Men' ordered the burglary and the president approved the cover-up simply because they could . Perhaps the old maxim about absolute power rings truest here, where The President’s Men' order the burglary .
 The Watergate Hotel, the beginning of the end for Nixon, is known to several federal government employees and Nixon himself . While he is aware that the CRP gathers intelligence on his rivals and administration's enemies, conversations reveal that he is either unaware of the scale of their activities or simply chooses
 The five men arrested at the Watergate were likely there either to recover bugs that had been left on the telephone of senior Democrats or install new surveillance equipment . Little significance is ascribed to the break-in .
 Washington Post rookie reporter Bob Woodward is sent to a local courthouse to cover the story . He discovers that the five men are no ordinary burglars, being found with unusually advanced bugging equipment and a surprisingly highpowered attorney .
 Woodward connects him to E Howard Hunt and Charles Colson using phone books belonging to the men . One of the men, James McCord, admits that he has previously worked for the CIA .
 Colson will claim that upon hearing of the arrests the day after they took place, Nixon hurled an ashtray at the wall in fury . Colson claims Nixon threw the ashtrays at him .
 Hunt is another CIA operative with a colourful background . He was once accused of involvement in the assassination of JFK . anecdotal evidence suggests he may have been in Dallas at the time of the killing .
 The Plumbers are a heady mix of CIA operatives, Republican aides and assorted security personnel . The extent of their activities is initially kept from Nixon by senior staff .
 Woodward realises Colson is a genuine link between the Watergate burglary and upper echelons of the White House . Colson was a special counsel, essentially a lawyer, and Woodward realised that he, unlike Hunt, is genuine link to Watergate .
 In 1972, Woodward is teamed with another reporter, Carl Bernstein, and the pair is urged to develop the story by the Posts executive editor . Woodward and Bernstein are teamed up to develop a story in 1972 .
 Woodward contacts an FBI source he has previously used, and uses an elaborate system of signals and instructions . Woodward is told that the scandal originates in the White House . Woodward contacts the FBI source using a system he has used previously used .
 Hunt demands money from CRP and White House to support the seven's legal fees essentially hush money . Hunt, G. Gordon Liddy and the five burglars are indicted on federal charges relating to the burglary . Hunt demanded money from the CRP for the legal fees of the seven
 Judge John Sirica believes that the men are lying about external help . They are all convicted in early-1973 and given stiff sentences . Judge Sirica believed they were lying about their external help.
 The president announces that a full investigation has occurred and found no evidence of wrongdoing while in fact no investigation has taken place . The president announced that the investigation had taken place and that the president had been cleared of wrongdoing .
 Nixon says his investigation indicates that no one on the White House staff, no one in this administration, presently employed, was involved in this bizarre incident .
 What really hurts in matters of this sort is not the fact that they occur, it's because overzealous people in campaigns do things that are wrong, it is because they are wrong . What really hurt is not that people do things wrong, but it's that they do it,
 Plumbers are arrested in the Democratic National Committee offices at the Watergate Hotel . Plumbers were arrested in 1972 . The first arrests were made at the DNC offices in Watergate .
 Payments to jailed men create a paper trail that implicates senior figures in the administration . Payments to the jailed men have been made by senior figures including senior officials .
 Woodward deduces that the chief of staff, HR Haldeman and Attorney General John Mitchell are also implicated in the scandal . Woodward dedues that the Chief of Staff, HR . Haldem and Attorney . Mitchell are implicated .
 Woodward and Bernstein write a book, All The President's Men, about their experience of the scandal . The book was later turned into a film about their experiences .
 Woodward and Bernstein are busy uncovering the paper trail to the White House . Another revelation will prove just as disastrous for Nixon .
 James McCord sent a letter to Judge Sirica explaining that he has perjured himself, alleging orders from high up in the White House . McCord was convicted of perjury in 1973 .
 In March, Nixon gets a lengthy rundown from John Dean on the scale of the dirty-tricks campaign and how the Watergate burglary came to happen .
 Dean's prognosis reveals illegal activities, blackmail and perjury on a grand scale . Nixon sighs his way through Dean’s prognosis, which reveals illegal activity .
 It is clear the chain is only as strong as its weakest link and those are cropping up everywhere as the net tightens . The net is tight as it tightens, and it's clear it's only as good as the weakest link .
 Dean says he is not confident the administration can ride it out . Dean: 'I'm not confident' administration can continue to ride the ride out .
 Dean can't shake the impression that he is being set up as a scapegoat . Even Dean himself is starting to feel the pressure . Dean himself feels the pressure and can't feel the impression he is set up .
 Nixon fires Dean, who turns star witness for the prosecution, and the president rolls the dice and gambles by disposing of some of his most trusted lieutenants . Haldeman and Ehrlichman resign from the White House .
 Gray reveals that he has provided daily updates on the Watergate investigation to the White House . Gray alleges that John Dean has ""probably lied"" to FBI investigators, enraging White House. Gray also alleges that Dean has lied to investigators .
 The identity of 'Deep Throat' was one of the greatest political mysteries until 2005 . Felt announced that he was journalist Bob Woodward's source in 2005 .
 Felt had been the FBI's associate director in 1973 . He was repeatedly passed over for the job of director by Nixon . Felt was a longtime FBI associate director, but was passed over by the president .
 G Gordon Liddy told him while playing golf that the break-in had originated within the CRP and that he should arrange for the burglars’ release . Richard Kleindienst became aware of Watergate when G. Liddy .
 He resigned the same day John Dean was fired and Haldeman and Ehrlichman quit . John Dean resigned the day after he was fired from the White House . He resigned as a result .
 Watergate hearings are being televised . Viewers see John Dean tell investigators that he had discussed the cover-up with Nixon at least 35 times . John Mitchell Nixon's web of lies is being shown .
 Nixon can plausibly deny knowledge of the CRP campaigns and protect himself by firing staff . Things are about to get much worse for the president . Nixon can't be blamed for the scandal .
 Nixon is a suspicious individual who has few real friends and sees conspiracies against him everywhere . Nixon is suspicious, says Nixon . He says he has few friends and is suspicious of conspiracies .
 Given to brooding behaviour and capable of vulgar outbursts and ruthless behaviour, the president will later acknowledge that the American people knew little of his real personality . The president will also acknowledge that he will later admit that the U.S. knew little .
 Nixon has had secret recording equipment installed in the Oval Office, Cabinet Room and his private office in the White House . Known only to a few individuals, Nixon has recordings made of his office .
 The resulting tapes are vital in proving his knowledge of and active participation in the Watergate cover-up and wider culpability in allowing his aides to commit behaviour both immoral and illegal . It is vital to prove that he knew of and actively participated in the cover up, according to the tapes .
 Barker was an early recruit to the White House Plumbers . He served one year in jail for his part in the Watergate break-in . A Cuban emigrant who had served in the U.S. armed forces .
 Gerald Ford Ford had found himself surprisingly promoted following the resignation of Spiro Agnew in 1973 . Ford was promoted to the post in 1973 after Agnew resigned from office .
 He was arrested at the Watergate complex and later informed Judge John Sirica that he had perjured himself at the trial . He later told the judge he had been ordered to carry out the break-in by senior White House figures .
 Mitchell was a personal friend and partisan colleague of Nixon's who was rewarded with the job of attorney general in 1969 . Mitchell was the attorney general for Nixon's White House .
 Mitchell was heavily involved in the so-called White House Horrors a term he coined of Nixon's presidency . Mitchell also okayed the Watergate burglary and had form in threatening journalists . Mitchell was a great believer in law and order .
 Mitchell was found guilty of conspiracy, obstruction of justice and perjury . Mitchell served a 19-month sentence . Mitchell was convicted of conspiracy and perjury and served 19 months in prison .
 Gordon Liddy Liddy was instrumental in forming the White House Plumbers . Liddy also was responsible for many dirty-trick schemes .
 Liddy supervised the breakins at the Watergate and acted as the chief liaison to the White House . Liddy oversaw the Watergate breakins and acted in the role of the president .
 He received a stiff 20-year sentence for his role but served only four and a half . He was sentenced to 20 years in prison but served just four and half .
 Frank Sturgis had long known E Howard Hunt . Hunt is alleged to have been involved in JFK's assassination and Cuban Revolution . Hunt was also involved in the Cuban Revolution and the JFK assassination .
 Sturgis was jailed for his part in the break-in and later made lurid allegations Kennedy's assassination . He was later jailed for making lurid claims about the Kennedy assassination .
 With help from Carl Bernstein he was able to piece together a paper trail that was instrumental in exposing the White House's dirty tricks . With coaxing from his editor and help from Bernstein, Carl Bernstein helped him piece together the trail .
 HR Haldeman was a tough White House aide who acted to block access to the president and protect his interests . He acted to protect the interests of the president .
 Robert Bork Bork was solicitor general when both the attorney general and deputy attorney general resigned over a refusal to sack Watergate Special Prosecutor Cox . He was attorney general during the scandal .
 Charles Colson was one of the Watergate Seven found guilty of obstruction of justice . He was sentenced to seven months in prison for his role in Watergate scandal .
 John Sirica presided over the trial of the Watergate burglars handing out tough sentences to coerce admissions from them that they acted in concert with others . Following his release Colson found God, donating all his subsequent fees to charity .
 President Nixon ordered Nixon to hand over tapes to Archibald Cox . Cox later ordered White House conversations to be turned over to Cox, who later handed them over .
 Alexander Butterfield was responsible for the operation of the White House's secret taping system . Butterfield had installed the system in Nixon's White House, which Nixon had installed .
 His deposition was crucial in establishing the existence of the system and the tapes that sealed Nixon's fate . The tapes were key to establishing the system, and sealed the fate of Nixon .
 He turned on Nixon and became the star witness for the prosecution at the Senate Watergate Committee hearings . He pleaded guilty to a single felony count after suspecting that he was being set up as a scapegoat .
 Dean destroyed evidence following the Watergate burglary arrests and received a prison sentence, despite his co-operation . Dean had destroyed evidence after the Watergate arrests and was jailed .
 Hunt Hunt was drafted into Nixon's unofficial investigations unit the White House Plumbers charged with fixing 'leaks' to the media . Hunt had been drafted into the unit the Plumbers were responsible for Watergate leaks . Hunt worked for Nixon's administration in the 1970s .
 He was involved in the planning of the Watergate burglaries . He was sentenced to over 30 months in prison for his role in the crime .
 NL Patrick Gray Gray was nominated to succeed Hoover as head of the FBI but resigned after less than a year on the job . Gray resigned from the job less than one year ago .
 Gray destroyed evidence from a safe belonging to E Howard Hunt . Underestimating its significance, Gray had destroyed evidence . Hunt had been on the run from the safe .
 When the scale of the conspiracy became clear to him he resigned and spent years trying to clear his name . When it became clear he resigned, he spent more than two decades trying to get his name cleared .
 John Ehrlichman ensured that Nixon was protected from unnecessary attention . John worked as White House counsel before moving to a role as chief domestic advisor .
 Ehrlichman launched vicious assaults on the president's enemies and created the White House Plumbers . From this position he launched vicious attacks on President Nixon's enemies . He also created a White House plumbers .
 He had worked with Nixon for over a decade initially on his unsuccessful 1960 presidential bid . He never forgave Nixon for the lack of a presidential pardon .
 P Archibald Cox was appointed as the first special prosecutor in the Watergate case . Cox is a respected lawman who was appointed by the White House in 1973 .
 Cox learned of the existence of secret tapes recorded at the White House . Cox pressed for the release of the tapes . Cox was eventually fired but left 'ith his reputation enhanced. Cox's reputation enhanced .
 He was heavily involved in Watergate and alleged that Nixon had prior knowledge of the affair . He also alleged that he knew about Nixon's involvement in Watergate .
 Stans denied any knowledge of Watergate and, though indicted for perjury and obstruction of justice, he was acquitted the following year . Stans was acquitted of perjury in the Watergate scandal .
 Hugh Sloan Sloan was unwittingly responsible for endorsing cheques that went to pay the White House Plumbers . Sloan's cheques were used to pay White House plumbers. Sloan was inadvertently responsible for the cheques . Sloan is the son of Hugh Sloan .
 Sloan resigned after he discovered the activities of the plumbers . He resigned and became a source for Woodward and Bernstein . Sloan became a key source for the Watergate team .
 He has made powerful friends and enemies alike and learned how to play dirty . He has ordered tax investigations on Kennedy and Humphrey, among others .
 In the run-up to the presidential election of 1972, when it looks like Ted Kennedy brother of JFK will be a potential opponent for the 1976 election, Nixon and his aides attempt to use the Secret Service and Inland Revenue Service to spy on the Democrat senator .
 Nixon smears his first political opponents as communists or communist sympathisers during his 1946 and 1950 Congress election runs . Such operations have been learned over 25 years in politics . Nixon smeared his first opponents as Communists or communists or sympathisers in his first congressional election runs.
 His nickname, Tricky Dicky, was devised during 1950 and he finds it hard to shake . His nickname was devised by 1950, and he has a hard time shaking it .
 Nixon also uses the shooting of presidential hopeful George McGovern in 1972 as an opportunity to place a loyal man within a security protection detail on Ted Kennedy . Nixon also used the shooting as a way to get a loyal security detail on Kennedy .
 The spy, Robert Newbrand, is to pass information back to the White House . Nixon of Kennedy: "e just might get lucky and catch this son of a bitch and ruin him for 76"
 July 1973 brings a bombshell that Nixon recognises as disastrous . In light of what the president knows to be on the tapes, July 1973 is disastrous . Nixon instantly recognises this as disastrous.
 The aide responsible for the president's schedule and day-today archiving testifies . Nixon has had recording equipment secretly installed throughout White House offices .
 The tapes lay bare just how widespread the use of dirty tricks are and how the orders frequently come direct from the president . The ramifications are obvious, with the ramifications of the tapes laying bare . The tapes show how dirty tricks can be used in the White House .
 Nixon refuses the request, citing executive privilege . The next few months begins a high-stakes game of bureaucratic cat and mouse in an effort to keep the tapes in his possession .
 Nixon astonishes his advisors by ordering Cox's firing something only Elliot Richardson, the attorney general, could legally do . In October, just days after losing his vice president, Spiro Agnew, to an investigation into past corruption, Nixon orders Cox fired .
 The president is furious at Cox's intransigence over refusing to hand over the tapes . He will accept the resignation of Richardson and Ruclcelshaus if they do not sack Cox .
 Richardson refuses the order and promptly resigns . The Saturday Night Massacre took place in October, dubbed the "Saturday Night Massacre" Richardson refused to resign .
 Solicitor General Robert Boric reluctantly carries out the order . Having been given the same order by Nixon, Ruckelshaus also resigns .
 Public opinion quickly turns against Nixon, with protests greeting the president's public appearances . Protests greet Nixon's public appearance .
 In November, he goes on the offensive, delivering the famous ""I'm not a crook" speech . He delivers the famous quote in a televised question-andanswer session .
 Bob Woodward of The Washington Post knew a source at the FBI who fed him regular information . Bob Woodward was a regular FBI source . Woodward knew a secret source in Washington, D.C.
 When the Watergate scandal broke, the source was in a perfect position to observe the presidency and resulting investigation . The source was a perfect vantage point to watch the president's presidency .
 Woodward referred to him as 'My Friend' but the Posts editor, Howard Simons, renamed him 'Deep Throat' a reference to a pornographic film of the time to protect his identity . Woodward referred him to him by the name of his friend, but Simons changed it to
 Woodward would move a flowerpot on the balcony of his apartment when he desired a meeting with Felt . Woodward would respond by leaving a time written on the journalist's daily newspaper . Woodward moved the flowerpot when he requested a meeting .
 Woodward reveals a complex web of deceit to bring down the president . Source fed information about the investigation to Woodward, revealing a web of lies . Woodward: The source fed the information to Woodward .
 Woodward and colleague Carl Bernstein protected Deep Throat's identity for 30 years . Felt outed himself in 2005, just three years before his death .
 Haldeman replies in the affirmative but crucially is not as good as his word . Perhaps believing that if he is seen to be responsible for destroying the tapes he would make the president bulletproof and seal his own fate .
 In July 1974, having exhausted various means of preventing their release, Nixon is ordered to give up the tapes to investigators and Congress moves to impeach the president . Nixon is eventually forced to give them up to investigators .
 A previously unheard tape is released in August, when a previously unheard recording is released . Any possibility that Nixon might hang on disappears in August .
 'The Bay of Pigs thing 1' refers to the CIA's role in the aborted CIA-backed invasion of Cuba in 1961 . The White House is expected to release sensitive information regarding the CIA role in Cuba .
 The tape constitutes authentic evidence that the president was involved in the Watergate cover-up and attempted to pressure federal agencies into participating . The tape is authentic evidence of the president's involvement in the cover up, the author says .
 Senior Republicans gather to tell Nixon that he has no support in Congress . Nixon tells Nixon he has 'no support' in Congress. Nixon says he has "no support" in Congress and wants to run for president .
 Even Nixon realises that he has exhausted his options, even though he had said he would never resign . Nixon is the only survivor of the political survivor .
 The president promptly resigns, knowing that he will be impeached if he remains in office . The president is impeached, knowing he would be in danger of being impeached . President Barack Obama resigns from office knowing he will face impeachment .
 His resignation speech is broadcast from the White House the night before he leaves for his home in California . The resignation speech will be broadcast from his White House .
 Typically, his speech wrongfoots many, with allusions to the difficulties of office and oblique mentions of wrongdoing, notions of duty and vague expressions of regret . Typically, he fails to make clear references to wrongdoing .
 Nixon also includes a lengthy summation of what he sees as his achievements in office, preferring them to discussions of Watergate a trope that would become familiar in years to come . Nixon also included a lengthy summary of his achievements .
 Nixon never escapes the taint of Watergate but becomes a respected statesman on the American and global stages . Nixon's legacy is tarnished by Watergate, but he becomes a world leader .
 He is almost immediately pardoned by his successor, Gerald Ford, in a move that many decry . Ford pardoned him almost immediately in the wake of his death .
 Nixon avoids jail but the scale of wrongdoing and the depth of the unpleasantness that modern U.S. politics constitute takes voters by surprise . Those at the top of government are venal, vulgar, deceitful and greedy .
 Nixon still inspires fascination long after his resignation . Nixon's story shows U.S. presidents to be flawed and long after he resigned, it shows . Most of all, he says, is that Nixon was flawed .
 Nixon spends most of his time at his house in California driving to a small outhouse on his golf buggy every day .
 In 1977, short of cash and keen to rehabilitate his reputation, he agrees to the now-famous series of interviews with journalist David Frost .
 The former president may have admitted some culpability but he never shakes off his ardent belief that the ends justified the means . The former President may have said some of the reasons for his actions .
 Nixon relied on a range of dirty tricks many illegal to claim power, and then affect change as he saw it . Nixon's 'dirty tricks' included dirty tricks to gain power and gain control .
 The apparently insignificant burglary that brought down the 37th president of the United States was just one of the ways that he bent the law . It’s just that this time, he got caught. The president got caught .
 Inconsolable at losing the job he had coveted so deeply, wounded by the thought he had betrayed the American people and lost with little to do at home in California, he quickly became ill and almost died .
 He worked to rehabilitate himself and by the time of his death was a respected political elder . He was sought after for advice by sitting presidents and even former opponents like Hillary Clinton .
 When he died it was revealed that he had requested not to have a state funeral, as is the usual custom for deceased U.S. presidents .
 In his resignation speech, Nixon made much of the advances he thought had been made in foreign policy where many U.S. presidents believe their legacy will be judged . Nixon made a speech in which he said his legacy would be judged by foreign policy .
 Vietnam will always tarnish the reputation of Nixon and his predecessor, Lyndon B Johnson . Nixon's Vietnam legacy will always be tarnished by Vietnam .
 He forged ahead with the desegregation of the South, created numerous environmental acts to protect the U.S. ecology . He avoided ideological impulses of following Republican presidents .
 Nixon strikes a strange figure among U.S. presidents oddly awkward and selfaware, yet driven by a conviction that the president could not be wrong . Nixon struck a conviction of the interests of the ruling administration and United States were indivisible .
 His pardoning of his disgraced predecessor was controversial, and his administration was dogged by a stagnating economy . Obama pardoned a disgraced former president and pardoned his predecessor .
 As if the Watergate scandal was not sufficiently demoralising, they began feeling the pinch of economic uncertainty for the first time in a generation . As if Watergate scandal wasn't enough demoralising it began to feel the pinch .
 The long post-war boom faltered, confronting western economies with the simultaneous rise of unemployment and inflation . Western economies faced simultaneous rise and inflation in the wake of the boom .
 The longest war in American history came to a chaotic and sordid end under Ford’s watch . Meanwhile the long-running war in U.S. ended under his watch .
 Despite massive amounts of money, manpower and technology it ended in U.S. humiliation . $173 billion, added inflation, inflation and a generation of traumatised veterans .
 Two million dead and millions more maimed in decade and a half of fighting in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia . Two million killed and millions maim in decade-long conflict .
 President Ford pardoned Richard Nixon in August 1974 after Nixon resigned rather than face impeachment . Ford took power on 9 August 1974 and pardoned his predecessor . Nixon pardoned Nixon in 1974 after resigning from office .
 Some of his political enemies speculated that the pardon had been part of a prearranged deal to reach the Oval Office . The pardon was a highly controversial decision .
 He inherited much of Nixon's cabinet, including his secretary of state, Henry Kissinger . He inherited many of the cabinet members from Nixon's administration, including Kissinger .
 He struggled with a Democrat-dominated Congress, vetoing 66 pieces of legislation he felt clashed with his fiscally conservative outlook . But he struggled with the Democrat-controlled Congress .
 After 1968 he had been a Nixon loyalist, voting for policies he disliked such as federal wage and price controls . But after 1968, he was more of a critic of Nixon's policies .
 Spiro T Agnew resigned in October 1973 over charges of bribery and tax evasion unrelated to Watergate . Ford was appointed vice president as per the president's executive prerogative .
 Born Leslie Lynch King Jnr in Omaha, Nebraska in 1913, his parents divorced when he was less than a year old . His mother remarried Gerald R Ford, whose name he took, and he took his name .
 Ford enlisted in the U.S. Navy during World War II and served aboard an aircraft carrier . Ford served aboard the aircraft carrier in the United States .
 By 1948 he had been elected to the United States House of Representatives . He would be re-elected to Congress 12 times in a row, always with more than 50 per cent of the vote .
 Unemployment reached nine per cent in 1975 . Exacerbated by the oil crisis, unemployment reached 9 per cent . Unemployment in 1975 was the highest rate in the world .
 Ford considered inflation to be the more immediate threat to U.S. living standards . Inflation was the main threat to American living standards, Ford said . Ford: "Inflation is the most immediate threat"
 In October 1974 he asked the public to 'WIN' by making economies and spending less . He asked for the people to make economies and spend less .
 Ford's foreign policy record was overshadowed by the collapse of US-backed regimes in Vietnam and Cambodia in April and May 1975 .
 President Nguyen Van Thieu’s regime had 1. million men under arms at the time of the 1973 Paris Peace Agreement . Ironically, the Vietnamese regime had more than 1 million troops under arms . The agreement was reached in 1973 .
 President Nixon had a secret pledge that Washington would respond with ""full force"" if North Vietnam violated the agreement . He also pledged to respond with 'full force' should North Vietnam violate the deal .
 The pledge came in the form of two letters, drafted by Kissinger and signed by Nixon, dated 14 November 1972 and 5 January 1973 . Kissinger and Nixon signed the pledge in two letters . Kissinger signed the letters on behalf of Nixon and Nixon .
 North Vietnamese Army launched 'Operation Ho Chi Minh' and dug deep into South Vietnamese territory within weeks . Operation Ho Chi-Minh was launched in early 1975 and was launched by the North Vietnamese army in 1975 .
 Congress learned of the letters in April 1975, it was furious that it had not been consulted . The letters were sent to Congress in 1975, but Congress was not consulted .
 By March, polls showed that 80 percent of Americans opposed further support for Thieu or his Cambodian counterpart, General Lon Nol . Polls show 80 percent oppose further support of Thieu, or his Cambodia counterpart .
 Hours after the last chopper ascended from the embassy roof, NVA tanks cashed through the gates of the Presidential palace in Saigon . The NVA was heavily armed and heavily armed in Vietnam .
 When the cargo vessel Mayaguez was captured off the Cambodian coast, Kissinger advised sending £ Marines to recapture the ship . Kissinger also advised sending troops to capture the cargo ship .
 The 39 Mayaguez crew were rescued but 41 American military were killed in the operation . The 39 crew members survived the rescue operation .
 Turkish invasion of Cypms strained relations within the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation . Disputes with Israel following the 1973 Yom Kippur war resulted in a cessation of aid through much of 1975 .
 Ford signed a strategic nuclear arms control agreement with the Soviets in 1974 . Ford also travelled to the Russian port of Vladivostok in November 1974 to sign a strategic arms control deal .
 The Helsinki Accords were designed to defuse Cold War tensions through a series of mutual agreements on trade, travel, security and human rights . The following August, the U.S. was a signatory .
 Ford was lucky to get the Republican nomination in August 1976, having beaten off a challenge by former Governor of California, Ronald Reagan . Ford beat Reagan by a narrow margin of votes in 1976 .
 Nixon pardon, Vietnam and the recession weighed heavily upon his record and he lost to Democrat Jimmy Carter . The Nixon pardon and Vietnam were also factors in his loss .
 In the years of his retirement, he skied, golfed and served as a director on the board of numerous companies . He skied and golfed during his retirement .
 Ford was the United States' only unelected vice president and president . Ford was elected president of the U.S. and vice president in 1973 . He was the first elected vice president to hold office in the country .
 Ford survived an assassination attempt when Oliver 'Billy' Sipple saved his life . Ford was also the longestlived Assassination attempt attempt to kill him . Ford survived the assassination attempt after he was saved by Sipple .
 Lynette 'Squeaky' Fromme, an acolyte of the murderous cult leader Charles Manson, got within a few yards of Ford in Sacramento, California, in 1975 .
 Sipple, a high school football star and Vietnam veteran, was walking past the St Francis Hotel as Ford emerged to a crowd . Seventeen days later Sipple was killed in a car crash . Sipple is a Vietnam veteran who served in Vietnam .
 Sipple wrestled the mentally disturbed Sara Jane Moore to the ground after spotting her threatening to pull a gun . The mentally disturbed woman was arrested after police say she pulled a gun on her own .
 When his sexuality was disclosed, reportedly by openly gay San Francisco politician Harvey Milk, there was no invite to the White House . When the openly gay politician Milk was elected there was reportedly no invite .
 Exposure traumatised Sipple who drifted into alcoholism and drug addiction, taking his life in 1989 . But exposure traumatised him and he drifted into alcohol and drugs addiction .
 Television was more escapist with shows like The Waltons and Happy Days harking back to a folksy uncomplicated US . The traumas of the 1960s and 70s were still in the future, but the traumaas of that era were still the future .
 Between 1964 and 1973 over 210,000 men evaded the Vietnam draft . Between 1964 to 1973 over 200,000 people evaded draft . Vietnam amnesty was declared in 1973 .
 In 1975 Time magazine named ‘American women’ as its Person of the Year . Time magazine also named American women as its person of the year in 1975 .
 The president and first lady were pro-choice after the landmark Roe vs Wade Supreme Court ruling in 1973 liberalised abortion laws in many states but also divided American opinion . The landmark decision in 1973 led to an abortion debate in the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Men, Women and Rape' attacked male defined views on sexual assault . 'Men, Women, Rape' was a book that attacked men's views of sexual assault on women .
 Ford survived two assassination attempts in the same month Patty Hearst was arrested . Hearst had been a member of the Symbionese Liberation Army, a group committed to terrorism and urban warfare .
 She had apparently been turned over to their cause in the eighteen months since her kidnapping . She was apparently turned over by their cause .
 In January 1975 the far-left Weathermen bombed the State Department building in New York .
 Jimmy Carter sought reconciliation at home and abroad . A naval officer and peanut farmer before turning to politics, Jimmy Carter turned to politics . Jimmy Carter was a peanut farmer and naval officer .
 Carter's one-term presidency was assailed by numerous crises . Although much praised for his diplomatic and humanitarian work since leaving office, he has been criticized for his lack of leadership .
 The second great oil shock of the 1970s led to recession . His handling of the Iranian hostage crisis attracted much criticism . He was criticised for handling the hostage crisis .
 It has even been suggested that Carter was in office at the wrong time . It has been suggested he was in the wrong place at the time .
 Had he been confronted with Civil Rights or the Vietnam War, he might have excelled . He might have been able to do so much more in Vietnam War .
 The late Seventies presented challenges that would have taxed any incumbent . But the late seventies present challenges . President George W. Bush was elected to office in 1972 .
 Following his inauguration, Carter and first lady Rosalyn alighted from the presidential limousine and walked to the White House along Pennsylvania Avenue, much to the consternation of his security detail .
 This symbolised the end of the ‘imperial presidency’ of Johnson and Nixon . It symbolised an end to the 'inperial presidency' of Johnson .
 Carter promised reconciliation in a U.S. divided and demoralised by Vietnam and Watergate . Carter promised unity in a United States divided by Vietnam, Watergate and Watergate.
 He also promised to end economic mismanagement and sought to lead by example . Mr. Obama promised to lead the country to an end to mismanagement .
 The presidential yacht Sequoia was sold in 1977 and White House salaries were cut by 10 per cent . The yacht was sold and the president's salary was cut by ten per cent in 1977 .
 Carter turned down White House thermostats and wore a cardigan sweater to make his first televised 'fireside chats' to the public .
 Carter promoted unprecedented numbers of women and ethnic minorities to government jobs . At the same time, he promoted unprecedented number of women, ethnic minorities . Carter's government was largely dominated by African Americans .
 The combination of high-minded idealism and personal rectitude did not sit easily within an environment characterised by compromise, trade-offs and bargaining .
 The Georgians Carter had brought to the White House clashed with the liberal wing of the Democrats, led by Ted Kennedy, frequently clashed with Walter Mondale and the vice president .
 The latter wanted spending on social programs that clashed with the balanced budget Carter had promised . Carter wanted to balance the budget, but the president wanted social spending .
 Carter's style was a product of his rural, Baptist upbringing in America's deep south . Carter was born in rural America and raised in a rural Baptist family .
 The first American president to be born in a hospital, his mother ‘Miss' Lillian was a trained nurse who joined the Peace Corps at age 68 . She was the first person in the U.S. to have been born in hospital .
 Unusually for the time, black people who sought her advice were allowed into the house by the front door . Unusually, they were allowed in by the door of her home .
 The ancestors of his father Earl had arrived from 17th-century England . His ancestors had arrived in England in 17th century .
 Carter was a cadet at the U.S. Naval Academy from 1943-46 . He married Rosalyn Smith, a friend of his sister Ruth, in 1946 .
 In 1948, having finished third out of 52 seamen in the Navy's submarine program, he was assigned to the nuclear submarine Sea Wolf . In 1948 he had finished third in a series of seamen .
 When Earl Carter died five years later, Jimmy resigned his commission . Jimmy returned to Georgia to rescue the family farm and peanut brokerage . Jimmy resigned from his commission and returned to his family farm .
 Rosalyn found the adjustment from military life punishing . He threw himself into farming but found it difficult to adjust to life in the family . Rosalwyn found it hard to get back to normal life after leaving the military .
 Carter became a church deacon and Sunday school teacher at the Plains Baptist Church . Carter was a deacon at the church in Plains, Arkansas .
 In 1966 he was defeated in the gubernatorial primary by the segregationist Lester Maddox . He was defeated by Maddox in the 1966 primary .
 Four years later, he was elected governor of Georgia with 49 per cent of the vote . Four years after he was re-elected, he won the election again .
 The near obliteration of the liberal George McGovern in the 1972 presidential election convinced him that the Democrats needed a centrist approach . The near-inflicted defeat of McGovern convinced him he needed to be centrist .
 As President he created the departments of Energy and Education . He also promoted reform of the civil service .
 Under Carter, the dumping of raw sewage in the oceans was banned and controls placed on strip mining . The dumping was banned under Carter, and controls were put in place .
 His administration moved right-ward in his final year, cutting social spending and raising the defence budget . His administration cut social spending in its final year .
 In his foreign policy, Carter advocated promoting human rights . His national security advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski was that of an ardent Cold Warrior .
 His administration established full diplomatic relations with China, but then imposed a boycott on the 1980 Moscow Olympics when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan . His administration then imposed an international boycott of the Moscow Olympics .
 In September 1978 Carter facilitated a meeting between Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Egyptian President Anwar Sadat at Camp David . Carter facilitated the meeting at the retreat of Camp David, Maryland .
 Israel agreed to withdraw troops from the occupied Sinai Peninsula and the state of war between both nations ended . This resulted in an agreement with Israel and the Sinai Peninsula .
 His handling of the Iranian hostage crisis fatally damaged his credibility in an election year . However, he handled the crisis in the aftermath of the hostage crisis in Iran .
 Few presidents have been so conspicuous on the world stage since leaving office . Few presidents are so conspicuous in the past that they've been conspicuous .
 Now in his nineties, Carter is often feted as one of America’s greatest ex-presidents . Carter is one of the world's most powerful men .
 The Iran Hostage Crisis was the biggest disaster of Carter's administration . Ronald Reagan was taking the oath of the office when the crisis ended . Reagan was in office at the time .
 Vast crowds welcomed the ageing Shi'ite cleric Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini to the capital of Tehran in February 1979 after a long exile in Paris .
 He was committed to establishing a new order based on strict Islamic principles . He was fiercely resentful of the U.S. and the West in general .
 On 4 November 1979, thousands of Iranians stormed the United States embassy in Tehran . The 27-acre parkland complex comprises 20 city blocks . The U.S. embassy is now a 27-acres complex in Tehran, Iran .
 Carter allowed exiled and terminally ill Shah Shah to enter the United States for medical treatment . The previous month Carter had allowed the exiled Shah into the U.S. for treatment .
 The blindfolded hostages, paraded before television cameras, became a focus for anger towards Carter . Carter was perceived as inept and feeble, perceived as feeble .
 Operation Eagle Claw in April 1980, where helicopters and C-130 aircraft were poised to stage an audacious rescue mission within Iran itself . Criticism became sharp following the debacle of Operation Eagle Clopper in 1980 .
 Two days before Reagan's electoral victory, an agreement was reached to unfreeze Iranian assets and release hostages . The hostages were released .
 The newly appointed chairman of the Federal Reserve Paul Volcker responded with the ‘shock therapy’ of jacking up interest rates above 20 per cent . The newly-appointed chairman  responded to the 'shock therapy' of raising interest rates .
 Gay rights movement After decades underground, homosexuality was increasingly visible . Homosexuality in the U.S. is increasingly visible in the gay community .
 Harvey Milk was America's first openly gay politician to be elected to office . Milk won a seat on the San Francisco Board of Supervisors in 1977 . Milk was elected to San Francisco in 1977 and served as mayor of San Francisco, California .
 His murder by the mentally disturbed Dan White, another city supervisor, provoked riots in San Francisco in May 1979 . White's relatively lenient sentence given to White provoked riots .
 The National Aeronautics Space Agency was pushing further afield . The agency spent the majority of the 1960s on space exploration missions .
 Voyager I and II began their tour of the solar system the following year . Voyager II and III were launched in 1977 . Voyager I began their first tour of solar system in 1986 . Voyager's first mission was Voyager II, Voyager III, Voyager II .
 Both probes contained records with a myriad of images and sounds from Earth . Both probes were sent back to Earth in 2004 .
 These included a greeting from President Carter, intended for any extraterrestrials who might encounter the spacecraft . President Carter also sent a message to any extraterrestrial visitors .
 Concerns over environmental destruction became particularly acute following a partial meltdown at the Three Mile Island nuclear station at Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, in March 1979 .
 Carter expanded America's national park system, including protection of Alaska . He also promoted solar energy and passed laws to dean up polluted locations . Carter expanded U.S. national parks system .
 Carter followed Nixon and Ford in negotiating the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks . Talks limited the development of strategic nuclear delivery systems .
 The treaty was signed by Carter and his Soviet counterpart Leonid Brezhnev in June 1979 . It was not ratified by the United States Senate due to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan later that year .
 Secret agent Derek Flint, played by James Coburn, uncovers the truth that a nefarious stand-in has been playing the part of the leader of the free world .
 Ronald Reagan was the 40th president of the United States . He was a former Hollywood star and TV performer . Reagan was elected to office 13 years later .
 President Obama proved to be an extraordinary leader during his time in the White House .
 Ronald Wilson Reagan was born in Tampico, Illinois in 1911 . His alcoholic father John (known as Jack), older brother Neil, and nurturing, compassionate mother Nelle . Reagan’s immediate family consisted of alcoholic father and brother Neil .
 She taught her boys not to blame their father as alcoholism was a disease . She said she taught them to not blame themselves for their father's alcoholism .
 The Reagan family had to move frequently for Jack Reagan to find work . It impacted upon everyone, however, in that the Reagan family moved frequently .
 Reagan's father moved to Dixon, Illinois, in 1920, where he sold shoes . They finally settled in Dixon, where Reagan's dad sold shoes, and Reagan's family moved to Illinois in 1920 .
 Following high school graduation, Jack's youngest enrolled in Eureka College, Illinois . Jack's son Jack graduated from high school to college . Jack and Jack are raising money to raise money for charity .
 He majored in economics and sociology, and while only average academically, he excelled in sport and drama .
 Reagan first found work as a radio sports reporter in Davenport, Iowa, soon progressing to a similar post with larger station, WHO, in Des Moines . Reagan worked for WHO, a radio station in Iowa, for more than 40 years .
 In 1937, while following the Cubs to a training camp in California, the budding reporter also arranged to make a screen test at Warner Brothers studios . The budding reporter followed the team to the California facility .
 Ronald Reagan landed a $200 per week contract . Reagan landed the $200 a week contract at the height of his career .
 Frequently he played wholesome, easy-going ’good guy’ characters who were, many have noted, rather like himself .
 Reagan had hoped to build on the success of the 1942 release . However, the war ended in the war and the release was canceled .
 Reagan was a U.S. Army cavalry reserve since the 1930s . He was called to active service in the wake of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor . Reagan served in the Army's cavalry reserve during World War II .
 Eyesight problems meant he wasn't suitable for combat duty . But his talents were put to use in the military’s first motion picture unit narrating training films .
 Raised in a poor family, Reagan followed a reasonably successful acting career with a stunningly successful political one . His first child, Maureen, was born in 1941, and a second, Michael, was adopted in 1945 .
 He was once a Democrat who later became an icon of Republican conservatives . He is now a Republican icon of conservative conservatism .
 He heightened the Cold War with provocative rhetoric before negotiating arms reductions . Affable by nature, he nevertheless heightened the tensions with Russia .
 The first music video shown on the channel was 'Video Killed The Radio Star' by British recording duo The Buggies .
 DeLorean gull-winged sports car launched on the American market in the early 1980s with the car industry in its biggest slump for decades . The car industry was in a slump in the 1980s when DeLorean launched .
 The company went bankrupt in 1982, though the car later featured as a time machine in the Back To The Future trilogy . The car was later used in a time-traveling episode of the trilogy .
 Armageddon almost by accident . The world came dangerously close to destruction in 1983 . Armageddon almost came by accident.
 With Cold War tensions high, U.S. and NATO forces began a wargame exercise called Able Archer ‘83 . Able Archer '83 was the first exercise to take place in the United States and NATO .
 Soviet Union feared a surprise attack might be instigated under such a premise, mobilised its nuclear forces and came close to launching . The Soviet Union, fearing a a surprise . attack might instigated by such a . premise, mobilized .
 The Moscow Olympics in 1980 were boycotted by many countries including the United States . The U.S. was among the countries boycotting the Moscow Olympics that year .
 Four years later, the Soviet Union and others boycotted the Los Angeles Olympics . Four years after the Olympics, the USSR and other boycotts were held in Los Angeles .
 Moscow hosted first, Seattle four years later, and there were three further tournaments . Seattle hosted first and Moscow hosted third, and Seattle hosted third .
 Space Shuttle Challenger began its tenth mission in January 1986 . Challenger was the first shuttle to carry out a space shuttle mission . Challenger's mission was the last of its 10 missions to take part .
 School teacher Christa McAuliffe is due to give lessons from space . Among its seven astronauts was school teacher .
 Reagan addressed the nation that evening to pay a moving tribute to the lost astronauts . Reagan said the loss of astronauts was a "tragedy" that night .
 He charged the scientific community with creating a system largely deployed in space to shoot down missiles launched at the U.S. The system would be deployed into space, he said .
 Research and development costs would be enormous, while such a system risked breaching existing weapons control treaties and instigating a new arms race . Such a system would risk breaching existing arms control treaties .
 The economy of the Soviet Union, meanwhile, was in a parlous state, particularly after the price of its main export oil plummeted . The Soviet Union was in an economic crisis in the 1980s .
 Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev was introducing reforms promising greater freedom . Reagan sought greater freedom and sought negotiations with Reagan . Reagan was president in the 1980s .
 The second summit in Iceland began with low expectations but progressed rapidly . Gorbachev eventually offered to eliminate all nuclear weapons within a decade if the Americans would confine SDI research to laboratories .
 Reagan, however, would not give up on SDI and such an historic agreement was never made . A later summit produced a treaty eliminating intermediate-range nuclear forces .
 SDI as originally conceived proving difficult to achieve, defence systems were downgraded to earth-based theatre, not national, levels . Years later, with SDI .
 Reagan was first elected president of the Screen Actors Guild, the union for film and television performers, in 1947 . Reagan was elected to the union in 1947 and has since been president since 1984 .
 The House of Un-American Activities Committee investigated left-wing politics in Hollywood in the 1950s and '60s . The committee was investigating left-right politics in the Hollywood film industry .
 Strongly anti-communist, Reagan fought other movie unions he felt were under communist influence . He testified as a friendly witness to the HUAC, and was an FBI informant .
 The blacklist of performers, writers and directors prevented from working for major studios numbered more than 300 . More than 300 people were banned from major studios because of their political views .
 He had been a liberal, Democratic Roosevelt supporter but was becoming more conservative . He was a conservative, but became more conservative in the 1930s .
 Meeting Nancy Davis, who had views similar to her rightwing adoptive father, accelerated the process . Meeting actress Nancy Davis also accelerated the adoption process .
 In 1954 Reagan landed a TV job as presenter and occasional performer for General Electric Theatre . The drama series became a staple of Sunday night viewing . Reagan's career was drying up when he landed a movie job .
 Actor's exposure to 'business America' convinced him that big government hindered rather than helped enterprise, pushing him further towards the political right .
 As such, he championed the 1964 conservative presidential candidate, Barry Goldwater .
 In the last week of the campaign, Reagan presented ""A Time for Choosing,"" a 30-minute nationally televised address, considered to be one of the finest political endorsements ever made . Reagan presented the speech in a nationally televised broadcast .
 Although Goldwater lost, Reagan rocketed to pre-eminence on the Republican right . Reagan was a major figure on the right in the Republican Party .
 Reagan ran for governor of California in 1966 against Democrat incumbent 'Pat' Brown . Reagan ran against Brown in 1966 .
 Brown tried discrediting his opponent as an inexperienced lightweight . Reagan flipped the accusations, arguing he was an ordinary citizen fed up with Brown . After numerous film appearances, and a divorce, Reagan marries actress Nancy Davis .
 She claims her life only really begins after her marriage, which produces two children, Patricia and Ronald . She says her life really begins when she gets married .
 The couple are devoted to each other, remaining deeply in love for the rest of their lives . The couple have been married for 18 years .
 Reagan’s personal politics have begun to shift, in part due to his position as president of the Screen Actors Guild, and in part because of his exposure to the business world .
 When the family settle in Dixon, Dixon, his alcoholic father becomes a shoe salesman . His alcoholic father is the shoe salesman. The story goes back to Dixon .
 Covering the team takes him to California, where he makes a successful screen test . He makes a trip to California for the first time .
 Goldwater loses, but Reagan’s profile as a prominent politician is firmly established . Reagan's profile as prominent politician was firmly established in the mid-'60s .
 Record tax increases to tackle a budget deficit and achieves some notable environmental success . Untypically, he sanctions record tax increases and sanctions record environmental measures .
 This appealed to voters, who also warmed to Reagan's affable personality . Reagan won the White House in 1980s and 1980s .
 A half-hearted tilt at the Republican presidential nomination failed in 1968 . In 1968, President Richard Nixon ran for the Democratic nomination for president .
 A more serious challenge to Gerald Ford president after Nixon's resignation followed eight years later . Gerald Ford was elected president eight years after Nixon resigned .
 Reagan was the obvious choice to secure the GOP nomination in 1980 . That failed too, but when Ford lost to Jimmy Carter, Reagan was an obvious choice . Reagan is the current GOP nominee for the 1980s .
 He resoundingly defeated President Carter, confidently asserting that he could rebuild the nation's economy and spirit badly tarnished after Vietnam, Watergate scandal, and the Iran hostage crisis .
 The American hostages in Iran were released the day Reagan was inaugurated . John Hinckley Jr attempted to assassinate the new President in early 1981 .
 A bullet was lodged in Reagan's body just millimetres from his heart . He was rushed to hospital with a bullet lodged in his body just a millimetre from his body . Reagan was taken to hospital after the incident .
 Reagan's survival of the attack and his endearing quips made his popularity soar . Reagan survived the attack but his popularity soared . Reagan's popularity soared after the attack .
 His language was hawkishly tough, however, when confronting the Soviet Union . His language of dealing with the Soviets was tough .
 Reagan dubbed it ""an evil empire" with his increased military spending . Reagan called it an "evil empire" by escalating the Cold War with increased spending . The Cold War escalated with increased costs .
 A further step came in 1983 when the president announced the country would develop the Strategic Defence Initiative . The initiative was part of the country's first major defence initiative .
 The system called for space-based technologies to intercept and destroy nuclear missiles launched at the United States . Critics labelled the system 'Star Wars' by critics .
 Some contended this was a dangerous escalation of the arms race that would create a black hole in the military budget . Others said it would be an escalation that would raise the costs .
 Others say pressures created by the SDI helped end the Cold War and pushed the Soviet Union into collapse . In later years, some say the Soviet economy was incapable of competing with such U.S. military expansion .
 With the economy booming again, a landslide second election victory was achieved in 1984 . In 1984, the Labour Party was re-elected to power in the UK .
 After Brezhnev, Andropov and Chernenko, the fourth Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, came to power during Reagan's presidency . The fourth president of the Soviet Union was elected by Reagan's administration .
 Unlike the previous three, Gorbachev signalled he was prepared to negotiate with the U.S. President . His bellicose language began to soften during his second term . Unlike previous three times, he was willing to negotiate .
 Reagan's discussions with Gorbachev on limiting the nuclear arsenal of both super powers bore fruit . Reagan was in position of strength following military expansion of the U.S. from a position of weakness .
 The economy continued expanding during Reagan's second term . There were increases to the budget deficit and the national debt, yet neither harmed his popularity . Reagan's popularity increased during his second term, but his popularity did not increase .
 American hostages are being held in Lebanon by groups friendly to Iran . American hostages were being held by groups sympathetic to Iran's regime .
 Between 1985 and 1986, arms were shipped to Iran in exchange for hostage releases and payments . Despite a policy of not dealing with terrorists, arms shipments were sent to Iran . Arms shipments were made in exchange with hostage releases .
 Later, some of the payments were diverted to the Contras of Nicaragua who were fighting to overthrow the country's socialist government . Such funding was outlawed by Congress even though such funding was illegal .
 It remains unclear how much of the president knew about the Affair, but he did apologise to the nation for it, tarnishing his image .
 On leaving office, Reagan had the highest presidential approval ratings since Roosevelt . Nevertheless, on leaving office he had the best approval ratings .
 Reagan was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease five years after exiting the White House . Reagan died from the disease in 1986 .
 His doctors insisted he did not have the illness when serving . Despite periods in his last years in office he appeared confused .
 The degenerative disease curtailed his public appearances in later life . His public appearances were curtailed by his degenerative condition .
 The image of a rider-less horse following the carriage carrying his coffin, with Reagan's own riding boots reversed in the stirrups, seemed pure Hollywood for the former actor . The image has been seen at state funerals for other former Presidents .
 He survives, the first president to do so after being shot in an assassination attempt . He is the first to survive, and is the only president to have done so .
 Hinckley was obsessed with the actress Jodie Foster and wanted to impress her . He emulates a character from her film Taxi Driver who makes an assassination attempt .
 Hinckley is found not guilty by reason of insanity and is confined to a psychiatric institution . Reagan retires from the White House in January 1989 . Reagan is found to be the first president to be elected to a state hospital .
 Four successful summits with Soviet leader Gorbachev paved the way for a peaceful resolution to the Cold War . Four summits between the Soviet Union and the U.S. led to the end of Cold War in 1989 .
 The Iran-Contra Affair in particular has been shambolic, even down to how much the president knew or didn't know about it . The president's role in the scandal has been described as "shambolic"
 Inflation is down and under control and there has been extensive growth, but the budget deficit has deepened while the national debt has soared . In inflation is down but under control, and there is extensive growth .
 Reagan unveils his proposal for a Strategic Defence Initiative to protect the United States from attack by nuclear missiles with space-based systems . Reagan leaves office a popular and highly regarded figure .
 It is the highest honour Britain can bestow upon a foreign national . The honour is given to the foreign national, though he cannot be referred to as Sir Sir .
 His father, Prescott Bush, had served as a captain during World War I and had gone on to serve as a U.S. senator . Prescott Bush was a captain in World War One .
 The second of five children, the young Bush attended the super-elite preparatory school Phillips Academy . He excelled both socially and academically, captaining varsity teams and holding a variety of leadership positions .
 George W. Bush met Barbara Pierce in 1941 . She was a young Barbara Pierce, who would remain at his side for decades to come . Bush met her in 1941 at the age of 25 .
 A year later, on his 18th birthday, Bush joined the United States Navy . Bush followed his father's footsteps a joined the military, opting for the Navy .
 After the war, Bush married his fiancee Barbara and moved to Texas (with son, and future president, George Jr in tow) where he made his mark in oil refinery . Bush graduated from Yale with an economics degree .
 In 1966, he earned a seat in the House of Representatives in 1966 . He was elected to the U.S. House after a series of defeats .
 His no-nonsense and direct demeanour, mixed with his family name, his experience as a war veteran and his influence as a former oil magnate made him a formidable force . He served as the United States ambassador to the United Nations and headed up the Republican National Committee during
 His political ascendance saw him assume the post of director of the CIA in 1976 . His political rise saw him take over the CIA .
 His attempt to win the Republican nomination in 1980 wasn’t to be, losing out to charismatic former Hollywood star Ronald Reagan . Reagan selected him as vice president in 1980s .
 Bush served two full terms as vice president . Bush was the first president of the United States to hold office in office .
 President Bush took a far more proactive and aggressive tone than his previous campaign . Bush’s victory wasn't a landslide, with the Republican taking 54.4% of the popular vote .
 Bush is the first serving vice president to be elected president since Martin Van Buren in 1836 . He is also the first president to succeed someone from his own party since Herbert Hoover in 1929 .
 Sworn into office on 20 January 1989, George W. Bush assumed the presidency at a time of dramatic change for the Western world . Bush assumed power at the end of the Cold War .
 Cold War that had silently raged for decades had petered out and Soviet states were finally transforming into democratic territories once more . The Cold War was over and the Cold War had finally ended and the Soviet Union was transformed into a democracy .
 In the face of such events, it's no surprise that Bush's administration would focus a great deal of its attention on foreign policy . The Bush administration is focused on the U.S. relationship with the world .
 Bush began a dialogue with liberal Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev . Between them RussoAmerican relations improved significantly in the 1980s .
 The signing of the Soviet Arms Reduction Treaty in July 1991 typified this new strategy of cooperation . The two would form something of a political power couple on the global stage .
 Bush's time in office was defined by the Gulf War . The Gulf War was a major factor in Bush's presidency .
 When the Iraqi military invaded Kuwait in January 1991, it thrust the world's oil resources into crisis . Iraq's invasion of Kuwait thrust the oil industry into crisis in 1991 .
 Saddam Hussein now in control of these oil fields illegally, Bush and his administration had to act . Saddam Hussein had control of the fields illegally .
 Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm saw U.S. forces drive out the Iraqi occupation and liberate Kuwait . Operation Desert Shield saw United States forces drive Iraqi occupation out of Kuwait . Desert Storm was the first Gulf War to liberate Kuwait from Iraq .
 The liberation of Kuwait (and, of course, its precious oil reserves) sent Bush's approval ratings through the roof . Bush's domestic administration brought him no end of ridicule .
 The United States' economy was in recession, mainly due to sluggish job recovery across the nation . While this downturn wasn't necessarily the fault of the Bush administration, it left a significant proportion of the American population feeling vulnerable and disillusioned .
 Bush lost his seat in the 1993 presidential elections to the popular Democrat Bill Clinton . Even his successes overseas couldn't repair the damage and he lost the seat .
 Bush proudly watched his son George W Bush assume the presidency in 2000, while his other son Jeb became governor of Florida between 1999 and 2007 .
 Now in his nineties and still going strong, the elder Bush continues his philanthropy . He has worked with charities across the United States raising money for countless good causes .
 When a democratic election ousted him from power he nullified the vote and reassumed control . When he was ousted from power, he reversed the vote, and took control .
 Bush sent 2,000 U.S. troops into Panama to settle the growing unrest under Noriega's de facto government . Bush sent the troops in Panama in order to settle growing unrest .
 The leader had been an issue for Reagan’s administration, but the Republican president had been unable to find a solution . Reagan's administration was unable to solve the problem .
 Under Bush's presidency, Noriega was removed from office and power was granted back to the rightful winner of the election, Guillermo Endara . Endara won the election in 2003 .
 Somalia descended into a devastating civil war in the early 1990s . The civil war plunged the country towards a humanitarian crisis . Life in the time of Geoige HW Bush was in Somalia during his presidency .
 In April 1994, the United Nations attempted to aid the situation, but the mission failed . U.N. mission failed in April 1994 .
 The war continued through Bush's administration and into Bill Clinton's presidency .
 Bush established the Point Of Light Award, an affectation of the Points Of Light movement, which aimed to promote the spirit of volunteerism in local communities . The award was created by President George W. Bush .
 The award itself was created to recognise those that went above and beyond in the name of helping their fellow Americans .
 In the same year Bush finally ascended to the presidency, the world around his new administration was changing drastically . The world around Bush's presidency was changing dramatically .
 The crumbling of the Soviet Union saw East and West Berlin divided for over three decades united as one . West Berlin was united in the wake of the collapse of the USSR .
 In December 1991, the prime and first ministers of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus signed the Belavezha Accords which deemed the Soviet Union dissolved . Soviet Union disbanded .
 Between April and October 1993, the U.S. suffered its worst recorded flooding in the history of the country . Flood damage was the worst in the country's history of flooding .
 It occurred in the American Midwest along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers . It caused a staggering $15 billion in damages across agriculture, property and more .
 Bill Clinton's HMjpresidency came at a time of relative stability in U.S. history . His government oversaw a booming economy and progressive welfare reforms .
 In 1992, Clinton was accused of draft dodging during the Vietnam War . Calling himself 'The Comeback Kid' Bill Clinton's reign was tainted by scandal but it was impossible to keep him down .
 The phrase hammered home the message that the economy was the most important electoral issue . During Clinton's subsequent term, the U.S. economy prospered .
 President Obama's eight roller-coaster years in office were marked by a number of things . But it was to be just one of a series of things that would mark his eight years in charge .
 Bill Clinton was born William Jefferson Blythe in the tiny town of Hope, Arkansas, on 19 August 1946 . He was born in 1946 . Clinton was the first president of the United States .
 Clinton's father died in a car crash three months before he was born . He was raised alone by his mother, Virginia Cassidy Blythe; his father had died in the crash .
 Cassidy was raised by his grandparents Eldridge and Edith Cassidy . His mother was studying for a nursing degree in New Orleans, New Orleans .
 The future president officially adopted his stepfather's surname at the age of 15 . Roger Clinton was a gambler and alcoholic prone to violence . His mother married Roger Clinton in 1950 and he adopted his surname at 15 .
 Lewinsky initially initially said the accusations were false . But she testified before the Starr commission and admitted nine encounters . Lewinsky also initially said she had no recollection of the allegations .
 It led to an impeachment trial in the Senate in December 1998 but in February the following year he was found not guilty on the charges of perjury and obstruction of justice . The following year, he was acquitted of all charges .
 On the positive side, he met an ambitious, smart woman called Hillary Rodham at Yale and the couple married in 1975 .
 He had only just begun his first of two split terms as the 40th and 42nd governor of Arkansas too, the second of which ended on 12 December 1992 . The second of his split terms ended in 1992 .
 Clinton was destined for greater things and his reputation was growing . Clinton's reputation is growing and he was destined to greater things . But Clinton was not ready to be president .
 He followed a progressive brand of politics, which was part of a New Democrat, centrist faction ideology that had emerged following George HW Bush's victory in 1988 .
 He firmly believed in the need to improve the quality of public education . The former president of the United States said he was committed to improving education .
 In 1992, he had won his party's nomination, running for president on a promise of welfare reform, tax cut for middle classes . In 1992 he had run for president with promise of expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit for working poor .
 His campaign was marred by claims of an affair by nightclub singer Gennifer Flowers . Clinton and Gore successfully won the White House in 1992 .
 Clinton focused his work on economic reforms that would drag the U.S. out of the recession that had blighted Bush's later years . Clinton focused on economic reform to drag the country out of recession .
 'Don't ask, don't tell' law replaced an outright ban on gay people serving in the military and prohibited discrimination . There were some positive standout moments including the so-called Don't Ask, Don't Tell' law .
 That same year, Israel’s prime minister Yitzhak Rabin shook hands with the Palestine Liberation Organisation's Yasser Arafat following the signing of the Oslo Accords .
 An agreement was also ratified in 1994 by the US, Canada and Mexico which created a trade bloc and eliminated barriers to investment . An agreement also was ratified by the U.S. and Canada in 1994 .
 Reform of the U.S. healthcare system had to be scrapped and it was a bitter blow . But reform of the United States healthcare system must be scrapped . The United States is one of the world's most expensive countries .
 First lady Hillary Clinton had been put in charge of spearheading the proposal unofficially nicknamed Hillarycare . The president had hoped to see it through .
 He yearned for universal health care and made it part of his presidential campaign . But strong opposition and red tape strangled it, he said .
 His second term was marked by the scandal involving White House intern Monica Lewinsky . Yet further trouble brewed in his personal life and his second term in office .
 It led to the president's impeachment , which blemished his reputation . The impeachment led to his reputation being tarnished .
 His final years of presidency saw a rise in his popularity with the signing of tax-relief plans, tax credits for children and college tuition, and the announcement of a $70 billion budget surplus .
 He oversaw a U.S.-led, two-month NATO bombardment of Serbia in support of the Albanians . But world tensions began to simmer and he oversaw a United States-led bombardment of Serbans .
 He also warned in 1998 that Iraq was pursuing nuclear weapons, prompting four days of concentrated air attacks on Iraqi military installations .
 He may have taken office after the end of the Cold War but the United States’ brief time of peace was coming to an end . The U.S. had a brief period of peace with the Soviet Union in mind .
 Many European borders were redrawn in the east, particularly due to the Yugoslav Wars, the Kosovo War and the Bosnian War . Clinton left office on 20 January 2001 .
 Many countries were also shifting away from the influence of the former Soviet Union .
 "The political landscape was shifting and the United States' standing was strengthened," says President Obama . "The U.S. standing in the world was strengthened. The United States was strengthened, says Obama .
 The American economy was flourishing in the Nineties, experiencing the longest period of peacetime economic expansion in its history . The U.S. economy was booming during that period .
 The Welfare Reform Act also succeeded in reducing poverty from 1996 . The U.S. had more than overcome the recession at the turn of the decade .
 The internet was proving to be revolutionary with email a popular form of communication . Email was proving a popular way of communication with the world .
 The 1990s saw the release of the first Star Wars prequel while animation moved up a notch with the debut of Toy Story . Toy Story was one of the most popular animated films in the world .
 OJ Simpson accused of the double-murder of his ex-wife Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald Goldman . Footballer and actor O. Simpson fell from grace after being charged with the double murder of Nicole and Goldman .
 United Airlines Flight 93 crashed in a field in Pennsylvania after its brave passengers attempted to overcome the terrorists . That day also saw another plane blasted into the Pentagon and control of a United Airlines flight 93 seized .
 The president listened intently for the few seconds it took for the message to be delivered . His face barely flickering as the cameras focused upon him .
 He was reading a book to schoolchildren in Florida and continued to read for a few more minutes . He stood up, stood up and apologised and left the scene .
 For brief moments, he was a picture of calm on an otherwise hectic and uncertain day . But for those brief moments he was calm .
 September 11 is the day which would define the 43rd president’s time in office . September 11 would be the day of his 43rd presidency .
 He had only been leader for eight months when 9/11 happened in 2001 . He barely had the opportunity to make his mark .
 He positioned himself as the head of the coalition of the willing a group of allied countries uniting sh in sister, R /e Bush . Bush and wife Laura were instrumental in setting up PEPFAR, which helps save the lives of HIV and AIDS sufferers in Africa against terrorism
 The United States was plunged into two long military campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq, which split the opinion of its citizens . The U.S. has been involved in two wars since 2001 .
 Bush was born on 6 July 1946 in New Haven, Connecticut . He was the son of George HW Bush, who made his fortune in oil . Bush was also a son of Barbara Bush and the future President George HW .
 It was a relatively happy childhood albeit tinged with great sadness following the death of his younger sister, Pauline, of leukaemia aged just three .
 Bush was seven at the time and it was the event which dominated and shaped his early years as he battled to come to terms with his grief . Bush was 7 when he was killed by a car bomb in 1993 .
 Bush repeatedly questioned why no one had told him she had been dying . A report in the Washington Post in 1999 said that Bush questioned why he hadn't been told she was dying . Bush was president of the United States in 1999 .
 It was the event which defined him, ensuring his life would be driven by chance and humour . It was a defining moment which defined his life, he said .
 He was a member of the privileged Skull and Bones society . He spent more time socialising and drinking than studying .
 George W Bush was the son of another president George HW Bush . He went on to receive a Master of Business Administration from Harvard Business School in 1975 .
 After becoming governor of Texas, he was elected as the 43rd president of Texas . He was elected president in 2001, only to bear the brunt of the terrorist atrocities of September 11 in 2001 .
 George W Bush is the son of former president George HW Bush . He was born George W. Bush and his wife Barbara in 1947 . He is now the president of the United States .
 Al-Qaeda terrorists would strike in Madrid, London and Mumbai, while Iraq and Afghanistan dominated political thinking . Iraq and Afghan dominated the political thinking, says CNN's John Defterios .
 There were mass protests against war, rising fears of further attacks and concern over Iran's nuclear ambitions . There were also mass protests over the threat of war against the regime .
 The world became less ignorant of other religions and began to learn and understand more about Islam, in particular . Religious awareness rises in the wake of the rise in Islam .
 Cardinal Laghi sent Cardinal Pio Laghi to meet Bush, asking him to reconsider invading Iraq . Two years earlier, Laghi had sent Cardinal Laffi to meet with Bush, urging him not to invade Iraq .
 More people began to invest in technology in part because of the phoenix-like revival of Apple spearheaded by Steve Jobs . Steve Jobs returned to the company in 1997 and returned to Apple in 1997 .
 The iPod was released in 2001 and revolutionised the way that people bought and listened to music . The iPhone in 2007 ushered in the smartphone era .
 Concorde was retired in 2003 following its only crash in 2000 . Concorde's only crash was in 2000; Concorde crashed in 2003 .
 It was also a victim of the terrorist attacks of September 11 which had caused a general downturn in air travel numbers . It heralded the end of supersonic transport and fast travel between the United States and Europe .
 With wars, climate change worries and disasters such as Hurricane Katrina, the world needed superheroes, it seemed . Superheroes dominate Hollywood films .
 His success, experience and responsibilities did not curb his fondness for alcohol, though . His success and responsibilities didn't curb him from drinking .
 He continued drinking for another ten years, only giving up alcohol in 1986, just two years before he became a paid campaign advisor on his father's successful presidential bid .
 In 1994, two years after being campaign advisor for his father's failed re-election campaign, Bush won governorship of Texas and served two terms . Bush won two terms of governor of Texas .
 It led to him becoming the Republican presidential nominee for the 2000 elections . It led him to become the Republican Party's presidential nominee .
 This had put him up against A1 Gore, vice president of the U.S. under President Bill Clinton . Gore was a vice president under President Clinton . He had been in office at the time .
 The election was mired in controversy as scores of voters said they had accidentally voted for the wrong candidate because the ballot was not entirely clear . Scores of voters say they had mistakenly voted for . the wrong . candidate .
 A recount was triggered in Florida where Bush's victory of margin was just 537 . Bush's margin of margin of 537 was 537. A recount of the vote was triggered .
 Disappointed voters had rows over hand recounts and punch card ballots where so-called 'chads' were hanging from the papers and were not registering votes .
 In the end, Bush was declared the winner even though Gore had won the popular vote by 48 per cent to Bush's 47 per cent . In the polls, Gore won the majority of the vote, but Bush won the most popular vote . Gore was declared a winner by Bush even though
 When Bush was seeking election, he had promised to overhaul Medicare, Social Security and public education . Bush had promised a Medicare overhaul when he was running for president .
 He wanted to put to bed the Clinton-esque scandals of the last office . "He rode a wave of principled policies. He wanted the Clintons-era scandals to put them to bed"
 Newspapers spoke of his desire to cut taxes and help the poor with health insurance tax credits . Newspapers said he wants to help them with tax credits for health insurance . He also wants to cut tax breaks for the poor .
 In his first term Bush achieved tax cuts, and he made strides in the education sector . But on September 11 everything would change . Bush's first term would be his second term .
 Bush’s priorities needed to shift in line with the expectations he laid out on the evening of that day, Bush says . Bush's priorities should shift, he says, to meet expectations he set .
 Bush was briefed on the terrorist attacks and their likely motivation . Bush's attention fixed on foreign rather than domestic policy, Bush's focus was on foreign policy .
 Analysts believed the United States could become an isolationist country but instead the U.S. went all-out, seeking retribution . Analysts believe the United Kingdom could become a nation of isolationist .
 Bush had said that “we will make no distinction between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbour them"" and so the army and air force were sent to bombard Afghanistan and drive out the ruling Taliban . Bush had, after all, said “We will make . no
 In 2003, attention switched to Saddam Hussein, the president of Iraq . Bush’s father had fought in the Gulf War between 2 August 1990 and 28 February 1991 . Saddam Hussein was Saddam Hussein .
 He studies history but it is not known what his grades were, quite possibly because he was not viewed as an exceptional student, rather someone who liked to drink, party and have fun .
 On one occasion he is arrested for disorderly conduct for taking a Christmas wreath from a shop door but the charges are dropped . On another occasion he was arrested for disorderly conducting in a shop shop door .
 On 1 January 1967, a notice in the Houston Chronicle says Bush is engaged to Cathryn Lee Wolfman . Bush was engaged to Wolfman in January 1967 .
 Bush defeats the popular incumbent Ann Richards and governs Texas for five years . Bush won a second term in 1998 the first Texas governor to have done so .
 He proves to be popular, winning 68 per cent of the vote the second time around . He wins 68. per cent in the second round of voting .
 Human rights activists have criticized George W. Bush's administration for human rights violations . Human rights groups have criticized the president's policies in the past .
 George W Bush was born in New Haven, Connecticut, in 1946 . He is the first child of Barbara and George HW Bush .
 His parents would later give him three younger brothers Jeb, Neil and Marvin and two sisters Dorothy and Robin . His parents later gave him three older brothers Jeb and Neil .
 This is where the young Bush grows up, later attending The Kinkaid School in Houston, Texas . Bush was raised in Houston .
 He decides to pursue a business career in oil and becomes highly successful . He becomes a successful businessman in the oil industry . He then decides to become a successful oil producer .
 Key to Bush's efforts to remove Hussein from power and cause change in Iraq was supposed evidence that Iraq was actively pursuing nuclear weapons .
 He claimed to have a stash of chemicals earmarked for warfare and was said to be a threat to world peace . He was claimed to be the leader of the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 The words 'weapons of mass destruction', or WMD, became widely used but searches in Iraq found nothing at the time of invasion . No caches of WMD have ever been discovered since .
 Bush was accused of misleading the American people, an allegation he has strenuously denied . Bush denies the allegation .
 He risked becoming tarnished by a war that seemed to have no end point in sight . He also risked losing his reputation as a war veteran .
 Some sections of the United States and the press often held him to ridicule . He was the victim of hoaxes falsely claiming him to have the lowest IQ of any United States president over the preceding 50 years .
 Certain policies while controversial around the world did not seem to affect him . Certain policies that he had been criticized for being controversial were not affected him .
 At that time, Bush had the highest approval rating of any president during a mid-term congressional since Dwight D Eisenhower . Bush's approval rating was highest in mid-terms since Eisenhower in 1953 .
 His standing deteriorated in 2005 when Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast in the summer, killing more than 1,000 people and causing $100 billion of damage . Katrina killed more than a quarter of a million people and caused $100B of damage in 2005 .
 Bush was on vacation in the 1,600-acre Prairie Chapel Ranch in Crawford, Texas . He did not immediately cut it short . Bush was vacationing at the ranch .
 Bush's slow response to Katrina rankled with the American people as news reports continued to show the extreme devastation . Bush's response to the storm rankled many Americans .
 Even when he did end his holiday two days earlier than intended, he did not visit the area straight away .
 It was widely seen as the event which caused the United States to lose confidence in him . The incident was widely thought to have caused the U.S. to lose its confidence in the president .
 By 2008 it had dropped further, to an astonishing 22 per cent according to one poll .
 By this time, the U.S. was suffering a financial crisis that was also engulfing the world . The United States was suffering from the financial crisis .
 The Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 sought to stimulate the economy but the global recession was in full force . The stimulus act was enacted in 2008, but the recession was still in force .
 Bush had come to the end of his second term but there was no appetite for four more years of Republican policies . Amid growing discontent, Bush was forced to step down as president .
 September 11 would go on to define George W Bush's presidency and overshadow everything else he achieved . 9/11 would be the defining moment of his presidency . September 11 was September 11, 2001 .
 He gives a short press conference at 9.30am that morning before he is moved to a secure location on board Air Force One .
 President Obama returns to the White House and begins work on a more long-term response . He returns to Washington, D.C. for the first time since leaving office .
 Bush was a keen sportsman and played rugby union during his high school and Yale years . Bush was also keen sports fan .
 He headed a group which invested $89 million and took a controlling stake in the franchise in 1988 . He took control of the Texas Rangers after learning they were put up for sale .
 Under Bush's watch, a new stadium was built for the team costing $193 million . The stadium is located in Arlington, Texas .
 Arlington residents raised a half-cent sales tax increase for Arlington residents . It was financed through a sales tax hike . Arlington residents increased the tax by half a cent more than a cent .
 The move boosted attendances, pushing them beyond two million for the first time in franchise history . The move boosts attendances to two million in the franchise's first year of existence .
 Bush continued to buy more shares and he eventually took his personal financial investment to $606,302 . Bush continued buying more shares in the 1990s .
 Rangers sued Rangers on behalf of two families whose property had been seized for stadium parking space . Attorney Glenn Sodd sued the Rangers for two families' property .
 The new Ballpark eventually opened in 1994 and achieved average crowds of 40,374 . Bush decided to step down as managing general partner when he was elected governor .
 In 1998, the franchise was eventually sold to Tom Hicks for $250 million, a sum which netted Bush a cool $14. million . The franchise was sold to Hicks in 1998, and Hicks sold the franchise to Hicks .
 Bush remains a huge fan of the Texas Rangers and he is often seen at the games . Bush has been married to George W. Bush for more than 30 years .
 Former Iraq president Saddam Hussein was finally executed by the U.S. year before . Saddam Hussein's execution was finally completed by the United States a year after his death .
 Bush publishes his memoirs in 2010 and he becomes a grandparent for the first time in 2013 . Bush becomes a grandfather in 2013 after becoming a father to his first child . Bush's memoirs are published in 2010 .
 Barack Obama was born in Hawaii less than two years after it was made the 50th U.S. state . Barack Obama would make history by becoming the first black president of the United States .
 President Obama faced many difficulties in a pair of terms that have yet to be fully evaluated . Inheriting an economy in the depths of a recession and still engaged in two wars in the Middle East, he faced challenges .
 Inauguration crowds were the largest since Lyndon Johnson's re-election in 1965 . He largely delivered on his promises to restore the country's shattered reputation abroad and resurrect it from the doldrums .
 Obama's only political experience consisted of one term in the Senate . Elected to the nation's highest office at the tender age of 47, he was a sensation .
 Obama's upbringing was atypical, yet emblematic of the American dream that came to underscore his political story . Obama was born in a suburban Chicago suburb, but his upbringing was emblematic .
 He was born in Honolulu to a mother from Kansas and a father from Kenya . He lived in Indonesia and Hawaii, splitting time between his mother and grandparents .
 He was unsettled as a teen, and admitted to smoking marijuana and experimenting with cocaine to fit in . He admitted to experimenting with drugs as a teenager . He said he was disturbed by his peers' behavior .
 He was rigorously home-schooled for much of his childhood by his mother . He credited this stern upbringing with instilling in him the values that would allow him to succeed .
 He gained national attention in 1991 when he was elected the first black president of the Harvard Law Review . He was elected in 1991 to be Harvard's first black Law Review president .
 He also began writing a book on race relations that would become his bestselling memoir, Dreams From My Father . He also wrote a book about race relations, Dreams from My Father, which became his bestselling book .
 During his political career, he would often return to the measured, patient tones that he honed teaching law . He often returned to the tones he had honed in law .
 During his candidacy for the Illinois Senate, Obama gained notoriety with his bitter opposition to Bush's invasion of Iraq .
 At the 2004 Democratic National Convention, he electrified his party with the keynote speech . He rose from obscurity to a genuine party leader .
 Despite a fruitful first term as Senator, Obama was a political neophyte . Few expected him to pose a serious challenge to Hillary Clinton in the lead up to 2008 presidential election .
 Obama's accessible, tech-savvy campaign harnessed a new cadre of young voters and small fundraisers . However, Obama's accessibility, tech savvy campaign harnesses a new generation of voters .
 He rode a wave of adulation and excitement to the White House, defeating John McCain in a landslide victory . He was an excellent orator, charismatic, and rode the wave of enthusiasm .
 The country was in a bad state, suffering from the wounds inflicted by Wall Street, and dealing with the worst recession since the Great Depression . The U.S. is now in a state of its worst state of the Great Recession .
 Obama embraced a radical spending plan, rejecting the austerity that many European nations opted for . Obama rejected austerity measures in the wake of the financial crisis .
 His stimulus plan was his most lasting and resounding success, as the country recovered quickly from the recession . Unemployment decreased steadily over his two terms .
 When Obama was inaugurated, the U.S. was also embroiled in two unpopular wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . The United States was embroiled in the wars in both countries .
 He had promised to end both wars, and when re-elected in 2012, he campaigned on his successes in the Middle East . He had ostensibly ended the Iraq War in 2011 .
 President Obama never did withdraw troops from Afghanistan altogether . However, as tensions boiled over in Syria and Iraq, Obama sent troops back in . He never did pull troops out of Afghanistan .
 His presidency was characterised throughout by battles with a stubborn Congress . Democrats had a majority in both Houses in his first term, but that didn't last .
 He failed to follow through on his campaign pledge to close the notorious Guantanamo Bay detention facility . But supporters will wonder if he could have done more .
 His lingering achievement was his Affordable Care Act, dubbed ObamaCare . It was a genuine and lasting effort to make basic healthcare available to all Americans .
 His efforts at working with Republicans on landmark legislation foundered . He faced the threat of government shutdowns from an increasingly fractious Republican House critical of his spending .
 In the wake of the Sandy Hook school shooting, Obama reiterated his desire to pass gun-control legislation, but was again thwarted . In the aftermath of the shooting, President Obama reiterated the need for gun control .
 Obama will be remembered for his deep commitment to progressive ideals . Obama will always be remembered as a leader of the progressive movement .
 President Obama repealed the ‘Don't ask, don't tell' policy, allowing openly gay men and women to serve in the military .
 In 2015, a Supreme Court featuring two of his appointed justices made same-sex marriage federally legal . And in 2015, the Supreme Court featured two of its appointed justices .
 He considered himself an arbitrator of racial disputes, and often intervened in police matters . Yet towards the end of his second term it became clear that racial tensions in the U.S. were worse than ever before .
 Obama's two terms featured notable foreign policy successes . Highlights were the rapprochement with Cuba, the killing of Osama Bin Laden, and negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program .
 His failure to deal with ISIS, his sluggish action in Syria, an inability to control the security environment in Iraq, a bombing campaign in Libya that left it a failed state, frosty relations with Israel, the debacle in Benghazi, and repeated humiliation at the hands of Vladimir Putin and Russia
 Critics will find similarities in the foreign policy of Obama and his predecessor . Obama continued Bush's extra-judicial drone strikes in dozens of countries .
 Obama swept in on a platform of hope and to his credit delivered on many domestic items, salvaged the economy, and did much to restore the United States' reputation abroad . Yet he failed to realise most of his promises and was widely seen as indecisive when it mattered most .
 Despite a slow roll-out of government-sponsored healthcare plans, the Act has made affordable healthcare available to working-class Americans, and granted the consumer protection from predatory insurance companies .
 A sub-prime mortgage crisis, a shady default swaps market, and the bundling of exotic financial instruments combined with deregulation of Wall Street in the 1990s and 2000s led to a total collapse of the financial system and the housing market in 2007 . Obama won a Grammy in 2006 for
 Obama creditably resurrected the car industry, regulated the banks, and restored the economy over his two terms . Obama credited with resurrecting car industry and regulating the banks .
 In early 2009, Obama announced that he would end the Iraq War within 18 months . The Iraq War 'ends' in early 2009 . President Obama said he would 'end' Iraq War .
 The United States public was upset with the fraudulent entry into the war and the subsequent failure of nation-building . The U.S. public was unhappy with the failed entry to the war .
 Thousands of U.S. troops re-entered Iraq after the Islamic State took over Mosul in 2014 . Thousands of American-trained and supported Iraqi army were killed by Islamic State .
 In May 2011, CIA intelligence revealed that Osama Bin Laden was living in Abbottabad, Pakistan . Osama meets his watery grave .
 Obama rejected a plan to bomb the compound, opting instead for a raid by Navy Seals . The raid is the first time the U.S. has targeted the compound since 2001 .
 The raid was considered a strategic and moral victory for the U.S. and bolstered Obama’s popularity . Though he was no longer actively involved in Al-Qaeda, the raid was seen as a victory for Obama .
 Edward Snowden revealed the NSA’s overreach in collecting data . The U.S. faced a stern backlash abroad after Snowden revealed it .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel was particularly enraged that U.S. intelligence was listening to her mobile phone calls . She was angry that the United States had been monitoring her calls . Merkel was angry at the intelligence of the U.K. intelligence .
 The NSA agreed to stop the overeager collection of data but Obama's popularity dipped . Obama's approval of the data collection has also dipped in recent months .
 Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad used sarin gas, a chemical weapon outlawed by the Geneva Convention, to murder thousands of innocent civilians in Damascus . Obama faced a conundrum when Syria used chemical weapons outlawed by Geneva Convention to use sarin .
 He called the use of such weapons a red line not to be crossed, at the threat of immediate military reprisal . He had called it a 'red line'
 Obama backed down from his threat and Putin mediated the situation instead, humiliating him . Yet Obama was humiliated by the humiliation of Putin's intervention .
 Offer code 'ZGGZINE' must be quoted to receive this special subscriptions price . Offer code ‘ZGG ZINE’ must be quote-in-depth to receive the special price .
 All About History is the only history magazine that is accessible and entertaining to all . The magazine is packed with world-leading features .
 Discover the events that rocked the world, from the biggest wars to the biggest moments in time . Discover the most important moments in the history of the world's history .