 Some of President John F Kennedy's advisers recommended that the United States launch a surprise air attack on Cuban and invade Cuba . Some of the advisers suggested that the U.S. launch an air strike on Cuba .
 This would have led to direct combat between U.S. forces and Soviet forces . The United States and the Soviet Union would have faced direct combat .
 Fidel Castro urged Soviet leaders to launch nuclear war against the United States if the U.S. invaded Cuba . During the crisis Fidel Castro called for the use of nuclear weapons . Fidel Castro was the Cuban dictator .
 The Soviets had a total of 42 nuclear-armed ICBMs, of which 36 could be launched on 15 minute warning . Of these, 26 were deployed in hardened silos . The Soviets also had 36 of their nuclear-army missiles, which were deployed on 15-minute warning
 U.S. photo-reconnaissance satellites verified the reverse--that the United States had nuclear superiority--in 1960 .
 The U.S. knowledge of its superiority was revealed to the public and the Soviets in a press briefing by Roswell Gilpatrick on October 21, 1961 .
 Until then Soviet leaders thought the United States believed Soviet forces were vastly larger than they were; and didn't know where Soviet forces are, hence couldn't target them . Until then, Soviet leaders probably thought the U.S. believed they were vastly smaller .
 The Gilpatrick briefing likely came as a great shock to Soviet leaders . Gilpatrick briefings likely came with great surprise to the Soviets .
 Historians and Soviet crisis participants interviewed later favor explanations #1 and #2, with focus on #2 . Historians later favor #2 and #3 .
 Lunas and Beagles were ideal for nuking a U.S. invasion force . The Lunas were ideal to nuke a United States invasion force.
 JFK warns Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to deploy no missiles in Cuba, Sept. and Sept. 1962 . U.S. response to JFK's warning: "No missiles" in Cuba . The United States did not respond to the warning .
 JFK expressed little concern about the military consequences of the Soviet missile deployment . JFK expressed no concern over the military implications of the deployment .
 The White House tapes don't reveal such concerns . Non-elected officials were more hawkish than JFK, suggesting that electoral politics weren't driving hawkish thinking .
 JFK did privately express fear of impeachment or defeat in 1964 election if missiles stayed in Cuba . JFK expressed fear of losing the missiles in Cuba if they stayed in the country . JFK did not speak out about the missiles .
 Exclusion only missiles and warheads for now, to freeze the military status quo . Exclude only missiles, warheads, to now . Exclusion is only a temporary measure .
 Maybe extend the blockade to cover oil and other items later, if necessary, to strangle Cuba . Maybe extend it to include oil and others later, maybe even more . Cuba is a key ally in the U.S.
 A surprise U.S. conventional air strike against the Soviet missiles, followed immediately by a United States military invasion of Cuba . A surprise United States conventional air . strike against Soviet missiles was followed immediately .
 JFK and most of his advisors favored option #3, Surprise Attack and Invasion . JFK favored option: Surprise Attack, Invasion, Invasion .
 United States officials didn't come up with the Quarantine idea until Oct. 3, three days into the crisis . U.S. officials came up with idea three days after crisis began .
 Soviets deployed four Foxtrot-class submarines near Cuba during the crisis . The Soviets deployed them during the Cold War .
 The United States devised a system to signal these subs to surface by exploding practice depth-charges near the sub . The U.S. transmitted this scheme to Moscow during the crisis .
 They interpreted depth-charge explosions not as signals but as an attack meant to sink them . Hence they interpreted depth charge explosions as a signal to attack them . They interpreted them as signals .
 One sub commander considered nuking a United States destroyer in response to the attack . Sub commander considered attacking a U.S. destroyer in a response . The sub commander said he wanted to nuke the destroyer .
 Khrushchev sent JFK a letter offering to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. noinvasion pledge regarding Cuba . JFK signed the letter on Friday Oct. 11, 1962 . Khrushchchev offered to remove missiles in return for a United States noinv
 Khrushchev's first offer was a Soviet withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba in exchange for a US pledge not to invade Cuba . He ignored the second letter and publicly accepted the first offer .
 He thought his bluff wouldn't be called. That's why he warned publicly against it, he thought it would be called, he said . He thought it was a bluff .
 The no-invasion pledge was overlooked as a solution to the crisis . The pledge is a pledge of support for refugees fleeing the region .
 Khrushchev didn't expect the U.S. to detect his missile deployment . He didn't think the United States would be able to detect the Soviet missile deployment.
 United States leaders underestimated Soviet and Cuban military capabilities in Cuba . U.S. leaders underestimated the Soviet and Cuba's military capabilities .
 The U.S. was unaware that the Soviets had 98 tactical warheads and means to deliver them in Cuba . More interestingly, the United States was unaware of the Soviets' intent to deliver the warheads .
 JFK unaware of symmetry of symmetry between Soviet and U.S. missile deployments . JFK was unaware of symmetrical symmetry of Soviet and United States missile deployments.
 On October 28 Khrushchev thought JFK intended to announce the start of war at 5:00m. that day that day . JFK thought JFK planned to announce start of world war with Soviet Union in advance of October 28 .
 U.S. anti-submarine operations were more aggressive than JFK knew, JFK knew . JFK knew more about anti-marine operations than he thought .
 The U.S. Navy knew more than the Navy itself knew about the dangers of the U.N. Navy itself .
 The Navy forced to the surface a Soviet submarine that, unbeknownst to the Navy, carried a nuclear torpedo . The submarine was commanded by a Soviet officer that feared he was under attack and briefly considered firing his nuclear torpedo.
 The Soviets could have thought this a precursor to a U.S. first strike . The Soviets may have thought it was a precursor .
 The Soviets scrambled fighters to shoot it down; the United States scrambled nuclear-armed fighters in response . The U.S. scrambled nuclear weapons in response to the shoot-down .
 The U.S. test intercontinental ballistic missiles were armed with nuclear warheads during the crisis . A scheduled test from this test-field was still conducted .
 A United States intelligence ship remained close to Cuba early in the crisis--an inviting target . A U.S. intelligence ship was seen as an inviting target for the Cuban government .
 We now know he made a plan to agree publicly to withdraw the US IRBMs from Turkey if this was necessary to resolve the crisis . The US president made a deal to withdraw them if necessary .
 JFK did formulate his last offer/threat as an ultimatum with a deadline--a risky act . JFK's last offer was a threat to JFK's life, a risky act, but JFK did make it as a threat . JFK made the offer as a "threat" with a
 Had he not been President history would have been different and more exciting . Had history been different, more exciting. Had history had been different .
 The Soviets had nukes in Cuba, including tactical nukes, commanded by officers with predelegated authority to use these weapons at the outset of the crisis . JFK had a hidden plan to pursue a public Jupiter trade .
 Khrushchev withdrew this authority during the crisis but there is no guarantee these weapons would have gone unused in event of war .
 A soviet sub commander considered launching a nuclear weapon at a U.S. destroyer . It also provoked Castro to seek nuclear war if Cuba was invaded by the US .
 Kennedy told the Soviets that the United States would 6 use force unless matters were resolved in a day or two . The United States was in a great rush to resolve the crisis, pressing matters at a desperate pace .
 Perhaps the U.S. could have avoided the crisis by leaving Castro's regime alone . The United States should have left Cuba alone, says CNN's John Avlon .
 United States superiority: there are some capabilities one does not want to have . U.S. superiority is a problem for the U.K.
 Soviet missiles in Cuba did not give the USSR a firststrike capability; and added little to Soviet secondstrike capability . U.S. domestic politics: Soviet missiles did not add little to the USSR's second strike capability .
 Any second-strike benefit to the USSR would be brief; any harm to the U.S. would be delayed only a year . So any benefit from a second strike would only be brief, he says .
 He would have set a higher ceiling had he thought the Soviets were deploying, he says .
 Perhaps the historical record understates the prevalence and effectiveness of conciliation as a tool of statecraft . The historical record is often understated the effectiveness of the use of it as a political tool .
 History features successful acts of belligerence while successful conciliations are downplayed . Successful acts of belligence are often downplayed in history .