 Jeremy Pressman is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Political Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology . In a series of letters, Pressman asks readers to share their thoughts on the future of the country .
 Many provided comments and suggestions, and I would especially like to thank David Art, John ""Mike"" George, Kelly Greenhill, Daniel Kryder, Sarah Iischer, Stephen Van Evera, Cory Welt, and the anonymous reviewers of Security Studies .
 An earlier version of this article was presented at the 1997 Northeast Political Science Association meeting in Philadelphia .
 September warnings have not been the focus of much scholarly attention . To date, the September warnings haven't been the subject of much attention .
 George, George and Smoke, Kahan and Long, and Sorensen highlight a second explanation for U.S. action based on international credibility . United States opted for a military response to preserve its international credibility by keeping the Soviets deterred .
 In this article, I reject the military balance explanation and regard the international credibility explanation as largely an outgrowth of domestic politics . In fact, I don't believe that the credibility explanation is a military-balance .
 I propose answers to these questions that rely on domestic politics but differ from past efforts to rely upon domestic politics . Instead of domestic politics, I propose solutions that use domestic politics to answer these questions .
 I challenge Paterson and Brophy's dismissal of the role of domestic politics in explaining U.S. policy toward Cuba in the fall of 1962 . I also challenge the authors' dismissal .
 There are a few sources that pay attention to the September statements . The September statements will be released this month .
 Concerns included the erosion of the U.S. nuclear deterrent, a numerical gain in missiles and nuclear warheads, increased coverage of United States targets . The possibility this would be the first of many Soviet missile emplacements in Cuba .
 Kennedy issued the tough-sounding statements to inoculate himself against Republican charges that he was weak in dealing with Cuba and, more generally, the international communist threat to the U.S. Kennedy was under heavy Republican pressure in August and September regarding United States policy toward Cuba . I argue that
 GOP pressure from press coverage and Republican pressure has led to changes in the language and timing of the statements . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his comments .
 Kennedy issued the statements to combat domestic critics, not because he ever thought the Soviets would actually consider deploying offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy said the statements were made in response to domestic critics .
 Intelligence and administration officials were fairly certain the Soviets would never deploy offensive weapons in Cuba . In fact, intelligence and administration .
 He could not back away from the September statements . When he was informed on 16 October of the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, however, he couldn't back away .
 U.S. officials considered diplomatic efforts to remove the Soviet missiles no longer considered feasible .
 The statements were issued with an eye toward Democratic victory in the November 1962 congressional elections and maintaining Kennedy's presidential popularity . The statements constrained Kennedy's range of action once the crisis began, he argues .
 This was largely due to international credibility concerns and, to a lesser extent, domestic concerns that led the White House to issue the statements in the first place . The White House has been criticized for its handling of the situation in Syria .
 He issued the statements so as not to look weak to Congress and the American people . Now he had to uphold his pledge to 'act' so not to 'look weak' to the Soviet Union .
 This explanation of the September statements and the military response 8.8 to the discovery of the missiles suggests a more general theoretical insight 8.9 . The September statements were made by the U.S. government .
 Bohlen considered air strike, invasion, and blockade as avenues of military action . Bohlen wanted to use air strike and invasion as avenues for military action. Bohlen: "Air strike" and "invasion" were possible .
 Leaders under attack from hawks often feared both looking soft on communism and that the perception of weakness in the battle against communism would hurt their popularity and electoral performance . Leaders often feared looking soft would hurt them politically and politically .
 As a result, they might issue tough, anti-Soviet statements for domestic political consumption, assuming they would never be forced to live up to them . They might issue them for domestic consumption . They would then issue tough anti-Russian statements for political consumption .
 Presidents seek to inoculate themselves against charges of being soft on communism . The statements form a key element of an ""immunization confrontation,"" a clash in which presidents seek to avoid charges .
 If at some later date a crisis arises and Soviet action violates the domestically inspired United States statement, U.S. leaders would be forced to respond to uphold the statement .
 They would be forced to uphold statements not only to placate their domestic critics but also to defend America's international credibility in the global struggle against communism . The U.S. should uphold the statements, they say .
 If, as in the Cuba case, the statement narrowed the president's range of action, then the initial domestic pressure by hawks had profound international consequences . If the president narrows the range of actions, it could have profound consequences for the world .
 An immunization confrontation could result from any situation in which hawks and doves are engaged in fierce debates over direction of a given country's foreign policy . Even more generally, one might consider whether such a confrontation could happen in any situation .
 There may be cases of doves using tough language to fend off hawkish critics only to find down the road that these statements constrain their policy choices during international crises . As long as the doves are concerned about their state's credibility on the international stage, these statements may constrain
 This article rejects Paterson and Brophy's conclusion by focusing on a slightly different set of questions, challenging some of their assumptions, and marshaling additional evidence . Some of the evidence has only become available subsequent to their publication .
 I explain how my article differs from other previous explanations based on domestic factors . I also explain how I think domestic factors are more important .
 Section one spells out more clearly what I mean by domestic political factors . Section one explains why domestic politics is more important than domestic politics . Section two explains how domestic politics plays out .
 Section two describes both the press coverage of the buildup and the right-wing attack on the Kennedy administration's policy toward Cuba in the fall of 1962 . Section three describes the buildup of Cuba and the attack on Kennedy's Cuba policy .
 Statements by U.S. decision makers are presented in sections three and four, followed by a section on polling data . Polling data is also presented in the sections of sections four and five .
 Some domestic opinion or opposition groups may prevent a leader from pursuing a disastrous policy . I do not contend that input from the political opposition is inherendy bad, but in some cases, it's not bad .
 Public pressure could also work in the opposite direction, forcing leaders to forswear more militant policies at an early stage and thus leaving a state with only diplomatic options .
 The administration felt vulnerable to challenges within the domestic arena, as well as the nature of the domestic threats that actually emerged, the White House says .
 Kennedy's presidential strength is not solely related to his presidential strength, however, but it's tied to his political success . Kennedy was a strong presidential candidate in the 1960s and '60s . He was elected to the White House in 1964 .
 In the fall of 1962, Kennedy saw the Cuba issue as one on which his reputation and popularity were on the line . In this article, I argue that in the fall, 1962, JFK saw the issue as a matter of concern .
 In summary, domestic vulnerabilities could be related to congressional or presidential strength . In this case, the vulnerability is related to the president .
 In the fall of 1962, domestic press coverage of the Soviet buildup in Cuba exposed these domestic vulnerabilities and led to specific U.S. policy steps . The Soviet buildup of Cuba and the impending congressional elections exposed these vulnerabilities .
 In Congress, the administration wanted to avoid midterm losses that would undermine party strength in Congress and possibly damage Kennedy's reputation and popularity . Kennedy's popularity and popularity in the U.S. may have been at risk, the White House says .
 While the 1962 elections primarily affected the issue of Democratic congressional strength, press coverage and Republican attacks could play on all the domestic vulnerabilities .
 There are a number of works that emphasize some aspect of domestic politics in the assessment of U.S. decision making .
 Stone, Bernstein, and Nathan were early critics who highlighted the role domestic politics played in the crisis .
 Each discussed press coverage and partisan politics prior to the missile crisis . Each discussed the press coverage of the crisis prior to that .
 They rejected military balance explanation for U.S. policy . Suggested domestic political considerations forced Kennedy to act by foreclosing the diplomatic option .
 Kennedy ruled out negotiations or turning to the U.N. because of the impending congressional elections, Stone says . According to Stone, Kennedy also ruled out seeking the United Nations . Kennedy has ruled out using negotiations or seeking the UN .
 Early writers did not place great emphasis on the September statements . Yet these early writers did . Yet, they did not .
 They wrote before the release of the transcripts of the Ex Comm meetings and before revelations such as the Jupiter trade .
 Hampson contended that writers missed the presidential element in Kennedy's electoral concerns in their domestic politics arguments . Hampson said JFK was worried about both his presidential strength and the 1962 elections, not just the latter .
 Hampson implied that international credibility played a role in U.S. policy making . He concluded that in that case an ultimatum, not a blockade, would have been the most appropriate policy .
 He did not spell out the relative importance of international political and domestic electoral concerns . The president did not say how much of the world is affected by the election .
 For more examples, see 5 in Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, We All Lost the Cold War , 422. For more . see 5 .
 As part of the resolution of the crisis, the United States secretly agreed to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The missiles were removed as part of a deal to remove them from the country .
 More recent works such as those by Lebow and Stein and by White have continued to reassess the role of domestic elements in art .
 Lebow and Stein downplayed the role of personal politics but highlighted the importance of international factors and domestic considerations . Kennedy's fear that a weak response to the Soviets would cause hardliners in the United States bureaucracy to revolt .
 Obama administration did not dwell on the interrelationship between international credibility, domestic politics, and the September statements .
 White presented an argument that is probably the most compatible with this article . White presented the argument that was probably the best compatible with his argument .
 He was more focused on the selection of the blockade over other military options rather than why a military option trumped diplomatic ones . He did not fully engage in the international credibility argument .
 In sum, I see a number of differences between this article and previous work on the role of domestic politics in explaining U.S. policy toward Cuba . The article concludes that this article is not about domestic politics .
 Soviet Union renewed and intensified arms shipments to Cuba in late July . The Soviet Union intensified its military presence in Cuba for most of 1962 .
 This did not escape the notice of the U.S. intelligence community, Kennedy officials, or the American press . "This is not the first time this has happened. This is the first of its kind. This does not escape our intelligence community or our press," he says .
 On 28 August, members of Congress began highlighting the Soviet buildup in Cuba . Members of Congress questioned the Kennedy response to the Cuban buildup .
 Stephen Young and Frank J Lausche were the first to bring up the issue on the Senate floor, but neither challenged the Kennedy administration . Neither challenged the administration .
 Senator Kenneth Keating led the Republican charge . Senator Keating was a key figure in the Republican Party .
 Mr President, the time for the truth is now and I hope the American people 15.15.15 will be able to hear the truth from Mr Obama .
 On 5 September, Senator Clair Engle commended the president's position and his ""very clear"" statement of 4 September .
 Engle contrasted what he saw as the status quo with the possibility that if ground-to-ground missiles are put in place in Cuba, they could deliver a nuclear warhead against targets in the United States .
 Were such missiles to be introduced, the U.S. should ""move to take them out"" rather than pursue a policy of interdiction . The United States should move to take such missiles out of the region .
 In CQ's four regional election reports, CQ writers listed Cuba as a campaign issue in at least seven senate races . Press coverage of die Soviet buildup in Cuba began in the first weeks of August and gradually increased .
 The next day, United States officials said ""they had no information 23.23.23" U.S. officials said they had no further information .
 This is an admittedly rough and noncomprehensive measure of what issues were important in the campaigns . This is a rough measure of how important issues were in the campaign .
 Of CQ's descriptions of the thirty-nine Senate races, seven discussed Cuba, two suggested a link to Cuba . Twenty-eight made no mention of Cuba . Two had an unopposed contest or a challenger who did not run a campaign .
 See ""Midwestern States,"" pt. of weekly report no. , 5 October 1962; ""Southern States"  "Southern States," "Western States" and "Eastern States" Report no. 11 October 1962: Eastern States .
 Cuba assumed an ever-larger role in Kennedy's press conferences . Meanwhile, Cuba assumed a larger role in the press conferences.
 Kennedy responded by acknowledging the arrival of Soviet technicians in Cuba . As had been noted in his briefing notes for the press conference, Kennedy acknowledged new supplies ""in large quantities""
 By 29 August there were more questions about Cuba, and they were asked earlier in the press conference . Cuba is still a major source of controversy in Cuba .
 Senator Capehart's speech criticized the Kennedy administration's response to the alleged flow of troops and supplies into Cuba . One reporter specifically referred to the speech in which Capehart was critical of Kennedy's response .
 Kennedy led the conference with a tough statement on Cuba on 13 September . Kennedy said the first two questions sought further clarification on U.S. policy toward Cuba .
 Events and policies continued to develop with regard to Cuba and the Soviet-sponsored buildup .
 Kennedy asked Congress on 7 September for standby authority to call up 150,000 reserves any time before 28 February 1963 . In addition to the president's statements on 4 and 13 September, Kennedy also asked Congress for standby power .
 This request was approved by the Senate on 13 September and the House on 24 September . This request is the first request to be approved by both chambers of Congress .
 The latter article includes the major points raised by Roger Hilsman in his background press briefing of 24 August 1962 . It includes the main points raised in the background of the background briefing of the same day .
 Kennedy mentioned Cuba in his answer to question 9 on foreign aid bill then before Congress . Kennedy also mentioned the island nation in answer to foreign aid question 9 .
 On 13 September, questions 1-2, 10-12, 12, 14, 18, and 20 dealt with Cuba . Cuba is Cuba .
 The fifth press conference, on 26 September, was a special meeting for business editors and publishers . It contained no mention of Cuba .
 In early October, Congress approved the foreign aid bill . It included provisions to sanction countries that allowed their ships to carry military or economic cargo to Cuba .
 Gourevitch raises the possibility of the ""second image reversed"" where international factors may in fact shape domestic concerns . International factors may influence domestic concerns, he says . Gourevitches raises the . possibility of a 'second image reverse'
 The U.S. military response to the discovery of the Cuban missiles was the same domestic factors that best explain the September statements and the military response . Applied to the Cuban case in United States politics, it would be worth investigating the extent to which the international realm had shaped the very same
 To fully answer this question requires a separate research project . Even if as a result of such research, one were to totally reject the independent effect of domestic politics, it would still be an important intervening variable .
 Keating "probably was genuinely concerned about U.S. national security," says Keating . Keating was "genuinely concerned about American national security"
 JFK's September statements were primarily determined by the need to address domestic concerns . JFK's writings and writings of JFK and odier leading officials support the claim that the timing, form, and public nature of the September statements was determined .
 The U.S. desire to warn the Soviets appears to have played only a secondary role . Though the evidence is not definitive, it appears to be that the United States wanted to warn Soviets .
 The September statements were first mentioned as an option on 23 August . It may have been due to growing press coverage, anticipated Republican charges, or a desire to warn the Soviets .
 On 23 August Kennedy met with his national security team to discuss Cuba . Kennedy met on 23 August to discuss the island nation .
 The meeting included President Kennedy, Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, and McCone . The meeting was held at the White House .
 The U.S. embassy in Moscow recommended an ""unpublicized demarche"" to the Soviets . On 31 August, after being notified the previous day about the buildup in Cuba, the United States embassy recommended an unpublicized demarche .
 The same day, Walt W Rostow (State Department) told McGeorge Bundy, National Security Advisor, "we should consider very seriously drawing a line which we would not only state publicly but to Moscow and Havana as well" National Security Adviser said the U.S. should consider drawing
 McCone made no specific reference in his notes to the idea of issuing a statement . It is plausible that the idea was discussed at the 21 August meeting, it is thought .
 Rostow told JFK that drawing the line in a statement might diminish anxiety in the U.S. and abroad in the public mind . Rostow: "Drawing the line may diminish anxiety ... in the United States and abroad"
 The U.S. sent a statement to reassure the Congress and the American people, but also to put the Soviets and the Cubans on notice as to what the position of the United States would necessarily be. We thought it important that this kind of public statement be made not only to
 "We were concerned that as a political issue, it would get out of hand with congressional resolutions and campaign speeches," the author says . "And we were worried that as well as political issues, we were concerned," she says .
 On 4 September 1962 Keating attacked Kennedy's Cuba policy on NBC's Today show . Keating appeared on the Today show on September 4, 1962 .
 Salinger is alleged to have said that Keating was inaccurate . Salinger allegedly said that the President would deal with those inaccuracies .
 Theodore Sorensen, recorded interview by Carl Kaysen, 6 April 1964, 47, JFKL Oral History Program . Sorennsen was a member of the Army, Army, Navy, Air Force, and Air Force Air Force One .
 Daniel and Hubbell outline a similar version of the story but offer no citation . The story is told by Hubbell and Daniel Daniel .
 Dobrynin-Sorensen meetings discussed avoiding Soviet provocations in the months before the November elections . The major topic of the meetings was avoiding provocations, Sorensens notes says .
 On 5 September 1962 another presidential adviser, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., expressed his concern to the president regarding the Cuban situation . The president expressed his concerns to the President regarding the situation .
 The Dobrynin-Sorensen meetings fit with repeated Soviet promises not to complicate U.S.-Soviet relations before the November elections . The meetings were made before November elections in the United States .
 JFK received a memorandum from a worried Bundy with recommendations for the president's approach in the 13 September press conference . Bundy's recommendations for JFK's press conference were based on a memo from Bundy . Bundy: JFK received the memo in September .
 The Congressional head of steam on this is the most serious that we have had. It's not the first serious issue the government has had in the past. The Congressional majority of support for the bill is needed to pass it through .
 The immediate hazard is that the Administration may appear weak and indecisive . The Obama administration may appear to be indecisive, too soon .
 One way to avoid this hazard is to act by naval or military force in the Cuban area, says CNN.com .
 "The other course is to make a very clear and aggressive explanation of current policy and of its justification," says Obama . The other course would be to make an aggressive explanation, he says .
 Bundy wanted the president to be aware that a forceful statement on Cuba was needed to undermine Republican attacks . Bundy wanted to make the president aware of the president's position on Cuba . Bundy: "A forceful statement is needed"
 Bundy acknowledges the central role during the crisis of domestic political considerations . Bundy's 1988 book, he acknowledges the . central role in the crisis, he acknowledged .
 On balance, evidence favors a domestic political one . While I cannot rule out such a credibility argument, on balance, the evidence favors domestic political ones .
 The wording, timing, and nature of the statement are consistent with motivations primarily rooted in domestic politics . Documentary evidence undermines the case for international credibility as the primary factor in the issuance of the . statement .
 Pressure was building on Capitol Hill with Capehart's speech on 29 August and Keating's on 31 August . Pressure was growing for the White House to crack down on immigration .
 The disagreement over how and whether to warn the Soviets was unresolved, with Gilpatric recommending gathering further intelligence information before issuing a warning .
 Bundy and Robert Komer, of the National Security Council staff, mention Cuba, domestic politics . Bundy and Komer mention Cuba and domestic politics on other occasions . Bundy, Komer: "It's been a very difficult time for the U.S. to get involved in Cuba"
 The confusing distinction Kennedy made between offensive and defensive capabilities and the failure to delineate a specific United States response provided a rather muddled warning to Soviet officials . The warning could have been much more clear even with what Kennedy knew at that time .
 U.S. officials struggled to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of different types of statements . Absent the domestic pressure, the deliberations could have continued without the domestic pressures .
 Given Gilpatric's conclusions on 1 September, it is possible that a statement might not have been issued for some time or at all . In practice, it's possible that it might not be issued until September 1 .
 Bundy recognized on 31 August . Bundy recognized the domestic situation in the near future . The domestic situation necessitated a statement in the future .
 This time pressure contrasts with memos dealing with warning the Soviets . If this had been the primary motive, the statement would likely have been issued later, if at all .
 The public nature of the statement was not foreordained, but it proved crucial in shaping U.S. behavior during the missile crisis . Public issuance proved crucial to shaping United States behavior .
 As the Moscow embassy suggested on 31 August and others mentioned, the U.S. could have undertaken a private diplomatic effort to warn the Soviets . The United States could have done so much to warn Russia .
 A private warning would have had different implications for international credibility . A private threat would have been different from a private warning . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Bundy and Rostow suggested that the U.S. settled on a vaguely worded public statement on 4 September and 13 September . Instead of a vague statement, the United States settled a vague public statement, they issued two more vague statements .
 Only a public statement could be used to quiet opposition attacks and bolster JFK's domestic credibility . JFK could use it to bolster his domestic credibility, says JFK's spokesman .
 If the primary U.S. intent had been to warn the Soviets, it would have sufficed . Public or private statement would have been more than a public statement would've been enough .
 The September statements constrained the U.S. range of action after the missiles were discovered . October 1962 highlights the importance of the domestic factor .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara attributed the problem of Soviet missiles in Cuba to domestic, not military, considerations . McNamara said in October 1962, the problem was not military but domestic .
 With reference to an earlier question posed to the Ex Comm participants by Bundy,58 McNamara says, "I'll be quite frank. McNamara is quite frank" McNamara: "I'm quite frank."
 It is conceivable that Dillon did not want a Republican House because he feared the political impact of such a change . It is possible that Dillon didn't want a GOP House because of its political impact .
 He was also a strong advocate of using substantial military force against Cuba . Yet he was also an advocate for using substantial force against the country .
 He may have seen this congressional argument as a tool to use in his effort to sway the president or a close presidential adviser . The president may have used it to try to sway him to support an air strike against Cuba .
 Even before the crisis began, Kennedy himself was concerned about domestic politics, McCone says . Kennedy was concerned that domestic politics was at risk, CIA director says .
 I then showed the President photographs of the crates which presumably would carry, or were carrying, Soviet medium bombers, and were deck loaded on a ship which had arrived in Havana in the early days of October .
 The President requested that such information be withheld at least until after elections as if the information got into the 59.9-county . President requested the information withheld until after election .
 By 20 October, both Dillon and Sorensen supported a blockade, but Dillon wanted an air strike 72 hours after the imposition of the imposed of the blockade if the Soviets had not backed down by then .
 Sorensen favored using the blockade to open negotiations with the Soviets . The blockade would have been used to open talks with the Soviet Union .
 The wording of McCone's notes leaves open the possibility that Kennedy was genuinely concerned about his foreign policy options becoming limited by attacks from the press, public, or politicians .
 The specific mention of the campaign and the elections suggests, however, that harm to Democratic politics was on his mind . It was not the first time he mentioned the campaign or elections .
 Kenneth O'Donnell, a Kennedy adviser, claims to have downplayed the importance of Cuba in the fall of 1962 . He notes that the president disregarded his advice . Kennedy disregarded the advice .
 "We had warm discussions on how he should answer [Keating and Capehart's] attacks," he says . "We were warm discussions" on how to respond to the attacks, he adds .
 I argued that the whole question of whether Cuba was a menace to America's security should be completely ignored by the Democrats . I argued the question was completely ignored .
 I insisted that the average voter could not care less about what was going on in Cuba, ands that full employment and Medicare mattered more to the people in Chicago and Pittsburgh than the debate about whether Soviet missiles in the Caribbean were defensive or offensive in range .
 Kennedy himself made at least two comments relevant to the elections after the U.S. learned of the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy made the comments in response to the Soviet missile threat .
 JFK told McNamara, Rusk, and several intelligence officials that "we have to be very careful about any evidence of offensive weapons in Cuba" Brugioni claims that in a 7 September briefing, JFK said he was "very careful" to avoid offensive weapons .
 President Kennedy's more famous comment, in which he raises his fear of impeachment, was first revealed by Attorney General Robert F Kennedy in his book Thirteen Days . It was confirmed with the release of audio tapes in late 1996 .
 McNamara, RFK, and Sorensen were some of the president's closest advisers on the Ex Comm. White House .
 All three link the U.S. hard line on Cuba to domestic political considerations . All three links the United States hard line with domestic political reasons .
 General Curtis E Lemay, Air Force chief of staff, told Kennedy that even a blockade and political talk ""would be considered.. . as being a pretty weak response to this," Lemay said . Lemay argued for an air strike against Cuba rather than a blockade .
 Transcripts of audiotape number 36. at the Kennedy Library . Transcribed by author from audiotapes number 36 at Kennedy Library.
 See also ""JFK and the Crisis Over Cuba,"" Boston Globe, 27 October 1996; and O'Donnell and Powers, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye,"" 307 .
 Lower-level administration officials also commented on the domestic aspects of U.S. policy making .
 Every course of action must be measured by its effectiveness in removing missiles, says President Obama .
 Given the awareness demonstrated by Bundy, Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Sorensen, and others to domestic factors, the notion that talking would be an acceptable response was highly suspect .
 Kennedy had tried the clear and aggressive explanation approach mentioned in Bundy's memo of 13 September . With the discovery of the missiles, the only politically palatable option left was military force .
 Kennedy remained popular compared to other postwar presidents . Polls showed a decline in his popularity over 71 years .
 According to Gallup polls, he started 1962 at 78 percent, was down to 73 percent by May, 67 percent in September, and 62 percent in October . Gallup polls: He started 1962 with 78 percent . Polls show he is down to 67 percent .
 Kennedy administration might easily have been concerned about a negative trend-line . Eke his sixteen-point drop in 1962 . Kennedy's approval ratings dropped 16 points .
 Gallup polling data also suggests that the public was skeptical of Kennedy's Cuba policy . Polls also suggest that public was also skeptical of the Cuban policy .
 Approval of JFK's Cuba policy was consistently 14—22 points lower than his overall popularity rating . Approval was 14 points higher than approval of his Cuba policy .
 Pollster Louis Harris told the president that most people disapproved of Kennedy's record on Cuban issues, 62 percent to 38 percent, despite the administration's overall popularity and strong position approaching the 1962 elections . In pollster's memo of 4 October 1962, he said most people .
 The administration was dealing with civil rights issues in Mississippi . The administration dealt with civil issues in the state .
 Gallup poll data in part depends on the point in the fall during which one looks at the polls . Gallup poll numbers are based on a recent survey of Americans in the United States .
 Kennedy says the trend would not have been apparent to Kennedy until the September and October polls were available .
 Third, this polling data only deals with possible concerns about the congressional elections, not presidential popularity and the 1964 presidential elections .
 The White House might still have been concerned about presidential popularity in 1962 . Even if polls showed a decided Democratic advantage in the fall of 1962, the White House may still be concerned about popularity .
 President Kennedy was deeply affected by the Bay of Pigs incident, says Sen. Richard Nixon . He says he felt the U.S. government would take timely action to get rid of Castro before the 1964 elections .
 "It was obvious that the Joint Chiefs of Staff had had with him. It was obvious in various conversations," he said . "It's obvious that he had had conversations with him," he added .
 The Democratic administration could never count on a working majority for its domestic proposals, the authors say . Paterson and Brophy consider only Kennedy's concern about the results of the upcoming congressional elections .
 For the polling data, see Los Angeles Times, 5 November 1962, in Paterson and Brophy, ""October Missiles and November Elections,"" 92 .
 Kennedy spoke publicly about the issue of midterm election losses in October . In October, Kennedy spoke about the election losses .
 Anderson, recorded interview by Joseph E O'Connor, 25 April 1967, 4, JFKL Oral History Program . Anderson was interviewed by O'Conner in 1967 . Anderson's interview was recorded on April 25, 1967 .
 Kennedy administration could still be concerned about appearing weak on Cuba even if the overall Democratic congressional prognosis looked favorable . Kennedy administration may still be worried about appearing weakened on Cuba .
 Theodore Sorensen, special counsel to the president, claims that on 20 October 1962, Kennedy felt ""that the whole situation was going to be very harmful to the Democrats" Kennedy felt that the situation was "very harmful" to Democrats .
 Polls, either early in a campaign or on the eve of the election, are not always correct or correctly interpreted . An anticipated victory is not the same as an actual one, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Alternative explanations of September warnings and the subsequent military response to the missiles are not as convincing as the domestic politics explanation .
 One might claim that the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba would shift the Soviet-American military balance sharply toward the Soviets and so must be met by a military response . Another might say that such a response would be met with military response, but that's not true .
 Second, one might suggest that the U.S. opted for a military response to preserve its international credibility by keeping the Soviets deterred and United States allies impressed .
 The military balance explanation encompasses a range of elements including concerns that the Soviet missiles in Cuba would erode the United States nuclear deterrent . The U.S. concerns include a numerical Soviet gain in missiles and nuclear warheads, increase coverage of United States targets .
 Concern about the military impact of the missiles was expressed by a number of prominent hawkish participants in the crisis . Concerns were expressed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Treasury .
 For both alternative explanations, I first consider whether it is a convincing explanation for the September statements and then consider whether the military response to the discovery of the missiles in October is convincing . For both, I ask whether it's a convincing alternative to September statements .
 There is litde evidence, however, that either alternative explains the September warnings .
 The international credibility explanation is helpful in understanding the decision to force the Soviet missiles out of Cuba . But only when combined with domestic political factors, the decision was made .
 The entire Cuban crisis took place in a period of massive U.S. nuclear superiority . The military balance explanation faces a significant evidentiary burden .
 The United States let the Soviets know that Washington was aware that Soviet nuclear warhead numbers were gready inflated . The U.S. told the Soviets in October 1961 .
 The United States possessed an overwhelming superiority in intercontinental strategic striking power, both sides were aware of it . Both sides knew the U.S. had an overwhelming advantage in intercontainment power and both sides knew it .
 Until mid-October, the Kennedy administration and the U.S. intelligence community believed almost unanimously that the Soviets would only send defensive weaponry to Cuba, so a military balance explanation does not explain the September statements .
 A Special National Intelligence Estimate released 19 September called the possible establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba "incompatible with Soviet practice to date and with 86 other countries"
 The U.S. blockade assumes that the 40 missiles in Cuba could make a difference in strategic terms . Once the United States became aware of the missiles on 16 October, a military-strategic explanation for the choice of a blockade assumes the missiles are in the strategic interest of the U
 The president and his key advisers did not believe that the military balance had changed, he says . Moreover, even if in reality the missiles in Cuba changed the strategic balance, the president's key advisers didn't believe it had changed .
 A U.S. official who believed at the time of the crisis that the missiles did worsen the strategic position of the United States concedes this was not a decisive factor in the mind of Kennedy or his key advisers .
 Robert A Hurwitch, recorded interview by John Plank, 24 April 1964, 136, JFKL Oral History Program . Hurwitch was interviewed in 1964 . Interview was recorded on April 24, 1964, at JFKL oral history program .
 U.S. officials often speak in vague terms, referring only to ""military"" or ""strategic"" factors without further specification . One difficulty in sorting out these various components is that United States officials often spoke only to vague terms .
 The Joint Chiefs pushed for an air strike on Cuba, but Kennedy argued with them and favored a blockade . Kennedy argued for a blockade, and the Joint Chiefs agreed with him .
 Kennedy emphasized that the Soviet deployments in Cuba added little to the existing capabilities of ICBMS based on Soviet soil . Kennedy said that the Cuban deployments in the 1960s were little needed .
 Administration officials argued that the missiles did not affect the strategic balance of power . Furthermore, key administration officials such as McNamara and Sorensen argued that they did not .
 Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union lacked the ability to launch a first strike without suffering a devastating retaliatory launch . It seems that McNamara and Gilpatric saw the military points as irrelevant .
 Sorensen said Kennedy had "drawn the line" at what he thought the Soviets would not do . Kennedy said the U.S. would accept the large Soviet military assistance to Cuba but would not accept strategic offensive missiles .
 Everyone except McCone had agreed that the Soviets would not put offensive missiles in Cuba . McCone was the only person to agree that the Soviet Union would not have offensive missiles there .
 Kennedy meant to draw a line that would preclude a serious change in the strategic balance, but believed no missiles was a safe place to draw it . Kennedy believed no missile missiles would be a good place for him to draw the line .
 On 17 October 1962, Sorensen wrote that it ""is generally agreed that these missiles, even when fully operational, do not significantly alter the balance of power"
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff said the U.S. government did indeed have to take prompt and forthright action, a, to eliminate the threat to the United States just ninety miles from home . This provided the ideal opportunity to get rid of the focus of infection of Communism in the Western
 This [missile crisis] was the incident that had been looked forward to. This [Missile crisis], was the project that had had been looking forward to . This is the first time this has happened since the U.S. has seen a missile crisis .
 JFK's September statements focused on what might be called the political balance of power . This second alternative is more plausible given JFK's statements; it is more likely .
 Hurwitch, recorded interview by John Plank, 24 April 1964, 136, JFKL Oral History Program . Hurwitch was interviewed in 1964 . Interview was recorded on April 24, 1964, in the JFKL oral history program .
 It did, however, represent a political move that, it was believed, must be reversed . The U.S. had made a commitment and the Soviets had brazenly defied it . The United States believed the move was a mistake .
 If the U.S. did not take forceful action, the administration feared that United States credibility would plummet . The administration feared the United States would lose credibility if it did not act .
 The fear that the Soviets would take further advantage of the United States if the U.S. did not respond strongly was frequently mentioned in the deliberations about Cuba policy .
 Kahan and Long mention domestic politics but conclude that nondomestic factors are enough . Long and Kahan say domestic politics is not enough to blame .
 If Kennedy had not issued the September statements, the range of policy options available to U.S. decision makers would not have been exacdy the same during the October crisis . Kennedy issued the statements during the September crisis .
 Nonmilitary solutions would have been a possibility, but not military solutions would be possible .
 In order to consider a world without the September statements, one needs to assess how else Kennedy might have responded to the intense Republican pressure of late August and early September 1962 . Kennedy would have responded differently to Republican pressure .
 Most of the possible responses to Republican pressure are not mutually exclusive . Kennedy administration efforts during the fall of 1962 relied on elements of several options .
 In reality, Kennedy chose presidential statements as his primary response to the Republican pressure . Kennedy could have allowed his subordinates to deal with the problem .
 Administration officials spoke with the press and testified on Capitol Hill . As the administration's response played out in actuality, a number of the administration officials spoke to the press .
 President Obama might have done nothing in response to the Republican pressure . Alternatively, he might have responded to the GOP pressure .
 In actuality, the administration did prepare reports for relevant congressional committees and key members of Congress and briefed them on the situation .
 Kennedy could have played up another issue to divert attention from the Cuba issue . A fourth alternative would have been diversionary rhetoric or actions .
 Kennedy statements would have constrained U.S. policy in the international arena to the same degree as the actual Kennedy statements of 4 and 13 September 1962 . Even without evaluating the domestic advantages and disadvantages of each option, it is still clear that none of them would have had any impact on U
 Statements by other members of the administration might have created some constraints . But taking no action, privately silencing critics, or diversionary rhetoric all can be used to keep domestic political attacks within the domestic political sphere .
 Without the constraints imposed by the September warnings, a solely diplomatic response to the discovery of the missiles in Cuba might have been feasible . As I have argued earlier, without the constraints . The September warnings were issued, a purely diplomatic response was possible .
 Evidence overwhelmingly suggests that the absence of explicit statements would have allowed the U.S. to consider adopting a wider range of policy alternatives . In my view, the evidence overwhelmingly suggests .
 No evidence that U.S. officials felt that the Soviets had violated anything other than the September statements, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Kennedy implied that the absence of the September statements would have allowed a greater range of choices in responding to the Soviet deployment in Cuba . Kennedy said, on 16 October, ""I should have said that we don't care"" about Soviet offensive capabilities in Cuba, he said .
 Kennedy would have dealt with the Republican attacks in September other than issuing public statements . How great that range of action would have been depends on how much of it would have taken .
 Secretary of State Martin asked United States officials to check whether any U.S. statements ""should have given Khrushchev cause for caution,"" assuming the Soviet decision to deploy the missiles was made prior to 1 July 1962 .
 The president had to define what he meant by his pledge of 20 April 1961 to protect the ""security of the Nation" with reference to Cuba .
 In such a situation, diplomatic and rhetorical pressure might have served as an acceptable demonstration of U.S. credibility vis a vis the Soviet Union .
 In the final analysis, we can only speculate in an informed manner about what did not happen, leaving a rather unsatisfying level of uncertainty in counterfactual scenarios .
 The September statements largely created the concerns about international credibility that U.S. officials voiced after the discovery of the missiles . Even if an outcome might occur in more than one fashion should not mean that explaining any one of those ways is a useless exercise .
 DOMESTIC politics helped shape Kennedy's policy toward Cuba . It would not be the only time that he allowed domestic political factors to shape his foreign policy decisions .
 American Jews had lobbied intensely for the sale . Some of them withheld contributions from congressional candidates until 115 years ago .
 JFK supported MFN status for Yugoslavia, but congressional pressure caused him to break with the State Department and oppose granting it . JFK supported the MFN, but later broke with the U.S.
 Lebow considers the possibility that the fear of domestic political retribution influenced the decisions of President Harry Truman and General Douglas MacArthur on U.S. policy toward Korea and China .
 A broader version of this theory could also be tested against cases from a variety of countries . The theory is looking at the impact of hawkish attacks on doves for being too dovish .
 The origin of the idea of issuing a statement remains clouded, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I have focused on the issuance of the September statements"
 According to a still limited public record, President Kennedy raises the idea at the 23 August meeting that resulted in NSAM 181 . President Kennedy says the idea was raised by President Kennedy .
 Kennedy's September warnings and policy decisions during the crisis represent a middle ground . Kennedy: "In the final analysis, Kennedy's warnings and policies during the . crisis represent the middle ground"
 He seemed to aspire to be tough enough to silence his critics but not so reckless as to bring about a confrontation . He seemed not to be so reckless that he brought about confrontation .
 His statements in September were strongly worded in the hopes of quelling domestic dissent on U.S. policy toward Cuba and the Soviet buildup in Cuba .
 The warnings did not spell out the U.S. response in the event that the statements were violated . The warnings, however, were not spelled out the United States response .
 Kennedy sought to placate domestic critics while avoiding a Third World War . With the discovery of the missiles in mid-October, Kennedy again sought to appease domestic critics .
 Kennedy rejected diplomatic approach that would have generated domestic protests . The blockade was a military policy; Kennedy rejected a diplomatic approach . Kennedy: "The blockade was military policy"
 He rejected an invasion or a Pearl Harbor, but also rejected an air strike . He feared that the Soviets would have no choice but to retaliate . He said he feared that an attack on the Soviet Union would be retaliation .
 U.S. officials refused to escalate and move beyond a blockade even when it appeared that the blockade would not lead to the removal of the missiles .