 USSR will yeiaove the ,IL-29s .anj rriW arrenRO adequate ground inspection. Afimgpotlon A, That the USSR will . yeiaovove the .il-29S .
 If the removal of the bombers la sufficiently assured and the inspection arrangements adequate, we could presumably regard the incident aa closed and give soaa form of guaranty retarding the invasion of Cuba .
 These arrangements would, of course, need to include isere than a provision for inspection by the five Ambassadors .
 Even limited progress might indicate a suf ficiently for thc omi n g attitude to make possible soma Third-Phase solution through a nuclear-free cone .
 Assumption B That the USSR will , arrange ground inspection, buty ^ refuse to rcnove t he 1L-233 on the around that those are Cuban property* This seen* rather unlikely . Assumption A: The USSR will . arrange ground . inspection of the 1L
 If the Cubans should agree to yield on the question of adequate ground inspection, (which means something Sore than merelecoad-Phaee arrangeoenta for inspection by the five Ambassadors) then it ia hardly likely that they would insist upon the retention of the
 Klyrashchov will excuse his non-oerfoTT^nce on the ground that Cuha ,1s a sovereign country . tho IL-28s belong to tho Cubans* end Castro Is flnwllllna t o ocnalt any Horn of
 Under assumption C or D we would be presented with a major choice of policy . Under assumption D or C, we would have to choose between C and D .
 We would continue to look to the Soviet Union to enforce the Kennedy •Khrushchev under* takings . J First, we would take the position that Cuba la effectively a puppet of the . Soviet Union since it is economically dependent on Koscow .
 Or we would take at face value the Soviet assertion that Russia cannot control Castro* In that event we would tacitly or explicitly accept the fact or fiction that Khrushchev had complied to the extent of his ability and thereafter concentrate our pressure on Cuba . Or second, we would accept the
 In that event, not only would we refuse to give any assurance of noninvasion, but ve would nake it clear that we could not tolerate— for reasons not only of our own security but of the security of the Hemisphere— that Castro be left in the possession of offensive weapons
 Second, Unoof, PqUcy, The second line of policy seetss preferable from the point of view of the total American interest, for tho following reasons t U Ihi ""12£2£B3 ,^£J TOP SECRE T -31. U
 The shifting of the burden of responsibility vould olnljnisa the dangers of a direct confrontation vita tha USSR, which might escalate into a larger conflict, 2.2. 3.4.5.5 .
 Khrushchev was trying to extricate the USSR from an involvcacnt in Cuba vhtch is proving progressively more costly and less profitable . It is proving more costly .
 It would eliminate the Cuban question froa the US-USSE dialogue and thus permit progress on other najor issues* 4.4.5.5 . The US-Cuba dialogue would be an example of progress in the U.S.-Cuba talks .
 It would provide freedom of action for the U.S. to deal with Castro directly, both on its own half and on behalf of the other American states .
 It should be consistent with our position that the United States cannot accept the continuance of offensive weapons in Cuba or the absenca of adequate safeguards against the introduction of new offensive weapons . Presumably that course of action should include the following elements .
 It should be designed to tndermiaa tha authority and prestige of Castro, both la Cuba end in the eyea of the world* <o> Xt ■ top grout -4 .
 The actions described in tha Department of Defense memorandum are aa follows i ""1. The actions are described in the memorandum . In the memorandum, the actions described were aa follow i ""
 S*n Julien Air Ease vith 16 P101 strike aircraft armed vith Napaln, 2.7$"" rockets and 2033 ascawitiou, accom* panied by 3 F-1Q4/P8U aircraft equipped vith G
 If the attack la delayed beyond the next 48 hours, dispersal of LL23a nay require attack on additional airfields* ""3* In the absence of air counter action, the attack should be strictly confined to the destruction ox serious damaging of the XL 23 aircraft .
 If there is air counter action, tha suppression of this action by the assigned suppression aircraft vould b* required . If there are air counter-actions, the suppression aircraft would be required .
 It vould be regarded as a direct attack against Cuba and the Soviet Union . Eight feel compelled to intervene on Cuba's behalf in order to save face .
 The inclusion of petroleum under the quarantine would have immediate and sharp reflections within Cuba . Cuba has a history of quarantined petroleum imports from Cuba, including petroleum .
 Nearly all electric power production in Cuba is dependent on fuel oil . Cuba is known for its oil consumption . The country's oil consumption is a major source of fuel production .
 If such a quarantine were established, compliance should be forthcoming shortly thereafter . For this reason, it would seem very likely taat very likely to happen .
 CAS and HaTO countries strongly support our insistence on adequate inspection -and perhaps a lesser extent on the removal of the XL-28's . CAS: Not only the CAS but the HaTO nations strongly support us .
 Soviet Union might be willing to withhold further supply to Cuba of Items on the proscribed list . For this reason it might secretly welcome a United States blockade .
 The Imposition of a quarantine on shipments of POL would be directly relevant to the immobilization of the IL-28's . This would result In the strangulation of the Castro regime without any direct loss of life . The Impositions of the quarantine might result in the destruction of the
 Even were the Soviet Union to run the blockade, the resulting confrontation could perhaps be restricted to sea warfare . This is an arena in which we have a clear advantage, he says .
 The danger of escalation might, therefore 9 be less than in the case of any form of bombing attack on Cuba which might result in bombing reprisals elsewhere . The danger is therefore less likely to be less likely than in any case of bombing .
 The renewed quarantine would be a direct challenge to the Soviet right of free sea transit . Arguments Asalnst Quarantine would be an attempt to quarantine the Soviet Union .
 It would fall V TOT SKCRIH? — r & iQ?-s*eiigr .9. to meet one of the criteria listed earlier . The action directly affects opera tins only on Cuba . It would thus fall under the criteria .
 Khrushchev yielded to the threat of our quarantine once by turning hie ship around* Ha could not afford to do the humiliation of doing 80 a second time .
 The USSa could not stand idly by while the economy of a Socialist state was slowly strangled . The loss of face and appearance of impotence vould be too high a price for it to pay .
 The quarantine vould be resented by several of our NATO friends, including the UK, which never acknowledged its legality .
 They might refuse to recognise a blockade which cut off valuable shipping of valuable shipping . They might also refuse to accept a blockade of valuable trade . They have already been criticised for their actions .
 Topics include failed U.S. -led invasion at the Bay of Pigs, renewed attempts to overthrow Castro through Operation Mongoose and Operation Northwoods . Soviet and Cuban decision making and communications during the crisis . Soviet-Cuban relations in its aftermath .
 It would provide a means for imposing a constant public humiliation on Castro, Castro, it says . It would be a way to impose a constant humiliation on the Castro regime .
 Government can perm it national air space to be constantly invaded without demonstrating its weakness » both at hone and abroad . So Government can . perm it . It can be . permited it national . air space . to be . constantly invaded .
 The possibility of escalation would be 'greater than in the caso of sea warfare following a reinposed blockade', says the United States .
 Such a course of action vould probably be regarded by vorld opinion as excessive, and it would involve grave risks of provoking retaliation elsewhere in the world . Such an action would probably be considered excessive by vworld opinion, according to the author .
 If Khrushchev could cut his investment and leave Cuba without specific security coaaitoants, he might be willing to turn his back, while the U.S. took advantage of the opportunities provided by Castro* s response to continued surveillance .
 Khrushchev could not sit idly by while we forceably eliminated tho XL23* a and wiped out the SAM sites, the surveillance course might appear too dangerous . On this assumption an expanded (quarantine has ouch to recommend it)
 If the quarantine route is followed no military action need to be taken directly against Cuba . Khrushchev vould not be called upon to respond to what he Ernst necessarily denounce as imperialist aggression .
 Under these circumstances Khrushchev might be prepared to see Cuba So down tho drain through the slow strangulation of a blockade .
 Georga W« Ball TOP oRcRtfc EXCISED COPY FOLLOWS vH ^geRBT^opK^ %rt 50RDE. t . tf m »■ at* rtt W» win utriiar; ■N ff
 It aaal** asalat Karmataar to aafagftttlisj taa ftraa as iamalvaaattt In Cuba vfclali la aravlas pw araaalvtly aaca costly aa
 Tha Ualtad Stat** will aaiataia tha araaaat / i aatU taa hawsers asa raaavaa md ■a'ataataata aa-alta^ laspaatlaaa, laalwriUs
 Uta aaara xaflaatlaaa vttkta teaa. At l at l aa ia i a a a. aa aaa ri n li i waald haw laati. Aaa aaa l aaa aaaa l
 Awwp-tf fr* 9ytnml iwt tlM aat aaljr tkOUItt AC taa pa (iwnrtii atraagly i ifMCt« — aa*, pai&apa ta a laa
 Anwm aaaiaat Oaa«aati— <a> Tha raaaaa* ftaiwarlna wa ul * aa a dlratt aaallaagaV ta taa Savlat rl§at af fraa aaa tnaalt .
 If , aa a taaalt af Caatsa'a aat kla lavaataamt aad lam Cuba vltaaat aaaniffit aataxity aaaadtaaata . Aa aaaaarily aanaaalag ~
 Oa taa ataar aaaft* if it la fait taat . aaaila aa fataaaaly aHafattad taa XL-2t'a wiaad aat taa HM aitaa, tat aaa
 I fekla* fete aiteafelaa lo aaoalaoaatf, m* 1 trying to aaaelaaa fete tnmctli wife* fetes . tooHalas ttefe fete Savlafeo X ■-gg