 JFK created the Presidential Commission for the Status of Women . Appointed Esther Peterson to the Women’s Bureau of the Dept. of Labor Court Decisions under Kennedy .
 The Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, is unconstitutional . Separate but equal is unconstitutional, the Supreme Court ruled . Brown v. Brown: Separate schools must be equal and equal .
 Outlawed gerrymandering-drawing congressional districts to favor the party in power . Gerrymandered districts are designed to favor Democrats and Republicans .
 JFK developed the flexible response doctrine which stated that if nations needed help fighting off communist nations, the president would push for a build up of weapons and troops . Dwight David Eisenhower, Richard Nixon and the Cold War .
 JFK created the military ‘Special Forces’ which were a unit specifically designed to fight guerilla warfare . Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union and John F Kennedy Green Berets .
 JFK sent aid to other nations, especially Latin America, during his time in Latin America . JFK sent money to Latin American nations .
 He created the Alliance for Progress which was a plan to aid Latin American governments . He created a plan for Latin America governments to aid their governments .
 Over 10 years the USA pledged $20 billion to help Latin America fight communism . The USA pledged the money to fight communism in Latin America .
 This was an organization of young Americans who went to 3rd world countries to provide humanitarian services and provide stability . This was a group of young American volunteers who went abroad to help provide stability and humanitarian services .
 John Glenn became the 1st American to orbit the Earth in 1962 . 3 years later Saturn V launched Apollo—a capsule that launched 3 men into orbit . John Glenn was the first man in space to orbit Earth .
 July 16, 1969, Saturn V launched Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Michael Collins on Apollo 11 . The Apollo 11 mission was the first of its kind .
 The first Cold war crisis for Kennedy occurred in Cuba—90 miles off the coast of Florida . The Bay of Pigs Fiasco was the first time Kennedy faced a Cold War crisis in Cuba .
 Castro established ties with the Soviet Union and this outraged Americans . Castro immediately established ties to the Soviet Russia . Castro's government was outraged by this .
 Under President Eisenhower, the CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) had trained Cuba exiles to invade the island . The CIA had trained Cuban exiles in Cuba to prepare for the invasion of Cuba .
 On April 17, 1961, 1400 armed Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs on the south coast of Cuba . 1400 armed exiles arrived in Cuba on the day of the invasion .
 The exiles boats hit coral reefs, JFK cancelled air support and most of the exiles were captured by Castro forces . Most of Castro forces captured by the Castro forces were captured .
 The invasion exposed an American plot to overthrow a neighbor’s government . It was revealed that the invasion exposed a U.S. plot .
 Nikita Khrushchev wanted to stop the flood of Germans pouring out of Communist East Germany . Berlin Wall was built in 1961 after the fall of the Berlin Wall .
 He demanded that USA recognize Communist east Germany and Great Britain, France and the USA pull out of West Germany . He also demanded that Great Britain and France withdraw from West Germany and that the U.S. pull out .
 JFK announced on TV Cuba if the USA would remove that USA spy planes had taken missiles in Turkey (Russia’s photos of Soviet long range neighbor). missiles in Cuba . USSR technicians and USSR offered the USA a deal— equipment arrived at Cuba, they would remove missiles in October 22
 JFK ordered Test Ban treaty was agreed to by that USSR dismantle missiles USSR and USA, and already in Cuba . a HOTLINE was created so that Kennedy and Khrushchev could talk at any time .
 The Alliance for Progress gave  billions of dollars in economic aid . The Alliance For Progress gave billions in aid to the world's poorest .
 These countries, in return, were to institute democratic and capitalistic reforms, a. a. b. government . These countries were to be given the opportunity to make reforms in return .
 A. train to fight in guerilla warfare B. overthrow Fidel Castro C. help with basic projects/skills like irrigation, medical, etc. Help with basic skills like irrigation and medical . A. B. A. C. B . B. D. B A.
 November 22, 1963, John F Kennedy was assassinated by Lee Harvey Oswald, a Communist sympathizer . Richard Nixon was the first president to be assassinated by a President .
 JFK was riding in a car with his wife in Dallas, Texas when this occurred . JFK was driving in Dallas when the shooting occurred .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson, VP, was sworn in as the President of the United States of America . Johnson was sworn into office in 1945 .
 Jack Ruby assassinated Lee Harvey Oswald to protect others involved in the crime . Ruby assassinated Oswald as Oswald was being escorted from a jail . Ruby was the assassin of Oswald, who was killed in the assassination .
 In 1964 the Warren Commission ruled that Oswald acted alone . The Warren Commission was created to investigate the Kennedy assassination . Oswald was found guilty of the assassination in 1964 .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson assumed the role of President on November 22, 1963 . He was President of the United States from 1963 to 1965 .
 He was sworn in on Air Force One in Dallas, Texas, on the day of Kennedy's assassination .
 In 1964 Johnson ran against Barry Goldwater who was an outspoken conservative . In 1964 he ran against Goldwater, who was a conservative .
 The Great Society was Johnson’s vision for a more perfect and equitable nation . Johnson's vision was for a better, more than a perfect nation .
 Peace Corps VISTA VISTA Consumer and Environmental Protection Water Quality and Clean Air Actsupported standards for the quality of air and water . The Peace Corps has been awarded a $1,000,000 grant to the Peace Corps for water quality .
 The U.S. Highway Safety Act created training standards for emergency technicians . The act supported a team effort between federal, state and local officials .
 Fair Packaging and Labeling Act required all consumer products to have informative labels that listed ingredients . Fair packaging and labelling Act required labels that list ingredients .