 The Daily Mail's weekly Newsquiz test your knowledge of stories you need to read in order to see the latest from CNN iReport . Submit your photos to the Daily Mail Online home . Please email us an email from somewhere else in the world .
 SparkNotes Plus is a free trial of SparkNotes . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on SparkNotes.com . Sign up for a new subscription to the weekly newsquiz .
 CNN.com will be joined by iReporters from around the world to test their knowledge of events in the U.S. national parks .
 SparkNotes Plus isn't available in your country . We're sorry we're sorry, SparkNotes+. Plus is available in the US .
 SparkNotes Plus subscription is $4.99-a-month or $24.99/year as selected above . SparkNotes is available at the end of each month for $1.99 per month .
 You may cancel your subscription on the Subscription and Billing page or contact Customer Support at custserv@bnbn.com .
 Your subscription will continue automatically once the free trial period is over . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Search all of SparkNotes Search Suggestions . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Visit CNN.com/SparkNotes for more information .
 Renewed your subscription to regain access to all of our exclusive, ad-free study tools .
 JFK suffered from Addison's Disease throughout his political career, a fact that was kept secret from the general public . JFK was diagnosed with the disease during his presidency .
 It was divided into two zones during the Cold War–one affiliated with the West, and one Communist-ruled . One zone was affiliated with West, one with Communist-controlled, the other one with Communists .
 Choate The prestigious Connecticut boarding school where JFK attended high school . JFK attended Choate . Choate was a member of the Choate family .
 Communism predicted the overthrow of capitalism, the abolition of private property, and rule by the working class . The ideology of the Soviet Union was the ideology of Communism . Communism predicted that capitalism would be overthrown .
 U.S. fears about the spread of Communism drove the Cold War with the Soviet Union . The Cold War was a Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Russia .
 The prestigious New England university attended by JFK, as well as by his father and Joe Jr. Harvard . JFK Jr. attended Harvard .
 It sent American volunteers overseas to work in less-developed countries . The U.S. sent volunteers to work overseas to help develop countries .
 Profiles in Courage is a book supposedly written by JFK while he was a senator . It depicts various heroic political figures in U.S. history . JFK is a former senator from New York .
 JFK received a Pulitzer Prize for the book in 1957 . Despite the fact that the book was largely written by Theodore Sorensen, JFK received the award .
 After World War II, the Soviet Union and the United States became rivals for global dominance . The Cold War never erupted in direct, or ""hot,"" battles .
 Vietnam is a former French colony in Southeast Asia that was threatened by the prospect of a Communist takeover . Vietnam was a French colony of the 1960s and 1970s .
 During JFK's presidency, the United States escalated its military involvement in the region . The U.S. has been involved in the Middle East since 1961 .
 Why England Slept is the name given to JFK's senior thesis when it was published in the early 1940s . JFK's thesis was the name of his senior thesis .
 The ill-fated attempt, in April of 1961, to overthrow Fidel Castro by means of an invasion of Cuban exiles . The Bay of Pigs was the first attempt to overthrow Castro in Cuba in 1961 .
 The invasion force was cut to pieces at the bay that gave the fiasco its name . It was cut off by the bay where the invasion force had been cut apart .
 The Cold War was the struggle between the Soviet Union and the United States for world supremacy . The struggle began with the end of World War II, with the U.S. winning the Cold War .
 JFK and Nikita Khrushchev were able to resolve the crisis peacefully . During these two weeks, international tensions threatened to catapult the world into nuclear war .
 World War II pitted Nazi Germany and Japan against Britain, the Soviet Union and the U.S. against Britain . The conflict was the first World War I conflict to be fought in Europe . The war was fought in Germany, Japan, Japan and the United States .
 SparkNotes is a weekly weekly feature on CNN iReport . Follow us on Twitter @SparkNotes . Please email us at the weekly newsquiz .