 For 13 tension-filled days in October 1962, the world came closer to nuclear war than it has ever come before or since . For 13 days, nuclear war was the closest point of contention in history .
 People hesitantly went about their daily lives, not knowing if they or their children would wake up the next morning . People went about daily lives not knowing what happened to them .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev engaged in a dangerous game of cat and mouse . They tried to keep the genie of nuclear war in its bottle before it escaped in a fatal puff of smoke .
 At the heart of the matter lay Cuba, the communist-controlled island 90 miles from the Florida shores . Cuba is 90 miles away from the Cuban island .
 Eisenhower administration decided it was worth a try to cooperate with Fidel Castro in 1959 . Fidel Castro came to power in the 1959 revolt that ousted corrupt leader Fulgencio Batista .
 Castro considered turning to the Soviet Union for military assistance . The policy was discarded after Castro deemed it more prudent to turn to the Soviets .
 That summer, the CIA constructed a secret training base in Guatemala for Cuban exiles . The CIA constructed the base that summer, in Guatemala .
 U.S. introduced economic measures designed to destabilize Cuba . The United States slashed the amount of sugar imported from Cuba and cut all diplomatic ties .
 JFK and the JMWAVE Cuba became a hot topic in the 1960 presidential election between Vice President Richard Nixon and Massachusetts Senator John F Kennedy . JFK was assassinated in Cuba in 1961 .
 Nixon was the point man in the administration’s secret efforts to oust Castro . On the campaign trail, Kennedy attacked both Nixon and Eisenhower for not doing enough to remove Castro .
 Nixon could not fight back, since he needed to protect the secret initiatives then going on behind the scenes to disrupt the Castro regime . Nixon was not able to fight back .
 When Kennedy won the election, the plan for the exile invasion of Cuba was well on its way to completion . The new president reluctantly agreed to proceed with the invasion .
 The exiles were soundly defeated by Castro’s far superior military at the ill-starred Bay of Pigs invasion . It took another year before all the surviving prisoners were finally released from Cuban jails .
 The failure at the Bay of Pigs was a turning point in the Kennedy administration’s attitude toward Cuba and the Castro regime . The failure was the turning point of the administration's attitude toward the regime .
 The defeat of the CIA-backed rebels only hardened policy makers in Washington as to what future steps to take to rid the hemisphere of Castro . Cuba now became the president’s number one international priority .
 Operation Mongoose is the largest covert war in the CIA's history . Operation Mangoose was run entirely by the CIA . The CIA was involved in a secret war against Castro Castro .
 The man in charge was the president’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was the attorney general for the Kennedy administration .
 Nikita Khrushchev watched with growing alarm the actions the U.S. was taking toward Cuba . Operation Anadyr was the first operation to take place in the Soviet Union .
 Russia poured military and technical advisers into Cuba to prevent another U.S.-sponsored invasion of the island . Under his aegis, the Russian president sought to prevent a U.N. invasion of Cuba . The Cuban government was overthrown by the United States .
 In July 1962, a Cuban delegation headed by Raul Castro arrived in Moscow for high-level talks about the shipment of military supplies to Cuba, including nuclear missiles . The Cuban delegation arrived in July 1962 for high level talks .
 Raul Castro signed a draft treaty with the Soviets that led to the deployment of Russian military forces to Cuba . Castro signed the treaty in order to deploy Russian forces to the country .
 The codename for the operation was Anadyr, named for the river that flowed into the Bering Sea . The operation was codenamed AnAdyr .
 Russian general staff wanted to fool Western intelligence into thinking that the operation was designed to take place in the far north of the USSR . Troops were given cold-weather clothing even though they were destined for warm, sunny Cuba .
 The initial group of Soviet military men arrived by air in Cuba on July 10 . They were soon joined by 67 others, who were given cover identities as machine operators and agricultural specialists .
 Over the summer, the first Soviet ships departed from ports along the Black Sea .
 Nuclear missiles were stored in specially constructed packing crates, and the ships were equipped with metal shields that could protect them from aerial photography . Nuclear missiles stored in special packing crates .
 The ships’ captains were given sealed envelopes and were told to open them at a certain point in the Atlantic Ocean . They were told they should open them when they arrived in the ocean .
 KGB officer on board each ship was on hand to determine the precise location . When they reached that destination, a KGB officer was there to make sure they arrived safely .
 85 ships began the long voyage across the sea to Cuba, along with Soviet troops who would man the missile sites . Soon, a total of 85 ships started the long journey to Cuba .
 American intelligence assets monitored the large fleet of merchant ships heading for Cuba . American intelligence agents monitored the ships heading to Cuba .
 No one in the intelligence community knew what the convoys contained or their true purpose . The convoys were sent by the U.S. intelligence community . No one knew what they contained or what they were carrying .
 Operation Anadyr consisted of medium-range R-12 missiles and long-range . R-14 missiles were to be placed at various sites around Cuba .
 36 nuclear warheads were on site to be placed on top of the missiles as needed . In total, 36 warheads were placed on the warheads as needed to protect the missiles .
 These missiles could reach all of the U.S. with the exception of the Pacific Northwest . The missiles could also reach the United States .
 Khrushchev gave General Issa Pilyev permission to use the nine Luna missiles for the defense of Cuba if the U.S. invaded the island . The missiles in Cuba were under the ultimate control of the Soviet-controlled missiles .
 The Soviets stationed 43,000 troops in Cuba under the strictest secrecy . The Soviet Union was stationed in Cuba in the 1950s .
 The soldiers wore civilian clothes to blend into the local population . Phillippe de Vosjoli, the Washington station chief for the French intelligence service, arrived in Cuba in 1962 .
 Other ships were landing people and cargos in harbors where the Soviet flag had, until now, been a rarity .
 Soldiers were reported guarding a cavern where work was being conducted secretly . Soldiers were said to have been guarding the cavern in a secret operation .
 Photographs taken by an agent showed that a large hole was drilled through the ceiling of the cavern to the pasture 50 feet above . Photographs were taken by a . agent . The hole was found in a hole in the cavern .
 After leaving Cuba, de Vosjoli returned to Washington, where he met with CIA Director John McCone to brief him .
 McCone replaced Allan Dulles, who was fired after the Bay of Pigs fiasco . McCone, a Republican, had replaced Dulles .
 McCone had no previous intelligence experience but ironically had served as chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission . McCone was a CIA director in the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 McCone took immediate steps to coordinate all available intelligence about the Russian ships en route to Cuba .
 After reading all the reports, he came to the conclusion that the Russians were shipping strategic nuclear missiles to Cuba and began alerting the other government departments about his hunch .
 A National Security Council meeting took place on August 22 in which the president was informed of McCone’s thesis . The president was also informed of the thesis .
 The president ordered the Defense Department to draw up a contingency plan to deal with any placement of Russian nuclear missiles in Cuba . The president believed Khrushchev would be stupid enough to make such a risky move .
 McCone left Washington for his honeymoon that summer . McCone's honeymoon was the first time he'd been to Cuba since his wedding .
 A U-2 surveillance mission on August 29 showed unmistakable evidence of surface-to-air millsile sites that were being built at a fever pitch .
 The U-2 also found evidence of a cruise missile site in eastern Cuba and missile patrol boats in various Cuban ports . The U.2 also discovered evidence of evidence of cruise missile sites .
 A U-2 took pictures over the San Cristobal area on October 14 . The pictures were developed by the National Photo Interpretation Center the next day .
 Analysts found equipment associated with Soviet Medium Range Ballistic Missiles . Military barracks, shelter tents, missile shelter tents and missile erectors . Analysts also found missile shelters and missile launchers .
 The Russians now had missiles that could strike the entire U.S. within minutes . Russia now has missiles capable of striking the entire United States within hours .
 U-2 spy photo on November 1, 1962, shows Russian ballistic missile sites at San Cristobal, Cuba . Ray Cline of the CIA and Art Lundahl, one of the photo interpreters of the U.2 flight over Cuba, took the startling pictures .
 They then met with President Kennedy and explained what the photos contained . The photos were then shown to the president .
 The president picked a group of his most trusted advisers to meet and decide strategy . The group of trusted advisers met in Washington to discuss strategy .
 The secret team was dubbed EXCOMM, or the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The team is the executive committee of the national security council .
 EXCOMM were the president, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Robert Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, General Maxwell Taylor, UN Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, Ambassador to Russia Llewellyn Thompson, and others .
 EXCOMM members discussed all sorts of military and political options, including an immediate air strike on the missile bases, an invasion of Cuba, or taking the matter to the U.N. The group also discussed taking the issue to the UN .
 The U.S. Navy had already planned a large-scale military exercise that was scheduled to take place in the Caribbean near Cuba . The United States Navy was already planning the exercise .
 An amphibious task force that included 40,000 Marines, plus 5,000 more stationed at Guantanamo Bay . The 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions of the U.S. began to move into place .
 Some 100,000 troops were waiting at bases in Florida for the signal to invade Cuba if necessary . Soon, the U.S. would be ready to attack Cuba if needed .
 Some 14,000 additional Air Force reservists were called up for emergency duty . The reservists would fly the transport planes if an airborne drop became necessary .
 The Pentagon began an intensive review of how best to use its military resources if war was necessary . The Pentagon is looking at the possibility of using military resources in a war .
 A surgical strike to take out nuclear missile bases would not remove all the missiles . It would still leave Russian bombers and torpedo boats untouched . The surgical strike would not take out all the missile bases .
 Such a strike would kill hundreds of Soviet soldiers, thus risking nuclear retaliation by the Soviets . The strike would also risk nuclear retaliation from the Soviet Union .
 In the EXCOMM meetings, an alternative course of action was brought up—a naval blockade of Cuba . In the meetings, a naval blockade was also brought up . The Cuban government has been criticized for its actions in Cuba .
 A blockade was technically an act of war, but it was the middle ground between doing nothing and an all-out war . The blockade was a middle ground in the war's middle ground . A blockade would have been a war-like act of action .
 The blockade would give the U.S. more time to finalize plans to remove missiles from Cuba . The blockade, in itself, would not remove the missiles, but it would give it more time for finalizing plans .
 The blockade proposal was hotly debated for several days, and when a vote was taken 11 members favored the blockade . Six members wanted an air strike .
 More U-2 photo reconnaissance flights roamed over Cuba and discovered that the development of missile sites was almost completed . The development of the missile sites and fitting out of the IL-28 Beagle light bombers that had been placed in Cuba were also found .
 Lyndon Johnson and Robert F Kennedy are pictured at center right . The incident almost led to all-out war .
 Major Rudolf Anderson piloted a U-2 over Cuba on a reconnaissance run on October 27, 1941 . Anderson was the first U.2 to fly over Cuba .
 While flying over the eastern tip of the island, his plane was hit by an SA-2 missile, and he was killed . He was killed in the attack .
 In Washington, there were immediate calls for a retaliatory strike against the missile site responsible for the shoot-down . Washington's President Barack Obama has called for a strike on the site .
 JFK refused to attack the site, despite intense pressure from the joint chiefs . JFK asked that cooler heads prevail, at least for the moment . JFK, despite pressure from joint chiefs, refused to .
 The Kennedy administration took its case against the Soviet Union to the General Assembly of the United Nations . Two days before the incident, the Kennedy administration had taken its case to the U.N. Two days later, the incident occurred .
 Stevenson came armed with slides of slides of the missile sites being constructed in Cuba . Stevenson was impressed with the slides of missile sites .
 The presiding member of the General Assembly at that time was Russian Ambassador Valerian Zorin . He denied that any missiles were in Cuba .
 Stevenson asked Zorin if he could prove the missiles were not in Cuba . Stevenson: "I can't prove that the missiles are in Cuba"
 Even after the quarantine on Cuba was established, the president wanted to defuse the situation, looking for a diplomatic end to the crisis . President Obama wanted to end the crisis with a diplomatic solution .
 There was talk of swapping the obsolete Jupiter missiles the U.S. had placed in Turkey in 1958 for the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Antonin Dobrynin to discuss the crisis . On October 27, Robert Kennedy held a meeting with Dobrynins to discuss crisis in Soviet Union . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The U.S. would end the quarantine against Cuba and remove its missiles from Turkey at an appropriate time in the future . If the missiles were removed, the United States would end Cuba's quarantine against Turkey .
 Khrushchev had asked the U.S. to withdraw its missiles from Turkey, remove its offensive missiles from Cuba . The president, in fact, had received two letters from the Soviet Union . The letters stipulate that if the United States promised to withdraw missiles, the Soviets would remove
 Ambassador Thompson, who knew Khrushchev well, advised the president to respond to the first message . The second was probably written under pressure from the Soviet military .
 Dobrynin cabled Moscow with Kennedy’s assurances on the Jupiter bases, and the Russian leader sent Kennedy a private message agreeing to Kennedy's proposals . Kennedy's proposal for Jupiter bases was approved by Dobrynkinin .
 The American naval blockade ended officially at 6:45 pm on November 20, 1962 . The U.S. naval blockade was officially ended by the end of the blockade .
 Historians still debate which side blinked first in the nuclear standoff, an academic exercise made possible by the peaceable settlement of the world's most dangerous international crisis .
 In their separate ways, both Kennedy and Khrushchev were heroes, although neither would have long to enjoy his achievements . In their own ways, they were heroes .
 Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas exactly one year and two days after the naval blockade ended . Khrushchev was ousted in a bloodless political coup in 1964 .
 In the annals of military history magazines, this is one of those moments . This is the moment when the U.S. military has a chance to win back control of the world's most powerful weapons .
 WWII changed the world more than any other single event in history . World War II was the largest single event to take place in the world .
 There have been countless thousands of published works devoted to all or of it . There have also been countless others devoted to the subject .
 WWII Quarterly is a hardcover journal of the Second World War that is not available in bookstores or on newsstands . It can only be obtained through a personal subscription through the mail .
 Atomic Spy Capital South African Paratroopers’ Raid on Cassinga . The Symbolism of the Berlin Wall during the Cold War . Our Magazines MilitaryHeritage Subscribe