 The Fourth Founding The United States and the Liberal Order Gideon Rose 10 How a World Order Ends And What Comes in Its Wake Richard Haass 22 The Stealth Superpower How China Hid Its Global Ambitions Oriana Skylar Mastro 31 The Age of Uneasy Peace Chinese Power in
 It does not accept responsibility for the views of any articles, signed or unsigned, which appear in its pages .
 Foreign Affairs is published by Foreign Affairs magazine . No part of the magazine may be reproduced, hosted or distributed .
 Foreign Affairs is a member of the Alliance for Audited Media and the Association of Magazine Media . To obtain permission, visit ForeignAffairs.com/permission to obtain permission .
 Yans work focuses on Chinas grand strategy and global influence and the ancient philosophical underpinnings of its foreign policy .
 In “The Age of Uneasy Peace” , he lays out Chinas foreign policy goals and considers what they will mean in a world increasingly shaped by U.S.-Chinese competition . He also considers what will happen in the world of China .
 In her years as a law professor, ELIZABETH warren researched bankruptcy, commercial law, and social mobility . She researched bankruptcy and commercial law .
 In 2012, after driving the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, she was elected as a Democratic senator from Massachusetts . She joined the Senate Armed Services Committee in 2017 .
 Warren argues that in today s struggle between open and closed societies, the U.S. needs to embrace policies that strengthen the foundations of democracy . In “A Foreign Policy for All” , Warren argues .
 Started her career working for Doctors Without Borders, which took her to Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic of Congo .
 Her experiences on the ground drove her into academia, where she has focused on trying to understand how societies move from war to peace . Her experiences drove her to academia, and she's focused on understanding how society moves from war-to-peace .
 Autesserre has conducted fieldwork in Burundi, Colombia, Congo, Cyprus, East Timor, Israel and the Palestinian territories, Somaliland, and South Sudan .
 In “The Crisis of Peacekeeping” she argues that international efforts to end wars have operated with a flawed assumption of what makes peace . She argues that peacekeeping efforts have operated on flawed assumptions .
 TIMOTHY GARTON ASH covered the final years of communism on the continent as a journalist . He covered the fall of the Berlin Wall and the transition to democracy in Europe .
 Polish journalist Witold Szablowskis rollicking account of eastern Europeans’ nostalgia for communist rule . In “Life After Liberation” he considers what it means for the region’s fractious present .
 T WO decades ago, the U.S.sponsored liberal international order seemed to be going from strength to strength . The U.N. hosted a large number of countries in the Middle East .
 Now, both order and sponsor are in crisis, and the future of the future is up for grabs . The future of order and sponsorship is in the balance .
 There are many elements of the story, including military blunders, stagnation for the middle and lower classes in the developed world . But a shifting balance of power may be the most important of all, and that's a shift in power .
 CNN focused on how the troubled hegemon and the confident challenger are trying to write the story s next chapter . That s why we ve focused on . how they s trying to . write the next chapter of the story .
 Collectively they map a range of possibilities for world order in the coming years . Collectively, they map range of possible world order for the next few years .
 Readers can decide which they find persuasive now, pending history’s actual verdict later . Readers can choose which side of the debate .
 I kick things off by arguing that rumors of the liberal order s demise are greatly exaggerated . I also argue that liberals are being persecuted in the U.S.
 The order is the deeply entrenched outcome of a century of U.S. efforts to promote a better kind of international relations . It has delivered more benefits than any alternative could, says President Obama .
 The next U.S. president is likely to try to revive it, with the support of United States allies . The next United States president will likely try to resuscitate it with the help of allies .
 Washington can muster domestic backing for constructive foreign policy, but it's unclear if it will succeed .
 The order can't be revived; Washington must accept that fate . Washington must focus on managing its deterioration . The order must be managed by managing the deterioration of it .
 The demise of the Concert of Europe, the world s last great order-building effort, showed the risks of catastrophe . It offers lessons for policymakers today who want to avert one, says David Cameron .
 Washington needs to be selective in its commitments, avoid unforced errors, and shed its reflexive opposition to multilateralism . Washington must be selective and avoid making unforced mistakes, says Julian Zelizer .
 China is trying to check the United States globally while expelling it from a Chinese sphere of influence in the Indo-Pacific . Oriana Skylar Mastro argues that China is not trying to replace the U.S. as a hegemon . Mastro says China is instead trying
 Beijing has so far managed to avoid undue attention and unwanted confrontation by quietly focusing on regional diplomacy . Beijing has also issued carefully orchestrated threats and promises, and attempts to Finlandize United States allies .
 By the time Washington pays attention and responds appropriately, the chance to avert disaster may be lost . The chances of averting disaster may well be lost if not .
 The temporary U.S. hegemony of the post-Cold War era has vanished, and bipolarity is set to return . The temporary United States hegemony has vanished . The bipolarity of the Cold War era will return .
 Chinese leaders understand this, but they haven’t yet worked out detailed plans for how to use their newfound strength to shape the world .
 Whether Washington tries to restart the old order or not is irrelevant, because it can’t be done . Washington can't be done, and it's irrelevant to restarting old order, says Obama .
 Nuclear deterrence should keep hot war at bay, but look for rising tensions and fierce competition at the levels just below . Nuclear deterrence is key to preventing hot war .
 Locke believed in Locke s idea that free individuals could escape the perils of anarchy by joining together and cooperating for mutual benefit . The founders created a country to show that it wasn't just talk .
 The signers of the Declaration of Independence bound themselves in a common political project, establishing a limited government to secure their rights and advance their interests .
 The act was the first solemn declaration by a nation of the only legitimate foundation of civil government . That act, noted Secretary of State John Quincy Adams in 1821, was “a solemn declaration” of the nation’s sovereignty .
 From the start, the United States was understood to be both country and cause, a distinct national community and the standard-bearer of a global political revolution . The U.S. was understood as both a nation and a cause, and the cause of a revolution .
 Until it did, until the surface of the globe was covered with a fabric of democratic republics, the good new country would have to survive in the bad old international system . Until it was covered in the fabric of democracy, until it did .
 Adams reasoned that the top priorities for the fledgling republic should be protecting the revolution and perfecting the union . Adams: "The top priorities should be protect the revolution" Adams: The nation's top priority should be to protect its revolution, perfect its union .
 Adams warned about the dangers of ideological crusades . He also warned about alliances and balance-of-power politics . Adams warned of the dangers to balance of power .
 The United States stood for universal principles, but it need not always export those principles or enforce them abroad . The U.S. should not always always export its principles, President Obama said in a speech .
 It could be the ‘well-wisher to the freedom and independence of all” while being the “champion and vindicator” only of its own . The U.S. should be a ‘champion’ and ‘vendicator�
 The American grand strategy that emerged in this era, the U.S. was self-righteous aloofness from the world beyond the seas . The U.N. was a commercial republic deep in the global periphery . The grand strategy emerged in the 1930s and '60s,
 The U.S. was protected by geography and British naval supremacy . It could work, however, only because of geography and naval supremacy, it could .
 The country’s long rise during the nineteenth century was made possible by its calm external environment . The liberal hegemon of the day provided the public good provided by the liberal government .
 The United States now dominated the Western Hemisphere, patrolled the oceans, drove the global economy . The U.S. needed a new grand strategy appropriate to its new situation, he says .
 American interests had once been served by keeping apart from the world . American interests were once served by separating them from the rest of the world, he says .
 They didn’t have to love one another or act saintly, they just needed to have some common interests and understand the concept of a positive-sum game . They didn't have to be love or act saintsly; they just need to have common interests .
 The more countries play such games, the more opportunities they would have to benefit by cooperation as well as conflict, says CNN.com.com's John Defterios .
 Interactions could turn into relationships and then communities, maybe even heartfelt . And gradually, interactions could turn to relationships, then communities .
 This approach promised to resolve the tension between American interests and American ideals by achieving them simultaneously, on the installment plan . This approach would be the first time the U.S. has achieved its own ideals on an installment plan, the White House says .
 The United States would protect its interests by amassing power and using it as necessary . It would serve its ideals by nurturing an ever-growing community of independent countries that played nicely with one another .
 Cooperation would lead to integration and prosperity, which would lead liberalization, he says . Cooperation would also lead to economic prosperity, he adds .
 New grand strategy produced the dense web of benign reciprocal interactions now known as the liberal international order . The new grand strategy led to the creation of the liberal world order .
 President Woodrow Wilson first tried to found it after World War I . He failed but gave his successors a model and some cautionary lessons .
 Presidents Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman tried again during and after World War II . This time, this time, the order took hold, at least in part of the world .
 Bush and Clinton refounded it for the post-Cold War era, extending it from the West to the rest of the world . Bush and Bill Clinton extended it to the West .
 As the cooperative arrangements developed in one period prove inadequate for the next, the order’s forward progress stalls, and pessimism spreads . As the cooperatives fail to cope with the next period, pessimism will spread .
 In the past, the obvious benefits of continued cooperation have led new generations to create new arrangements so the good times keep rolling . The obvious benefits have ultimately led to new arrangements, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In 2016, Anglosphere voters rang down the curtain on the third phase of the order’s history with the election of U.S. President Donald Trump . For two years, the world has drifted .
 Conventional wisdom says the order is finished, has failed, was always a naive fantasy or a mere epiphenomenon of temporary surplus power . The order is not finished, but it is always a reality, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The order’s core insight about the potential for mutual gains from voluntary, rules-based international cooperation remains sound . The order's core insight remains sound.
 Most of the world has bought into the project and wants to stick with it, says CNN.com's John Defterios . "Most of the people have bought into it and want it to continue," he says .
 No alternative approach offers as many benefits, and most carry grave risks, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "No alternative approach is better than the ones offered by the U.S. and the world"
 The administration after Trump's administration will almost certainly tack backward somewhat and try to revive the order yet again . So the conventional wisdom is likely wrong, and the administration will likely tack backward again .
 The catch is that it will take a sincere commitment by the world’s dominant power to lead rather than win . It will also take a genuine commitment to lead, not just win, to lead .
 When the Great War broke out, in 1914, the U.S. instinctively dove for cover . Gideon Rose was the first person in the United States to write a book about the First World War .
 The country had grown too strong to be ignored, but it didn't last long in the twentieth century, because it didn t last long .
 As fighting in Europe settled into a grinding war of attrition, the outcome depended on the Allies’ access to the U.S. economy .
 Unrestricted submarine warfare was designed to squeeze the Allies into submission . Unrestricted submarines were designed to crush the Allies . The U.S. Navy was defeated by the Allies in World War Two .
 The U.S. pulled into the war, and the world, for good . Instead, it pulled the United States into the world for good, and pulled the world back .
 Wilson refused to normalize the slaughter as a neutral, Wilson had refused to . Wilson watched the slaughter in a neutral role .
 The whole enterprise of war was evil, he was sure, not just any one belligerent . He was sure that the whole enterprise was evil . He said he would not be surprised if the war was going to end .
 "The root problem was the ruthless jockeying for advantage that all European countries considered normal foreign policy behavior," says David Frum .
 Wilson called on the belligerents to declare the stalemated war a draw and move to a new kind of postwar order based on collective security rather than competitive self-interest . So from the sidelines, Wilson called for the war to be declared a draw .
 Soon afterward, Germany started torpedoing all the United States ships it could find . The U.S. was attacked by the Germans in World War II .
 Wilson convinced Wilson that his vision couldn't be realized unless Germany was reformed from the inside out . This convinced him that Germany needed to be reformed from inside out, he said . Wilson's vision was realized that Germany would be transformed into a nation of people .
 Wilson thought regime change was necessary because dictatorships could not be trusted to participate in his collective security system . Wilson: "Dictatorships cannot be trusted" to participate with the U.S. in its collective security .
 His secretary of state, Robert Lansing, thought democracies would be less warlike in general . He said democracies would have a better chance to avoid warring nations .
 The administration planned to reinforce its institutionalized democratic peace with an open international trading order . So benign commercial interactions would gradually bind the world together in peace and prosperity, he says .
 International security, international economics, domestic politics would have to be transformed before the U.S. could be secure . The United States would need to be secure before it could be secured .
 Wilson needed to get his own country behind him, keep the British and the French in check, and bring a revived, democratized Germany back into the European balance . Wilson was needed to keep the French and the British in check .
 The cynical British and French pocketed American help during the war, paid lip service to Wilson’s pieties, and kept on pursuing their individual short-term interests just as before . In the event, the cynical British
 The American people turned out to want not a negotiated truce and a postwar balance of power, but complete submission . Wilson sought to avoid harsh treatment of Germany that he sought to prevent .
 As the guns fell silent, the Kaiser’s regime collapsed, to be followed eventually by a weak, unstable democratic successor unable to defend itself at home or abroad . And then, as the . guns fell . silent, it was followed eventually followed by . a weak and unstable democratic
 The British and the French took advantage of the situation, imposing a more punitive settlement at Versailles than Wilson wanted or the Germans felt they had been promised, and things went south from there . The French and the British imposed a harsher settlement than Wilson had wanted, and it went south
 Wilsons failure seemed to confirm the wisdom of Adams’ prudence, and so during the 1920s and 1930s, the U.S. turned inward again .
 Just as before, however, the realities of power made such a course impractical . The reality of power is that such a change of course would not be possible .
 The strongest country in the world necessarily affected, and was affected, by, what happened everywhere else . The strongest nation is affected by what happens everywhere else, says President Obama .
 Within a generation, the other great powers were back to their old tricks, pursuing short-term individual interests, beggaring their neighbors, and so forth . Sure enough, within a generation they were back in their old trick .
 This led to a downward spiral of mistrust, predation, depression, and war, says President Obama . "This led to mistrust and predation," he says . "War" was the result of the war, he says.
 In 1941, just as in 1917, the United States was attacked and dragged in because it was too powerful to be ignored . The U.S. was dragged in by the U.K. because of its power . The United States, too, was dragged into the war because it
 Washington is roused from its geopolitical slumber and driving to victory, Washington had to decide what to do next .
 They continued to believe that the best way to protect American interests was to use U.S. power to transform international politics . They said they continued to want to use American power to change international politics.
 They believed it even more passionately, given what had happened since . If anything, they believed it more passionately than before, given the circumstances since .
 Having bungled the job once, they knew they would have to up their game the second time around . Still, having bungled it once, the team knew it would need to up its game to succeed again .
 Gideon Rose istration had tried to be soft on Germany and hard on Russia . The Wilson admin admin admin. The Wilson administration has been accused of being soft on both sides of the fence .
 It had permitted the United Kingdom, France, and Italy to make secret agreements and hold acquisitive war aims . The United States, France and Italy had made secret agreements .
 It had waited until after the war to set up the League of Nations, designed it badly, and failed to secure congressional approval of American participation . It was designed badly by the U.S. and designed badly, but failed to get congressional approval .
 Because of these mistakes, the victorious wartime alliance fractured, the league foundered, trade barriers deepened the Depression, and eventually a despotic Germany rose up again and dragged the world back into the maelstrom .
 This remembered nightmare lay behind the entire complex of U.S. planning for the postwar order . This was behind the complex of United States planning for postwar order.
 This time, the thinking ran, Germany and the other defeated Axis powers would be occupied and democratized . The thinking ran that this time, it would be the time to occupy and democratize . This time of the time, Germany would be occupying and democratizing .
 A better-designed league would be set up during the war, with American participation locked in from the start . American participation would be locked in at the start of the war .
 Peace and prosperity would be maintained through a combination of democratic peace, great-power concert, institutionalized multilateral cooperation, and free trade . Peace, prosperity would also be maintained by combination of peace, peace, cooperation, cooperation .
 Some things, such as Germany’s future status, were left undecided because Roosevelt wanted it that way . Roosevelt wanted that way because he wanted it to be left undecided .
 Although somewhat concerned about Soviet behavior in eastern Europe and the transition from wartime to peacetime economy, the president died in April confident his hopes would be realized .
 There were lots of big problems looming, not least how to square the great juggler s own conflicting promises to different constituencies .
 Roosevelt had allowed no succession planning, the job of implementing his ambitious agenda in the actually existing postwar world fell to his successor, Truman . Truman was Truman's successor . Roosevelt's ambitious agenda fell to Truman, Truman, who had to implement it .
 The United Kingdom was weaker than expected and rapidly shedding its remaining global commitments . The U.K. is rapidly shedding remaining commitments to other countries .
 Europe was in ruins, revolutionary nationalism was rising, the Soviets were playing hardball, and the U.S. was quickly turning inward again . The American public turned inward again in the 1930s .
 After two years of watching the situation deteriorate, Washington decided to shift course, putting aside the grand universal institutional framework it had just constructed and building a smaller, more practical one in its place .
 The Bretton Woods system was supplemented by the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, and nato, a new set of arrangements designed to revive and protect an American sphere of influence run along liberal lines . The Truman Doctrine was thus supplemented by nato .
 Cooperation is difficult, especially with other people, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cooperation is hard to achieve, but cooperation is essential, he says .
 Rousseau: Put together a group for a stag hunt, somebody will run off to chase a hare, letting the stag escape and the others go hungry . Rousseau noted that somebody will chase the hare and let it escape, leaving others hungry .
 'Hope and fear got yoked together to pull it forward. So a crucial moment for the order came when hope and fear pulled it forward,' he said . 'The order came to pull forward'
 In 1947, the Truman administration moved forward with its plan to pump American capital into a revived European economy centered on Germany and France . The Truman administration planned to pump U.S. capital into the newly integrated European economy .
 It offered generous aid to any country in the region willing to play by the rules of the new system . Most grabbed the chance, and most took the chance .
 A relieved Washington then began building its order in the western half of the continent, as Moscow did the same in the East . Washington then moved to the west and east .
 Second phase of the order s history came to coincide with the geopolitical conflict known as the Cold War . And so the second phase of history coincided with the conflict .
 American policymakers did indeed come to see the Soviet Union as a threat during the late 1940s . U.S. policymakers came to see it as a potential threat during that time .
 It was to the order they were trying to build, which extended well beyond American borders to the major industrial power centers of Europe and Asia and the global commons . The order required a sustained forward presence to maintain .
 Neither Congress nor the American public was clamoring for the launch of such a grand new postwar project . Neither Congress or the public were clamoring to launch such a project .
 Europe's leaders were skeptical of authorizing large amounts of money to get Europe back on its feet . They had their own problems and were skeptical about authorizing large sums of money .
 Truman administration cleverly flipped the story, presenting its new approach as a response to a growing Soviet threat . Truman presented the new approach not as an independent project of American order building but as an order building .
 This got the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, and other measures approved . The Truman Doctrine was used to get the Truman Plan approved . This included the Truman plan, the Eisenhower Doctrine and the Truman War .
 Once containment was established as Washingtons strategic frame, it dominated the narrative . But once containment established as a key part of the U.S. strategy, it became dominant .
 Cooperative integration was sold as something that was done to bind the American alliance together to win the conflict rather than as something valuable in its own right . The U.S. government sold the idea of cooperative integration as a way of winning the war in Afghanistan .
 Frederick S Pardee School of Global Studies 15 Gideon Rose . Offering a ONE YEAR MA in International Relations . Offered one year MA in international relations .
 Much ink was spilled in the ‘Kennan sweepstakes’ as people proposed replacements for containment . At the time, this seemed like an open question, and much ink spilled .
 The Bush administration recognized that the Cold War had really been a challenge to the order, and so when the challenger gave up, the order was free to expand and flourish . The Cold War was really a challenge that the Bush administration realized that the order had to expand .
 Dean Acheson's memoirs, Present at the Creation, was published in 1945 . In 1945, he wrote that their task “began to appear as just a bit less formidable than that described in the first chapter of Genesis”
 We now have unprecedented opportunities to do more, to pick up the task where they left off, while doing what must be done to protect a handsome inheritance . We are doing what we need to do to protect our handsome inheritance, says David Cameron .
 During the 1990s, the Bush and Clinton administrations refounded the order for the post-Cold War era . During the 90s, therefore, the George W. Bush administration refounded order for post-cold war era .
 They weren’t sure how long unipolarity would last and faced a skeptical public and Congress . They faced skepticism from the public, Congress .
 Bush skillfully managed the Soviet collapse, made a reunified Germany a pillar of the order, led a coalition to stabilize the Persian Gulf after Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait . Bush also nudged Israel and the Arabs toward peace, and managed U.S. finances responsibly .
 He advanced North American economic integration, renewed the U.S.-Japanese alliance, expanded nato to eastern Europe, contained regional security threats in the Middle East and Asia . He also promoted the Arab-Israeli peace process, and also managed United States finances .
 By the turn of the millennium, the United States and the order were stronger, richer, and more secure than ever . The U.S. and the world order was stronger and richer than ever at the time .
 By providing international public goods such as global security, freedom of the commons, and a liberal trading system, the U.S. created what was by any historical standard a stable and benign global environment . The United States created a planet-sized petri dish for human and national development,
 On the big-ticket items, peace and global prosperity, the realist pessimists were wrong, and the liberal optimists were right . The liberal optimist optimists are right. On peace and prosperity, they are wrong, they say .
 The architects of the current phase of globalization forgot that the spread of capitalism is a net good, not an absolute one . And the architects of globalization forget that it's not a good thing, not a bad thing .
 Along with its gains come losses—of a sense of place, of social and psychological stability, of traditional bulwarks against life s vicissitudes . Alongside its gains, there are also losses of social, psychological stability and social stability .
 Absent some sort of state intervention, its benefits are not distributed steadily or evenly, producing anger and turbulence along with rising expectations . The benefits of the U.S. have not been distributed evenly or steadily distributed by the state .
 Washington turbocharged globalization even as it cut back the domestic safety net . It shifted risk from the state back to the public just as the gales of creative destruction started to howl . Washington has shifted risk away from state to public, shifting risk to public .
 technocrats running things got so wrapped up in their cosmopolitan dream palaces that they missed how bad things were looking to many outside . And the technocrats ran things so wrapped around themselves that they didn't know how bad it was looking to the outside .
 As a result, liberalisms project ended up getting hijacked by nationalism, just as Marxisms project had back in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . Liberalism project got hijacked by nationalists, as did Marxism project .
 Large segments of many Western populations came to think that the order wasn’t working for them . They increasingly saw no reason to defer to dysfunctional establishments bent on lining their own pockets .
 By the 2010s, the old arrangements were clearly broken, but thanks to political gridlock, nothing changed . The old arrangement was clearly broken . By the 2018s, it has been clearly broken.
 President Barack Obama’s foreign policy focused on trying to protect the order's core by retrenching from overextension in the periphery . Obama's foreign policy is focused on protecting the core of the order, but also on the periphery of the world .
 Trump is a self-taught political genius who rode to office as an outsider denouncing all existing government policy . Trump's election victory was the first of its kind in the nation's history .
 Foreign policy experts scoffed at Trump’s instinctive embrace of “America first” as a campaign theme . But everybody knew that was the approach that had failed disastrously just before the order succeeded brilliantly .
 It is based on sustained cooperation for mutual benefit, which is not something Trump does . It's not something he does .
 The person tasked with running U.S. foreign policy wanted to take it back to the halcyon days of the 1930s . The person now tasked with . running United States foreign policy .
 He favored competition rather than cooperation, protectionism rather than free trade . He favored authoritarianism, authoritarianism and free trade, rather than democracy, he said .
 He felt that his election allowed him to control the entire government by fiat and whim, the same way he controlled his company . And he felt that he felt he could control the government by decree and whim . He felt he was able to control his company by the same manner as he did
 At one point, Trump’s entire national security apparat gathered in the basement of the January /February 2019 17 Gideon Rose Pentagon to explain the order to him .
 Over his first two years in office, the president gradually worked out functional power-sharing arrangements with Republicans in Congress . His administration is devoted to tax cuts, deregulation, conservative courts, military spending, and restrictions on immigration and trade .
 In external affairs torn between amateur president pulling one way and the other, lacking a grand strategy or even strategists, the president has offered little more than photo ops and irritable gestures .
 The routine operations of global-order maintenance continue, but to increasingly less effect . The commander in chief scorns the underlying mission, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Trump deploys national power instinctively to grab whatever is in reach . The president's national security instinct is to grab what's in reach, he says . He says it's a sign that the U.S. is going to win .
 The next two years are likely to follow the same pattern, with Trump s increasing control of the executive branch offset by Democrats’ control in the House of Representatives .
 President Obama will have to figure out what to do next when he's in charge of the White House . He says the next president will come in and have to come up with his own plan .
 It might seem that the cleverest post-Trump foreign policy would be a kinder, gentler Trumpism . The cleveest foreign policy might be the kinder and gentler version of the president .
 The new president could pocket whatever gains Trump extracted, drop the trash talk for sweet talk, offer some concessions, and nod toward the old ideals . Even while continuing to bargain hard with everybody about everything, he could pocket what he extracted .
 The world would be relieved to get past the crazy and would praise the new occupant of the Oval Office just for not being Trump . The new president would be a better person than his predecessor .
 With some token apologies for the unpleasantness and a renewal of vows, life could go on sort of as before . Life could go as normal as before, with apologies and a renewed vows .
 By the time Trump leaves office, the dial on U.S. foreign policy will have moved from supporting the order to undermining it . For by the time he leaves office it will have changed to undermining the order . The White House has been criticized by some of the world's most powerful
 During Trump s tenure, the United States will have broken the bonds of trust needed to keep the common project moving forward . Without trust, without trust, the order will gradually start to come apart, says Julian Zelizer .
 Unless there is a major change in course, other countries will follow Washington s lead and chase after hares . Nobody will get to eat venison for a long time .
 If the next administration appreciates that distinction, it will get the opportunity to restart it yet again . The next administration will have the chance to do so again .
 A return to great-power conflict is inevitable; the only question is how far things will go . A return is inevitable, but how far it will go?
 Such bold pronouncements, however, are rooted in an outdated conception of national power . The U.S. should not rely on such a view of power in the world, it says .
 Realists focus their analysis exclusively on material factors such as military forces and shares of global economic output . Realists tend to look at material factors like military forces, economic output and military forces .
 That might make sense in a world of billiard-ball states constantly knocking one another around .
 In those areas, countries are knit together in lots of relationships and networks, and life is an endless series of stag hunts . In some countries, life is a series of events like stag hunting .
 Survival is not just about winning individual immunity challenges, it requires a social game . Survival requires the ability to bring groups together and bring people together . Survivor is the first season of The Game of Thrones .
 The United States’ hard power has indeed declined in relative terms from its postwar peak . The U.S. hard power is declining relative terms since its post-war peak, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The country's absolute hard power is greater than ever and is multiplied by its soft power, realists say . But this fact does not have the significance realists assume, because of the fact that soft power is more important than hard power .
 An in-DEPTH ANALYSIS of Russia’s economy at a critical juncture . For generations, the United States has done what realist theory said was impossible, playing international politics .
 A CRITICAL look at the major international dynamics at play in Eurasia affecting peace and prosperity in the region . The book is published by Vladimir Putin and Vladimir Putin's successor, Vladimir Vladmir Zelizer .
 On balance, it has considered its role in the order to be the protector of a community, not the exploiter of hapless marks . It has participated in alliances, not run a protection racket, says author .
 The system can add its friends’ power to its own . Thanks to that, when it comes time for crucial tasks of system maintenance, it can be added to its power .
 The speed and scale of its rise over the last 40 years have been astonishing . It has been the fastest rise in the world's fastest-growing economy since the 1970s .
 China, too, took full advantage of the calm external environment and open trading order provided by the liberal hegemon of its day . China's economic success in the 1930s was seen as a success in China .
 CNN.com CEO: "Now it, too, has grown to become a global player, requiring a new strategy appropriate to its status. And now it's too, it's needed to be global player"
 China's own hard power is pretty much all it has to offer . Yet because China plays as an individual, it plays as individual, its own hard-power is all there is .
 Apart from North Korea, North Korea has few allies . The cooperation it gets from others is purchased or commanded . The U.S. needs to rely on allies in order to survive .
 One might see a power transition in the offing . Squinting only at the bilateral material balance, one might see the power transition . The U.S. has a history of power struggles .
 Team Washington versus Team Beijing is a lopsided contest . Order backed by three-quarters of global defense spending, most of the largest economies, and the world's reserve currency .
 What theorists call ‘the Thucydides trap’ has been pried open by the possibilities of modernity, it has been said .
 Dealing with the Chinese challenge will involve the familiar task of herding international cats . It will involve a familiar task, herding cats in China .
 The United States joined with the United Kingdom, France, and Russia to beat Wilhelmine Germany . The U.S. joined the UK, Russia, France and Russia in the victory .
 It got the band back together plus nationalist China to beat Nazi Germany and imperial Japan . The band got back together and the band got together again .
 China brought together larger group plus communist China to beat Soviet Russia . Then it brought together a larger group of larger groups and communist China . Then the Soviet Union brought together large group plus China to defeat Russia .
 China needs to lead a still larger group in a dance with contemporary China . Now it must lead a larger group of people in dance with China .
 During the Cold War, the United States traded with its capitalist allies and glowered at its communist enemies . The U.S. traded with capitalist allies in the 1950s and '60s . The Cold War was dominated by the Soviet Union and the Soviet-Russian alliance .
 The modern fields of international economics and security studies emerged during this period . They emerged as separate tool kits for each set of relationships . The fields emerged during the period as separate tools for each relationship .
 China is playing a mixed game of cooperation and competition, something that Washington has never had to deal with before at this level . Now that China has risen to be an economic peer without liberalizing its regime, the U.S. has never dealt with this issue .
 U.S. President Barack Obama has been criticized for being aggressive in the Middle East . He says the U.N. should not be bullied, but by patiently working out a mutually acceptable compromise .
 The order features an array of cooperative bilateral, regional, and functional groupings . The order of the order is based on cooperative bilateral and regional groups . The Order of Order includes the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Because of so many aspects and points of entry, countries not ready to sign up for the whole package at once can ease into it over time, starting on the margins and progressing toward the core at their own pace .
 U.S. and its allies should try to get China to do, in hopes that one day, it may indeed play a role of responsible stakeholder in the system . That’s what the United States and allies should do, the U.N. should try and get
 If not, blame for any future conflict will fall on Beijing, not Washington . China is a key ally in the Middle East, not the U.S.
 One of the lessons from the 1930s was that for economic liberalism to be politically sustainable in a democracy, the state had to step in to help shield citizens from being whipsawed by market forces . The state must step in in order to protect citizens from the market forces, the author
 The Europeans insisted on acknowledgment of this as the price of their participation in the postwar system . As a result of this, national economies were not forced to open up rapidly or completely, he says .
 U.S. policymakers should recognize the wisdom of that earlier bargain, pairing international cooperation with a commitment to repairing domestic social safety nets and giving their societies time .
 This domestic side of the project is both valuable on its own and necessary to maintain public support for the foreign policy side . The project is important to maintain support for both the domestic and foreign policy sides .
 The real challenge to the fourth founding lies not in theory or policy but in politics, says David Frum . He says the real challenge lies not theory but politics, but politics .
 The order is not a nation-building project, just a functional set of cooperative arrangements . It is designed to reduce the downsides of anarchy, the author says . The order will not be a nation building project .
 Although the story told here is true, the narrative thread is clearer in retrospect, so its truth is not universally acknowledged . Moreover, although the story . is true . The narrative thread of the story is clear in retrospect .
 Without the Cold War, it has proved ever more difficult to generate popular support for the country’s actual foreign policy . Many Americans never bought into the project, and many still don't .
 Each president since the collapse of the Soviet Union has come into office promising to do less abroad than the previous one . Each president has been dragged by events into doing more abroad .
 Some supporters of the order find a silver lining in the growing Chinese threat, reasoning that it might be possible to re-create a neo-Cold War consensus in yet another long, twilight struggle against a new opponent . Since it is easier to mobilize on fear than on hope, some supporters
 It would be far better for Washington to listen to the better angels of its nature and try to avert, rather than hasten, such an outcome .
 In 1945, at the peak of its relative power, the U.S. could have done anything it wanted . The United States rejected isolation and realpolitik and chose to live in a world of its design . In 1945 the United States could have achieved anything at the height of its
 We have learned that we cannot live alone, at peace; that our own wellbeing is dependent on the well-being of other nations far away . We are not alone, but we are dependent on each other's wellbeing, says President Obama .
 We have learned that we must live as men, not as ostriches, nor as dogs in the manger . We must not live as dogs, not men, in the Christmas manger, says the author .
 "We have learned to be citizens of the world, members of the human community," says President Obama . Obama: "We are here to learn how to live in this kind of way"
 When Roosevelt said it, he meant it, others believed and joined him . Roosevelt meant it . He meant it and because of that, others joined .
 The team of free countries he assembled now runs the world in a loose, patchy, inefficient consortium . Three-quarters of a century later, the world runs in an inefficient consortium of nations .
 When its members meet the next U.S. president, they will expect to hear the usual rhetoric, and will clap politely when they do . When the next United States president, the members of the U.N. caucus will expect it to be polite .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 "When one does arise, it tends to come after a great convulsion that creates both the conditions and the desire for something new," says the author .
 It requires a stable distribution of power and broad acceptance of the rules that govern the conduct of international relations, it says . The U.S. needs to be more secure in the world of power .
 No matter how ripe the starting conditions or strong the initial desire, maintaining it demands creative diplomacy, functioning institutions, and effective action to adjust it when circumstances change and buttress it .
 Some countries fall, and others rise, the result of changing capacities, faltering wills, and growing ambitions . Some countries are falling, but others are rising, and some rise, as a result of change .
 Those responsible for upholding the order make mistakes both in what they choose to do and what they don't do . Those responsible make mistakes in both what they do and not .
 If the end of every order is inevitable, the timing and the manner of its ending are not . The end of the order is not inevitable, but the timing of its end is not .
 Orders tend to expire in a prolonged deterioration rather than a sudden collapse, experts say . Order orders are likely to expire slowly, not as quickly as a collapse .
 Good policy and proactive diplomacy can help determine how that deterioration unfolds and what it brings . Statecraft depends on effective statecraft and effective action, effective action .
 Scholars and practitioners have looked as far afield as ancient Greece, where the rise of a new power resulted in war between Athens and Sparta . The period after World War I, when an isolationist United States and much of Europe sat on their hands as Germany and Japan ignored agreements and
 The Concert of Europe in the nineteenth century was the most important and successful effort to build and sustain world order until our own time . But the more illuminating parallel to the present is the Concert of European in the 19th century .
 Order established at Congress of Vienna defined many international relationships and set basic rules for international conduct . From 1815 until the outbreak of World War I a century later, the order established at the Congress of Austria defined many of the world's relationships .
 It provides a model of how to collectively manage security in a multipolar world . The project is a model for security in the world, says the author of the book .
 That order s demise and what followed offer instructive lessons for today—and an urgent warning . Order s demise offers instructive lesson for today, and the lessons of today .
 If the deterioration is managed poorly, catastrophe could well follow . But if the deterioration of the country's infrastructure is managed well, catastrophe will follow .
 The global order of the second half of the twentieth century and the first part of the twenty-first grew out of the wreckage of two world wars . Out of the ashes of the world wars, the global order was born of the rubble of the wars .
 Austria, Prussia, Russia, and the United Kingdom, the great powers of their day, came together in Vienna in 1814 and 1815 . After defeating Napoleon and his armies, the victorious allies met in Vienna .
 At the Congress of Vienna, they set out to ensure that France s military never again threatened their states . They also ensured that revolutionary movements never again threaten their monarchies . The Congress was held in Vienna, Austria, in 1903 .
 The victorious powers also made the wise choice to integrate a defeated France . The course was very different from the one taken with Germany following World War I and the one chosen with Russia in the Cold War .
 Although centered in Europe, it constituted the international order of its day given the dominant position of Europe and Europeans in the world . Europe was dominant in Europe's dominant position in Europe .
 There was a set of shared understandings about relations between states, above all an agreement to rule out invasion of another country or involvement in the internal affairs of another without permission .
 Foreign ministers met (at what came to be called ‘congresses’) whenever a major issue arose . Foreign ministers meet (at) what became known as "congresses" Foreign ministers often met at the end of each other's terms .
 Treaty of Vienna had made numerous territorial adjustments and then locked Europe’s borders into place . It allowed changes only if all signatories agreed to change borders only if they agreed . Treaty was made in Vienna in 1918 .
 It also did what it could to back monarchies and encourage others to come to their aid . France did in Spain in 1823 when they were threatened by popular revolt .
 The concert worked not because there was complete agreement among the great powers on every point but because each state had its own reasons for supporting the overall system . The concert was held in New York City, New York, New Jersey, Washington and Washington .
 Austria was most concerned with resisting the forces of liberalism, which threatened the ruling monarchy . Austria was the most concerned about resisting the efforts of liberalism .
 There was enough overlap in interests and consensus on first-order questions that the concert prevented war between the major powers of the day .
 The concert technically lasted a century, until the eve of World War I . But it had ceased to play a meaningful role long before then .
 The revolutionary waves that swept Europe in 1830 and 1848 revealed the limits of what members would do to maintain the existing order within states in the face of public pressure .
 Ostensibly fought over the fate of Christians living within the Ottoman Empire . But actuality was more about who would control territory as that empire decayed .
 The conflict pitted France, the United Kingdom, and the Ottoman Empire against Russia . The conflict was the first major conflict between Russia and France .
 It was a costly war that highlighted the limits of the concert’s ability to prevent great-power war . Great-power comity that had made the concert possible no longer existed . The cost of the war was the result of the costly war .
 Majorpower conflict had returned to the heart of Europe after a long hiatus . Subsequent wars between Austria and Prussia and France demonstrated that majorpower conflict was back in Europe .
 Matters seemed to stabilize for a time after that, but this was an illusion . Matters seem to stabilize again after that .
 The combination set the stage for World War I and the end of what had been the concert . The concert was the first to take place in 1918 .
 The rise and fall of major powers determines the viability of the prevailing order . Changes in economic strength, political cohesion and military power shape what states can and are willing to do beyond their borders .
 A powerful, unified Germany and a modern Japan rose, the Ottoman Empire and tsarist Russia declined . France and the United Kingdom grew stronger but not strong enough .
 Changes to the concert's foundation upended the balance of power that had been the concert’s foundation . Germany, in particular, is the focus of the concert .
 Changes in the technological and political context also affected that underlying balance .
 Under the concert, popular demands for democratic participation and surges of nationalism threatened the status quo within countries, while new forms of transportation, communication, and armaments transformed politics, economics, and warfare .
 Conditions that helped give rise to the concert were gradually undone . The conditions that helped create the concert are gradually undone.
 It would be too deterministic to attribute history to underlying conditions alone . Yet it would be overly deterministic if history was to blame for history's decline .
 That the concert came into existence and lasted as long as it did underscores that people make a difference . The concert came to existence in order to make it happen .
 Metternich of Austria, Talleyrand of France, Castlereagh of the United Kingdom were exceptional diplomats . The diplomats who crafted the document were exceptional .
 The concert preserved peace despite the gap between France and the United Kingdom . It shows that countries with different political systems and preferences can work together to maintain international order .
 Crimean War might well have been avoided if more capable and careful leaders had been on the scene . The Crimean War may have been avoidable if more careful leaders were present .
 It is far from clear that Russian actions warranted a military response by France and the United Kingdom of the nature and on the scale that took place . Russia's actions did not warrant military response to the actions of the French and British forces .
 That the countries did what they did also underscores the power and dangers of nationalism, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Grigary Yavlinsky’s book is of great importance, says Jack Matlock Jr., former U.S. ambassador . “A much-needed insider view from an important poiiticai figure and reform economist.” —Jack Matlock .
 Richard Haass gives us a ciear-eyed diagnosis of Putinism, a phenomenon that exacerbates the crisis in democracy and casts a shadow over the worid order in the 21st century .
 First, it is not just core issues that can cause an order to deteriorate . It is not only core issues but also core issues can cause a deterioration in an order .
 The concert s great-power comity ended not because of disagreements over the social and political order within Europe but because of competition on the periphery . Europe's great power comity was based on competition from the periphery, says David Cameron .
 The process of deterioration is often not evident to decision-makers until it has advanced considerably . And second, because orders tend to end with a whimper rather than a bang, it's often not obvious to decision makers until it's advanced considerably.
 By the outbreak of World War I, when it became obvious that the Concert of Europe no longer held, it was far too late to save it—or even to manage its dissolution . By the end of the war, it had already been impossible to save the Concert .
 The global order built in the aftermath of World War II consisted of two parallel orders for most of its history . Two parallel orders were built for the U.S. in the wake of the Second World War .
 One grew out of the Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . One of the world's most powerful nuclear weapons systems was created in the 1980s and 1990s . Another grew out from the Cold war between the United States and Russia .
 At its core was a rough balance of military strength in Europe and Asia, backed up by nuclear deterrence . At the core was the balance of nuclear deterrence, backed by the Soviet Union .
 Both sides followed informal rules of the road that included a healthy respect for each other s backyards and allies . Both sides follow informal rules that included respecting each other .
 Helsinki Accords reached an understanding over the political order within Europe, the principal arena of Cold War competition, in 1975 . In 1975, the Helsinki accords codified that mutual understanding in Helsinki . The Accords were codified in 1975 in a deal to end the Cold War era .
 Even in a divided world, the two power centers agreed on how the competition would be waged . Their order was an order based on means rather than ends, says CNN's John Sutter .
 That there were only two power centers made reaching such an agreement easier . The agreement was reached after a series of high-profile events in Washington .
 The other post-World War II order was the liberal order that operated alongside the Cold War order . The liberal order operated alongside Cold War orders .
 Democracies were the main participants in this effort, which used aid and trade to strengthen ties and fostered respect for the rule of law both within and between countries . Democracies are main participants .
 The economic dimension of this order was designed to bring about a world (or, more accurately, the noncommunist half of it) defined by trade, development, and well-functioning monetary operations . The world is defined as a non-communist world defined by development, trade
 Free trade would be an engine of economic growth and bind countries together so that war would be deemed too costly to wage . The dollar was accepted as the de facto global currency . Free trade was an engine for economic growth .
 The idea was that a standing global forum could prevent or resolve international disputes . The idea is that the idea was to prevent, or resolve, international disputes.
 The UN Security Council, with five great-power permanent members and additional seats for a rotating membership, would orchestrate international relations . The Security Council would be a permanent body with five permanent members .
 The order depended on the willingness of the noncommunist world to accept American primacy . Yet the order depended just as much on the willing willingness to accept U.S. primacy, the author says .
 The U.S. was more often than not viewed as a relatively benign hegemon, one admired as much for what it did at home and abroad . As it turns out, they were prepared to do this, as the United States was prepared to .
 Increased international trade and opportunities for investment contributed to U.S. economic growth . Increased trade contributed to the United States economic growth, experts say . Increased international investment and increased trade helped boost the economy .
 Neither order reflected a perfect consensus; rather, each offered enough agreement so that it was not directly challenged . Neither of the orders reflected enough agreement to be directly challenged by the public .
 Where U.S. foreign policy got into trouble was not because of alliance commitments or considerations of order, it was because of ill-advised decisions to prosecute costly wars of choice . Vietnam and Iraq were examples of costly wars that the United States got in trouble .
 Western efforts to integrate Russia into the liberal world order achieved little . The Cold War itself ended long ago, but the order it created came apart in a more piecemeal fashion . Western efforts in Russia achieved little, and the Cold War did not end .
 One sign of the Cold War order s deterioration was Saddam Husseins 1990 invasion of Kuwait, something Moscow likely would have prevented in previous years .
 Nuclear deterrence still holds, but some arms control agreements buttressing it have been broken . Arms control agreements are fraying, and others are breaking, experts say .
 All of these represent a rejection of the principal constraints associated with the old order . All of the new ideas have been rejected by the world's most powerful and influential .
 Russia also judged the 2003 Iraq war and 2011 NATO military intervention in Libya as acts of bad faith and illegality inconsistent with notions of world order as it understood them . The 2003 war was undertaken in the name of humanitarianism but quickly evolved into regime change .
 Authoritarianism is on the rise not just in the obvious places, such as China and Russia, but also in the Philippines, Turkey, and eastern Europe . Authoritarism is also on rise in Philippines, Philippines and Turkey, according to CNN.com .
 Global trade has grown, but recent rounds of trade talks have ended without agreement . World Trade Organization has proved unable to deal with today s most pressing challenges, including nontariff barriers and intellectual property theft .
 Resentment over the U.S. exploitation of the dollar to impose sanctions is growing . Concern over the country’s accumulation of debt is growing, as is concern over its debt .
 The UN Security Council is of little relevance to most of the world’s conflicts . International arrangements have failed more broadly to contend with the challenges associated with globalization, writes Andrew Hammond .
 "The composition of the Security Council bears less and less resemblance to the real distribution of power," says President Obama . Obama says the U.N. Security Council is "less and less likely to be more powerful"
 The world has put itself on the record as against genocide and has asserted a right to intervene when governments fail to live up to the “responsibility to protect” their citizens, but the talk has not translated into action .
 The eu, by far the most significant regional arrangement, is struggling with Brexit and disputes over migration and sovereignty . It is also struggling with disputes over sovereignty and migration .
 Around the world, countries are increasingly resisting United States primacy . The U.S. is the most powerful superpower in the world .
 It is instructive to look back to the gradual demise of the Concert of Europe . The Concert of European Europe was founded in 1968 . It was the first concert of its kind .
 Nonstate actors (from drug cartels to terrorist networks) pose a serious threat to order within and between states . Chinas rise, the appearance of several medium powers (Iran and North Korea, in particular) that reject important aspects of the order, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The technological and political context has changed in important ways, too, too . The technology and politics have also changed in recent years .
 Globalization has had destabilizing effects, ranging from climate change to the spread of technology into far more hands than ever before . Globalization also has a range of groups and people intent on disrupting the order .
 Nationalism and populism have surged as a result of greater inequality within countries, the 2008 financial crisis, job losses caused by trade and technology, increased flows of migrants and refugees . The power of social media to spread hate has also played a role in the rise in populism .
 No one today would design a UN Security Council that looked like the current one . Yet real reform is impossible, since those who would lose influence block any changes . Real reform is possible, but those who lose influence would block it .
 Efforts to build effective frameworks to deal with the challenges of globalization, including climate change and cyberattacks, have come up short . Efforts have come to a failure to tackle climate change, cyberattacks and climate change .
 Mistakes within the EU have created a powerful backlash against existing governments, open borders, and the eu itself . The U.S. has committed costly overreach in trying to remake Afghanistan, invading Iraq, and pursuing regime change in Libya .
 But it has also taken a step back from maintaining global order and in some cases has been guilty of costly underreach .
 U.S. reluctance to act has come not over core issues but over peripheral ones that leaders wrote off as not worth the costs involved . In Syria, where the United States failed to respond meaningfully when Syria first used chemical weapons, or to help anti-regime groups .
 This reluctance has increased others’ propensity to disregard U.S. concerns and act independently, the U.N. State Department says . The reluctance to act independently has increased .
 Crimea marked the effective end of the Concert of Europe and signaled a dramatic setback in the current order . Russian actions in Syria and Ukraine should also be seen in this light, writes Peter Bergen .
 Doubts about U.S. reliability have multiplied under the Trump administration, thanks to its withdrawal from numerous international pacts and its conditional approach to once inviolable alliance commitments in Europe and Asia .
 Given these changes, resurrecting the old order will be impossible, says President Obama . "The old order is impossible," says Obama .
 The long deterioration of the Concert of Europe should serve as a lesson and a warning . Once this is acknowledged, it should be acknowledged, the long deterioration should be a lesson .
 For the U.S. to heed that warning would mean strengthening certain aspects of the old order and supplementing them with measures that account for changing power dynamics and new global problems . For the United States, it would be necessary to strengthen certain parts of the new order .
 The United States would have to shore up arms control and nonproliferation agreements, strengthen alliances in Europe and Asia . The U.S. would also have to bolster weak states that cannot contend with terrorists, cartels, and gangs .
 Russia should not give up trying to integrate China and Russia into regional and global aspects of the order . Yet it should not be given up, says the Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Such efforts will necessarily involve a mix of compromise, incentives, and pushback . Such efforts need to be met with a mixture of compromise and incentives .
 The judgment that attempts to integrate China and Russia have mostly failed should not be grounds for rejecting future efforts . The course of the twenty-first century will in no small part reflect how those efforts fare, as well as how successful integration efforts fare .
 The U.S. needs to reach out to others to address problems of globalization, especially climate change, trade, and cyber-operations . The United States also needs to address other issues such as climate change and trade, especially cyber-operation .
 These will require not resurrecting the old order but building a new one . These will need to be built on the foundations of the new order .
 Efforts to limit, and adapt to, climate change need to be more ambitious, say experts . Efforts must also be ambitious to adapt to climate change, they say . Climate change is a major challenge for the world's future .
 The WTO must be amended to address the issues raised by Chinas appropriation of technology, provision of subsidies to domestic firms, and use of nontariff barriers to trade . WTO must address the sorts of issues raised .
 The United States must show restraint and recapture a degree of respect in order to regain its reputation as a benign actor . The U.S. needs to show restraint to regain a respect for the U.K. It must also recapture its reputation for its role in Syria .
 The current reflexive opposition to multilateralism needs to be rethought . But more than anything else else else, the current . need to re-think, says David Cameron .
 It is one thing for a world order to unravel slowly; it is quite another for the country that had a large hand in building it to take the lead in dismantling it . It's quite another .
 All of this also requires that the U.S. get its own house in order, including reducing government debt, rebuilding infrastructure and improving public education . It also requires adopting a smart immigration system that allows talented foreigners to come and stay .
 The United States cannot effectively promote order abroad if it is divided at home, distracted by domestic problems, and lacking resources . The U.S. can't effectively promote international order if it's distracted at home or lacking resources, President Obama says .
 The major alternatives to a modernized world order supported by the U.S. appear unlikely, unappealing, or both . The alternative is likely to be either unlikely or unapp appealing, or not .
 A Chinese-led order, for example, would be an illiberal one, characterized by authoritarian domestic political systems and statist economies that place a premium on maintaining domestic stability . A Chinese order would be characterized as authoritarian and stateless, like a Chinese state .
 There would be a return to spheres of influence, with China attempting to dominate its region, likely resulting in clashes with other regional powers . India, Japan, and Vietnam would probably build up their conventional or even nuclear forces .
 A new democratic, rules-based order fashioned and led by medium powers in Europe and Asia, as well as Canada, would simply lack the military capacity and domestic political will to get very far . Canada would be the only major power in the Middle East, Asia and Canada, however,
 A more likely alternative is a world with little order, a world of deeper disarray . A world of deep disarray is more likely than a world without order, the author says .
 Protectionism, nationalism, and populism would gain, and democracy would lose . Protectionism and populism gain, but democracy loses, says President Obama .
 Conflict within and across borders would become more common, and rivalry between great powers would increase . Conflict within, across borders, would be more common and more common .
 If this picture sounds familiar, that's because it increasingly corresponds to the world of today . If this is familiar, it's increasingly likely to be true to today's world .
 The deterioration of the world order can set in motion trends that spell catastrophe, says David Cameron . The deterioration in the world's economic and political climate can be catastrophic, he says .
 World War I broke out some 60 years after the Concert of Europe had for all intents of purposes broken down in Crimea . World War II broke out in Crimea 60 years ago .
 Now is the time to make sure one never materializes, be it from a breakdown in U.S.-Chinese relations, a clash with Russia, a conflagration in the Middle East, or the cumulative effects of climate change .
 The good news is that it is far from inevitable that the world will eventually arrive at a catastrophe . But the bad news is it is not certain that it will not, and that it won't, be inevitable .
 Chinese officials have been pushing the message since their country's spectacular rise began . It was a message that they have pushed ever since .
 For decades, they have been at pains to downplay Chinas power and reassure other countries, especially the U.S. of its benign intentions .
 Jiang Zemin, Chinas leader in the 1990s, called for mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, and cooperation in the country’s foreign relations . Zemin calls for mutual . trust and mutual benefit in China's foreign relations.
 Hu Jintao, who took the reins of power in 2002, became the phrase of the moment . “Peaceful development” was the phrase for the moment in China .
 Xi Jinping insisted in September 2017 that China “lacks the gene” that drives great powers to seek hegemony . The current president, Xi Jinping, insisted in Sept. 2017 that . Xi Jinping said China ‘lacks a gene’ to drive great powers toward hegemony .
 Beijing truly does not want to replace Washington at the top of the international system . Beijing truly wants to replace the U.S. with the world's most powerful power .
 The U.S. has no interest in establishing a web of global alliances, sustaining a far-flung global military presence, sending troops thousands of miles from its borders, or leading international institutions .
 China's reluctance to engage in the Middle East is a mistake, writes Andrew Hammond . But to focus on this reluctance, and the reassuring Chinese statements reflecting it, is not a mistake .
 China does not want to usurp the U.S. position as the leader of a global order, but its actual aim is nearly as consequential . China's aim is to take over the United States’ position as a global leader of the global order .
 China wants to force the United States out and become the region’s unchallenged political, economic, and military hegemon . In the Indo-Pacific region, China wants complete dominance .
 The U.S. is happy to leave the United States in the driver’s seat, but it wants to be powerful enough to counter Washington when needed .
 China is trying to displace, rather than replace, the United States. In other words, China is . China is not trying to replace, but displace the U.S.
 The way China has gone about this project has caused many to conclude that it is merely trying to coexist with American power rather than fundamentally overturn the order in Asia and compete with U.S. influence globally .
 Chinese leaders have recognized that in order to succeed, they must avoid provoking an unfavorable response . They have refrained from directly challenging the United States, replicating its orderbuilding model, or matching its globally active military .
 There is a limit to how powerful a country can get without directly challenging the incumbent power, and China is now reaching that point . Yet, there is still a limit on how powerful China can get .
 History has shown that in the vast majority of cases in which a country was able to sustain its rise, the rising power ended up overtaking the dominant power, whether peacefully or through war . The rise of a rising power has led to the death of many countries, including Russia .
 That does not mean that the U.S. cannot buck the historical trend, says CNN's John Sutter . That doesn't mean the United States can't buck the trend .
 It will have to deepen, rather than lessen, its involvement in the liberal international order . Britain must deepen its involvement, not lessen, in order to maintain its place in liberal world .
 It will have to double down on, rather than abandon, its commitment to American values . The U.S. must double down, not abandon, rather abandon, American values, it will say .
 Would-be powers have invented new ways of growing in the world . How China rose? Tell us how it came to power in China .
 The Mongol Empire connected lands through trade, the Qing dynasty built a tributary system, the United Kingdom collected colonies, the Soviet Union created ideologically linked spheres of influence . The United States established an institutionalized order and global military presence .
 China, too, has looked for new sources of power and has used it in ways not previously attempted . China has been trying to find new ways to harness power in recent years .
 China has undertaken a combination of covert actions and public diplomacy to co-opt and neutralize foreign opposition . In the political realm, China has taken steps to remove foreign opposition from the political sphere . China has been trying to neutralize and co-opted foreign opposition in China .
 Chinese intelligence agents have even recruited Chinese citizens studying abroad to act as informants . They pass along what Chinese students and professors are saying about their country .
 In Australia and New Zealand, China has sought to influence politics more directly, secretly donating money to preferred candidates . China has tried to influence politicians more directly in the past .
 The strategy here has been to finance infrastructure in the developing world in order to create dependent, and thus compliant, foreign governments . The strategy is to create dependency on foreign governments, and to create compliant, compliant governments .
 The Belt and Road Initiative is a massive regional infrastructure project launched in 2013 . Most recently, it has taken the form of the Belt & Road Initiative .
 China does demand allegiance on a number of issues, including the nonrecognition of Taiwan . China does not recognize Taiwan .
 The key is that Beijing has left the military dimensions of this project ambiguous, generating uncertainty within Washington about its true intentions . The key to this project is to leave military dimensions ambiguous, Washington says .
 Many observers have wondered whether the Belt and Road Initiative will eventually have a strong military component . But that misses the point. Many observers wonder whether it will have a military component, but that's the point .
 Even if the initiative is not the prelude to an Americanstyle global military presence, China could still use the influence generated by the project to limit the reach of American power .
 It could pressure dependent states in Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia to deny the U.S. military access to their airspace or ground facilities .
 Chinas entrepreneurialism is not limited to the economic and political realms; it also has a hard-power component . Chinas entrepreneurs are not only successful in the economic, political realms, they also have a hard power component .
 Beijing has been more entrepreneurial than in its military strategy . China's military strategy has been entrepreneurial in recent years . Beijing has invested heavily in the development of its military technology .
 Instead of confronting the United States to push its military out of the Asia-Pacific region, China has engaged in subtler activities, such as harassing U.S. ships and aircraft with nonmilitary means . This allows it to maintain a degree of deniability and discourage a United States response
 China has made significant political and territorial gains without crossing the threshold into open conflict with the United States or its allies . Such tactics have been used by China to gain political, territorial gains .
 China has avoided sparking a concerted response from the U.S. by deliberately delaying the modernization of its military . China has also avoided sparking the United States' response from a coordinated response .
 China opted to first build up other types of powereconomic, political, and cultural—in order to project a less threatening image . Since countries tend to draw inferences about a challenger s intentions from the size and nature of its armed forces .
 Deng started pursuing the ‘four modernizations’ of agriculture, industry, science and technology, and national defense . He saved military modernization for last . Deng: "Four modernizations" were the last .
 Throughout the 1980s, China focused first on building its economy . Then supplemented its burgeoning economic power with political influence . China joined international institutions throughout the 1990s and the first decade of this century .
 Its ships didn't have the capability to sail safely far beyond visual range of the coastline . Its pilots were not adept at flying at night or over water, and its nuclear missiles relied on outmoded liquid fuel .
 Most of its ground units did not have modern, mechanized equipment, such as up-to-date tanks . Most of the country's ground units were not equipped with modern mechanized tanks .
 It was not until the late 1990s that China began modernizing its military in earnest . China's military has been modernizing since the late 1980s .
 China focused on capabilities that were more appropriate for dominating Taiwan than projecting power more broadly . And even then, it focused on military capabilities that are more appropriate to dominating Taiwan .
 China also signaled that it sought to use its military for the global good, with Hu publicly announcing that its forces would focus more on peacekeeping and humanitarian relief than on war . Hu publicly announced that China would focus its forces .
 Even Chinas infamous A2/AD doctrine was initially framed as a way of limiting the United States’ ability to intervene in Asia rather than as a method for projecting Chinese power .
 China didn’t launch its first aircraft carrier until 2012 . Not until 2013 did it undertake structural reforms that will eventually allow its military to contest United States primacy in the Indo-Pacific region .
 China's strategy of accumulating power concerns its relationship with the U.S.-led global order . Another key part of China’s strategy is to strengthen its position in the Middle East .
 Beijing has created uncertainty about its ultimate goals by supporting the order in some areas and undermining it in others . Beijing created uncertainty by supporting some areas of the order by supporting it in other areas .
 China's pick-and-choose approach reflects the fact that China benefits greatly from parts of the current order . China has taken a more cautious approach to the world's most powerful nations .
 Permanent membership in the UN Security Council allows it to help set the international agenda and block resolutions it disagrees with . Permanent membership allows the U.N. Security Council to set its own agenda .
 The World Bank has lent China tens of billions of dollars for domestic infrastructure projects . China has been heavily reliant on the World Bank for its infrastructure projects in China .
 The World Trade Organization, which China joined in 2001, dramatically opened up the country’s access to foreign markets . China joined the organization in 2001 . It led to a surge in exports that drove a decade plus of impressive economic growth .
 The country has discovered that by exploiting existing gaps, it can do so without triggering immediate concern . And the country has found it can exploit existing gaps without triggering any immediate concerns .
 Global challenges are more urgent than ever, and tackling them requires fresh ideas and new approaches . Today’s global challenges need fresh ideas, new approaches, says President Obama .
 Heller provides students with the cutting-edge theoretical skills and on-the-ground experience they need to tackle tough challenges . Heller: Students have exactly what it takes to make meaningful global impact. Heller: "At Heller, we arm students with cutting edge theoretical skills"
 Master of Arts in Conflict Resolution and Coexistence . Master of Science in Global Health Policy and Management Social Impact MBA . Q Doctor of Philosophy in Social Policy .
 China has found that it can make significant inroads without provoking the hegemon . In those places, where the United States presence tends to be weak or nonexistent, China has won power .
 China initially chose to focus on leveraging its economic power to build influence in Africa, Central Asia, and Southeast Asia . Thus, China initially focused on leveraging economic power in Africa and Central Asia . China's first focus was to build its influence in the Middle East and Africa .
 It also doubled down on close relationships with unsavory regimes that the international community had ostracized, such as Iran, North Korea, and Sudan, which allowed it to increase its political power without threatening the United States’ position .
 China has sought to establish new standards, rules, norms, and processes that advantage it . In issue areas where the established order is weak, ambiguous, or nonexistent, China has established new standards and norms .
 China is trying to shape the rules governing this new technology in ways that favor its own companies . It legitimizes its use for domestic surveillance and weakening the voice of civil society groups that inform the debate about it .
 In this view, cyberspace should be governed primarily by states, rather than a coalition of stakeholders . States have the right to regulate whatever content they wish within their borders, he says .
 China has put the brakes on U.S. efforts to include civil society groups in the UN Group of Governmental Experts . The UN is the main normsetting body for Western governments in cyberspace .
 Since 2014, China has also held its own annual World Internet Conference . It promulgates its own view of Internet regulation . The Chinese government has also been in charge of regulating the Internet .
 China exploiting a lack of international consensus on the law of the sea . In the maritime realm, China is exploiting a . lack of . international consensus . on the international . law .
 The United States insists that naval vessels’ freedom of navigation is enshrined in international law . Many other countries contend that warships have no automatic right of innocent passage through a country’s territorial waters .
 China is able to contest U.S. freedom-of-navigation operations within the rubric of the existing international order . By taking advantage of these discrepancies (and the United States’ failure to ratify the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea), China can contest U
 China has been able to grow into one of the most powerful countries in the world, second, perhaps, only to the U.S.
 If it had chosen to persist with this strategy, the country would have continued to stay off the U.S. radar screen . And if it did, it would have stayed off the United States’ radar .
 China has now entered the beginning stages of a direct challenge to the U.S.-led order, writes John Defterios . But rising powers can delay provocation for only so long, he says . The bad news for the United States and for peace and security in Asia .
 Under Xi, China is unabashedly undermining the United States alliance system in Asia . Xi is unapologetically undermining the U.S. alliance system . Xi: China is unashashley undermining the US alliance .
 It has encouraged the Philippines to distance itself from the United States . It has also supported South Korea’s efforts to take a softer line toward North Korea . The Philippines has also backed Japan's stance against protectionism .
 China is blatantly militarizing the South China Sea . It is not relying on fishing vessels or domestic law enforcement agencies to exercise its conception of sovereignty .
 It has even started engaging in military activities outside Asia, including establishing its first overseas base, in Djibouti .
 China is no longer content to play second fiddle to the United States and seeks to directly challenge its position in the Indo-Pacific region . China is not content with the U.S. and wants to challenge it .
 Washington should focus on building U.S. power and influence everywhere else in the world . Instead of undermining Chinas attempts to do the equivalent, Washington should build its power elsewhere .
 Washington can reduce the risk of creating an enemy and triggering unnecessary conflict . By focusing on self-improvement over confrontation, the U.S. can avoid creating a enemy .
 The first step is for the U.S. to expand the reach of the order it leads, thus reducing the gaps China can exploit . The United States needs to expand its reach to reduce the gaps it can exploit, he says .
 Contrary to the worldview of U.S. President Donald Trump, the world needs more order, not less, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The world needs order not less . He says the world must have more order and more order .
 Washington should add new institutions to cover the parts of the order that have none and revise old ones for the parts that are outdated . Washington needs to add institutions to the order order .
 The U.S. should lead effort to update the Missile Technology Control Regime, a 1987 partnership to stop the proliferation of nuclear delivery systems, to better account for unmanned drones .
 U.S. should join organizations early on to influence their development, not undermine them . China set up its own institutions, as it did with the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in 2016 .
 The goal should be to build a more comprehensive international order that cannot be pulled in Chinas illiberal direction . The goal is to build an international order not pulled in the direction of China's illiberal policies .
 China has nearly as many formal trade agreements in place as does the United States . The U.S. has struck bilateral free-trade agreements with only Australia, Singapore, and South Korea .
 The administration has preferred protectionist policies, which will serve only to facilitate Chinese economic dominance in Asia . Instead of protecting itself, the U.S. should focus on China's economic dominance .
 To get more bang for its buck, the U.S. will need to coordinate more closely with its allies .
 In the Pacific Islands, the United States lags well behind China in terms of trade, investment, and development assistance . The U.S. lags behind China's efforts to develop the islands .
 The U.S. could multiply its influence in the region by pooling resources with Australia . Australia has announced a massive infrastructure project there . The project will take place in 2019 .
 Cooperation is not enough on its own, however, Washington also needs to increase its own unilateral aid . Washington needs to boost its unilateral aid, the U.S. State Department says .
 The U.S. can take a cue from China and become more entrepreneurial in how it acquires and exercises power . The United States can maintain its edge by becoming more entrepreneurial, experts say . China is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 The standard playbook Washington has been following since the end of the Cold War will no longer do . Washington will not be following the standard playbook that has been in place since end of Cold War . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Washington .
 If the U.S. is upset with a country over its human rights abuses, it risks ceding influence to a less discriminating China . Cutting off economic and diplomatic ties as punishment risks losing influence in China, experts say .
 Washington should increase its engagement with the unsavory government, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Washington should pursue U.S. interests not just on a diplomatic level but also on a people-to-people level .
 The U.S. needs to upgrade its tool kit to improve its relations with Russia . The United States needs to strengthen its relationship with Russia and China .
 Port visits, air shows, and even foreign military sales and joint exercises are often merely symbolic and fail to demonstrate the U.S. commitment to a country . Port visits and air shows are often just symbolic and often fail to show the United States’ commitment .
 Far more effective in preparing for conflict would be efforts to create common threat perceptions through enhanced intelligence sharing . Joint contingency planning would be more effective .
 U.S. policymakers must also consider what costs would be worth bearing in order to maintain the United States’ dominant position in Asia . The United States should also consider the cost of maintaining its dominant position .
 Most agree that the U.S. should try to maintain its preeminence in the region through competitive but peaceful means . Most agree the United States should maintain its power through peaceful means.
 The irony, however, is that if the U.S. succeeds in doing that, the likelihood of conflict with China may go up . The irony is that it may lead to conflict between the two countries .
 Chinese leaders believe failure to rejuvenate their nation is worse than war . They will not shy away from a conflict if that is what it takes to succeed, they say .
 If U.S. leaders deem primacy in Asia worth protecting, they should brace themselves for the possibility that doing so may require the use of military force . As a result, if United States . leaders deem Primacy . in Asia . worth protecting .
 The worst of all worlds would be to fail to compete in peacetime, thus accommodating Chinese power by default, and then—once a conflict erupts—decide that United States primacy is important .
 By that time, however, the United States would be in a poor position to prevail . The U.S. would not be able to prevail in the next few days .
 The U.S. must also consider what costs it is willing to bear to defend countries in Asia that are not its allies yet . The subjugation of these countries would threaten the bedrock principles of the international order .
 In the South China Sea, for example, the U.S. claims that its naval operations are aimed at defending the general principle of freedom of navigation . But in practice, it has proved willing to physically protect the passage rights only of United States and allied ships .
 Washington’s failure to stand up for non-allies whose rights to sail freely is being restricted puts its preeminent position at risk . Washington's failure to protect its pre-eminence puts it at risk, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The United States should start laying the groundwork for a coalition, similar to the antipiracy task force it developed in the Gulf of Aden . U.S. ships would escort any vessel in need of protection in the South China Sea .
 When Chinas first round of military reforms are completed, which is projected to be around 2025, Beijing will be tempted to test its new capabilities against weak countries that do not enjoy United States protection .
 If China forcibly took an island in the South China Sea currently occupied by Vietnam and Washington stood by, its role as the guarantor of peace in the region would be thrown into question, and China would be emboldened . Even though the United States has no obligation to defend the country,
 Washington needs to be prepared for the unfamiliar possibility of using military force to defend a country with which it has no alliance . Washington must be prepared to use military force against a nation with no alliance, Washington says .
 Great-power competition is not just about military calculations or economic pull, it's also about the pull of the world's most powerful nations . Great power competition is also about economic pull and not just military calculations, it says .
 Some in the Washington establishment speak longingly about Beijing s ability to get things done, thanks to its disregard for liberal norms . Beijing's disregard for norms is seen as a key to its success in Washington .
 It is able to win over Asian governments by doling out money with no strings attached . Its state-owned enterprises receive not just state support but also proprietary information through espionage . Its authoritarian political system makes it easier to control the narrative about its goals and missions .
 The U.S. prefers to work with weak partners that can be easily controlled . That's why, unlike the United States, it prefers to deal with weaker partners . The United States has a history of instability in the region .
 The U.S. has chosen to lead the world in a way that ensures that others also benefit . The United States does not by any means have a perfect track record of living up to its values, but by and large, it has led the world .
 Washington should support the international institutions that make up the liberal order . Washington needs to support international institutions like the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 It should dedicate greater resources to defending its allies and partners . The U.S. should dedicate more resources to defend allies, partners, it says .
 It should focus on quality over quantity, seeking to make sure that as many people as possible benefit from development . And in its economic assistance, it should be focused on quality, rather than quantity .
 Only by expanding the reach of its own liberal values can the U.S. weather China's challenge, it says . The U.K. should expand its reach of liberal values, he says .
 China has been involved in territorial disputes in the South China Sea and in the U.S. China is accused of trying to meddle in the United States' elections .
 Pence accused Beijing of breaking international norms and acting against U.S. interests . Pence said Beijing broke international norms by acting against American interests .
 The tone was unusually blunt—blunt enough for some to interpret it as a harbinger of a new Cold War between China and the U.S. Some say it could be a sign of a Cold War in China .
 The transition will be a tumultuous, perhaps even violent, affair . Chinas rise sets the country on a collision course with the U.S. over a number of clashing interests .
 Beijing has no clear plan for filling this leadership vacuum and shaping new international norms from the ground up . Washington is slowly withdrawing from some of its diplomatic and military engagements abroad . Beijing is looking to fill this leadership void and shaping international norms .
 Contrary to what more alarmist voices have suggested, a bipolar U.S. world will not be a world on the brink of apocalyptic war . Contrary to the more alarmistic voices, China will not have an apocalyptic war, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Chinas ambitions for the coming years are much narrower than many in the Western foreign policy establishment tend to assume . This is in large part because Chinas hopes for the next few years are narrower than Western expectations .
 Chinese foreign policy in the coming decade will largely focus on maintaining the conditions necessary for the country’s continued economic growth . Leaders in Beijing will likely push leaders in Beijing to steer clear of open confrontation with the United States .
 The coming bipolarity will be an era of uneasy peace between the two superpowers . Instead of being bipolarity, it will be a era of unease peace between superpowers.
 Both sides will build up their militaries but remain careful to manage tensions before they boil over into outright conflict .
 Beijing and Washington will largely carry out their competition in the economic and technological realms . And rather than vie for global supremacy through opposing alliances, they will mostly carry out competition in economic and technology .
 U.S. bipolarity will likely spell the end of sustained multilateralism outside strictly economic realms . The combination of nationalist populism in the West and Chinas commitment to national sovereignty will leave little space for political integration and norm setting .
 Chinas growing influence on the world stage has as much to do with the United States’ abdication of its global leadership under President Donald Trump as with China’s own economic rise . The United States has abdicated of global leadership as well as with its own economic
 Since 2015, Chinas gDP growth has slowed to less than seven percent a year a year . Recent estimates put United States growth above the three percent mark .
 In the same period, the value of the renminbi has decreased by about ten percent against the U.S. dollar . This is undercutting Chinas import capacity and its currency’s global strength .
 The expectation that the U.S. will continue to promote an international order has changed a great deal . What has changed is the expectation that it will promote a liberal internationalist internationalist principles . The United States is expected to continue to push for an order of liberal internationalism .
 Under Trump, the country has broken with this tradition, questioning the value of free trade . Trump has embraced a virulent, no-holds-barred nationalism . The country has also embraced the idea of nationalism, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Trump administration is modernizing the U.S. nuclear arsenal, attempting to strong-arm friends and foes alike . The administration is also withdrawing from several international accords and institutions .
 In 2018 alone, the US ditched the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, the nuclear deal with Iran, and the UN Human Rights Council . In 2018, it also ditched  the IRA Treaty and the Iran deal .
 It is unclear if this retrenchment is just a momentary lapse or a new U.S. foreign policy paradigm that could outlive Trump s tenure . It is still unclear if it is a short-lived aberration from the norm .
 The global fallout of Trumpism has already pushed some countries toward China in ways that would have seemed inconceivable a few years ago . But the global fallout is already pushing some countries to China .
 Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe effectively reversed Japans relations with China, from barely hidden hostility to cooperation . Abe visited Beijing in October 2018, when China and Japan signed over 50 agreements on economic cooperation .
 Structural factors keep widening gap between China and U.S. and the rest of the world . China and the United States are the two global front-runners, but the gap is widening further .
 By 2023, the U.S. defense budget may reach $800 billion, and the Chinese one may exceed $300 billion . No other global power will spend more than $80 billion on its forces . The United States January /February 2019 41 Yan Xuetong .
 The question is not whether a bipolar U.S.-Chinese order will come to be but what this order will look like . The question, then, is whether it will be a bipolar order .
 Beijing's priorities are a liberal economic order built on free trade, says Beijing . At the top of Beijing s priorities is a liberal economy built on trade, it says .
 Chinas economic transformation over the past decades from an agricultural society to a major global powerhouse— and the world s second-largest economy— was built on exports . Chinas economy has been built on export exports .
 The country's exports are beginning to compete with those of highly advanced economies . The country has slowly worked its way up the value chain .
 Chinas overall export volume continued to grow in 2018, despite trade tensions between China and the U.S. Even amid escalating trade tensions, Chinas export volume grew .
 U.S. tariffs may sting, but they will not change Beijing s fundamental incentives nor portend a general turn away from global free trade . United States tariffs are not going to change Beijing's fundamental incentives, writes Andrew Hammond .
 China hopes to develop a vast network of land and sea routes that will connect its export hubs to far-flung markets . This strategic impetus is at the heart of the much-touted Belt and Road Initiative . The initiative is aimed at connecting China's export hubs with overseas markets .
 As of August 2018, some 70 countries and organizations had signed contracts with China for projects related to the initiative . This number is set to increase in the coming years, and this number is expected to increase .
 China is also willing to further open its domestic markets to foreign goods in exchange for greater access abroad . China is willing to open domestic market to foreign imports in exchange of greater access to the market .
 China lowered its general tariff from 10. percent to 7. percent . The move comes in time for a major trade fair in Shanghai in November 2018 .
 The image of a revisionist China that has gained traction in many Western capitals is misleading . Given this enthusiasm for the global economy, the image of China is misleading, he says .
 Beijing relies on a global network of trade ties, so it is loath to court direct confrontation with the U.S. China relies heavily on global networks to avoid confrontation .
 Chinese leaders fear a confrontation might cut off its access to the U.S. markets . They fear it might lead the United States allies to band together against China rather than stay neutral .
 Beijing's foreign policy will be the order of the day in Beijing’s foreign policy in the coming years . As a result, caution, not assertiveness or aggressiveness, will be in the way of the future, say experts .
 China will carefully avoid pressing issues that might lead to war with the U.S., such as cybersecurity and the weaponization of space . Even as China continues to modernize and expand its military, it will avoid warring issues such as the South China Sea and cybersecurity .
 American leaders balk at the idea of relinquishing their position at the top of the global food chain . They will likely go to great lengths to avoid having to accommodate China .
 Beijing officials in no hurry to become the sole object of Washingtons apprehension and scorn . Officials in Beijing would rather see a multipolar world in which other challenges—and challengers—force the United States to cooperate with China .
 The United States’ rise in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries provides something of a model for how the coming power transition may take place . In fact, the U.S.’s own rise in power transition in the 19th and early 20th century provides a model .
 The United Kingdom, the world's undisputed hegemon at the time, was preoccupied with fending off a challenger in its vicinity . It did not bother much to contain the rise of a much bigger rival across the pond .
 China is hoping for a similar dynamic now, and recent history suggests it could indeed play out . Recent history suggests that it could play out in the future .
 Relations between Beijing and Washington were souring over regional disputes in the South China Sea . Relations reached boiling point when a Chinese air force pilot died in a midair collision with a U.S. surveillance plane .
 Following the 9/11 attacks, Washington came to see China as a useful strategic partner in its global fight against terrorism . Relations improved significantly over the rest of Bushs two terms .
 The list of common threats that could force the two countries to cooperate is short . Today, unfortunately, the list of . common threats is short, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 After 17 years of counterterrorism FOREIGN AFFAIRS we break it down . We don't break the news; we break down it down. We're breaking the news. The news is breaking down the news .
 Foreign Affairs Foreign Policy Briefing is a weekly Foreign Affairs Briefing program . Use this week's program to learn about the most pressing global issues of today . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of foreign policy in the United States .
 Bring us to your office or event space to provide expert perspective on the forces shaping your world and your business .
 The sense of urgency that once surrounded the issue has faded. CO m 43 Yan Xuetong campaigns .
 Climate change is unlikely to make the list of top threats anytime soon . Climate change isn't likely to be the same as climate change as other threats .
 The most plausible scenario is that a new global economic crisis will push U.S. and Chinese leaders to shelve their disagreements for a moment to avoid economic calamity . But this, too, remains a hypothetical .
 Some points of potential conflict are here to staychief among them Taiwan . To make matters worse, some points of possible conflict are still to stay .
 Relations between Beijing and Taipei, already tense, have taken a turn for the worse in recent years . Relations between the two countries have been described as 'stricken' by some .
 Taiwan’s current government, elected in 2016, has questioned the notion that mainland China and Taiwan form a single country . The “one China” principle, also known as the ‘one China China’ principle, is the basis for the idea that Taiwan and China
 A future government in Taipei might well push for de jure independence . Taipei may well push to de facto independence from Taiwan .
 A Taiwanese independence referendum likely constitutes a redline for Beijing and may prompt it to take military action . Yet a Taiwanese independence vote is likely a red line for Beijing .
 A military intervention by Beijing could easily spiral into a full-fledged U.S.-Chinese war . If the United States were to respond by coming to Taiwan’s aid, a military intervention could easily turn into a war .
 Beijing is determined to nip any Taiwanese independence aspirations in the bud by political and economic means . Beijing wants to avoid such a crisis by nipping any Taiwan independence aspirations by political means .
 Taiwan likely to continue lobbying third countries to cut off diplomatic ties with Taipei . It has already taken the same approach with several Latin American countries .
 China set somewhat different emphases in its approach to norms that undergird the international order . Cautious or not, China set its own emphases on the norms of the order .
 A more powerful China will push for a stronger emphasis on national sovereignty in international law . In particular, a more powerful . China is pushing for a strong emphasis on the country's sovereignty in law .
 China is merely signaling its support for a liberal economic order, not for ever-increasing political integration . China is only signaling support for an economic order not for an ever-growing political integration, says J. Zhang. Zhang .
 Beijing remains fearful of outside interference, particularly relating to Hong Kong, Taiwan, Tibet, and Xinjiang, as well as on matters of press freedom and online regulations . Beijing is also wary of interference in Hong Kong and Taiwan .
 It views national sovereignty, rather than international responsibilities and norms, as the fundamental principle on which the international order should rest, as a matter of principle . As a result, the U.S. views the sovereignty of the nation as the basis for international obligations .
 Even as a new superpower in the coming decade, China will pursue a less interventionist foreign policy than the U.S. did at the apex of its power . China will therefore pursue less interventionism than the United States did in the 1960s .
 Increased Chinese clout may also bring attempts to promote a vision of world order that draws on ancient Chinese philosophical traditions and theories of statecraft .
 China's power and legitimacy derive from its ability to fulfill other countries’ security and needs— in exchange for their acquiescence to Chinese leadership . The word represents a view of China as an enlightened, benevolent hegman .
 Efforts on both sides to build ever more effective antimissile shields unlikely to change this . Neither China nor the U.S. can improve their systems to the point of making the country completely impervious to a nuclear counterattack .
 The U.S. withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty will encourage both sides to build up their nuclear forces and improve their second-strike capabilities . Neither side will be confident it can launch a nuclear attack on the other without suffering a devastating retaliation .
 The threat of nuclear war will also keep Chinese tensions with other nucleararmed powers, such as India, from escalating .
 Proxy wars, however, cannot be ruled out, nor can military skirmishes among lesser states . Proxy wars can't rule out, but can be ruled by lesser states as well .
 The two superpowers’ restraint may embolden some smaller states to resolve local conflicts by force . In fact, the latter are likely to become more frequent, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Russia is trying to regain its superpower status and maintain its influence in eastern Europe and the Middle East . Russia, in particular, may not shy away from war as it tries to regain power in the region .
 France and the UK may seek to buttress their claim to permanent membership in the UN Security Council through military intervention abroad . The UK and France are among the countries facing calls for reform of the council .
 Iran, Turkey, and Saudi Arabia struggle for regional dominance shows no signs of abating . In the Middle East, meanwhile, Iran and Turkey are at odds with each other .
 Across the globe, secessionist conflicts and terrorist attacks will continue to occur . The latter especially if competition between China and the United States reduces their cooperation on counterterrorism measures .
 Export-driven economies will ensure the survival of a global liberal trade regime built on free-trade agreements and membership in the World Trade Organization . No matter what path the U.S. takes, export-driven countries will ensure a global free trade regime, writes Andrew Hammond .
 On other matters of global governance, cooperation is likely to stall . Cooperation is unlikely to be achieved on other matters, however, says the U.N. report .
 China’s status as a junior superpower would make it difficult for the United States to sustain strong leadership that has traditionally spurred such initiatives in the past . Even if a future U.S. administration led a renewed push toward multilateralism and international norm setting, China's status as
 Differences in ideology and clashing security interests will prevent Beijing and Washington from leading jointly, but neither will have enough economic or military clout to lead on its own . China and the U.S. will not be able to lead the world on their own .
 To the extent that multilateral initiatives persist in such a world, they will be limited to either side’s respective sphere of influence .
 China’s emphasis on national sovereignty, together with Western societies’ turn away from globalism, will deal an additional blow to multilateralism, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: ‘China’�s focus on sovereignty, along with Western society’ turning away from
 The European Union is already fraying, and a number of European countries have reintroduced border controls . Border controls are already being reintroduced across the continent .
 In the coming decade, similar developments will come to pass in other domains, such as Facebook and Twitter .
 As technological innovation becomes the primary source of wealth, countries will become more protective of intellectual property . Countries will become increasingly protective of their intellectual property, according to experts .
 Many January /February 2019 45 Yan Xuetong countries are also tightening control of capital flows as they brace for a global economic slump in the near future . Many of these countries are tightening control over capital flows .
 More and more countries will increase visa restrictions for foreign workers . Concerns over immigration and unemployment threaten to undermine Western governments’ legitimacy .
 Unlike the order that prevailed during the Cold War, a bipolar U.S. order will be shaped by fluid, issue-specific alliances rather than rigid opposing blocs divided along clear ideological lines . Unlike Cold War era, the Chinese order will shape up by fluid alliances .
 The immediate risk of a U.S.-Chinese war is vanishingly small . Neither side appears willing to build or maintain an extensive—and expensive—network of alliances .
 China still avoids forming explicit alliances, and the U.S. regularly complains about free-riding allies . The United States regularly complains that allies are not free to rely on allies . China has no formal alliances with the United States .
 Neither side is currently able to offer a grand narrative or global vision appealing to large majorities at home, let alone to a large number of states . Moreover, neither side has a grand vision or a global vision that appeals to voters .
 U.S. bipolarity will not be an ideologically driven, existential conflict over the fundamental nature of the global order . It will be a competition over consumer markets and technological advantages, playing out in disputes about trade, investment, employment, exchange rates, and intellectual property .
 Most states will adopt a two-track foreign policy, siding with the U.S. on some issues and China on others . And rather than form clearly defined militaryeconomic blocs, most states will not form clear military blocs . China will be more likely to back the United
 Western allies are still closely aligned with the United States on traditional security matters inside nato . Australia, India, and Japan have supported the U.S. strategy in the Indo-Pacific . Western allies, for instance, are still aligning with the US .
 Several states have sided with Beijing in trying to reform the World Trade Organization . At the same time, these states still maintain close trade and investment relations with China .
 This two-track strategy shows just how far down the road to bipolarity the world has already advanced . The world is moving towards bipolarity, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Beijing and Washington will be two global heavyweights in the coming decade . The raw military and military clout on which American and, increasingly, Chinese dominance rests rests .
 As during the Cold War, each side’s nuclear warheads will prevent proxy conflicts from easily escalating into a direct confrontation between the two superpowers . Each side's nuclear warheads would prevent proxy wars from escalating .
 China’s leadership is acutely aware of the benefits its country derives from the status quo, for now . China will avoid putting these benefits on the line anytime soon, unless China's core interests are in the balance . It is chief among the conditions for China's continued economic and soft
 Chinese leaders will work hard to avoid setting off alarm bells in already jittery Western capitals . China's foreign policy in the coming years will reflect this objective, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Expect recurring tensions and fierce competition, yes, but not a descent into global chaos, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 Authoritarian governments are gaining power, and right-wing demagogues are gaining strength . Authoritarism is gaining power in the U.S. and in the world, says Julian Zelizer .
 Inequality is growing, transforming rule by the people into rule by wealthy elites . The U.S. has been in the grip of a growing tide of inequality .
 Many Americans seem to accept—even embrace—the politics of division and resentment . And here in the United States, many seem to embrace it, CNN's John Sutter says .
 There’s a story Americans like to tell ourselves about how we built a liberal international order . The U.S. is committed to civil and human rights, accountable to citizens, and focused on economic prosperity for all .
 Washington’s focus has shifted from policies that benefit everyone to policies that help a handful of elites . But in recent decades, D.C. has shifted its focus away from the poor to the wealthy .
 After the Cold War, U.S. policymakers started to believe that because democracy had outlasted communism, it would be simple to build democracy anywhere and everywhere . After that, the United States began building democracy anywhere in the world .
 They began to export a particular brand of capitalism, one that involved weak regulations, low taxes on the wealthy, and policies favoring multinational corporations . They included low taxes, low regulations and low taxes .
 The U.S. took on a series of seemingly endless wars, engaging in conflicts with mistaken or uncertain objectives and no obvious path to completion . And the United States took on the wars with mistaken objectives and uncertain objectives . The United States has been engaged in a war that has no obvious
 International economic policies and trade deals have worked well for elites around the world . But they have left working people discouraged and disaffected, they say .
 Efforts to promote the United States’ own security have soaked up huge resources and destabilized entire regions . Efforts have soaked U.S. resources, destabilizing entire regions, experts say . The United States has spent huge resources on promoting its own security .
 ELIZABETH WARREN is a Democratic U.S. Senator from Massachusetts . She is a Democrat .
 Inequality has grown worldwide, contributing to an unfolding nationalist backlash that seeks to upend democracy itself . It is little wonder that the American people have less faith in their government today than at any other time in modern history .
 To fight back, we need to pursue international economic policies that benefit all Americans, not merely the elite few, says President Barack Obama .
 We need strong yet pragmatic security policies, amplified by diplomacy, says David Cameron . The UK needs a strong and pragmatic security policy, says Cameron .
 The U.S. can no longer maintain the comfortable assumption that its domestic and foreign policies are separate . And the United States can't afford to think that its foreign policy is separate from its own .
 "Every decision the government makes should be grounded in the recognition that actions that undermine working families in this country ultimately erode American strength in the world," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 If we do not stand up to those who seek to undermine our democracy and our economy, we will end up as bystanders to the destruction of both. If we don't stand up against those who want to undermine democracy, we'll be bystanders to both. We need to stand up and
 The globalization of trade has been tremendously profitable for the largest U.S. corporations . Trade has been hugely profitable for many of the largest American corporations .
 It has opened up opportunity and lifted billions out of poverty around the world . It has also lifted billions of people out of the world's poverty zones .
 U.S. trade and economic policies have not delivered for the middle class, says CNN.com's John Sutter . But U.K. President Barack Obama's administration has failed to deliver on the Middle Class .
 For decades, both Democratic and Republican leaders asserted that free trade was a rising tide that would lift all boats . Free trade has been a problem for many of the world's most powerful institutions .
 Trade deals mainly lifted the boats of the wealthy while leaving millions of working Americans to drown . Great rhetoric, except that the trade deals they negotiated lifted the rich while leaving working people to drown, he says .
 Policymakers were willing to sacrifice American jobs in hopes of lowering prices for consumer goods at home and spreading open markets abroad . Policymakers sacrificed American jobs to lower consumer prices and open markets .
 Former Soviet states pushed former Soviet states to privatize as quickly as possible despite the risk of corruption . They advocated China’s accession to the World Trade Organization despite its unfair trading practices .
 Elizabeth Warren says she backed international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund . She says they backed austerity, deregulation, and privatization policies that reduced public faith in capitalism and democracy . Warren: They backed austerity measures that left governments with fewer fiscal levers when crises hit .
 Capitalism unwittingly helped create the conditions for competitors to lash out against each other . Instead, capitalism unwittingly created the conditions of competitors to rise up and lash out, critics say .
 China weaponized its economy without ever loosening its domestic political constraints . The country's political constraints have never been loosened by the government's policies .
 A program once aimed at promoting the forces of freedom ended up empowering the opposite . The program was once intended to promote freedom, but instead it empowered the opposition .
 Corporations exploited their enormous influence on both sides of the negotiating table to ensure that the terms of trade between nations always favored their own bottom lines . Meanwhile, multinational corporations exploited their . influence .
 Job training and transition assistance proved powerless against the onslaught of offshoring . Job training provided little more than burial insurance for workers who lost their jobs .
 Corporations and wealthy individuals sent trillions of dollars to offshore tax havens . The U.S. government of needed resources to reinvest in infrastructure and public education, the author says .
 After two years in office, it's clear that his economic policies are beyond inept . They are deliberately rigged in favor of his family and his wealthy friends, he says .
 North American Free Trade Agreement raises drug prices for consumers while doing little to stem the flow of good jobs going to other countries . President Obama's renegotiated NAFTA deal will raise drug prices and raise jobs for Americans .
 His tariffs have hit farming communities hard and driven trading partners into the arms of U.S. competitors . The tariffs have also driven trade partners to the U.K.
 U.S. foreign policy should not prioritize corporate profits over American families, says President Obama . Obama has conflicts of interest with corrupt foreign governments, he says .
 This president may have campaigned on a promise to put “America first,” but his policies have put the Trump family first . Middle-class American families last, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 U.S. foreign policy should not prioritize corporate profits over American families . United States foreign policy must not prioritise corporate profits, says President Obama . The United States should not be prioritizing American families, says Obama .
 Trade negotiations should be used to curtail the power of multinational monopolies and crack down on tax havens, says Julian Zelizer . To make sure that globalization benefits middle-class Americans, trade negotiations must be used .
 Workers should be meaningfully represented at the negotiating table . The resulting agreements should be used to raise and enforce labor standards, the author says .
 Washington should also work with like-minded allies to hold countries that cheat to account, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 The United States’ economic policies must also reflect the realities of the twenty-first century . The U.S. economic policies should reflect the reality of the 21st century, the author says .
 To address corruption, it is critical to work closely with allies to require transparency about the movement of assets across borders . The U.S. must work closely to ensure transparency about assets can be traced across the world .
 If we are serious about privacy, we must protect data rights from global technology companies and countries that seek to exploit technology as a means to control their populations . We need to protect privacy rights from companies that exploit technology to control populations .
 To make progress on climate change, we should leverage foreign countries’ desire for access to U.S. markets as an opportunity to insist on meaningful environmental protections . Foreign countries want access to the United States markets as a way to make progress, authors say .
 None of this requires sacrificing the interests of American businesses, it will require some of them to take a longer view .
 U.S. businesses can compete with the best in the world when given a level playing field . They are stronger when the American middle class is strong, the author says . The American economy is stronger when it has a strong middle class .
 If our trade and economic policies work for all Americans, shareholders and corporate executives will profit as well . If our policies work, all Americans will benefit as well, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 A foreign policy that works for all Americans must also be driven by honest assessments of the full costs and risks associated with going to war . The U.S. should end its endless wars, President Obama says .
 All three of my brothers served in the military, and I know our service members and their families are smart, tough, and resourceful . I know that our military is smart and tough .
 Having a strong military doesn’t mean we need to constantly use it, says President Obama . But having a strong . military doesn't mean we should constantly . use it .
 An effective deterrent also means showing the good judgment to exercise appropriate restraint, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Over the past two decades, the U.S. has been mired in a series of wars that have sapped its strength . The United States has been in the midst of several wars .
 By financing conflicts while cutting taxes, the U.S. has charged the costs of war to a collective credit card for future generations to pay . Money diverting money that could have been invested in critical domestic priorities, he says .
 "This burden will create a drag on the economy that will last for generations," says President Obama . "It's a burden that will create an economic drag on generations," he says .
 "The costs have been extraordinarily high, but these wars have not succeeded even on their own terms," he says . The costs have not been so high, he says, but the wars have failed even on its own terms .
 We’ve “turned the corner” in Afghanistan so many times that it seems we’re now going in circles . We've turned the corner many times in Afghanistan, but now we're going circles, says CNN's John Sutter .
 After years of constant war, Afghanistan hardly resembles a functioning state . Both poppy production and the Taliban are again on the rise . The Taliban is on the increase in Afghanistan .
 The invasion of Iraq destabilized and fragmented the Middle East, creating enormous suffering and precipitating the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people . Hundreds of thousands died in the Iraq invasion, the U.S. says .
 The promise of the Arab Spring crushed, Iran emboldened, Syria devastated, the Islamic State and its offshoots stubbornly resilient . The region remains a tangled mess, with a massive refugee crisis threatening to destabilize Europe .
 Neither military nor civilian policymakers seem to be capable of defining success, but surely this is not it . The U.S. military and the U.K. government have been unable to define success in Iraq .
 A singular focus on counterterrorism, meanwhile, has dangerously distorted U.S. policies, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We have allowed an imperial presidency to stretch the Constitution beyond recognition to justify the use of force, with little oversight from Congress . Here at home, we have allowed . an imperial president to stretch . beyond recognition . We have . allowed . little oversight .
 The government has at times defended tactics, such as torture, that are antithetical to American values . U.S. government has defended tactics such as torturing Americans, but not necessarily America .
 Washington has partnered with countries that share neither its goals nor its ideals . Washington has partners with countries who share neither their goals nor their ideals .
 Counterterrorism efforts have often undermined other foreign policy priorities, such as reinforcing civilian governance, the rule of law, and human rights abroad . Counterterror efforts often undermine other priorities, including reinforcing civilian Governability and the Rule of the Law .
 U.S. support for Saudi Arabia’s proxy war in Yemen risks generating even more extremism . The Yemen war is a proxy war between the United States and Saudi Arabia .
 As a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, I have seen up close how 17 years of conflict have degraded equipment, sapped forces’ readiness, and forced the postponement of investment in critical military capabilities, he says . As a senator, he said: "I have seen
 China is making massive bets in these and other areas in an effort to surpass the U.S. as a global technological power . China is trying to overtake the United States as a technological superpower .
 Whether the U.S. will maintain its edge and harness these technologies for good remains an open question .
 It is long past time to start asking what truly makes the country safer, and what does not . It is the job of the U.S. government to do what is necessary to protect Americans .
 Military efforts alone will never fully succeed at ending terrorism, says U.S. President Barack Obama . It is not possible to fight one’s way out of extremism, says Obama .
 Some challenges, such as cyberattacks and nuclear proliferation, require much more than a strong military to combat . The U.S. faces challenges like cyberattacks, nuclear proliferation and cyberattacks .
 It’s time to seriously review 'f. f. infec, .j. tious diseases, cannot be solved through military action at all . And other dangers, such as . infec and .j . tious disease, not military action, must be reviewed,
 The U.S. will spend more than $700 billion on defense in the 2018-19 fiscal year alone . The United States commitments overseas will be at least $1 billion .
 That is more in real terms than was spent under President Ronald Reagan during the Cold War . That's more than all the rest of the country’s discretionary budget put together .
 U.S. military leaders point out that funding a muscular military without robust diplomacy, economic statecraft, support for civil society, and development assistance only hamstrings American national power and undercuts any military gains .
 As president, he has expanded the U.S. military footprint around the globe . He has expanded air strikes in Somalia and established a drone base in Niger .
 Trump promised to rebuild the military, but as president, he has gutted the diplomatic corps . The diplomatic corps on which the Pentagon relies relies relies on .
 He promised to reduce the threat of nuclear proliferation, but he has undermined a successful nuclear deal with Iran . He has failed to roll back the North Korean nuclear program, and seems intent on spurring a new nuclear arms race with Russia .
 Additional American blood spilled will not halt the violence or result in a functioning democratic government in either place . They have fought with honor, but additional U.S. blood spilled won't stop the violence .
 Defense spending should be set at sustainable levels, author says . Money saved should be used to fund other forms of international engagement and critical domestic programs, he says .
 It is long overdue for an audit that would allow Congress to identify which programs actually benefit U.S. security . Congress should audit the programs, not merely line the pockets of defense contractors .
 Rather than mindlessly buying more of yesterday’s equipment and allowing foreign countries to dominate the development of critical new technologies, we should recommit to investing in cutting-edge technology capabilities at home .
 U.S. should invest in multilateral arms control and nonproliferation efforts for the twenty-first century . The United States should recommit to being a leader in the fight to create a world without nuclear weapons .
 To achieve all these goals, it will be essential to reprioritize diplomacy and reinvest in the State Department and the development agencies . Foreign policy should not be run out of the Pentagon alone, says Julian Zelizer .
 The United States spends only about one percent of its federal budget on foreign aid . The U.S. spends about one per cent of its foreign aid budget .
 Some Americans struggling to make ends meet question the value of U.S. contributions abroad . We should expect our partners to pay their fair share, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Diplomacy is not about charity; it's about advancing U.S. interests . Diplomacy must prevent problems from morphing into costly wars . Diplomats are not charity; they are about advancing United States interests .
 Alliances are not exclusively about principles; they are about safety in numbers . Similarly, alliances are not only about principles but about safety of numbers, they're about numbers .
 The world is a big, complicated place, and not even the strongest nation can solve everything on its own . "The world is not a one-sided sided, it's a very complicated place," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "As we face down antidemocratic forces around the world, we will need our allies on our side," says David Cameron . "We will need to rely on the support of our allies," he says .
 With U.S. power increasingly challenged from within and without, we can no longer afford to think of our domestic agenda as separate from our foreign policy . The U.N. should not think of its domestic agenda separate from its foreign policy.
 A stronger economy, a healthier democracy, and a united people—these are the engines that power the nation, writes Elizabeth Warren . Warren: These are engines that will project American strength and values throughout the world .
 "Every day, shortsighted domestic policies weaken American national strength," says President Obama . "Shortsighted policies weaken America's national strength" says Obama . Obama administration has a history of domestic policy failures .
 The United States is in the midst of a reverse-Sputnik moment, reducing investments in education and scientific research . The U.S. is reducing investment in education, scientific research even as potential adversaries expand .
 Congress’ response has been a $1.1. trillion tax giveaway to the wealthiest Americans . Congress' response to the tax cuts is to give the wealthy a huge tax break . Congress has passed a massive tax cut to the wealthy .
 Life expectancy in the United States is falling as overdose deaths skyrocket . The country’s health-care system remains ill equipped to respond to the problem .
 Climate change poses a threat to our survival, but the government is gutting environmental regulations and subsidizing fossil fuels at the bidding of wealthy campaign donors, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The government should be careful not to subsidize fossil fuels .
 The educational opportunity gap is widening, while politicians starve schools of resources and saddle an entire generation with crippling student debt . Politicians starve schools and saddle entire generations of students with crippling debt .
 The president seems bent on keeping Americans frightened and divided . And in a desperate attempt to stave off the inevitable reckoning, he seems to be trying to keep Americans frightened . The White House seems to want to keep America frightened .
 Investments at home strengthen the economy, but they also serve national security, says President Obama . Investing at home strengthens the economy but also serves national security .
 A twenty-first-century industrial policy, for example, would produce good jobs that provide dignity, respect, and a living wage . It would reinforce U.S. international economic might, he says .
 When workers and families are more secure in their livelihoods, the country is stronger on the world stage, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Infrastructure projects to increase connectivity and expand opportunity across the United States . Infrastructure projects will increase connectivity across the U.S.
 Educational and job-training policies to produce skilled workers, encourage entrepreneurship, and grow the talent base . Education and job training policies are key to success .
 Immigration policies to yield a more robust economy and a more diversified work force, say experts . Immigration policies will yield more robust economic growth and diversification of workforce, they say .
 Higher education to equip the coming generations for the future without crushing them with debt . Higher education will equip them with the skills and skills they need to use to prepare for their future .
 Highquality, affordable health care to ensure security and productivity for every person . Highquality health care will ensure security, productivity .
 An economy that is fair and open to entrepreneurs and businesses, all sizes, is open to all . The economy is fair, open and open for entrepreneurs, businesses of all sizes . It is open and fair to entrepreneurs, entrepreneurs and all sizes.
 A progressive tax system that requires the wealthy to pay their fair share . The wealthy should pay a fair share in taxes, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Underlying it all, we need to remain vigilant against threats to U.S. democratic norms and processes, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There will be severe consequences for anyone, foreign or domestic, who meddles with it. That means protecting the electoral process and making clear that there will be strict consequences . That's not just protecting the election process, but protecting it from foreign interference .
 Our democratic norms also require us to renew our commitment to justice, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Our democratic norms need to be renewed"
 Fractures in society damage us from within, leaving us vulnerable to a toxic stew of hatred and fear . Fractures are in society, leaving people vulnerable to hatred, fear and hatred, says author .
 Hateful rhetoric fuels domestic terrorism, whether in Charleston or Orlando, Charlottesville or Pittsburgh . It fuels all kinds of domestic terrorism in America, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We must strengthen our determination to ensure that every American has equal access to opportunity in society and equal justice and protection under the law . And we must strengthen .
 We must do that because it is morally right—and because it's essential to our national strength . We must be morally right and morally right, President Obama says .
 After years as the world’s lone superpower, the U.S. is entering a new period of competition . Whether our leaders recognize it or not, after years of dominance, the United States is entering new competition .
 Democracy is running headlong into ideologies of nationalism, authoritarianism, and corruption . Democracy is being run headlong by the ideologies of authoritarianism and corruption, says CNN's John Sutter .
 China is on the rise, using its economic might to bludgeon its way onto the world stage . China is offering a model in which economic gains legitimize oppression . China offers a model of oppression in the U.S.
 To mask its decline, Russia is provoking the international community with opportunistic harassment and covert attacks, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia is seeking to mask the decline, Putin says .
 Both nations invest heavily in their militaries and other tools of national power . Both nations are investing heavily in the military .
 Both hope to shape spheres of influence in their own image and ultimately remake the global order to suit their own priorities .
 If we cannot make our government work for all Americans, they will almost certainly succeed . If we can't make government work, they may well succeed, they'll succeed .
 The dictators who run those countries stay in power not simply because they hold unwilling populations under brutal control . They also maintain control through corrupt economic policies that favor the wealthy elites who keep them in power . The dictators are also responsible for keeping their people in control .
 Putin attacks free speech and fans nationalism, but his real power derives from the careful intertwining of his government with state-run corporations overseen by friendly oligarchs . In Russia, Putin's real power is to intertwine his government and state-owned corporations with oligarchs, says CNN's
 Other countries have learned from this approach, Warren says . Warren: "Other nations have learned to take this approach"
 From Hungary to Turkey, from the Philippines to Brazil, wealthy elites work together to grow the state’s power . While the state works to grow wealth of those who remain loyal to the leader, the state also grows wealth .
 This marriage of authoritarianism and corrupt capitalism is a direct threat to the U.S. It undermines the very concept of democracy, says Julian Zelizer .
 It enables corruption to spread across borders and allows authoritarian leaders to foment a global crisis of confidence in democracy, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says . He says authoritarian leaders are fomenting a crisis in confidence in democracies .
 Free and democratic societies, the U.S. included, risk sliding toward corruption and kleptocracy . The United States’ included, are democracies in name only, says Julian Zelizer . Democracy is not a democracy in name, he says .
 President Trump seems all too comfortable with this rising authoritarianism . Trump seems to be all too familiar with this rise authoritarianism.
 He shamefully kowtows to Putin, even in the face of Russian attacks on U.S. democracy . The president of the United States should be proud of his actions .
 His trade policies toward China are hardly stopping Chinese economic malfeasance, says President Obama . Obama's trade policies hardly stop Chinese economic misbehaving .
 Instead of strengthening crucial alliances with Japan, South Korea, and Europe, he is actively undermining them . He said: "Instead of strengthening alliances, he has actively undermined them. Instead of strengthening alliances"
 The president has displayed an unsettling enthusiasm for replicating authoritarian language and tactics at home . autocrats abroad return the compliment by using the president’s words to justify their own misdeeds .
 The United States has lived through devastating wars in the past, and no sane person wishes to invite conflict between great powers in the future . The U.S. has lived .
 The U.S. faces challenges, but it's essential that we are honest and clear-eyed about the challenges we face, says CNN's John Sutter . "It's essential to be honest about challenges the United States faces," he says .
 "We should join forces to protect not only our collective security but also our shared ideals," Obama says . "Our democratic allies share our values," he says .
 In Europe, we should work with our allies to impose strong, targeted penalties on Russia for its attempts to subvert elections . We should work to help our European allies develop energy independence, says David Cameron .
 In Asia, we should encourage our allies to enhance their multilateral cooperation and build alternatives to China’s coercive diplomacy . China's coercive diplomacy is one of the key challenges facing the U.S. in Asia .
 We should also respond to China’s efforts to force foreign companies to hand over sensitive technology in order to gain access to the Chinese market . China should also penalize its theft of U.S. intellectual property, the authors say .
 Around the world, we should aggressively promote transparency, call out kleptocracy, and combat the creeping influence of corruption, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We should stand with those who bravely fight for openness and pluralism in Moscow, Beijing, and beyond . And we should support those bravely fighting for openness in Russia, Beijing and beyond, writes David Frum .
 We can adopt a foreign policy that works for all Americans, not just wealthy elites, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: We need to adopt an approach to foreign policy to all Americans .
 "We can protect American interests first and foremost, while recognizing that those interests are best served when we leverage the support of allies and partners," says President Obama .
 We can reform international institutions to make them more flexible and inclusive, while still preserving the United States’ global leadership role, says President Obama . The U.S. can still retain its global leadership, he says .
 We can make smart investments to deter adversaries and defend the country, says President Obama . We can balance our ambitions with our resources, he says .
 We can adapt to the technological demands and challenges of the twentyfirst century, designing policies that reflect the world not as it once was but as it will be, we can adapt . We can design policies not as once was, but as the world will be. We need to adapt to
 Global power is generated here at home, recapitalizing the American economy and reinvesting in U.S. democracy at its roots, says Obama .
 Despite the threats on the horizon, I am confident that we can pursue a foreign policy that works for all Americans, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "Despite the threats ... I'm confident that ... despite the threats, I’m confident"
 So far the chief purpose of our military establishment has been to win wars,” the American nuclear strategist Bernard Brodie wrote in 1946 . “T hus hus hus so far the Chief purpose is to win war,’ he said .
 For decades, U.S. policymakers put deterrence at the center of defense strategy . Deterrence is key to preventing rivals from attacking in the first place, Kennedy says .
 Applied effectively, deterrence discourages an adversary from pursuing an undesirable action . Applied to deterrence, deterrence encourages an adversary to pursue undesirable action. Applied effectively it discourages unwanted action .
 It works by changing the adversary’s calculation of costs, benefits, and risks . The system is designed to change the calculation of risks, costs and costs .
 The threat of denial or punishment has helped keep the peace among major powers for over seven decades . Through the threat of denial or punishment, deterrence has kept the peace in the world for decades .
 Even 30 years after the end of the Cold War, it remains at the heart of U.S. defense strategy . The U.N. has been in touch with the United States for 30 years .
 Andrea F. Krepinevich is a member of the Commission on the National Defense Strategy for the United States . He is a Senior Fellow at the Hudson Institute, Adjunct Senior .
 By now, that declaration has been made so many times, over so many decades, that it has become an article of faith . It has become so common, it has been said many times that it is now an item of faith.
 Like several of its recent predecessors, the Trump administration has spent little time explaining how the U.S. intends to deter existing and future rivals .
 In fact, deterring aggression has become increasingly difficult, and it stands to become more difficult still, as a result of developments both technological and geopolitical . The U.S. has not been able to deter aggression in the past decade .
 The era of unprecedented U.S. military dominance that followed the Cold War has ended, leading to renewed competition between the United States and two great revisionist powers, China and Russia . The era has also ended, with China becoming the world's leading revisionist power .
 Military competition is expanding to several new domains, from space and cyberspace to the seabed . New capabilities are making it harder to accurately gauge the military balance of power, experts say .
 Advances in cognitive science are challenging the theoretical underpinnings of deterrence by upending the theory of deterrence . Cognitive science challenges the theory that deterrence is based on human behavior .
 During the Cold War, the military power of the United States and the Soviet Union dwarfed that of any other state or group of states . The U.S. and Soviet Union were the two most powerful nations in the world .
 With the Soviet collapse, this duopoly gave way to unrivaled U.S. military dominance, especially in the conventional realm . With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the United States has dominated conventional warfare .
 During the Cold War, Washington’s defense strategy was built on deterring a single major rival . In the post-Cold War era, U.S. policymakers didn’t have to worry about major rivals at all .
 Today, the United States confronts an international system with not one, or two, but multiple centers of gravity . The U.S. confronts a system that has multiple centers, not just one or two . The United States is facing a complex international system .
 For much of the Cold War, the two superpowers stockpiled over 20,000 warheads each . While the British, Chinese, and French arsenals numbered in the low hundreds .
 A series of bilateral U.S.-Russian arms control agreements have radically reduced both countries’ strategic nuclear forces to 1,550 deployed strategic weapons each . The Chinese, Indian, North Korean, and Pakistani nuclear arsenals are growing in size and sophistication .
 China is updating its delivery systems, complete with new ballistic missile submarines and land-based missiles . China is also updating its missile delivery systems with new missiles .
 Beijing seems unlikely to settle for second best in military competition . As in every other major area of military competition, Beijing will not settle for first best .
 Some of the key conditions that once ensured relative stability between Moscow and Washington will no longer obtain . In such a multipolar nuclear world, some key conditions are no longer possible .
 To keep this delicate balance, both sides sought to maintain a rough parity in their nuclear forces . The goal that endures to this day in the New start agreement endures .
 The emergence of China as a major nuclear power threatens to throw this balance of terror off-kilter . Beijing, Moscow, and Washington each view the other two as rivals .
 If China continues to expand its nuclear forces, the U.S. might respond with a significant buildup of its own . The United States is forced to prepare for a possible attack on not one but two flanks .
 Any major increase in U.S. nuclear forces would likely prompt Russia to follow suit . Russia wants to maintain parity with the United States .
 In a world with three nuclear great powers, none can maintain parity with the combined forces of the other two . Simply put, in a world of three nuclear power, none of the world's greatest powers can keep parity with each other .
 In this multipolar environment, the three rivals will be less confident in being safe from a nuclear attack than the Cold War superpowers were . The three rivals are less likely to be safe from an attack than they were in the 1950s .
 Deterrence is ailing not just on account of new powers, it's also because of new power . The U.S. has been in the grip of the world's most powerful and most powerful since World War II .
 The 1990-91 Gulf War showcased the power of integrating high-end intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance systems with precision-strike weapons . The Gulf War was the first Gulf War to integrate intelligence and surveillance systems with weapons .
 Russian theorists feared that such capabilities represented an alarming glimpse of what was to come . Russian military theorists feared such capabilities would be alarming .
 As these capabilities matured, the argument went, the U.S. would be able to conduct pinpoint strikes to eviscerate Russia’s nuclear arsenal without having to go nuclear . Following such an attack, Russia could of course retaliate with whatever nuclear forces had survived .
 Russia's "broken-back" attack would be diminished by U.S. air and missile defenses . It would risk triggering a full-scale United States nuclear counterstrike that would be the end of Russia as a functioning society .
 Russia has designed nuclear weapons with very low yields and adopted a military doctrine that calls for such weapons to be used if Moscow fears that its nuclear arsenal is at risk or if it is losing a conventional war . To offset this perceived disadvantage, Russia's nuclear weapons have been designed to be very
 A similar line of thinking may be taking hold in China, where political and military leaders have intimated that certain kinds of nuclear weapons are acceptable for use even in a conventional conflict, such as those in China .
 Firebreak between conventional and nuclear war is slowly disappearing, with worrying implications for deterrence . The result is that the firebreak between nuclear war and conventional war is disappearing, experts say . The firebreak is slowly becoming more likelier for conventional war .
 Beijing and Moscow may see conventional aggression as less risky, since they can employ certain types of nuclear weapons if things go badly . Both Beijing and Russia may want conventional aggression less risky than nuclear weapons .
 I j maintaining nuclear weapons is to deconventional and nuclear ter others from using them, a view that ivar is slowly disappearing. completely decouples nuclear from conventional war. I j maintained nuclear weapons are to deconfigure and decouple them from conventional warfare .
 U.S. leaders may enter a conventional war thinking that there’s little risk of it escalating into a nuclear conflict . As a result, United States leaders may think there's little chance of a nuclear war escalating into nuclear war .
 Chinese and Russian leaders may be far less hesitant to cross the nuclear threshold than the U.S. expects . But China and Russia may be less hesitant than the United States expects .
 Cyberweapons have enormous but untested potential to corrupt a state’s early warning and command systems . Cyberweapons could muddy the waters of deterrence even further, experts say .
 Some have speculated, for instance, that Israel’s 2007 air strike on a nuclear reactor under construction in Syria was accompanied by a cyberattack that blinded Syrian air defenses . The attack may have been accompanied by an Israeli cyberattack .
 Even though none of the Israeli aircraft was of stealth design, Syrian air defenses never fired at them . Even though they were attacking a high-value target, they were not fired .
 If other states think they can compromise a rival’s early warning and command systems, as Israel seems to have done in Syria, the anticipated costs and risks of striking first in a crisis may fall dramatically .
 The geographic location of today’s nuclear powers is undermining deterrence, too, too . The geographic locations of today's nuclear powers are undermining deterrence .
 During the Cold War, valuable Soviet and United States homeland targets were far enough apart to guarantee some warning time ahead of an attack . The U.S. homeland was far enough away from Soviet and U.K. homeland targets .
 The spread of nuclear and other strategic weapons to states located relatively close to their rivals means that attack warning times are much shorter today today . Attack warning times have been reduced to less than two decades .
 This is especially true for nuclear-armed states fielding fast, accurate ballistic missiles capable of striking their rivals’ nuclear forces . This is particularly true for nations with fast-accurate ballistic missiles .
 Short flight times may compel senior policymakers to place their strategic forces on heightened alert at all times, as well as to devolve to lower-ranking commanders the authority to release them . Short flight time may compel policymakers to . place their . strategic forces under heightened alert .
 Georgetown alumni community spans the globe and includes leaders in the public, private, and non-profit sectors . When you join Georgetown’s extensive alumni community, you are preparing to make a difference . yoin the legacy, change the world. yoin  the legacy and change the
 The emergence of new domains of warfare is eroding the foundations of warfare, says the U.S. government .
 Today’s major powers built their economic and military might on a vast but Amlnerable network of satellites, as well as undersea pipelines and cables .
 The United States military depends on government and commercial satellites for its operations . The U.S. military, in particular, depends on commercial and government satellites for operations .
 National economies have come to rely on satellites for a wide range of services . Other major militaries have followed suit, and national economies rely on them .
 Pipelines on the ocean floor carry over a quarter of the world’s oil and natural gas supply . Pipelines are carried over the world's oil and gas pipelines .
 Almost all trans-oceanic data flow through undersea cables . Economies and militaries rely on the Internet, and almost all data flow from undersea networks .
 "All this infrastructure is susceptible to disruption, and deterring aggression against it is not easy," says CNN.com. "Deterring aggression on it not easy. Unfortunately, all this infrastructure can be disrupted."
 Disabling a satellite, corrupting a computer network, or cutting an undersea data cable is often easier than fending off an attack, favoring the offense and undermining deterrence through denial . Disabling the satellite or corrupting the computer network is often a better option than fighting an attack .
 Quickly identifying and retaliating against an aggressor is far more difficult than in the case of conventional attacks via land, air, or sea . Quickly identified and retaliated against such a threat is more difficult for the U.S.
 Many states are capable of operating effectively in these relatively new domains . attribution will be even more complicated because of so many states' ability to operate .
 War serves as the ultimate test of military systems, force structures, and the doctrines governing their employment . War is a test for military systems and force structures .
 The lack of a war between major powers since 1945 means that the true balance of conventional, nuclear, and cyber-military capabilities is uncertain . The balance is uncertain between conventional and nuclear capabilities .
 New capabilities incorporate artificial intelligence, novel biological agents, laser weaponry, hypersonic speed, and robotics . And if this is true for well-established technologies, it is doubly so for new capabilities .
 Future belligerents may have diverging beliefs about their benefits and dangers, increasing the likelihood that one side might opt for aggression . Because few of these capabilities are thoroughly battle tested, future belligerent may have different beliefs .
 This is true particularly for risk-tolerant leaders who assume such uncertainties will work in their favor . This is undermining deterrence where it is most fragile, says Julian Zelizer .
 Recent insights into the nature of human decision-making raise questions about the logic of deterrence . Recent insights raise questions on the very logic of deterring .
 As a theoretical concept, deterrence rests on the assumption that where risk is involved, humans act rationally, in the sense that they base their decisions on a cost-benefit calculus and act only when expected gains outweigh the anticipated costs .
 Research in behavioral economics has cast great doubt on this assumption . Over the past 40 years, however, research has found that behavioral economics is very different .
 Humans, it turns out, cannot be counted on to always maximize their prospective gains . Humans can't count on always maximizing their potential gains, experts say .
 They are remarkably inept at understanding how the opponent in a conflict is calculating its own costs, benefits, and risks . And even when they do, they don't understand how the other side is calculating .
 Human nature hasn’t changed, but our understanding of it has, says author . That bode ill for defense strategies built on deterrence, he says .
 The first problem has to do with our understanding of how leaders conceive of losses, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Prospect theory says people risk more to avoid losing what they already have than to gain something of equal value . Prospect theory: People will risk more than to lose something equal value than gain something equal .
 Policymakers run higher risks to retain their own territory than to seize foreign territory of equal value . Policymakers will run higher risk to retain territory rather than seize it .
 In theory, this phenomenon would seem to strengthen deterrence, since it predicts that leaders generally prefer to stick with whatever land and resources they already own, rather than attempt to seize what belongs to another .
 Decision-makers set their so-called reference point, which determines whether they consider their current situation to be one of loss or gain . This is because of how decision-makers consider their situation in their own life .
 One might expect that people always base their reference point on the status quo— the state of things at the time they make a decision . But the state-of-the-status quo is the reason for the decision to make such a change .
 After a series of gains, individuals adjust their reference point to the new status quo . After a long period of gains people adjust their references to the status quo, they adjust to a new reality .
 Any setback looks to them like a loss rather than a gain forgone . Any subsequent setback is likely to be a loss for them, they say .
 We should therefore expect them to be relatively risk tolerant in their efforts to defend their latest gains, which they now see as a potential loss .
 After individuals suffer losses, they tend not to adjust their reference point to the new, less favorable situation . People tend to react negatively to a new situation in order to cope with it .
 They see their own attempts to retake what has been lost not as the pursuit of gains but as the avoidance of losses . They therefore see their efforts to retake the lost as as an attempt to avoid those losses .
 As a result, they are often ready to take great risks and accept high costs to achieve this end . They are often willing to take risks to achieve the end of their mission .
 For a historical example, consider the U.S. economic embargo against Japan in the summer of 1941 and Japan’s decision to attack Pearl Harbor a few months later . The embargo was followed by the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 In imposing the embargo, U.S. leaders were attempting to punish Japan for a series of invasions across East Asia . The United States viewed the losses as losses compared with the previous situation .
 Japan’s leaders had updated their reference point to include their most recent territorial gains . They saw the embargo as an American attempt to take from the Japanese what was now rightfully theirs .
 Both sides were operating under a paradigm of loss, which made them more willing to risk war . Both sides, in other words, are operating under the paradigm of losing, which led them to risk a war .
 Beijing is occupying and fortifying disputed territory in the South China Sea . Beijing is apparently intent on creating new facts on the ground . The situation is similar to that of China in the 1980s .
 The United States and its allies continue to view China’s actions as illegitimate . The U.S. continues to view the situation as illegitimate and retain the original situation as their reference point . The United Nations and allies still consider China's actions illegitimate .
 If the dispute comes to a head, both China and its opponents will be operating from a reference point of loss . China and opponents will have to work together to avoid a repeat of the conflict .
 The logic of deterrence also depends a great deal on the people in charge of the country .
 Research in cognitive science suggests that political leaders are unusually optimistic and overly confident in their ability to control events . The traits that helped them come to power helped them to power, according to cognitive science research .
 Given their built-in optimism, they are prone to doubling down in the face of failure instead of cutting their losses . They are also prone to double down on their optimism .
 Any one of these characteristics can undermine deterrence, says CNN.com.com .
 Assuming that uncertainty will resolve itself in one’s favor inflates the anticipated gains while reducing projected losses, making a risky path of action far more enticing . Assuming that . uncertainty inflates . anticipated gains and reduces projected losses makes risky path .
 This bias for optimism may be especially pronounced when the leader in question is a personalist dictator . This bias is especially pronounced in the case of a dictator .
 To rise to the top in a cutthroat political environment, such leaders must be extremely risk tolerant and believe they can beat the odds . Such leaders must also be very risk tolerant to rise to a top job .
 Once in power, they are often surrounded by sycophants who feed their egos and selfimages as skillful strategists . They feed their selfimages and selfimage as skillly strategists. Once they are in power they often surround them with syphants .
 Excessive optimism may partly explain Hitler’s risky decision to remilitarize the Rhineland and annex Austria and Czechoslovakia . Germany was still weaker than France, Russia, and the United Kingdom when Hitler took over the Rhine .
 Saddam Hussein’s willingness to take on the U.S. suggests a propensity for high-stakes gambles . Mao Zedong's decision to plunge China into the Korean War was also a gamble .
 Research in the behavioral sciences has found that one’s cultural environment can lead to dramatic differences in cognitive processes, including in the ways people understand equity, costs, benefits, and risks . Research has also found that cultural differences in one's cognitive processes can affect people's understanding of equity
 When pursue mdteridl gdin dbove they were in the role of Player B, they were more likely to reject offers that were significantly less than a rough split of the money . accepting any offer above zero would have improved their financial situation .
 In some less developed societies, such as Central Asia and Latin America, those in the Player A position were often far less charitable . Player B counterparts rarely refused even much lower amounts .
 Those on the receiving end at times refused the money even when offered more than half the cash . And in other tests involving societies in Central Asia, East Africa, and New Guinea, the people refused the cash even when they were offered half the amount .
 Individuals are not necessarily utility-maximizing machines that rationally pursue material gain and expect others to do the same . Individuals, however, don't necessarily seek material gain in order to get others to follow .
 They are prepared to reject what they perceive as unfairness or slights to their personal honor . Even at a substantial cost to themselves, they reject unfairness and slights .
 Leaders sometimes reject win-win deals in favor of seemingly irrational outcomes in which both sides lose . This is why leaders sometimes reject "win-win" deals . Leaders sometimes make irrational decisions in which they choose to lose both sides .
 Khrushchev was partly motivated by his sense that the balance of U.S. and Soviet relations was unfair . The balance of the two countries' relations in the Middle East was also unfair .
 Khrushchev expected U.S. leaders to tolerate deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The United States had positioned nuclear-armed missiles on the Soviet Union’s southern flank, in Turkey .
 Kennedy offered a guarantee that the U.S. would not invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviet Union’s withdrawal of the missiles . It was a mutually beneficial outcome, albeit with a modest payout to the Soviets . Kennedy: "It was a mutual beneficial outcome"
 Should Khrushchev refuse, the ultimate lose-lose outcome— war—appeared likely . Khrushchevitch refused to negotiate with the Soviet Union .
 Given the United States’ enormous nuclear advantage over the Soviet Union, the U.S. missiles in Turkey were a nonissue . The United States had a nuclear advantage in the nuclear arms race with Russia .
 Khrushchev felt pressure to demonstrate to his colleagues in the Soviet Presidium that he had been treated fairly . The missiles in Turkey became a sticking point in negotiations to resolve the crisis .
 In the end, Kennedy committed to quietly withdrawing the missiles from Turkey, the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba, and war was averted . The end of the war was a victory for Kennedy .
 Given all these theoretical and practical limitations, it may appear as if deterrence should be discarded altogether . The U.S. may appear to be abandoning deterrence altogether, as far as defense policy and strategy go .
 Winston Churchill said deterrence may be the worst form of defense, except for all the others . But to paraphrase Winston Churchill, deterrence is the worst of all the other forms of defense .
 Any attempt to buttress deterrence must address these factors, rather than wish them away . Any attempt must address this factor must address, not wish it away, it says .
 For the United States, this means undertaking a comprehensive assessment of the military balance of power . For the U.S. this means assessing the military power balance of the world .
 U.S. analysts tend to assess the strategic balance of power by focusing primarily on nuclear weapons . United States analysts, for example, tend to look at nuclear weapons as a factor .
 Russian counterparts also incorporate ballistic missile defenses, early warning systems, cyberweapons, and cyberweapons into their assessments . Their Russian counterparts, on the other hand, also incorporate missile defenses and early-warning systems into their assessment .
 Chinese strategists usually take a similarly comprehensive view of the strategic balance . China's strategic balance is considered one of the world's most important strategic powers .
 "At a more theoretical level, policymakers must change how they think about escalation," says Peter Bergen . He says policymakers must also change the way they think of escalation .
 Today’s strategists still use the metaphor, developed during the Cold War, of an escalation ladder . The rungs represent the gradual and linear stepping up of a war from the lower level of conventional conflict up until nuclear exchanges .
 In the age of precision munitions and cyberattacks, this linear metaphor is badly in need of revision . "The linear metaphor" is badly need to be revised, he says .
 What will emerge may look less like a ladder than like a web of crosscutting paths . What will emerged may look like a Web of cross-cutting paths.
 At each intersection, escalation in one domain, be it cyberspace, the seabed, or space, could trigger an escalatory response in another . At each interaction, escalation could trigger escalatory responses .
 This intersectional model would allow the U.S. to identify areas where it enjoys an advantage over its rivals . It would also allow the United States to take steps to strengthen deterrence .
 The United States will also have to find ways to buy back warning time for incoming attacks and improve its ability to trace their origins . The U.S. will also need to improve the ability to track down incoming attacks .
 Eventually, advances in artificial intelligence and “big data’ may prove useful for promptly detecting an attacker’s fingerprints . Eventually, the technology could be used to detect an attacker's fingerprints .
 By causing prospective aggressors to lose confidence in their ability to act with anonymity, such tools would enhance the threat of punishment and thus strengthen deterrence . Such tools would also strengthen deterrence, says author .
 To reduce the uncertainty surrounding new, untested capabilities, the U.S. military must also train its forces for a wider range of conflict scenarios . The United States needs to train its troops for a wide range of scenarios .
 Since 9/11, U.S. forces have devoted most of their attention to counterterrorism and counterinsurgency training . Since then, the United States has focused on counterterrorism training .
 Conducting realistic exercises at the operational level of war can reveal much about the effectiveness of various military doctrines, force structures, and capabilities, author says . The exercises can be conducted at the level of military campaigns against advanced military forces .
 As for human nature, there is of course little that can be done to change that, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Policymakers should be aware of how humans make decisions under conditions of risk . But policymakers should at least be aware that humans make mistakes under risk .
 This does not mean they must immerse themselves in the behavioral and cognitive sciences any more than their predecessors at the dawn of the nuclear age had to develop a deep understanding of quantum physics . Krepinevich, Jr. says they must learn more from the behavioral sciences .
 It does, however, mean they must have a clear awareness of what these fields’ findings imply for a deterrence strategy’s prospects for success .
 In particular, it is worth knowing what individual opponents, especially dictators, most value and fear losing . It is also important to know what dictators fear and fear to lose, especially in dictators .
 Such knowledge allows leaders to fine-tune their deterrence strategies based on punishment . Such knowledge can be used to help guide deterrence strategies, experts say .
 Since World War II, U.S. defense strategy has relied on communicating to rivals that any aggression would either fail or provoke a devastating counterattack . This is a nutshell: Deterrence in a nutshell .
 The strategy’s success until now has convinced many leaders in Washington that a major war is unlikely . The strategy is likely to continue, but it has convinced some leaders that it's unlikely .
 As revisionist great powers emerge, military competition expands to include new weaponry and unfamiliar domains . Effective deterrence is becoming more and more challenging, experts say .
 The fears that once spurred strategists and politicians to embrace deterrence are still relevant . The fears of deterrence still remain relevant today, experts say .
 A new major-power war could still exact a horrific human and material toll . U.S. policymakers are right to look for strategies to deter such a conflict, says John Avlon .
 Do not take deterrence for granted, not take it for granted . But doing so will require, above all, that they not take threats for granted.
 Confronting a hostile Democratic House of Representatives will be a rude awakening for a president who chafes at any limits on his authority . The White House will have to confront a hostile Congress . President Barack Obama is expected to face a hostile House .
 For the first two years of his presidency, Trump experienced little resistance from the Republican-controlled Congress . Trump has sought to disrupt the established international order .
 Republicans stood by as Trump withdrew from vital international agreements, embraced autocrats while giving allies the cold shoulder . Republicans largely stood by while he abandoned democracy and human rights as core values of U.S. foreign policy .
 Democrats have taken power in the House of Representatives . Congress has a chance to influence the administrations foreign policy .
 The Constitution gives Congress more authority over foreign affairs than most observers understand . Congress has more authority than most people think, including the president .
 It has the power of the purse, the power to declare war, and regulate the armed forces, trade, and immigration . It also has power of declaring war and regulating war .
 Congress can fund programs it supports and withhold money from those it doesn't . Congress can also withhold funds from programs it doesn’t support or withholds .
 It can block initiatives that require legislation and use investigations to expose and curtail executive-branch wrongdoing . It can also block initiatives requiring legislation or use investigations .
 BRIAN McKEON is Senior Director of the Penn Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement . He served as U.S. Principal Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Policy from 2014 to 2017 . McKEon is a senior director of the Biden Center .
 He was Chief Counsel for the Democratic members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee from 1997 to 2009 . He was chief Counsel for Democrats on the Foreign Relations committee .
 CAROLINE TESS is a Senior Fellow at the Penn Biden Center . She was Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Legislative Affairs at the National Security Council from 2014 to 2017 . TESS: We need to find a way to get the government to work together .
 She worked on Capitol Hill from 2003 to 2010 . She worked in the office of the Senate Majority Leader and on the staff of the Intelligence Committee .
 Democrats will have to stay disciplined and united, and use the powers the Constitution grants them in ways they have not done in years . Democrats will need to stay focused and united in order to win the election .
 That Republicans in Congress have done little to rein in Trump should not be surprising . Republicans can check and balance balance-balancing-when it wants to, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Trump has trashed long-standing party orthodoxy on trade, democracy, and nato . His silence as Trump trashed orthodoxy on nato may seem jarring .
 Members of Congress typically give a president of their own party substantial running room on foreign policy . But members of Congress usually give the president substantial room to make foreign policy decisions .
 Republicans keen to avoid the wrath of the president and the party faithful who support him . Deference to Trump was also a sound political strategy for Republicans . Republicans want to avoid being the target of Trump's wrath .
 In 2017, the U.S. imposed new sanctions on Russia . President Trump signed under protest and has been reluctant to implement the measures .
 Democrats have won control of the House of Representatives, with its attendant committees and powers . Democrats have taken control of Congress in November . They will face a host of new committees, committees, powers .
 History suggests there is a lot a determined Congress can do to stand up to a wayward president . History suggests a lot can be done to stop the president from becoming president .
 In the 1970s, large Democratic majorities moved to rein in the so-called imperial presidency . In response to overreach by President Richard Nixon, Democratic majorities reined in the 'imperial presidency'
 Congressional investigations led to reforms of the ciA and the fbi, too, including by restricting domestic spying . Standing congressional intelligence committees were created to oversee the intelligence agencies .
 In the 1990s, a Republican Congress sought to exert its own foreign policy priorities . In the 90s, the Republican Congress was trying to exert influence in foreign policy .
 It passed legislation requiring that UN reforms be implemented before the U.S. would pay its back dues . It also reorganized the foreign affairs agencies, merging what had been separate agencies responsible for arms control and public diplomacy into the Department of State .
 Much of the action required majorities in both houses of Congress . Much of that action required majority in both chambers of Congress.
 Without control of the Senate, Democrats will have fewer options, but they can still make a significant impact . Without control, they will be limited to a handful of options .
 Congressional committees should be returning to standard practice for oversight of the White House . Their first step is to return to the role of oversight, which is a core function of the committees .
 From January to November 2018, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held just 14 full committee hearings not related to nominations . The administration can overhaul U.S. foreign policy without the need to explain itself in public .
 Richard Lugar of Indiana chaired 14 hearings in the first three months of the year in 2004 . Lugar often chaired two hearings in one day, often chairing two hearings a day . In 2004, Lugar was chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, a Republican .
 Foreign Affairs and Foreign Relations, Armed Services, Intelligence, Homeland Security, and Appropriations committees, as well as the investigative committees . The committee will hear testimony from members of Congress .
 The House Foreign Affairs Committee could set the tone early by holding two full hearings with senior State Department officials . Iran and North Korea could be the focus of the hearings . The committee is expected to hold hearings on Iran, North Korea .
 In 2018, the committee did not hold a single hearing with administration officials dedicated to either topic .
 The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee will likely spend a good portion of its time investigating the Trump family businesses .
 A preliminary report laying out the facts would establish a road map, allowing the media and members of Congress to connect the dots between Trump's private businesses and his official actions .
 Hearings and investigations draw attention to neglected issues, can force administrations to rethink decisions . But hearings and investigations can also force the White House to rethink its decisions .
 They can divert the executive branch from its priorities and focus the attention of the press, particularly when they stick to a limited set of issues and sustain the pressure .
 Department official to exaggerate intelligence findings to fit policy views, officials say . He says he tried to remove analysts who disagreed with him from the intelligence community .
 Republicans’ relentless use of congressional hearings over the last two decades to discredit the science of climate change demonstrates the impact that sustained congressional pressure can have on the public discourse . Republicans have been using hearings to discredit climate change science for decades .
 Democrats, now serving as committee chairs armed with subpoena power, will make extensive requests for information, interviews, and witnesses . Democrats will be seeking information from the House of Representatives .
 Contrary to popular belief, the White House cannot fully control how agencies respond to Congress . White House can't fully control agencies' response to Congress, says White House .
 Departments depend on Congress to fund them, approve their requests to repurpose existing funds, and confirm their senior staff . Departments rely on Congress for funding, approval of their requests and confirmation of staff .
 Congressmen strive to maintain working relationships with oversight committees in both houses of Congress . They work with their oversight committees of both houses .
 Administration officials regularly agree to appear, provide documents, and cooperate with congressional investigators . Administration officials often agree to cooperate when faced with legislation and limits on their budget authority .
 Congress can also enlist other investigators, such as inspectors general, to dig into executive-branch activity . Inspectors general are housed within departments and agencies and charged with rooting out fraud .
 The gao works for Congress, not the executive branch . It has the statutory authority to review the activities of most agencies . It is a non-executive branch of Congress .
 Inspectors general are independent of their agency’s leadership; nearly all of them endeavor to protect that independence and respond to congressional requests . Inspector general is independent of his agency's leadership, but not its leadership, he says .
 Congress should keep it simple, shining a spotlight on the ethical swamp under Trump’s leadership . The ethical swamp is causing long-term practical and reputational damage to the United States .
 This should include how foreign governments are influencing the administration by spending money at Trump properties . This should also include how U.S. foreign policy toward China, Russia, and the Persian Gulf is affected by Trump family interests .
 It is important to be focused and patient as effective congressional investigations unfold slowly, often lasting months, even years, as new facts are discovered and new avenues of inquiry pursued .
 Subcommittee chairs can use their gavels to focus attention on important issues . Complementing the work of the full committees, energized subcommittee chairs can focus attention to important issues, experts say .
 The chair of the House subcommittee on human rights can shine a light on dark places by hearing testimony from dissidents and human rights defenders from China, Cuba, the Philippines, Russia, and Turkey .
 Such hearings would underscore the United States’ long-standing commitment to human rights for people everywhere . The U.S. has a long history of human rights, including human rights in the U.N.
 The House Foreign Affairs Committee held hearings with a Syrian defector known only as “Ceasar” who smuggled thousands of photos out of Syria that documented the Syrian government’s brutality . In 2014, the committee also heard testimony from a defector who smuggled photos of the
 The hearings drew widespread attention in Congress and the media to his work . The hearings were the first of his congressional hearings .
 Congress should also step in to save the U.S. Foreign Service, which is bleeding senior talent . The White House and State Department are forcing out many senior diplomats .
 Attrition at senior levels has been higher than usual this year . A number of notable public resignations have been made public .
 Foreign affairs committees can help arrest the decline of diplomatic experience . It will take years to regain the experience that has been lost among the diplomatic corps . Foreign Affairs committees will help arrest decline .
 Each should designate a subcommittee to focus solely on the health of the Foreign Service . The Foreign Service should be a focus of the subcommittee .
 Subcommittees should hold hearings, make recommendations to the Appropriations Committees . They should draft legislation to make sure that the service gets adequate funding to support recruitment, diversity and career advancement .
 The House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence should focus on standard oversight of the intelligence community, including covert operations, the collection of sensitive intelligence, and the impartial analytic process . Republican efforts to discredit the leadership of the fbi and Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian interference in the
 All members of Congress should receive candid, regular, and thorough classified briefings, the author says .
 Members of Congress should seek in-depth briefings before and after any discussions with North Korean leadership . Given the unclear status of the nuclear negotiations, members should seek briefings, members say .
 Congress demanded—and received—throughout the negotiation of the Iran nuclear agreement . That’s what Congress demanded, and received, through the negotiations .
 Republicans retained control of the Senate, but Democrats can still exert influence there . Even though the GOP retained control, Democrats still have influence in the Senate .
 Nominations offer serious leverage to individual senators, no matter which party holds the majority . Nominationations offer real leverage to individuals in the Senate, no one party holds majority .
 An individual senator can place a hold on a nomination to influence policy or force the administration to hand over information or provide witnesses for hearings . A hold can influence policy, influence the administration or force hearings .
 Senators should avoid delay for delay’s sake, but using nominees as leverage on other issues is often an effective way to get an administration's attention . Senators should not delay nominees for the sake .
 Congress must do more than conduct oversight; it must legislate . Congress has the power to legislate, and it must do so, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Every year, the appropriations process leads to must-pass bills that keep the government funded and give the legislative branch a chance to influence policy . The appropriations process is the process of funding the government .
 Congress also passes annual defense and intelligence authorization bills . In doing so frequently incorporates unrelated foreign policy legislation .
 Congress used the defense authorization bill to reorganize the government agency that conducts international broadcasting . Congress also reorganized the agency responsible for international broadcasts .
 The Democrats’ majority in the House gives them significant leverage to include their priorities in must-pass legislation . The House will vote on a bill that must pass this week .
 Congress should include language barring U.S. forces from refueling Saudi planes and from offering intelligence support to the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen in annual defense authorization bill .
 Congress can also exert its prerogatives on Cuba, lifting travel restrictions imposed by the Trump administration . Congress can lift travel restrictions on Cuba through legislative provisions in annual must-pass bills, rather than in freestanding legislation .
 At the top of the legislative calendar, the incoming Speaker of the House must schedule an early vote on legislation to protect the Mueller investigation .
 Congress should also consider the Defending American Security From Kremlin Aggression Act of 2018 . The bill would provide additional sanctions on the Russian energy sector and new tools to protect the U.S. electoral system from foreign interference .
 Congress should take steps to safeguard the U.S. role in the international order, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: Congress should safeguard the United States’ role in international order .
 Congress should enact legislation to block Trump from pulling the United States out of nato and the World Trade Organization . Trump has reportedly considered pulling the U.S. out of the world trade organization .
 Some in Congress question whether President Trump can withdraw from treaties unilaterally . Congress could pass a statute preventing him from taking such impulsive steps .
 Such legislation would send a strong signal abroad that the United States’ long-standing commitment to international institutions and alliances remains strong . The legislation would also send a signal that the U.S. is committed to international alliances .
 Congress should not limit itself to directly countering Trump’s foreign policy, it should also act positively on its own . Congress should act positively against the president's foreign policy in the future, says Julian Zelizer .
 The U.S. infrastructure is deeply vulnerable to cyberattacks, and the government has been far too slow to respond to them . The United States’ infrastructure is . The government has not been able to respond quickly to the cyberattacks .
 Congress should enact comprehensive legislation that better enables the sharing of cybersecurity information between the government and the private sector . Lawmakers should also strengthen the ability of law enforcement to fight cybercrime .
 The Constitution dictates that no money can be drawn from the Treasury without appropriations made by law . The money can't be taken from Treasury without law, the Constitution dictates .
 Congress has substantial authority to influence policy, subject only to executive branch foot-dragging in executing congressional directives or the rare presidential veto . Congress thus has substantial power to influence foreign policy . President Barack Obama has vetoes, but Congress can influence policy .
 Congress has pushed back successfully against the Trump administration during its first two years . Controlling the purse is one way in which Congress is pushing back against the administration .
 The Appropriations Committees will likely do the same in both chambers . During the next two weeks, the Appropriations Committees are likely to vote .
 Subcommittees that cover foreign operations, which handle State Department and foreign aid budgets, are islands of bipartisanship . In particular, the appropriations subcommittee that covers foreign operations is a bipartisan .
 Congress should safeguard nckmg. They protect diplomatic resources and quietly advance worthwhile causes such as ending river blindness and promoting democracy .
 Administrations often United otUteS. wlc in want to use funds for projects other than the international Order. their original purpose. Administrations. often . use funds to fund projects other . than the . original purpose .
 Subcommittees have effectively established a form of legislative veto over some administration actions . Law requires the executive branch to notify Congress before trying to shift funds in this way . The subcommittees are effectively established by law requiring them to do so .
 This past summer, the Trump administration attempted to rescind billions of dollars in foreign aid money . The move would have slashed the State Department and usaid budgets months after Trump signed the appropriations bill funding them .
 Faced with bipartisan congressional outrage, the White House backed down . The White House has been forced to back down on the proposal .
 Congress has substantial control over arms exports, which it should use to curtail U.S. support for Yemen war . Congress also has control over weapons exports . Saudi Arabia and the UAE are waging a bloody war in Yemen .
 The State Department must notify foreign affairs committees of every weapons sale over a certain dollar threshold . Congress must also wait a certain period of time to allow for possible congressional votes .
 This process also includes an informal “prenotification” before a formal notice is submitted to the committees, which can lead to adjustments to the proposal .
 Congress can try to formally reject a sale, but it almost never succeeds . The president usually vetoes such attempts . Congress can also try to block a sale .
 Constitutional historian Edward Corwin once wrote that the Constitution creates an “invitation to struggle” among the political branches . The Constitution creates a ‘invitation” to struggle among political branches, he said .
 A Congress that delegates its powers or consistently acquiesces in the face of executive action not only ignores that invitation; it abdicates its responsibilities . A Congress can delegate its powers, but it can also abdicate its responsibilities, the author says .
 The Constitution grants Congress the power to “lay and collect” duties and regulate foreign commerce . The Constitution gives Congress the ability to ‘lay . and collect . duties’
 The president has no express constitutional power over foreign trade . The Constitution gives him general authority to negotiate treaties, but he has a general authority .
 Congress has delegated substantial authority in this area to the president, allowing him to impose retaliatory tariffs and negotiate trade agreements under what is known as "fast-track" authority .
 The agreements are then considered in Congress in an expedited process in which no amendments are allowed . The agreements must be approved by Congress .
 The growth of the federal government and the complexity of the modern economy have led Congress to yield significant power in many areas to the executive branch and administrative agencies . This sort of delegation is not unusual, the author says, but it's not unusual .
 In 1980, President Jimmy Carter’s announcement that he would impose a fee on crude oil imports in an attempt to limit U.S. dependence on foreign oil . The fee was part of an effort to limit the United States' dependence on oil imports .
 Congress created a mechanism by which it could override presidential actions on crude oil imports . Congress can override the president's decision to impose restrictions on crude imports .
 President Trump has invoked bogus claims of national security to impose sweeping tariffs on allies and partners . He has given little consideration to the harm his actions will inflict on the U.S. economy .
 Congress should limit or revoke the president’s authority to enact retaliatory tariffs, increase the burden of proof he must meet, or create a mechanism for Congress to reject proposed tariffs . Congress should also increase the burdens of proof the president must meet .
 Article 1 of the Constitution gives Congress substantial power over the use of force and regulation of the armed forces . Article 1 gives Congress not merely the authority to declare war but also substantial power .
 The framers would not recognize the practice that has developed over the last few decades, with presidents directing extensive U.S. military actions while Congress often sits on the sidelines .
 The law remains in effect, and has been used far beyond its original intent . The law was passed by Congress in 1996, but has been expanded beyond its intent .
 The executive branch has invoked it to justify counterterrorism operations in a long list of countries . It has also invoked it in the continued detention of terrorist suspects at Guantanamo Bay .
 A bipartisan effort in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during the current Congress would be a good starting point . The bill should be a bipartisan effort .
 The aspect of foreign policy over which the president has the greatest control is probably diplomacy . The executive carries out negotiations with other governments and because it has a large bureaucracy to help .
 Leading members of Congress should recognize that they can help reassure allies and repair damaged relationships, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The new Speaker of the House should issue an early invitation to Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to address a joint meeting of Congress . Trudeau should be invited to address the joint meeting .
 Congress should award the Congressional Medal of Honor to nato service members in recognition of the 17 years they have spent fighting alongside U.S. forces in Afghanistan .
 The Speaker should personally lead a bipartisan delegation to visit nato allies early in the year and designate senior members to lead delegations to reassure countries in other regions of the world .
 The United States Constitution gives the president considerable power over foreign policy . The U.S. Constitution gives President Barack Obama considerable power .
 Trump has used those powers to begin remaking the U.S.’s global image and role . Trump has been in charge of the White House since 2009 .
 The framers of the Constitution wisely vested Congress with powers of its own to influence and check the executive . Yet the framers wisely chose to give Congress the power to influence the executive, he says .
 President Trump pulled the United States out of the Iran nuclear deal but has shown no eagerness for a conflict with the Islamic Republic . He pulled the U.S. out of a nuclear deal with Iran, but has said he doesn't want a war .
 He has continued U.S. support for the Saudi-led war in Yemen . He has resisted calls for deeper military engagement there .
 Despite his promise of a “deal of the century,’s a U.S. proposal on Arab-Israeli peace remains on the shelf . The United States proposal for a peace deal remains on a shelf .
 His support for an “Arab NATO’s” security alliance among Egypt, Jordan, and six Gulf states has been stymied by deepening rifts among the Gulf countries . The Arab NATO is a security alliance between Egypt and Jordan, Egypt and six other countries .
 His vacillating approach toward Syria has led to confusion over the U.S. military’s mission there . The United States military has been involved in the Syrian conflict .
 The Defense Department has scaled back U.S. military capabilities in the Middle East in order to redirect resources to the increasing threats posed by China and Russia . Partners in the region are wondering about Washington's commitment to their security .
 For all the aggressive rhetoric, Trump’s Mideast policies have proved remarkably reserved . Trump's Middle East policies have proven remarkably reserved, he says .
 She was United States Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy and Force Development from 2015 to 2016 . She was the U.S. deputy assistant secretary of defense for strategy and force development .
 TAMARA COFMAN WITTES is a Senior Fellow in the Foreign Policy Program at the Brookings Institution . She says the U.S. needs a strong ally in the Middle East and the world's future .
 She was United States Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs from 2009 to 2012 . She was the U.S. deputy assistant secretary of state for near Eastern Affairs .
 The two seem to share the view that the U.S. is too involved in the region and should devote fewer resources and less time to it . But they also seem to agree that the United States should spend less time on it .
 There is every reason to believe that the next president will agree with President Obama . And there are every reasons to think that he will agree .
 The reduced appetite for U.S. engagement in the region reflects not an ideological predilection or an idiosyncrasy of these two presidents but a deeper change in both regional dynamics and broader United States interests . President Obama and President Obama have been in touch with the region since 2001 .
 Although the Middle East still matters to the United States, it matters markedly less than it used to . The Middle East matters less to the U.S. than it does to the world .
 U.S. strategy toward the Middle East, however, has yet to catch up with these changes . United States strategy toward Mideast is still not catching up with the changes .
 The United States is too distracted by regional crises to pivot to other global priorities . The U.S. is not invested enough to move the region in a better direction .
 It sows uncertainty among Washington’s Middle Eastern partners, which encourages them to act in risky and aggressive ways . The U.S. has been in the Middle East for more than a decade .
 It deepens the American public's frustration with the region’s endless turmoil, as well as with U.S. efforts to address it . The U.N. has been in the Middle East for decades .
 It diverts resources that could otherwise be devoted to confronting a rising China and a revanchist Russia . The U.S. has been criticized for its anti-China policies .
 To say that the Middle East matters less to the United States does not mean that decreased U.S. involvement will necessarily be good for the region . The Middle East is not a matter of concern, but it's important to the U.K.
 The Middle East is in the midst of its greatest upheaval in half a century, generating an all-out battle for power among its major players . The Mideast region is in a state of upheaval that is generating all the region's biggest power struggle .
 The region’s governments are working hard to draw the hegemon back in . They are worried about what Washington's disregard for the Middle East means for their own stability .
 It is time for Washington to put an end to wishful thinking about its ability to establish order on its own terms . But it is time to put a end to wishingful thinking that Washington can transform self-interested and shortsighted partners into reliable allies .
 The U.S. must make some ugly choices to craft a strategy that will protect its interests in the region . That means making ugly choices, but not sending the United States back into purgatory .
 In response to the Iraq war, the United States has aimed to reduce its role in the Middle East . The U.S. has a goal of reducing its involvement in the region . The Middle East is a less important region than the rest of the world .
 Three factors have made that course both more alluring and more possible . Three factors made it possible for the U.S. to move to the top of the world .
 Interstate conflicts that directly threatened U.S. interests in the past have largely been replaced by substate security threats . First, interstate conflicts directly threatened United States interests have been replaced with sub-security threats .
 Other rising regions, especially Asia, have taken more importance to U.S. global strategy . Asia has taken on more importance than the United States .
 Third, diversification of global energy markets has weakened oil as a driver of U.S. policy . Diversification has also weakened the United States' dependence on oil, the authors say .
 During the Cold War, traditional state-based threats pushed the U.S. to play a major role in the Middle East . During the 1950s, the United States had to deal with the threat of terrorism in the region .
 Arab-Israeli conflict tamping down Arab-Arab conflict so as to help stabilize friendly states . That role involved not only ensuring the stable supply of energy to Western markets, but also working to prevent the spread of communist influence .
 The U.S. nudged Egypt out of the pro-Soviet camp in the 1970s . It oversaw the first Arab-Israeli peace treaty, and solidified its hegemony in the region .
 Despite challenges from Iran after its 1979 revolution and from Saddam Hussein’s Iraq throughout the 1990s, U.S. dominance was never seriously in question . Despite challenges, the United States never seriously challenged by Iran or Iraq .
 The United States contained the Arab-Israeli conflict, countered Saddam’s bid to gain territory through force in the 1990-91 Gulf War . America s Middle East Purgatory military presence in the Gulf deterred Iran and muffled disputes among the Gulf Arab states .
 The chances of deliberate interstate war in the Middle East are perhaps lower now than at any time in the past 50 years . Thanks to all these efforts, the chances of a war are perhaps less likely now than ever before .
 The chief threat in the Middle East is not a state-on-state conflict but the growing substate violence spilling across borders . This is a challenge that is harder to solve from the outside of the region .
 The terrorism and civil war plaguing the Middle East have spread easily in a permissive environment of state weakness . The terror attacks and civil wars have spread quickly in an environment of weak state weakness, experts say .
 The recome from the Arab gions most violent hot spots are those where dictators met demands from their States . citizens with force and drove them to take up arms . Dictators met their citizens' demands with force .
 The U.S. cannot fundamentally alter this permissive environment for terrorism and chaos without investing in state building at a level far beyond what the American public or broader foreign policy considerations would allow . The United States can't fundamentally alter the environment for terror and chaos, writes Peter Bergen .
 The U.S. cannot hope to do much to counter the Middle East’s violence or instability . And so it simply can’t hope to . do much . to counter . the violence, instability or violence .
 In Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and elsewhere, dysfunctional stateled economic systems and unaccountable governments are failing to meet the needs or aspirations of a large, young, reasonably healthy and globally connected generation .
 Arab societies cannot drive this kind of transformation from the outside . Arab societies, it cannot drive the transformation from outside, says Al-Ahmad .
 Some argue that these problems still matter a lot to the United States and that there is still much to solve them if it were willing to go all in . Others argue that the U.S. could still do much more to solve these problems .
 The U.S. has been involved in Iraq, Libya, and Syria in three countries . It would be extremely challenging to sustain domestic political support for long-term investments in these countries .
 Even as the Middle East’s problems have become less susceptible to constructive outside influence, the United States’ global interests have also changed . The U.S. has also changed when it comes to Asia, especially in the region .
 For decades, U.S. policymakers debated whether China could rise peacefully . China's destabilizing behavior has led many to worry that it will not . The country’s insistence that its neighbors accept its territorial claims in the South China Sea and over Taiwan has led some to worry .
 Both Obama and Trump recognized that Asia has become more important to U.S. grand strategy . Asia is more important than the United States grand strategy, the president said .
 Russia has generated growing concern ever since its invasion of Crimea in 2014 . Fears about European security and stability have pushed the Middle East even further down the list of U.S. priorities .
 Middle Eastern oil remains an important commodity in the global economy, but it is weakening as a driver of U.S. policy . Oil is still a key factor in the United States' economic policy .
 One reason is the more abundant global supply, including new domestic sources aided by technologies such as fracking . New domestic sources are also aided by fracking .
 Another is a widely anticipated stall in global demand, as technological advances and concerns about greenhouse gas emissions cause countries to shift away from fossil fuels . Another is the anticipated stall of global demand .
 The Middle East is less central to global energy markets and less able to control pricing . The U.S. can afford to worry less about protecting the flow of oil from the region . The result is a Middle East that can't control pricing and less of the region's energy markets .
 Many of the things that mattered to the U.S. when it first became involved in the Middle East still matter today . Many of these things still matter to the United States today .
 Global -/s-Asian is the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy's flagship digital platform focusing on policy issues affecting Asia and the world . Global is based in Singapore and Hong Kong .
 Our content aims to shape global thinking and steer meaningful conversations on Asian policy issues . Backed by research and grounded in practitioners' experience, we are committed to shaping global thinking . Back by research, grounded in research, we're committed to making meaningful conversations about Asian policy .
 The question is how crucial these priorities are relative to other ones, and how much the U.S. should invest in them . It's not clear how much of the United States should spend on these priorities .
 The answer is that the U.S. should probably be less involved in shaping the trajectory of the region than it is . The answer to this is that it should probably not be more involved than it does .
 For a long time, policymakers have been tempted by the notion that there is some kind of golden mean for U.S. engagement in the Mideast .
 The United States can develop a strategy that keeps it involved in the most critical issues but avoids allowing it to be drawn into the region’s more internecine battles . Somehow, the argument runs, the U.S. can keep it involved but avoid being drawn in the region
 The U.S. could reduce its military presence while retaining a ‘surge’ capacity, relying more on local partners to deter threats . Aid and trade incentives could build coalitions among local actors to advance stabilizing policies .
 But this Goldilocks approach rests on the false assumption that there is such a thing as a purely operational U.S. military presence in the Middle East .
 In 2011, Bahrainis and the Saudis ignored Obama’s disapproval and crushed Shiite protests there . The Saudis and Bahrainis understood the message of support sent by the U.S. naval base in Bahrain .
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry’s experience with the negotiations over the Syrian civil war was undercut by President Obama's reluctance to involve the United States . Kerry's experience demonstrated that diplomacy without teeth doesn’t get you very far in Syria .
 Goldilocks proponents imagine that the U.S. can somehow escape the push-pull dynamic of Middle Eastern involvement . But all this approach ends up prolonging the time in purgatory .
 It's not enough to simply propose that the U.S. do less in the region without explaining what that would look like in practice . Yet it is not enough for the United States to do less, it needs to explain what that means in practice.
 It is clear that Washington should reduce its role in the Middle East . How it scales back and what end are the critical questions .
 United States policymakers and the public already seem surprisingly comfortable watching repressive Arab rulers consolidate power in some countries, while brutal insurgents displace civilians and destroy cities in others .
 A superpower must make tough choices, prioritizing the conflicts and issues that matter most for its global strategy . But the U.S. has to make tough decisions, including prioritizing conflicts and the issues most important for global strategy, experts say . The U.N. says it will
 During the Cold War, the U.S. took a relatively hands-off approach to most of Africa, backing anticommunist strongmen and proxies in a few places even at the cost of long-term stability . The United States has a long history of backing anti-commun
 This had terrible consequences for the people of, say, Angola or what was then Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) But it was a tolerable decision for U.S. interests .
 It is not enough to just set limits on its commitments, the U.S. must also clearly communicate those limits to other countries . The United States needs to clearly communicate that limits to others, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 At a summit at Camp David in 2015, Obama told Gulf partners that the U.S. would protect them from external threats but pointedly declined to mention internecine ones . Obama alarmed Gulf partners when he told them that the United States will protect them .
 Obama was right to put the onus on Gulf states to address their own internal challenges . Obama made clear that the U.S. had no dog in most of their regional fights .
 Washington must also set clear guidelines about when it will and won't use force, says D.C. State Department . Washington must set clear rules on when and when to use force .
 A less engaged U.S. will have to leave more of the business of Middle Eastern security to partners in the region . The United States must rethink how it works with them, the author says .
 The U.S. military is fond of talking about a “by, with, and through” approach to working with local partners . For example, military operations are led by partners, state or nonstate, with enabling support from the United States . The United States Central Command
 Washington needs partners on the ground to share Washington’s priorities . But that model works only if the partners on ground share Washington's priorities .
 Consider the Defense Department’s doomed program to train and equip rebels in Syria . Consider the Pentagon's doomed program for Syria .
 Washington was wary of partners in Syria, fearing they might drag the U.S. into a war with Bashar al-Assad . Washington was unwilling to provide sophisticated support .
 The fighters were instructed to prioritize attacking isis over regime forces that were shelling their hometowns . They changed course when Turkey invaded Afrin and began fighting the Turks instead, stalling the campaign .
 The United States has worked well with Kurdish militias in the fight against isis in northeastern Syria . But as soon as Trump expressed his desire to pull United States forces out, rebels began to explore cutting a deal with Damascus .
 It is crucial that the U.S. accept the limitations of its partners and see them for what they truly are, warts and all . It is also crucial to the United States accept its limitations and see the limitations .
 Sometimes, these partners won’t be able to confront security challenges without direct help from the U.S. The United States will help them in the fight against terrorism in Afghanistan .
 U.S. policymakers will have to accept that if the effort is imperative for national security interests, Washington must do the work itself .
 The United States has spent decades trying to build a security alliance among Gulf states . For example, the U.S. has tried to build an alliance with the Gulf states in the region .
 Alumni/alumnae have served at the highest levels in government, international and non-governmental organizations, business, and the scholarly professions . Its scope and global impact are reflected in a long list of distinguished alumni .
 The Dean will bring a comprehensive vision to The Fletcher School, one that is inclusive, forward-thinking, and which will thoughtfully lead an institution with an august history and a global mission to produce the next generation of the world's leaders .
 Fletcher fulfills its mission through manifold, innovative programs and degree tracks . Fletcher fulfilled its mission by offering innovative programs . Fletcher's students are students from all over the world . Fletcher College of Education is located in Atlanta, Georgia .
 Fletcher’s ongoing commitment to innovative, policyand business-relevant programs continues to make it indispensable . Fletcher's commitment to innovation, policy, and conflict continues to be indispensable, Fletcher says . Fletcher: In a world of accelerating change and increasing global interdependence, complexity, and
 The Dean will engage enthusiastically with a wide variety of audiences internally, externally, and internationally . He will bring credibility through strong academic standing and connections .
 The Fletcher School's Dean will bring thought leadership to the rapidly changing domain of international affairs . Equally important, the Dean will be able to provide thought leadership in the changing world .
 Fletcher School is assisted in this effort by the executive search firm Isaacson, Miller . The Fletcher School will host a panel of experts to discuss the search for a new president .
 Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates are blockading Qatar . Now that this alliance is looking even more like a pipe dream .
 A clear-eyed approach also requires accepting that China or Russia will likely gain more of a footing in the Middle East as the U.S. pulls back . The U.N. is pulling back from the region .
 The good news is that neither power is likely to make a real bid for regional hegemony . Neither country will likely make real bids for regional dominance, says CNN's John Sutter .
 China has established itself in the region by gingerly stepping around multiple conflicts, seeking friendships and trade relationships . So far, China has avoided taking sides in any rivalries .
 Russia’s involvement in Syria suggests that regional governments will face a strict quid pro quo from Moscow, not the kind of reliable partnerships the U.S. has traditionally provided . Kremlin-linked mercenary firms have fought for Assad and gained lucrative oil profits from their involvement .
 The U.S. should be able to retain the preponderance of power in the Middle East even after pulling back . Given the relatively limited ambitions of China and Russia, the United States has demonstrated the immense price of being the regional security manager .
 If one of its core partners or interests is threatened, it will need to change course . Yet if one of those partners is threatened it may need to be prepared to do so . The U.S. needs to find a way to protect its interests in the region .
 These recommendations all involve accepting what doesn't matter to U.S. interests . What still matters is what still matters to the United States .
 There are still issues in the Middle East that still greatly concern the U.S. But there are issues that still concern the United States .
 Those who prefer that Washington withdraw from the region entirely underestimate how dangerous the resulting power vacuum could be, say experts .
 The United States does have important interests in the region to protect . The U.S. has important interests to protect, the U.N. says .
 The Strait of Hormuz, the Bab el Mandeb Strait, and the Suez Canal are among the major maritime passages in the Middle East . The U.S. Navy is responsible for freedom of navigation for the United States Navy .
 Littoral states and other concerned parties across Asia and Europe share Washington’s objective . Outside the Persian Gulf itself, the littoral state and others share the same objective .
 Chinese naval forces have participated in antipiracy efforts in the Horn of Africa . China recently built its first overseas base to support that mission, in Djibouti .
 The U.S. could encourage China to participate in the 33-member Combined Maritime Forces and Combined Task Force 151, which fight piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off the eastern coast of Somalia . China’s activities should be focused on shared maritime security, the authors say .
 This would allow the United States to rely more on other concerned parties to address the piracy challenge . The U.S. could rely on other parties to help address the problem .
 China has sought to rewrite the rules on freedom of navigation in its own region . Still, doing so would come with its own costs, especially in the region .
 The U.S. will have to prevent new threats from emerging in the Middle East . To secure the American people, including United States forces stationed abroad, and the most important United States partners, the United States will need to stop new threats .
 The Trump administration has emphasized the need to lower the level of U.S. involvement in counterterrorism efforts . Like the Obama administration, the administration has stressed the need for lower U.K. involvement .
 Washington should recognize that its partners will inevitably permit or even encourage the activities of terrorist groups if doing so aligns with their short-term interests . Washington should also recognize that partners will allow or encourage terrorist groups to engage in their activities .
 Qatar, for example, has proved willing to work with extremist groups that, at a minimum, give aid to terrorist groups with international ambitions . Qatar has shown that it has shown willingness to cooperate with terrorist groups .
 The U.S. cannot control everything its partners do and focus its efforts on discouraging their relationships with terrorist groups that might pursue operations beyond their immediate neighborhood or acquire game-changing capabilities . The United States should focus on discouraging relationships with terrorism groups .
 U.S. still has an interest in seeing its main partners stable and secure . It should weigh its investments in security cooperation and economic aid accordingly . The United States should weigh security cooperation with its partners accordingly .
 Preventing conflicts from spreading does not mean launching all-out military interventions . Preventing conflict from spreading doesn't mean launching military interventions, says U.S. president .
 The U.S. will sometimes have to actively contain the fighting and engage in coercive diplomacy . But it will sometimes require the United States to contain fighting . The United States will sometimes need to intervene in a civil war .
 Stability and security for the Middle East will come only if the relationship between rulers and the ruled changes . Ultimately, lasting stability and security is only if rulers and rulers change the relationship .
 The U.S. needs far more carrots and sticks than Washington is prepared to deploy . But that change cannot be driven by the United States without more carrots or sticks .
 U.S. policymakers should instead support those who propose constructive solutions to the region's problems, authors say . They say .
 Work could involve others with a stake in Middle Eastern stability, including Europe . That work could involve other countries, such as Europe, for example .
 For the foreseeable future, policymakers must accept that the Middle East will likely remain mired in dysfunction . U.S. partners there will bow less and less to Washington’s preferences, Washington says .
 The United States will also have to abandon the fairydusted prospect of a negotiated agreement to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict . The U.S. will have to settle for constraining the worst impulses of both sides .
 The U.S. should return to the agreement and continue efforts to roll back Iran’s bad behavior . The United States should continue efforts, both alone and with partners, writes Aaron Miller .
 Heavy U.S. involvement in the Middle East over the past two decades has been painful and ugly for the United States and for the region . Heavy United States involvement in Mideast has been ugly and painful for the U.K. and the region.
 U.S. policymakers have grown accustomed to the costs associated with it . But it is the devil we know, and so policymakers are accustomed to it . It is not easy to deal with, but it is a problem .
 Pulling back is the devil we don't know, and so everyone instinctively resists this position . Pulling . back, however, is the Devil we don’t know, so people instinctively resist this position. Pulling. back is not easy, but it’s the
 It will be painful and ugly for the Middle East, but compared with staying the course, it will be less so for the U.S. It will also be painful for the Mideast, but less for the United States, it says .
 It’s time for the U.S. to begin the difficult work of getting out of purgatory . The United States should begin the hard work to get out, says President Obama .
 In many of these places, the primary enforcers of order are not police officers or government soldiers but the blue-helmeted troops of the United Nations . The United Nations is the country's most powerful military force .
 With more than 78,000 soldiers and 25,000 civilians scattered across 14 countries, un peacekeepers make up the second-largest military force deployed abroad, after the United States military .
 Peacekeepers are invited into war-torn countries and charged with maintaining peace . From Haiti to Mali, from Kosovo to South Sudan, peacekeepers have been invited in war-stricken countries .
 In most cases, that means nothing less than transforming states and societies . "Transhumanitarianism" is a form of radicalism that can transform society and society .
 Peacekeepers set out to protect civilians, train police forces, disarm militias, monitor human rights abuses, organize elections, provide emergency relief, rebuild court systems, inspect prisons, and promote gender equality . Peacekeepers are also tasked with protecting civilians, training police forces .
 They attempt all of that in places where enduring chaos has defied easy solution . Otherwise, they wouldn't be there to begin with. And they attempt to do that, they say .
 Global leaders continue to call on ‘the blue helmets’ as the go-to solution whenever violence flares in the developing world . Global leaders call on the blue helmets as a solution when crises break out in developing countries .
 UN peacekeepers too often fail to meet their most basic objectives, UN says . Peacekeepers must meet their objectives, the UN says, but they must meet them . The UN says peacekeepers are not always meeting their objectives .
 It is hard to fault the UN for that, since it relies on contributions from its members . The UN relies on its members to contribute to it, but that's not enough, it says .
 The larger problem, however, is a fundamental misunderstanding about what makes for a sustained peace, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The larger problem is that there is a misunderstanding about peace"
 The un’s strategy favors top-down deals struck with elites and fixates on elections . The un has a history of winning and losing elections .
 When the un was created, in 1945, it was never intended to have its own fighting force . The un Charter makes no mention of peacekeeping . It was created in 1945 .
 It quickly became clear that some such capacity would be essential if the organization was to have any hope of meeting its simplest goals . But it was quickly clear that such capacity was essential .
 In 1948, the mediator in Palestine asked for a small group of un guards to monitor the truce between Israel and its Arab neighbors, an ad hoc mission that marked the birth of peacekeeping .
 Peacekeeping missions were rare during the Cold War . The possibility of a veto meant that intervention was limited to places not caught up in the East-West rivalry . Peacekeeping operations were rare in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Only 13 were set up between 1948 and 1978, and none between 1979 and 1987 . Only 13 of the 13 set up in that period were set-up between 1948-1978 . None was set up during that period .
 A small number of unarmed observers would monitor cease-fire lines and troop withdrawals, as in Kashmir in 1949, or lightly armed soldiers would try to insert themselves between national armies . The situation in Kashmir was similar in 1978 and 1949 .
 Sometimes, the presence of un soldiers helped prevent further conflict, while at other times, it did not . The presence of soldiers in Afghanistan has led to the deaths of more than 100 people .
 The peacekeeping forces were awarded the 1988 Nobel Peace Prize . Their global impact remained limited .
 With U.S.-Soviet tensions no longer paralyzing the UN, the organization would finally, its leaders thought, be able to do its job . The UN would finally be able, they thought, to finally, say leaders . The organization's leaders thought they could finally do their job
 In the span of roughly two years, from April 1991 to October 1993, the U.N. launched 15 new peacekeeping operations . That was more than it had in the first 40 years of its history . The United Nations says it launched 15 peacekeeping missions in two years .
 Owing to the sheer number of missions, peacekeeping became institutionalized . Peacekeeping has become institutionalized in the United States .
 It acquired a dedicated department within the un and its own staff, budget, and standard operating procedures . The department has its own budget, staff, and standards of operating procedures.
 UN would send approximately 28,000 troops to monitor a ceasefire in Somalia’s long-running civil war and provide humanitarian relief . The UN would also provide humanitarian aid to the country .
 UN peacekeepers stood by as local armed groups perpetrated genocide in Srebrenica in 1995 . Then came the massacres in Rwanda in 1994 and 1995, when the massacres occurred in Rwanda and Srebrerenica .
 The people living where peacekeepers operated were not much kinder, portraying them as meek foreigners uninterested in their work . Peacekeepers were not kind of the people living in the area .
 16 missions were authorized by the Security Council between 1994 and 1998 . Major powers preferred un operations to the type of full-scale interventions they had no interest in . The Security Council continued to generate missions at a fast pace .
 Leaders in Kosovo, East Timor, Sierra Leone, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo reached peace agreements in 2007 . Kosovo leaders asked for the UN’s help in implementing them .
 Kofi Annan requested two major reviews of international intervention . Annan wanted to prevent new failures, so he requested the reviews .
 The Brahimi report was named after the Algerian diplomat who led the initiative . It detailed reforms to make peacekeeping more effective . The first resulted in a report by the Brahimi team .
 These reports, and the debates they launched, transformed the un’s approach to peacekeeping . These reports have transformed the way the UN has been approached by peacekeepers .
 No longer should peacekeepers merely monitor cease-fire lines passively . Peacekeepers no longer should be monitoring cease-fires passively . Instead, they must instead be monitoring the lines of the border .
 They should take a proactive stance, using military force to prevent combatants from perpetrating violence . Instead, they should use military force, preventing violence from occurring .
 To avoid another Rwanda or Bosnia, peacekeeping forces should have strong mandates and ample resources . Peacekeeping forces need strong mandates, ample resources, says U.N. envoy .
 Peacekeeping is now very different from what it was during the Cold War . Peacekeeping has become more difficult to maintain peacekeeping in the U.S.
 When the UN was created, in 1945, it was never intended to have its own fighting force . Instead of trying to try to create a force, the UN tried to find a way to get around .
 Since 1886 NYU’s Graduate School has prepared generations of global leaders . NYU's Graduate School prepares students for generations of leaders .
 The Progrann in International Relations offers a rigorous, multidisciplinary study of contemporary international affairs .
 Students in the M.A. program have access to a range of degree options with various technical and regional specializations . Scholars from GSAS, Arthur L Carter Journalism Institute, School of Law, Stern School of Business and Wagner Graduate School of Public Service .
 M.A. students also have the opportunity to study at NYU’s Washington, DC center and other locations . NYU's expansive global network includes M.I. students from around the world .
 Their duties have expanded to include reorganizing armies, protecting populations and arranging elections . Their duties include organizing armies to protect populations and organizing elections .
 UN missions now hire experts on development, gender, politics, economics, administration, justice, human rights, land-mine removal, elections, media, and communication . UN missions are now hiring experts on everything from development to politics and gender .
 In postwar East Timor and Kosovo, the UN even served as a de facto transitional government overseeing the new states’ functions . The UN has been involved in both countries’ post-Kosovo and East Timors .
 In the Central African Republic, Congo, and Mali, troops have ended up fighting rebel groups on the side of—or on behalf of--the government .
 Peacekeepers often fail to meet the high expectations set for them . Despite all these supposed improvements, today, just like 20 years ago, peacekeepers often don't meet expectations . Peacekeepers are still struggling to meet high expectations .
 Experts all use different definitions of success and thus arrive at different conclusions . Whether or not a mission can be considered a failure is a matter of interpretation .
 85 percent of operations have resulted in prolonged periods of peace or shortened periods of war . Michael Gilligan and Ernest Sergenti have calculated that 85 percent .
 UN troops reduce both battlefield deaths and civilian killings . UN troops are deployed in the United States to combat terrorism in the Middle East .
 Jeremy Weinstein discovered that 75 percent of civil wars in which the un intervened resumed within ten years of stopping . Jeremy Weinstein found that 75 per cent of the civil wars resumed within 10 years .
 Roland Paris analyzed 11 missions in depth and found that only two were able to build a sustainable peace . Roland Paris: Only two missions were successful in building peace in Afghanistan .
 Peacekeepers can't hold the Security Council responsible for all their shortcomings . Peacekeepers won't be held accountable for all the shortcomings of the council, says Peacekeepers .
 Peacekeeping deployments at the municipal level did not promote security or help restore local authority, a study shows . Peacekeepers did not help restore authority in Liberia, according to the study .
 Even the success stories tend to fall apart on closer inspection . Finally, even the stories of success stories fall apart .
 The mission in Cyprus began in 1964 and is often heralded for having reduced fighting between Greek and Turkish Cypriots . But it can hardly be called a triumph, and the mission is not a triumph .
 The island is divided in two, and political reunification looks almost as distant as it did 50 years ago . Political reunification is still a long way away, 50 years after independence .
 The 2004-6 operation in Burundi was credited with tamping down violence after years of civil war and helping the country transition to democracy . The operation is now the world's most successful peacekeeping operation .
 The bottom line is that un missions do help, sometimes, some extent, but they could do far better . "Un missions" missions help, but do not help, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 UN’s defenders rightly point out that peacekeepers have one of the hardest jobs in the world . Peacekeepers have a tough job, says UN's defenders . The UN says peacekeepers are the best of the world to keep on the cheap .
 They operate in places rife with ruthless militias, abusive armies, corrupt officials, and shabby infrastructure . They operate from the same places as militias, militias, and abusive armies .
 Instructions from the Security Council to support the host government further complicate their task . Rebels are less inclined to cooperate when they believe that the un is aiding the enemy .
 Peacekeepers are given precious few resources with which to accomplish their ambitious mandates . Great powers tend to care little about crises the un is sent to address, peacekeepers say . Peacekeepers have few resources to fulfill their mandates .
 At $7 billion annually, the UN peacekeeping budget may seem impressive . UN peacekeepers cost the United Nations nearly $8 billion a year .
 With it, the organization is expected to help resolve more than a quarter of all ongoing wars . But it equals less than 0.0 percent of global military spending .
 The main consequence is too few people on the ground, which makes it difficult for the un to even scratch the surface of its mandates . "The main consequence of the un is not being able to get to the ground," says the president .
 In Congo, the un mission’s gender office in the province of North Kivu, where sexual violence is pervasive, was staffed by one lone un volunteer for years .
 The number of soldiers is usually paltry given the size of the territories they’re supposed to monitor or pacify . Meanwhile, the number of un-soldiers is usually limited to a fraction of the soldiers .
 Compare that to the peak of the U.S. war in Afghanistan, when there was one foreign soldier per two square miles, or the United States itself, where there is one law enforcement officer per four square miles .
 Since the UN does not have its own pool of soldiers, it must rely on the goodwill of its member states to provide them . The UN has no pool of its own soldiers, but relies on its members' goodwill to provide it .
 Countries are reluctant to risk lives of their troops in conflicts in which they have no stake . UN often takes months for the UN to muster forces it needs to muster .
 When it finally does, it almost always ends up with poorly trained and poorly paid soldiers from developing countries . The U.S. has a long history of recruiting poorly trained soldiers from poor countries .
 These troops are often poorly equipped, too, too—forced to get by without helicopters and make do with outdated vehicles . They are often forced to rely on outdated vehicles and helicopters to get around .
 Their commanders report not just to the UN leadership but also to their own country’s chain of command . To make matters worse, their commanders report to the United Nations leadership .
 When they have to choose between fulfilling the UN mandate and avoiding casualties, they generally choose the latter . The UN says it has a duty to protect the Syrian people from harm .
 The Dutch commander of a peacekeeping battalion, outnumbered and outgunned, had his soldiers stand by as Serbian forces rounded up and killed some 8,000 Muslim men and boys .
 In the Central African Republic, Congo, and Somalia, they have engaged in torture . In the . Central African . Republic, . Congo, . Somalia, has engaged in . torture, they say . In . Central . African Republic .
 In Bosnia, Haiti, Kosovo, and Kosovo, they have been implicated in sex-trafficking rings .
 Over the past 12 years, the UN has received nearly 1,000 allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation by peacekeepers . In fact, over the past year, the U.N. has received more than 1,300 allegations of abuse and sexual exploitation by soldiers .
 Those who commit such horrible acts are a minority, but the bad apples have done grave harm to the UN’s reputation . The UN has been accused of a series of human rights violations in the past .
 Peacekeepers need more money, more logistical support, and more people, say peacekeepers . Peacekeepers say they need more people and more realistic instructions to ensure success .
 Peacekeepers can’t hold the Security Council responsible for all their shortcomings . Peacekeepers won't be held accountable for the shortcomings of the council, says U.N. envoy .
 Because they are the product of compromise, mandates are always vague, and they always need to be interpreted . Mandates are the result of compromise and must be interpreted, the author says . The mandate is always vague and vague .
 Even when powerful states and troop-contributing countries devote ample resources to a mission, the resulting efforts often fail . Besides, even when . powerful states . devote ample . resources to the mission, they often fail to achieve their objectives .
 The standard more harm than good in ending wars is to host large, costly conferences to strike agreements between governments and rebel leaders and then organize a national vote and declare victory . The standard of ending wars in the U.S. is to end wars by hosting large conferences and then organizing a
 The weakness of the top-down approach is that warfare is often the result of not just national or international competition but local competition, too, too . War is often a result of international and local competition .
 In many conflict zones, the fight is over such issues as land, water, livestock, and low-level traditional and administrative power . The fight is often over water, land and livestock .
 Tensions between President Salva Kiir and the former vice president and rebel leader Riek Machar fuel the current fighting . clan rivalries and countless spats between herders and farmers fuel the fighting in South Sudan .
 The problem is that pushing for a vote before a country is ready may do more harm than good . The un’s fixation on elections is to blame for the country's fixation with elections .
 Congo is the site of both the world’s deadliest conflict since World War II and the largest peacekeeping mission in the world . Both of these errors are on full display today in Congo, the world's deadliest conflict .
 It views elections, which Kabila has delayed for years, as a sort of cure-all . The government views elections as sort of a sort-all. It views the elections as a kind of cure all .
 Disputes often center on who will control neighboring land, the exploitation of local mining sites, or the traditional or administrative power over a village or a district . Disputes are often centered on who has control of neighboring land or exploitation of nearby mining sites .
 Tensions often result in localized fighting in one village or territory but often escalate into generalized conflict across a whole province . These tensions often spill over into neighboring countries and sometimes spill over to neighboring countries .
 Compounding these mistakes is the un’s overriding disdain for all things local . Compound these mistakes, the un has a disdain for local things, says CNN.com .
 Foreign management positions almost always go to foreigners, who usually have no in-depth knowledge of their host societies, cultures, or institutions . Subject-area experience is valued more than country expertise, experts say .
 Staff lack language skills to communicate with local people, or even with one another . Often, staff lack the language skills needed to speak with locals .
 In Cyprus, for example, few peacekeepers speak Greek or Turkish . The same is true for Arabic or Nuer in South Sudan, Albanian or Serbo-Croatian in Kosovo, and French or Haitian Creole in Haiti .
 Both the un’s military personnel and its civilian personnel live in fortified compounds and gather information mainly from elites . The un's military personnel are stationed in fortified compound .
 Sometimes, the result is that they thoughtlessly apply universal templates . Sometimes, they apply universal template. Sometimes, it's thoughtlessly applied universal templates.
 UN attempted similar initiatives in Haiti and South Sudan, where conditions were different, but they failed . For example, on seeing the success of so-called disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration programs in Burundi and Sierra Leone, the UN has seen similar initiatives fail
 By empowering the Congolese government and its army, the strategy actually led to an uptick in human rights violations, including sexual abuse, says Dr. Frida Ghitis . Ghitis: The strategy that emerged from this view led to a spike in sexual abuse in the Congo .
 The preponderance of foreign staff and foreign ideas also generates resentment among local partners . Foreign ideas also generate resentment among locals .
 In country after country, residents complain that peacekeepers are arrogant and demeaning . Peacekeepers live in lavish accommodations, drive fancy suvs, and spend far too much time relaxing and doing their jobs .
 They regularly disparage peacekeepers as neocolonial . Local media portray them as parasites at best and thugs at worst . Peacekeepers are portrayed as parasites by local media .
 In recent years, insiders and outsiders have attempted to change the standard UN approach . The UN has been criticized for its lack of transparency and transparency .
 Certain low-level staff and high-ranking leaders within field missions have tried to promote local conflict resolution .
 A 2015 independent review of peacekeeping, commissioned by the UN, emphasized the importance of customizing projects to each context .
 The un is largely paying lip service to the importance of these ideas instead of actually implementing them . Apart from a few marginal cases, however, the un is mostly paying lip .
 Peacekeeping is broken, but that doesn’t mean the world should give up on it . Peacekeeping should be a priority, says U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . U.S. President Barack Obama has declared peacekeeping a priority .
 In many conflict zones, peacekeepers are the only ones protecting populations against abuse by national armies and rebel groups . Peacekeepers are often only ones to protect populations from abuse by armies and rebels .
 There’s no alternative body or mechanism for reestablishing peace in conflict-stricken countries, says David Cameron . What's more, there's no alternative to the body of peace, he says .
 It has a cookie-cutter approach that begins with international best practices and tries to apply them to a local situation . It has been described as a 'cookie-cuter' approach to the international community .
 It should start with local realities and then create a customized strategy . Instead of local realities, the government should look at a customized approach .
 For inspiration, the un need only look to the pockets of peace that already exist in many war-torn places . For inspiration you need to look to areas of peace already exist, say experts .
 Since war broke out in Congo in 1996, Idjwi has avoided the brunt of the violence . Since then, other islands in nearby lakes have not suffered similar violence .
 Island's poorest and least powerful residents have set up grass-roots organizations to help resolve disputes . Religious networks, women’s associations, youth groups, and so on . Island residents, including the poorest, least powerful, set up organizations to resolve disputes.
 Includes round-trip airfare from anywhere in the US, food and lodging, and all program costs . Includes round trip airfare, food, lodging and all costs .
 All presentations provided by the highest level of professionals in their respective areas of expertise . All presentations were provided by a top level of professional professionals .
 It was two weeks of no-less-than perfect organization, logistics, learning, and hospitality . "It was no less than perfect organization," says author .
 Somaliland has reduced violence through a twin process of bottom-up peace building and state building . The autonomous region has relied on ordinary people and local leaders to help maintain its hard-won stability .
 In Colombia, residents have created a zone of peace in the middle of a region controlled by militias . Residents of the rural community of San Jose de Apartado have created the zone . The area is controlled by militia groups .
 Contrary to UN’s standard procedures, building peace doesn’t require billions of dollars in aid or massive international interventions . Building peace doesn't require billions in aid, it does not require massive international intervention . The United Nations says it is committed to building peace in Syria .
 The UN currently views such bottom-up peace-building efforts as a sideshow . The UN views such efforts as sideshow as a side-up issue .
 The U.S. should see them as an essential complement to its current top-down efforts to stop fighting . Instead, they should be seen as a complement to efforts to end the war, rather than just stop fighting.
 In practice, this means acknowledging that resolving local disputes is just as important as addressing broader issues . Peacekeepers must also address local disputes as well as broader issues, says Peacekeepers .
 Both at headquarters and on the ground, the un should create specialized offices or departments for bottom-up peacemaking . Staff them should staff them with experts in the analysis and resolution of grass-roots conflicts .
 This new staff, in turn, should produce guidelines and organize training for their colleagues . This is how they must produce guidelines, organize training and produce guidelines for new staff .
 The Security Council should also mandate that all missions support bottom-up peace building financially and logistically, the U.N. says . Security Council also should mandate that bottom up peace building financial and logistic .
 Leadership should emphasize to all staff members that doing so within their own areas of expertise, whether that be elections or gender, is mandatory . And the un leadership should emphasize .
 As peacekeepers seek to bolster local peace efforts, they must resist temptation to impose universal approaches . Peacekeepers must resist the temptation of imposing universal approaches to peacekeeping, says UN .
 Life and Peace Institute is a Swedish peace-building agency that grounds its actions in in-depth local expertise . They can take their cues from the Life & Peace Institute .
 In Congo, it relies heavily on local employees and does not implement projects directly . Instead of implementing projects directly, it works with handpicked on-the-ground organizations .
 These organizations empower ordinary citizens to come to their own conclusions about the causes of their communities’ conflicts, agree on the right solutions, and put them into practice . These organizations then empower ordinary people to come up with solutions .
 It’s not foreigners based in capitals and headquarters who conceive, design, and implement peace initiatives . The intended beneficiaries are the intended beneficiaries themselves, with an assist from outside organizations .
 When considering retention and promotion, it should value time spent in a given area more than the number of missions completed in dif_ ferent countries . Time spent in given area should be valued more than missions completed, it says .
 Foreigners should be hired only for positions for which no local person with the necessary skills can be found, or for those in which outsider status is an asset . For example, a recruiting post in which a local employee would face inordinate pressure to hire friends or family, a political job
 Even if the UN paid its local recruits a salary equivalent to that of its foreign staff, as it should, this measure would still save money . The UN currently spends a great deal on extras for foreigners, such as insurance premiums and hardship allowances .
 As things stand now, foreigners tend to make decisions, while local staff execute them . Foreign staff tend to take decisions, rather than execute them, in the case of a local government .
 This makes sense for diplomatic missions seeking to uphold their countries’ interests, it is a bad idea for an international organization whose main mandate is to promote peace . Although this makes sense . It is a good idea for a diplomatic mission to uphold its interests .
 Letting the intended beneficiaries of international intervention decide is all the more important when there are hard choices to make between two worthy goals . Letting democracy and peace is important for the sake of peace and justice, the author says .
 Far better to let those who have to live with the consequences of a decision be the ones making it. Far better than to let the decision be made, says the author .
 The UN should recognize the tradeoff between focusing on elections and addressing other pressing issues, such as poverty . UN should also recognize that focus on elections would come at the expense of other pressing sources of conflict, says Peter Bergen .
 If the demand truly exists for elections, they can be set up quickly, with the understanding that the risk of violence may grow . If that is true, they should be set-up quickly, but the risk may grow, too .
 The UN should put democracy on the back burner and apply its scarce resources toward solving those underlying causes of war . UN should apply scarce resources to solving the underlying cause of war, says Peter Bergen .
 The consequences of conflict rarely stay within national borders . A better way to deal with conflict is to prevent it from happening again .
 What initially looks like contained fighting can quickly destabilize vital regions . War creates a breeding ground for terrorists and illicit traffickers, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In many cases, calling on the blue helmets has become merely a convenient substitute for a serious grappling with what it would take to bring peace . Calling on blue helmets is not a necessary substitute for grappling with the issue of peace, it says .
 The same story repeats itself, whether in Bosnia, Congo, East Timor, Kosovo, Rwanda, Somalia, or South Sudan . South Sudan is one of the worst-hit countries in the world .
 After the outbreak of war, donor countries pledge millions of dollars in aid and ask the UN for help . Donations come from donor countries who ask for help in war-torn countries .
 Warring parties call for ceasefires, sign agreements, and hold elections . Eventually, the warring parties hold ceasefires and sign agreements .
 Emerging markets benefit from demographic dividend and rising spending power . Such GDP figures are not uncommon among emerging markets that benefit from a demographic dividend .
 The Philippines stands out as a star player in the ASEAN region because of its exceptional advantages, like its skilled workers . Thousands of Filipinos operate ships, fly planes and run hospitals across the world .
 The Philippines, an archipelago of more than 7,100 islands, cannot ignore geopolitical and economic movements in the region and beyond, for better or worse . With technology advancing rapidly, driving the world towards greater convergence and integration, the Philippines cannot ignore the world's technological advances .
 Many have accepted that liberal politics and globalization have not provided the vast majority with their expected benefits . The rise of populism around the world as seen in the Donald Trump election phenomenon and growth of Eurosceptic movement .
 Two years into the Duterte Administration, the Philippines appears to have diverged from familiar policies, particularly in the fields of politics and diplomacy, without abandoning its commitment to free market economics . The Philippines is committed to free markets and free markets, but not free trade .
 As a trade war rages between the U.S. and China, and the rising standard of living in China has resulted in higher labor costs . And as a growing labor costs rise in China, the cost of living has increased .
 Southeast Asian economies position themselves as alternative locations for manufacturing and assembling finished goods . Southeast Asia economies positioned themselves as alternatives to manufacturing .
 The benefits of economic growth in the Philippines have not been inclusive . The Philippines is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 The current administration enacted the first package of a tax reform law that cut the personal income tax rate for low earners and raised the rates for high earners . To correct that, the current administration .
 The main objective of the new tax law was to raise revenue for the government's ambitious, multi-billion dollar ""Build, Build, Build"" infrastructure program .
 Companies and investors have had to enlist the services of local law firms . Many go beyond advice on basic legal compliance but provide crossdisciplinary expertise and strong connections .
 Villaraza & Anganco has grown into a full-service law firm that has developed a deep and extensive knowledge of issues and challenges that face the business community in the Philippines . Founded in 1980, the law firm is now a fully-fledged law firm in Manila .
 As such, they are able to formulate strategies that help their clients surmount unfamiliar difficulties . As such they can formulate strategies to help them surmount difficulties .
 We look at our clients' problems not just from a purely legal point of view but also from a strategic point of . view, as we consider regulatory and administrative aspects, as well as legal and administrative . We are happy to clarify that we are not just looking at legal issues, but
 Navarro remains optimistic, despite the unexpected headwinds the Philippine economy is facing . Navarro: "Just like any market, there are some challenges. There are challenges," he said .
 The second package of this tax reform will reduce the corporate income tax rate and lessen fiscal incentives . The tax reform package will also reduce the corporation's tax rate .
 This will support the growth of local SMEs and affect businesses in export processing zones . It will support SMEs in the export processing zone . This will also help local businesses .
 In the Philippines, we're seeing growth in tourism all around the country . In the country, tourism is growing all over the Philippines . The Philippines is a tourist destination .
 "This is an area that is open for even more investment and development,"" he added .
 Philippine laws prohibit full foreign ownership in certain vital industries . Finding the right local partner is essential for international investors . Finding the right partner in the Philippines is essential .
 While it may appear to be a hindrance, this reguirement, in the long term, will encourage serious commitment to the national economy and local communities .
 Cruz, Marcelo & Tenefrancia has gained a reputation for being the go-to law firm for mustwin cases . The law firm has ironed out successful deals that have benefitted both the foreign investor and the local community .
 Law firms such as CMT play an important role in that we have helped companies, both big and small, navigate the local jungle .
 Without the right professional advice, issues can develop in later stages of the deal . Without the help of professionals, issues may develop later in stages of a deal .
 "As much as we would only like to present the advantages and possible benefits of coming to the Philippines, we also need to be upfront about the potential pitfalls,"" she also said .
 Higher levels of unpredictability usually accompany investment and financial commitments to emerging markets, say experts . "Unpredictable" is a sign of uncertainty for emerging markets .
 Right partners provide a predictable winning investment, securing excellent legal guidance and obtaining extensive due diligence . The right partners provide the right partners with the right legal guidance .
 U.S. President Donald Trump is the most prominent mercantilist of today . Update the language, and they could easily have been tweeted by him .
 Trump believes the U.S. “loses” when it runs trade deficits with other countries, he says . Trump says the United States "loses" when it trades with other nations .
 Their arguments have convinced virtually every economist ever since, but they seem to have made only limited inroads with the broader public . The arguments have been made by the authors of the book, The Economist .
 Polls show only tenuous public support for free trade and even less understanding of its virtues . Polls also show public support of free trade is tenuous, with little understanding of it .
 The idea of comparative advantage is counterintuitive . It holds that two countries can both benefit from trade even when one can produce everything more cheaply than the other .
 Defenders of free trade also have to contend with populist politicians and well-financed opponents . They find foreign workers and firms easy scapegoats for domestic economic woes .
 Worst of all, economists may be misunderstanding what most people value in the economy . Worst is that they may be fundamentally misunderstanding what people value most .
 After the Great Depression, a frightened world set out to build a new, stronger trading system . After the almost total breakdown of international trade during World War II, the world began building a new trade system . The new system was built in response to a series of restrictions on trade .
 U.S. policy was broadly internationalist and pro-trade when viewed from 30,000 feet . U.N. policy during the Cold War was pro-freezing period .
 The average tariffs levied by the U.S. have been falling since the Smoot-Hawley tariffs of the 1930s . The average tariff has been falling with only minor interruptions .
 Washington led the negotiations that resulted in the WTO and later the GATT . Washington led negotiations that led to the Gatt and WTO .
 When seen up close, U.S. trade policy looked rather more protectionist . The U.K. has been accused of being a protectionist in recent years .
 The agreement marked a huge step toward freer trade in the Western Hemisphere . That agreement marked the first step toward a free trade agreement .
 There are still many Mexican farmers who can’t export their tomatoes to the U.S. because of quotas, for example . There are also many Mexican truckers who can't drive their cargoes across the United States border .
 Both Democratic and Republican leaders backed freer trade until recently . Despite these limitations, both Democrats and Republicans have long backed free trade .
 During the 2016 presidential campaign, President Donald Trump's protectionist outcries shocked many observers . Many observers saw them as far outside the mainstream .
 Republican members of Congress have seemed to go along with Trump’s attacks on trade, and he seems to have paid little or no political price for them .
 Most Americans’ belief in free trade is a mile wide but an inch deep . Trump was able to push so many Americans into sixteenth-century thinking because most Americans believe in freetrade .
 Polls show that the level of support depends on what is meant by “free trade,” how the question is posed, and when it is asked . Polls also show that support for free trade depends on how it is posed and when asked .
 Taken in isolation, the phrase ‘free trade’ seems to meet Americans belief in free trade . With approval, for example, a poll . *77 by NBC and The Wall Street Journal tS U Iflilc Wldc uUt dfl in February 2017 asked
 Put any mention of jobs into the question, and the results for international trade get even worse . Put the question into question, the results of international trade in the U.S. get worse .
 29 percent thought trade created jobs and 48 percent thought it destroyed them . Among the others, 29 percent said trade created job creation .
 The most obvious reason is that comparative advantage is counterintuitive . It just doesn't sound right, but it's counterintuitive to say 'compatitiveness'
 The notion that demand declines and supply increases as prices rise makes intuitive sense . The idea that demand decline and supply increase as prices go up makes sense .
 Adam Smith’s concept of the invisible hand—the idea that decentralized markets produce a dazzling variety of goods and services efficiently and get them into the hands of the consumers who want them . The invisible hand is a concept of Adam Smith's idea of distributing goods efficiently and getting them into
 Country A can produce every product more cheaply than Country B, thanks to its lower wages or to its greater efficiency . Country B produces more cheaply because of its higher wages or efficiency, or because it is more efficient .
 Ricardo argued that it’s the former, as each country exploits its comparative advantage by specializing in producing different goods . Ricardo argues that it's the former . Ricardo: Each country exploits their comparative advantage to produce more goods .
 Country B can specialize in producing what it is least bad at, and then the two countries can trade to their mutual advantage . The two countries should be able to trade to each other's mutual advantage.
 My economics students have to listen patiently for 50 minutes while I explain comparative advantage and rebut the arguments against it . "My economics students must listen patiently to 50 minutes," he says .
 Lack of understanding is not the only reason for public skepticism about the virtues of trade, it says . Yet lack of understanding also contributes to skepticism about trade trade, he says .
 Some people may understand the theory tolerably well but still have good reasons to oppose trade openings . Some people still oppose the idea of free trade .
 Elementary trade theory shows that every move toward freer trade creates both winners and losers, just like almost any economic change . Every move toward free trade creates winners, losers .
 That other Americans— automakers and their employees, say, are winners from that same trade will be little consolation . That Americans are winners will not be able to say that .
 The theory of comparative advantage holds that the gains from trade to the nation as a whole exceed the losses of trade . The theory is based on comparative advantage .
 U.S. has failed to do anything remotely close to that. But successive administrations, like governments of other countries, have failed to . It's time for the United States to take action against the problem .
 Trade Adjustment Assistance offers people who have lost their jobs to foreign competition money for retraining and extra income while they are unemployed . The program is offered to help people with retraining or extra income .
 Taa is poorly funded, hard to access, and reaches few displaced workers . But taa is well-funded, hard-accessed and reaches many displaced workers, it says .
 This attitude, although understandable, creates an insuperable barrier to creating a better policy . This attitude is understandable, but it creates a barrier to improving policy, he says .
 A pro-labor program that organized labor won’t support will get nowhere politically, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: Pro-union programs that labor won't support won't get anywhere politically .
 The way the gains and losses from trade liberalization are distributed makes the politics of trade agreements even more difficult . The way of trade liberalizing is distributed makes it more difficult to deal with trade .
 The losses, by contrast, are concentrated, are highly visible, and hit well-defined groups . The losses are concentrated and highly visible .
 When it comes to totting up these gains and losses, the economic calculus virtually always favors freer trade . But the political calculus often does not apply to free trade in the U.S.
 The gains and losses are the same, but the economics and the politics place enormously different weights on them . The economy and politics place enormous weights on each other, says CNN's John Sutter .
 No individual sugar buyer will be moved to political action to save a few dollars a year . But no individual sugar buyers will be affected by the move . The sugar industry will not change its stance on the issue .
 The quotas may be the only thing standing between its firms and extinction and between its workers and unemployment . The quotas are the only things standing between them and extinction . It is not only the quotas are standing between firms and their workers .
 To them, it is worth going to the political mat to preserve quotas . To them they are worth it to preserve the quotas .
 There will always be firms and workers who are hurt by trade and clamor for protection . But there is always a need for protection, and there will be more protection for workers .
 Economists and other supporters of free trade are not the only salespeople, they say . What’s more, economists and other free trade supporters aren’t the most vocal supporters of trade .
 Interested sophistry did not end in 1776, when that book was published . Interest interest in sophistry didn't end when it was published, when the book was written .
 In fact, modern mass communication and lobbying-based democratic politics have made it more powerful than ever . Modern mass communication has made it even more powerful, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 People are constantly being hurt by economic changes beyond their control . In the hurly-burly of a modern economy, people are constantly hurt by changes beyond control .
 If it can't be traced directly to government actions, there will be political hell to pay . Politicians know it, and politicians know it .
 Free trade is the natural state of affairs, even if most people don't realize it . After all, free trade is free trade, even though most don’t realize it, it’s not surprising .
 If governments didn’t erect barriers at borders, goods and services would flow freely across them, says John Defterios . If governments don't erect barriers, goods would flow free across borders, he says .
 This natural trade constantly creates winners and losers, without any government action . This is without government action. This is a natural trade that creates winners, losers, and creates winners .
 In order to make it through Congress, trade agreements need political backing . Trade agreements need to be approved by both parties in order to pass .
 By treating higher exports as the main goal, it adds political heft to mercantilist attitudes . First, by treating exports as an export target, it gives political clout . Second, it makes it easier to make the case for higher exports to be exported .
 Second, it strengthens the left’s image of free trade as part of the corporate agenda, it says . It strengthens the idea that free trade is part of a free trade agenda, he says .
 Before Trump, protectionist sentiment in the United States came mainly from Democrats . But before Trump, it was mainly from the Democrats, it came from Republicans .
 There’s a striking difference between the failure of the Luddites and the enduring allure of mercantilism . Luddite workers smashed mechanical weavers in England, but mercantillism survived .
 Technology and trade seem to occupy very different places in the public mind . Tech and trade occupy different parts of the public's minds, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Despite sporadic fears of robots, it is hard to find anyone today who advocates blocking technological progress on the grounds that it will cost jobs . But despite sporadic fears, there are no fears that robots will take over jobs .
 Job losses caused by technological advances are shrugged off as inevitable, part of the price of progress . Rather than being blamed for job losses, job losses are shrug-off as inevitable . Job losses are seen as inevitable as part of progress, rather than the cost of technology .
 Job losses due to trade are blamed on specific villains, and people try to prevent them . But job losses are often attributed to specific villains . People try to protect themselves from job losses .
 Economists see technological improvements and freer trade as similar in their effects . Freer trade is similar to technological improvements in the United States .
 Both offer higher living standards to the majority at the expense of job displacement for the minority . They both offer . higher living . standards . for the majority .
 Improvements in technology, moreover, have been prime drivers of expanded international trade . Improvements to technology have led to increased trade in the world .
 Most people see no contradiction in supporting technological advances while opposing freer trade . But most people don't see a contradiction in opposing free trade, they see it .
 Unlike Silicon Valley, foreign exporters have no representatives in Congress and make convenient scapegoats for demagogues such as Trump . Foreign exporters are not represented in Congress .
 Economists see the central goals of an economic system as producing goods and services at the lowest possible cost and distributing them to the people who want them . Economists say the goal is producing goods at the cheapest possible cost .
 The well-being of producers is secondary—if it enters the picture at all . Producers say they want to focus on the well being of producers, not their well being .
 In the economists’ vision, firms exist to serve the ultimate goal of consumer welfare . In the economist’s vision, they aim to create an environment for consumers to be happy .
 Work is something people do to earn the income they need to support their consumption . People do it to earn money to support consumption . Work is a vital part of the economy in the United States .
 "It is not an end in itself, nor a direct source of satisfaction or self-worth," says the author . "It's not an ending in itself. It's not a source of self-esteem or satisfaction," she says .
 The interests of producers, including the value people get from their jobs, count for little or nothing in standard economic calculus . Producers' interests, including people's jobs, are important to the economy, experts say .
 Work is scored as a negative—something people dislike and do only to support their consumption . In fact, work is a negative, according to the study . Work is not only a negative but a positive thing, it's something people dislike .
 Economists have been barking up the wrong tree for more than two centuries . That would mean economists were barking up a wrong tree, economists say . Economists are wrong to think economists are wrong .
 Maybe the public sees the central goal of an economic system as providing well-paid jobs, not producing cheap goods . Maybe the goal is to provide well paid jobs not to produce cheap goods, not to make cheap ones .
 Economists have been making the pitch for centuries . That seems to be a harder sell and, in any case, is not the pitch economists have made .
 A 2016 Bloomberg poll asked Americans whether they would pay a little more for domestically produced merchandise . Americans would pay more for domestic produced goods, the poll found .
 A Quinnipiac poll that same year posed a similar question, asking respondents whether they supported renegotiating trade deals, even if that meant paying higher prices .
 Maybe consumers would not be willing to shell out more to buy domestic rather than foreign goods . Maybe consumers are not willing to pay more for foreign goods, says CNN.com .
 After all, they frequent Walmart and other big retailers where imports line the shelves . After all of them frequent Walmart, they often buy imports .
 Even if attitudes that show up in polling don’t have much effect on how people shop, those attitudes may still resonate with politicians . But even if the attitudes are not shown in polling, they may still resonant with politicians, they still resonate .
 There aren't any quick fixes to the problem of selling free trade to the public . There are some things economists and policymakers can and should do that might soften the opposition to free trade at the margins .
 Washington should devote more money to the taa program, make it simpler and easier to access . Washington should also boost efforts to get displaced workers into new jobs, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Right now, taa is a bureaucratic maze to navigate—and underfunded to boot . Right now it's a bureaucracy to navigate and underfunded .
 Economists could also try to tie trade closer to technology in people’s minds . Economists are also trying to tie the trade to technology .
 The hope here is that hammering home the similarities between the two might generate some innocence by association . The hope is that there will be an innocent by association.
 Online shopping is just the latest technological innovation that spurs trade . If the goods are made abroad, online shopping will be a big part of the global trade .
 Such a campaign probably wouldn't work, but it wouldn’t cost much to try . It wouldn't cost a lot to try, but there's a chance to try.
 It would cost even less to get economists to stop using the dismissive term ‘transition costs’ to refer to job losses from trade .
 A 55-year-old steelworker loses his job in Ohio won’t find solace in the fact that new jobs are popping up in aircraft manufacturing in Seattle . The new jobs come from aircraft manufacturing .
 These are all things economists and policymakers can do, although it's not clear if they would work . It is not clear whether they would help the economy .
 Sadly, there is a longer, and much more important, list of things that probably can’t be changed . Sadly, it is not the only thing that can be changed in the world of politics .
 The principle of comparative advantage really is counterintuitive and therefore hard to sell to a public that has many other demands on its attention . The public has a lot of other demands to do with its attention, says David Frum .
 The political calculus really is inherently biased against freer trade, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the political calculus is biased against free trade .
 Politicians who vote for trade agreements can’t avoid taking the blame for any losses that result . Politicians must take responsibility for the losses they result from trade agreements .
 For centuries, demagogues have blamed foreigners for domestic woes . They aren’t going to stop anytime soon. Demagogues will continue to blame foreigners for problems .
 If consumers care more about good jobs than cheap goods, the standard arguments for trade won’t persuade them . And most fundamental, if consumers don't care for good jobs, the argument for trade is not strong enough .
 Economists should feel lucky that international trade is not in even worse shape than it already is . International trade is already in a bad shape, economists say .
 President Donald Trump is finding the vast U.S. government to be both an instrument of and a barrier to the implementation of policies that he desires . Elliott Abrams: President Trump's first term is now at the halfway mark of his first term .
 President Barack Obama has been in office since 2009 . He has a history of his struggles with the White House . Obama's administration has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 A White House visitor once presented a proposal to President John F Kennedy . As the diplomat Charles Frankel recalled in his memoir, the proposal was presented to the president .
 The distinction between the president and the government is not a product of the Trump era, but it has become one of the administration’s defining characteristics . It has become a defining characteristic for the administration .
 Rhetorically, the president has often squarely rejected the U.S. foreign policy consensus of recent decades . The president often rejects the United States foreign policy .
 He has questioned the United States’ commitment to allies in Asia and Europe . He has fumed about wars in the Middle East, and lauded the leaders of Washington’s geopolitical rivals .
 Although Trump’s pronouncements have ruffled feathers, his policy has been marked more by continuity than by change . His administration has been consistent with continuity than change, the White House says .
 The United States remains in NATO, thousands of U.S. troops are still deployed throughout the Middle East . Washington is pursuing a hard line against China and Russia .
 In part, it may be the result of an intentional ploy by a president who thrives on chaos—a good cop . The good cop may be a good cop in the White House, but he thrives in chaos .
 ELLIOTT ABRAMS is Senior Fellow for Middle Eastern Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations . Abrams is a senior fellow member of the Council of Foreign Relations and author of a book on Middle Eastern affairs .
 He served in senior National Security Council and State Department positions in the Reagan and Bush administrations .
 Trump’s opponents may applaud this internal resistance, but it brings with it problems of its own . The U.S. is uncertain as to where the United States really stands .
 When foreign states cannot predict what mix of Trump’s objectives and U.S. goals will ultimately be translated into policy . allies will be slow to support U. States initiatives and enemies may take chances that Washington would have led them to avoid .
 There is a long history of conflict between U.S. presidents and the United States government . The White House and the White House have been at odds for years .
 In 1977, President Jimmy Carter announced his intention to follow through on a campaign promise to withdraw U.S. troops from South Korea . Despite widespread resistance to the move at the CIA and the Department of Defense, the decision was made .
 The pattern is familiar, and it is limited neither to the United States nor to democracies, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The pattern of this is familiar and familiar, but it's not limited to the U.S. nor democracies .
 Trump called for an end to the war in Afghanistan in 2013 . In 2013, he tweeted, “Let’s get out of Afghanistan. Let's get out,” he tweeted .
 The clearest example of the gap between the president and the government is the U.S. policy on Russia policy .
 Trump has often praised Russian President Vladimir Putin and expressed a desire for improved relations with Moscow . Trump has publicly supported Russian positions in the past .
 Russia was kicked out of the G-8 in 2014 for annexing Crimea . The G-7 leaders met in Canada for the first time since Crimea was annexed .
 U.S. troops are in northern Poland participating in the largest special forces training exercise in recent memory . Trojan Footprint is “the largest nato special forces exercise in . recent memory” in the words of a Washington Post columnist .
 The divide between the president's words and his administration’s actions raises the question . The question is whether there is a real difference between words and actions .
 The president has a Hobbesian worldview and is skeptical of allowing international commitments and diplomatic pleasantries to stand in the way of pursuing U.S. national interests .
 This runs counter to the instincts of most career diplomats, military officers, and analysts, who see alliances as the very heart of U.S. power and influence . This is not the first time the United States has taken a decision to pull away from alliances .
 The resulting tension within the administration is often on public display . The resulting tensions between the White House and the administration are often public .
 Trump’s conflict with the government reflects a populist impulse to represent the views of voters who feel left behind by an out-of-touch elite . In some cases, Trump's conflict with government reflects his populist impulse .
 Trump has bucked the bipartisan consensus by criticizing “unfair’s deals, imposing tariffs . Trump has threatened to impose tariffs on the world's largest trade deals .
 Most in Washington agree that the global trading order has greatly benefited the U.S. But there are millions of Americans it has harmed . Millions of Americans have been harmed by the order .
 They rightly believe that their concerns have been ignored by the great and the good in government, at universities, and on Wall Street, they say . They say they are disappointed that they have not been heard by the good and good .
 Trump channeled popular frustrations about the cost of U.S. alliances . Trump has similarly channeled public frustrations about cost of alliances .
 At nato’s July 2018 summit in Brussels, he reportedly threatened to leave the alliance un_ less the Europeans stepped up their spending hetween the deiense spending .
 The rhetoric p't'^Stdent S WOVuS UTld htS resonates with Americans who recogudtflinistfCltion’s dCtioHS nize that alliances are critical for y^^ises the question, What is
 As rich a country as Germany, it spends only 1. percent of its gdp on defense, compared with the United States’ 3. percent . Germany, for example, spends 1.1 percent of gDP on defense .
 Many of Trump's positions fall well within the Republican and, indeed, the United States foreign policy mainstream . Despite Trump’s unorthodox rhetoric, many of his positions fall within the GOP and U.S. foreign policy .
 Robert Gates, who served as secretary of defense under Presidents George W Bush and Barack Obama, warned of “a dim if not dismal future” for nato unless Europeans spent more .
 Trump has been criticized for his friendly relations with enemies, including Putin, North Korea’s Kim Jong Un, and Chinese President Xi Jinping . Such outreach was celebrated when Obama made similar overtures to Cuba and Iran . Obama has also made such overtures .
 Despite stating his desire to disengage from what he sees as endless and unproductive wars, he has kept U.S. troops in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria .
 His administration’s official foreign policy documents, including the 2017 National Security Strategy and the 2018 National Defense Strategy, reflect the Republican consensus .
 His supporters say he is merely trying to right imbalances that have built up over recent decades . Where he diverges, supporters claim, is merely in his push to right certain imbalance .
 NATO allies have led to real accomplishments, including better defense spending and better trade deals with South Korea . North American Free Trade Agreement and a better trade deal with South Korean have also been key to success .
 Trump’s style has provoked enraged criticism from the self-proclaimed resistance, which treats every minor breach of protocol as a prelude to the apocalypse . Most of the mainstream media and nearly all elected Democrats have criticized the president's style .
 There is far more continuity, and far more success, in the current administration's foreign policy than Trump’s critics will ever acknowledge . But if one looks past the hysteria, the argument goes, there is more continuity .
 In many cases, animosity toward the president has precluded balanced policy analysis . President Obama's administration has been criticized for its policies .
 Many of the attacks on Trump are exaggerated, and the media spectacle surrounding his presidency has done little to illuminate his strengths and weaknesses of his administration . Trump's administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Criticism of the president should ideally come from those who sympathize with Trump and his policies . There are of course such weaknesses, but constructive criticism should come from people who want to see them succeed . The president's policies should be seen as a model for success, but there are many
 Trump administration has been unable to find and retain qualified staff, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The administration's real problems are finding qualified staff .
 As a result, the administration has struggled to employ qualified and effective implementers of Trump’s foreign policy vision .
 The White House has been slow to fill vacancies and has often had to rely on acting officials who are veterans of the establishment and oppose the president’s worldview .
 His leadership style seems to assume that bureaucratic conservatism and even resistance come with the territory . He also assumes that even resistance comes with the .
 In such a system, the loyalty and skill of officials are especially critical . The loyalty of those officials is especially critical in the United States .
 Staffing problems have, in turn, exacerbated the danger of unpredictability, say officials . Staffing has been a problem for the government for years .
 No one knows whether officials at various levels of the administration are implementing a version of Trump’s orders or ignoring his preferences . Neither U.S. officials nor foreigners can be sure where United States policy stands or where it will end up .
 Trump administration’s support for nato has in many ways been quite strong, but such comments may cause Montenegro and other NATO members, not to mention Putin, to wonder how the president would react in a crisis .
 This unpredictability is fed by a sense that Trump does not see the United States’ alliances as the enormous assets that they are . Trump's unpredictability feeds a sense of a sense he doesn't see the U.S. alliances as an asset, he says .
 If U.S. policy came to reflect that view consistently, no amount of bureaucratic resistance could prevent those alliances eroding from eroding . That would be hard to repair .
 As Mattis suggested in his speech to the Naval War College, alliances are the foundation of U.S. security . The alliance is one of the chief features that distinguishes the United States from China, Iran, and Russia .
 It is perfectly appropriate for President Obama to take a tougher line in trade negotiations, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says it's appropriate for him to take tougher line, especially given support among blue-collar Americans .
 Not every bilateral relationship must show a positive trade balance every year . But not every single bilateral trade balance must show positive trade balances every year.
 Trump himself has stated that his tariffs are tools for getting fairer deals, not ends in themselves . His success in renegotiating nafta is evidence that his more aggressive line can work .
 U.S. should work with partners such as Canada, Japan, and EU to force China to play by the rules, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond says the president's approach would be more productive than bilateral negotiations .
 If Trump can use huge tariffs to win Chinese concessions on trade and investment, he will have won a significant victory . Whether acting alone or in a coalition, it will be a significant win for the president .
 Trump has still not grasped that enormous benefits come from having a moral foundation for U.S. foreign policy . Trump has not grasped the benefits of having moral grounds for foreign policy, says Julian Zelizer .
 He has too often acted as if the U.S. were merely one nation among many, out solely to maximize its wealth and power . He has acted as though the United States was merely one country among many .
 The world’s most powerful country needs to uphold a global system that condemns, and tries to prevent, some forms of aggressive conduct and growing tyranny . Yet the world's most powerful . country must uphold a . global system of condemning aggressive conduct . and trying to prevent tyranny .
 Washington’s opponents recognize that the spread of democracy is in the United States’ interest . They try to subvert democracy when and where they can, writes Julian Zelizer . Washington's opponents clearly recognize that democracy is the U.S. interest, he says .
 Trump has sometimes indicated his own support for democracy and human rights . He has sometimes criticized the abysmal human rights records of Cuba, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela .
 President appears to have senior advisers he fully trusts . He did not assemble the current team until Bolton arrived in April 2018 . Now, for the first time, the president appears to be fully trusted .
 The number of vacancies on the National Security Council staff and at the State Department is slowly but steadily falling . It is possible that during the second half of Trump’s term, the gap between the president and the government will shrink .
 Trump’s views on U.S. troop commitments, for instance, have already shown an evolution toward the government's stance .
 He will always try to extract the last ounce of U.S. advantage from allies as well as opponents . He will not abandon the rhetoric that got him elected and that so alarms his critics at home and abroad .
 If no new problems arise in the next two years, he will be able to show U.S. voters that his foreign policy did not lead to war or defeat .
 He will be able to argue that the gains of a more aggressively nationalist stance outweigh its costs . Furthermore, he will argue that a more aggressive stance outweighs the costs .
 His critics will face the difficult task of convincing Americans that the costs of Trump’s foreign policy, many of them intangible, were high .
 Critics’ refusal to weigh Trump’s foreign policy fairly and their focus on his rhetoric and personality make it unlikely to happen . That is a debate worth having, but the critics’ failure to weigh it fairly makes it extremely unlikely .
 A more nuanced argument about the president will have to await his departure from office two— or, perhaps more likely, six—years from now . The president will be leaving office in 2016 .
 Given the anxiety about President Donald Trump and what his administration might do, it was something to be grateful for . But given the anxiety over what he might do—pull out of NATO, start a war with Iran or North Korea .
 In fact, Trump’s first two years in office have been marked by a surprising degree of stability . Trump's presidency has been marked with surprising stability .
 Remarkably, however, those shortcomings have not yet translated into obvious disaster . The government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 The surface-level calm of the last two years should not distract from a building crisis of U.S. foreign policy . Trump is both a symptom and a cause of the problem, writes Julian Zelizer .
 The president has outlined a deeply misguided foreign policy vision that is distrustful of U.S. allies, scornful of international institutions, and indifferent to the liberal international order that the United States has sustained for eight decades .
 The push for a U.S. retreat from the world did not begin with the president and will not end with his exit . One can and should hope that the forces that have constrained Trump so far will continue to limit the damage of his remaining years .
 Although the worst has not come to pass, the president’s foreign policy has been curious and in some ways disturbing . President's foreign policy is curious and disturbing .
 On trade, his administration blew up the North American Free Trade Agreement . He replaced it with the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement . It includes somewhat better terms for American dairy farmers .
 Trump began a steadily mounting trade war with China while intensifying U.S. complaints about intellectual property theft . China has increasingly aggressive interactions between Chinese forces and United States warships in the South China Sea .
 Trump’s diplomacy with U.S. rivals has been similarly erratic, but here, too, the damage so far has been limited . Trump's diplomacy with United States rivals is similarly erratic .
 On North Korea, Trump dials back his initial threats to unleash “fire and fury” and abruptly shifts toward placating the regime . Trump dialed back initial threats on North Korea on Tuesday .
 On Iran, Trump reversed the Obama administration’s more accommodating policy . Trump pulled out of the nuclear deal with Iran in May 2018 and hit Tehran with a barrage of financial sanctions .
 The government has continued with a confrontational policy despite the president’s friendly rhetoric . And on Russia, the government continues to be confrontational .
 U.S. relations with some allies, especially those in Europe, have been strained, but those with others have continued unimpaired . United States relations with NATO allies have remained strong, but relations with others are strained .
 The U.S. has grown closer to India and strengthened relations with Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates .
 Israel denied entry to young Americans affiliated with the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions movement . The rightwing government of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu could not be happier with the U.S. administration .
 U.S. campaigns against Taliban in Afghanistan, Islamic State in Iraq and Syria carry on apace . Obama administration has little change from Obama administration, with little change .
 In April 2018, when asked what he wanted to do with United States troops in Syria, Trump said, “I want to get out,” but then he reversed course . Today over 2,000 United States soldiers remain in the country, with an eye toward countering Iranian influence
 There is an idea behind Trump’s foreign policy but not a concept of geopolitics . There is a plan or set of priorities based on calculation and reflection . Trump's foreign policy is based on calculations and reflection, says Julian Zelizer .
 The U.S. has picked fights with China and Russia, but also with allies such as Canada, Mexico, and the eu . Under his leadership, the United States has picked a fight with China, Russia and other allies .
 His hopes of denuclearizing North Korea and resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict strike most observers as quixotic . Most observers say his hopes of solving Israel-Palestine conflict and denuclearising North Korea are unlikely .
 His policy seems driven by sporadic fits of belligerence or enthusiasm, unrelated to any coherent set of objectives or methods for achieving them . The UK's foreign policy seems to be driven by erratic fits of aggression or enthusiasm .
 On many questions of substance, the Trump administration has kept U.S. foreign policy more or less intact . Yet, erratic though it is, it has kept United States foreign policy in the past .
 The crisis of U.S. foreign policy has been a long time in the making, and it will last beyond Trump . The crisis is a long-time crisis that has been long-lasting and will last well beyond Trump's presidency .
 Insider accounts of the administration should be taken with a grain of salt, but they paint a consistent picture . Insider accounts are taken with grain of the salt but are consistent with what the administration says .
 It is unsurprising that a man who gets most of his news from television cannot get a grip on the vast complexity of the U.S. government .
 Trump faces unprecedented opposition from within his own administration . The president's administration faces unprecedented resistance from within the White House .
 This opposition has only grown as Trump has replaced his initial cadre of advisers . This opposition to the president has grown as he has replaced advisers .
 John Bolton and John D. Bolton are both more familiar with Washington than their predecessors and more adept at telling the president what he wants to hear . Bolton and D.C. officials are both familiar with the president's circle of power .
 Both candidates hold views of foreign policy that are not wildly distant from those of establishment Republicans . They just take care not to rub them in Trump’s face .
 Trump lavishes praise on Russian President Vladimir Putin and then more or less goes along with the hard line pushed by his subordinates . Trump has been criticized for his praise of Putin .
 Another explanation is that foreign leaders, like Trump’s officials, have learned to manipulate the president . Another explanation for the administration's continuity with past administrations is foreign leaders .
 Polish President Andrzej Duda proposed establishing a permanent U.S. base on Polish soil and naming it “Fort Trump” The suggestion is appealing for a United States president who likes to plaster his name on buildings .
 French President Emmanuel Macron has impressed Trump by inviting him to the sort of military parades he would like to throw in the U.S. The French president has invited him to a military parade in the US .
 North Korea’s Kim has flattered Trump by writing him warm personal letters . North Korea's Kim wrote a warm personal letter to the president .
 Trump has also benefited from the continuing recovery of the U.S. economy, which has defused much of the anxiety that his trade wars might have otherwise provoked .
 The months and months of a booming stock market, low unemployment, and consistent growth have not only deflected attention from Trump’s erratic behavior on the world stage . They have also given the president leverage .
 It was always possible that a sufficiently aggressive U.S. president could bully Canada and Mexico into renegotiating nafta . Given the relative sizes of the three economies, the relative size of three economies is possible .
 Trump himself may not get enough credit for his tactical circumspection . The president may get credit for being cautious in his strategic moves .
 He has expressed his desire to pull out of not just Syria but Afghanistan and Iraq . He has been hesitant to use military force .
 He reportedly toyed with the idea of a military intervention in Venezuela . The Venezuelan leader was quickly talked out of it .
 He clearly does not want a war on the Korean Peninsula; if anything, he wants to be the president who finally ends the Korean War . If anything, it would be President Obama .
 Trump has evaded genuine hazards throughout his life, which may also explain his failure to visit U.S. troops in war zones . As a real estate developer, Trump's business career was built on heavy borrowing . Trump has avoided genuine hazards through his life .
 The short-term damage of Trump’s first two years has, thankfully and against all odds, been less than what many feared, many feared . Trump's administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 In the long term, however, his malign influence will not be escaped so easily . In the short term, he may not be able to escape so easily, but he will still be influential .
 Obama's antics and rhetoric have undermined U.S. credibility, he said . "For one thing, he has undermined United States credibility," he added .
 A 2018 survey by the Pew Research Center polled respondents in 25 countries . The international public places more faith in Macron and Merkel relative to Trump . Putin and Xi Jinping are seen as more popular than Trump, according to the survey .
 To a stunning degree, the Trump administration has diminished the sense of U.S. constancy that has been indispensable to the postwar liberal order . The administration has also diminished a sense of United States constancy, the author says .
 The effects of that lost credibility are intangible for now, but they will become manifest in the event of a crisis . U.S. allies do not answer a call for help or, worse, choose to appease or accommodate rival powers such as China and Russia .
 If U.S. Special Counsel Robert Muellers investigation into possible collusion between the Trump campaign and Russia ends with credible accusation against the president or one of his family members, it will mean a domestic political crisis with spillover effects on foreign policy .
 There are also uncertainties of the world, such as terrorist attacks, military escalations, nuclear tests, and the like . "There are also the sheer uncertainties of world," says author .
 Such incidents have surprised presidents in the past, and they might surprise this one, too . President Barack Obama has a history of surprises in the White House .
 Even if the Trump administration is not hit with an international crisis or a devastating domestic scandal, it does not bode well for the future of U.S. foreign policy . Trump’s presidency is not well for foreign policy, but for reasons having less to do with his concrete
 Behind the chaos of the administration lies a more or less unified vision . Behind the day-to-day chaos, there is a unified vision, says White House aide .
 He opposed global governance, prosperity to bad deals that cheat the U.S., and national pride to universalistic visions of humanity . Patriotism he opposed was opposed to global governance .
 What's most dangerous about Trump’s worldview is not its incoherent or erratic elements but its coherent and consistent ones, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The appeal of the president and his populist supporters is not limited to his right-wing populist supporters . Trump's worldview is
 Trump believes most U.S. interventions abroad have been costly and stupid . He believes the United States should focus on nation building at home . Trump believes that most of America's interventions abroad are costly .
 Obama administration's emphasis on “leading from behind” allowed the present disaster in Syria to unfold . Obama administration had a gentler touch than the current one, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In other hands, Trump’s foreign policy vision would amount to a doctrine, one in which the U.S. is merely one great power among others . Trump's vision could amount to something like a doctrine in other hands .
 In this view, Washington should pursue its own interests, stand for freedom chiefly at home and only intermittently abroad . Washington should reject as a matter of principle the international organizations that previous generations of U.S. leaders so carefully built .
 Trump is unlikely to change his views while in office; indeed, he seems positively incapable of doing so . Trump is likely to be the president of the United States .
 At best, the U.S. can expect two or six more years of fecklessness, in which the country is erratic, unfocused, economically aggressive, and indifferent to the international norms and institutions that it helped create . That means, at best, that the United States can expect
 Some of the president’s early critics of a nuclear war conjured up by some of his early critics . That's not nearly as bad as some of the chimera of a nuke war .
 The more disturbing sign for the future, however, is that although Trump has made nearly every aspect of U.S. foreign policy worse, he is not the sole cause of the United States’ erratic, shortsighted, and selfish behavior .
 He has merely accelerated a trend that was already developing by the time he took office . Washington’s retreat from its global responsibilities will outlast him, he says .
 World War II was a world-historical event that revolutionized U.S. foreign policy and shaped its course for most of the twentieth century . This trend is only likely to continue, since its roots lie not in passing political events but in the extinction of the living memory of World
 The generation of American statesmen that shaped the postwar order had learned some hard lessons from the war . The generation had learned a lot from the lessons of the war, the historian says .
 They learned from their experience with imperial Japan, Nazi Germany, and, later, the Soviet Union that it was incumbent on free nations to stand up to ideologies and governments hostile to individual freedom . The U.S. should stand up against ideologies that threaten individual freedom, they say .
 They learned from the Great Depression and the economic nationalism of the 1930s that beggar-thy-neighbor policies and a focus on state advantage, rather than systemic rules, could create the conditions for totalitarian ideologies to flourish .
 American leaders recognized that they would, in the long run, favor U.S. interests . These might not always favor United States policies, but American leaders recognize that .
 That generation learned the right lessons, as the peace and prosperity of the last 70 years attest . That generation of Americans learned the lessons of the past 70 years, as well .
 The foreign policy they created was alien to the United States’ pre-1940s traditions, which saw the country as primarily a commercial power with little interest in global power politics, save as a means of protecting itself and preserving its sphere of influence .
 Breaking free of those traditions required the lived experiences of those who had witnessed the poverty of the Depression and the destruction of the war years firsthand . Breaking free from tradition required those who witnessed poverty and destruction of war .
 Today's lessons are no longer living truths; they are dead dogmas, as the philosopher John Stuart Mill might have put it . Today, however, those lessons no longer live truths, as well as those lessons, are dead .
 Most U.S. foreign policy elites have forgotten how to make the argument for a global order that has existed for longer than most of them have been alive . Many have forgotten that they needed to argue for it at all .
 The generation that came of age during and immediately after World War II had a visceral awareness of just how terrible the world could become if the U.S. chose not to lead .
 The U.S. lost over 400,000 lives in the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was a war that cost the United States and other countries millions more .
 Their passing, and the fading of the subsequent generation that they directly molded, is the most consequential fact of all for the future of U.S. foreign policy . The passing of their generation, and their fading of their influence on foreign policy, is a significant fact .
 An omen of this change came on August 25, 2018, when Arizona Senator John McCain died at the age of 81 .
 McCain was born in 1936 to a naval officer who would go on to serve with distinction in World War II . McCain was a man shaped by the experiences of his parents’ generation, which led him to advocate American engagement in the world .
 McCain was indefatigable in dealing with crises and alliances, writes CNN's John Sutter . McCain visited crisis zones or simply tending to alliance relationships, Sutter says . McCain was "indefinite" in doing those things, he says .
 There are no current politicians as unambiguously committed to bipartisanship in foreign policy . Nor are there any contemporary politicians as committed as they are in the past .
 For the moment, it continues to constrain Trump’s efforts to remake the international system along more nationalist, self-interested lines .
 Once he is gone, there will be no snapping back to the consensus of the 1990s or the early years of this century, which was sustained by men and women with personal memories of what the world looked like without U.S. leadership . Once he's gone, the world will
 The erratic “America first” of today’s populist right may well be replaced in 2020 or 2024 by a no less erratic ‘America’ of the populist left . The populist left may be replaced by an erratic "America first"
 Rep. Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii met with Syrian President Bashar alAssad in January 2017 . She cast doubt on Assad’s responsibility for chemical attacks against Syrian civilians . This tendency is already visible in figures such as Rep. Tom Steyer .
 Eventually, both may be replaced by an “America first” of the exhausted middle . The exhausted middle may also be replaced .
 This version might be marked by more moderation and a greater amount of handwringing than its leftand right-wing cousins, but its chief characteristic would be a return to the mindset of the late 1930s .
 The United States would engage economically with the world but react with indifference to massacres or even genocide . The U.S. would withdraw psychologically, if not formally, from international institutions; and convince itself that other countries could not affect its liberties or interests .
 To some extent, foreign interference in the U.S. political process has already proved it untrue . Foreign interference is already proving it untrue, but it's not the first time .
 Foreign countries believe they can use force in aggressive or vicious ways without provoking a U.S. response . But it will be proved untrue in other, possibly more violent ways, too .
 This has happened before when the U.S. has failed to lead, and the results were not happy ones . The United States has not been able to lead in the past when it has failed .
 Those who remember unhappy results will soon be gone. Unfortunately, those who remember those unhappy results are soon to be gone .
 It is hoped, but not expected, that the hard lessons they learned will not go along with them . It is to be hoped, not to be expected that they will learn from their lessons .
 At a time when partisans can barely agree on facts, such persuasiveness might seem as if it could bring a welcome clarity . But it could also bring clarity to the debate .
 People today can rely on their own eyes and ears to an unprecedented degree . And thanks to smartphones, which make it easy to capture audio and video content, and social media platforms, that content can be shared and consumed .
 Video shows Israeli prime minister in private conversation with a colleague . Video appears to show him apparently revealing a plan to carry out a series of political assassinations in Tehran .
 Or an audio clip of Iranian officials planning a covert operation to kill Sunni leaders in a particular province of Iraq . Or a video clip of an Iranian official planning an attack on a Sunni leader in Iraq .
 Advances in digital technology could soon make this nightmare a reality . It could be the first time it's possible to have a nightmare come true .
 Deepfakes are likely to proliferate quickly, producing an ever-widening circle of actors capable of deploying them for political purposes . Worse, the means to create deepfakes will proliferate rapidly, producing a wider circle of people capable of using them .
 Disinformation is an ancient art, of course, and one with a renewed relevance today . Disinformation has a new relevance today, especially in the digital age of 21 .
 The current disinformation wars may soon look like the propaganda equivalent of the era of swords and shields . But as deepfake technology develops and spreads, it may look like a propaganda equivalent to the era .
 Deepfakes are the product of recent advances in a form of artificial intelligence known as “deep learning’s” in which algorithms learn to infer rules and replicate patterns by sifting through large data sets .
 Deepfakes emerge from a specific type of deep learning in which pairs of algorithms are pitted against each other in “generative adversarial networks” or cans .
 CANS can produce highly realistic yet fake audio and video content . Since each algorithm is constantly training against the other, such pairings can lead to rapid improvement .
 Commercial and even free deepfake services have already appeared in the open market . Black market versions with alarmingly few safeguards are likely to emerge on the black market .
 The spread of these services will lower the barriers to entry, meaning that soon, the only practical constraint on one’s ability to produce a deepfake will be access to training materials .
 The capacity to create professional-grade forgeries will come within reach of nearly anyone with sufficient interest and the knowledge of where to go for help .
 Modified audio or video of a historical figure could be created for the purpose of educating children . Modified audio and video of historical figures could be used to educate children .
 Users have already employed deepfake technology to insert people’s faces into pornography without their consent or knowledge . The growing ease of making fake audio and video content will create ample opportunities for blackmail, intimidation, and sabotage .
 The most frightening applications of deepfake technology may well be in the realms of politics and international affairs . Deepfake technology could be used in the future of the world .
 There, deepfakes may be used to create unusually effective lies capable of inciting violence, discrediting leaders and institutions, or even tipping elections . Deepfakes can be used in the U.S. to incite violence, incite violence or tip elections .
 Deepfakes have the potential to be especially destructive because they are arriving at a time when it already is becoming harder to separate fact from fiction . Deep fakes are especially dangerous because they could be especially damaging to society .
 For much of the twentieth century, magazines, newspapers, and television broadcasters managed the flow of information to the public .
 Journalists established rigorous professional standards to control the quality of news . The relatively small number of mass media outlets meant that only a limited number of individuals and organizations could distribute information widely .
 Over the last decade, more and more people have begun to get their information from social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter . Social media platforms depend on a vast array of users to generate relatively unfiltered content .
 People pass along information shared by others without bothering to check if it is true, making it appear more credible in the process . These platforms are also susceptible to so-called information cascades, which people pass along with others .
 Social media will be fertile ground for circulating deepfakes, with potentially explosive implications for politics . These dynamics will make social media fertile ground .
 Russia’s attempt to influence the 2016 U.S. presidential election has already demonstrated how easily disinformation can be injected into the social media bloodstream . Russia tried to spread divisive and politically inflammatory messages on Facebook and Twitter, spreading divisive messages .
 The deepfakes of tomorrow will be more vivid and realistic and thus more shareable than the fake news of 2016 . Fake news will be shared more easily than fake news in 2016, says CNN's John Sutter .
 People are especially prone to sharing negative and novel information, the more salacious the deepfakes, the better . And because people are particularly prone to share negative information, people are more likely to share it .
 Use of fraud, forgery, and other forms of deception to influence politics is nothing new, of course . The use of fraud and forgery has been used in politics for more than a century .
 When the USS Maine exploded in Havana Harbor in 1898, American tabloids used misleading accounts of the incident to incite the public toward war with Spain .
 Protocols of the Elders of Zion described a fictional Jewish conspiracy . The anti-Semitic tract was circulated widely during the first half of the twentieth century .
 Photoshop has made doctoring images as easy as forging text . More recently, technologies such as Photoshop have made it easier to forge text .
 What makes deepfakes unprecedented is their combination of quality, applicability to persuasive formats such as audio and video, and resistance to detection . Deepfakes are the result of their ability to create convincing images and videos .
 As deepfake technology spreads, an increasing number of actors will be able to convincingly manipulate audio and video content in a way that once was restricted to Hollywood studios or the most well-funded intelligence agencies .
 Deepfakes will be particularly useful to nonstate actors, such as insurgent groups and terrorist organizations, the authors say . "Deepfakes" will be useful to insurgents and terrorists, they say .
 These groups will be able to depict their adversaries—including government officials—spouting inflammatory words or engaging in provocative actions, with the specific content carefully chosen to maximize the galvanizing impact on their target audiences .
 Such videos will be especially difficult to debunk in cases where the target audience already distrusts the person shown in the deepfake . Such videos can be especially hard to debunk .
 States can and no doubt will make parallel use of deepfakes to undermine their nonstate opponents . States can make similar use of fake documents to undermine opponents, experts say .
 Deepfakes will also exacerbate the disinformation wars that increasingly disrupt domestic politics in the U.S. and elsewhere, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In 2016, Russia’s state-sponsored disinformation operations were remarkably successful in deepening existing social cleavages in the U.S. Cite just one example, take Russian accounts on social media claiming to be affiliated with the Black Lives Matter .
 Next time, instead of tweets and Facebook posts, such disinformation could come in the form of a fake video of a white police officer shouting racial slurs or a Black Lives Matter activist calling for violence . The video was posted on Facebook .
 A well-timed forgery could tip an election, experts say . Deepfakes are the most acute threat associated with deepfakes . The threat is the possibility that a well timed forgery can tip a presidential election .
 Russian hackers tried to undermine the French presidential campaign of Emmanuel Macron by releasing a cache of stolen documents . Many of the documents, many of them doctored, were released on the eve of the election .
 French media law prohibits election coverage in the 44 hours immediately before a vote . That effort failed for a number of reasons, including the relatively boring nature of the documents .
 The nature of deepfakes means damaging content can be guaranteed to be salacious or worse . But in most countries, most of the time, there is no media blackout, and the nature of a deepfake means that damaging content is salacious .
 A convincing video in which Macron appeared to admit to corruption, released on social media only 24 hours before the election, could have spread like wildfire and proved impossible to debunk in time .
 The problem is not just that deepfakes can be used to stoke social and ideological divisions, it's also that they can also be used as a weapon to stir social divisions . It's not only that deepfake photos can be taken, but they can be a weapon of propaganda
 More broadly, as the public becomes sensitized to the threat of deepfakes, it may become less inclined to trust news in general . The public may be less likely to trust information in general, experts say .
 Journalists may become more wary of relying on, let alone publishing, audio or video of fast-breaking events for fear that the evidence will turn out to have been faked . And journalists, for their part, may be more wary .
 There are several legal and technological approaches that can help mitigate the threat . Some already existing, others likely to emerge, are already being developed .
 The first relates to forensic technology, or the detection of forgeries through technical means . The second relates to the detection forgeries using technical means, such as forensic technology .
 In the deepfakes arms race, such advances only serve only to inform the next wave of innovation . In the real world, the future of the technology is in the hands of hackers .
 In the future, cans will be fed training videos that include examples of normal blinking . Canines will also be fed videos that show how blinking normal .
 The speed with which deepfakes can circulate on social media will make debunking them an uphill battle . And even if extremely capable detection algorithms emerge, they won't be able to debunk them .
 By the time the forensic alarm bell rings, the damage may already be done, it may already have been done .
 A second technological remedy involves authenticating content before it ever spreads . This is referred to as a “digital provenance’s solution .
 Companies such as Truepic are developing ways to digitally watermark audio, photo, and video content at the moment of its creation, using metadata that can be logged immutably on a distributed ledger, or blockchain .
 A record of authenticity could be used later as a reference to compare to suspected fakes . In other words, one could effecade one of the world's most powerful nations .
 First, they would need to be ubiquitously deployed in the vast array of devices that capture content, including laptops and smartphones . The technology is needed to be ubiquitous in the world .
 First, their use would need to be made a precondition for uploading content to the most popular digital platforms, such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube . Second, they need to make their use a pre-condition for uploading content to most popular platforms .
 Device makers will not adopt digital authentication until they know it is affordable, in demand, and unlikely to interfere with the performance of their products . Device makers, absent some legal or regulatory obligation, won't adopt it unless they know they are affordable and demand .
 Few social media platforms will want to block people from uploading unauthenticated content, especially when the first one does so will risk losing market share to less rigorous competitors . Social media platforms are unlikely to block content that is not authentic .
 A third, more speculative technological approach involves what has been called “authenticated alibi services,” which might soon begin emerging from the private sector . The idea is to use the term “alibi services” to avoid being tracked down .
 Deepfakes are especially dangerous to high-profile individuals, such as politicians and celebrities, with valuable but fragile reputations . Consider that deepfakes can be dangerous to people with valuable reputations, like politicians .
 To protect themselves against deepfakes, some individuals may engage in enhanced forms of “lifelogging” The practice of recording nearly every aspect of one’s life is recorded .
 Companies might begin offering bundles of alibi services, including wearables, storage and authentication services .
 These bundles could even include partnerships with major news and social media platforms, which would enable rapid confirmation or debunking of content .
 Such logging would be deeply invasive, and many people would want nothing to do with it . Such logging is deeply invasive and people would not want to do it .
 Some employers might begin insisting on lifelogging for certain categories of employees . Police departments increasingly require officers to use body cameras . Lifelogging is legal in the U.S.
 Even if only a relatively small number of people took up intensive lifelogging, they would produce vast repositories of data . The rest of us would find ourselves inadvertently caught, creating a massive peer-to-peer surveillance network for constantly recording our activities .
 Making or sharing a deepfake could constitute defamation, fraud, or misappropriation of a person’s likeness, among other civil and criminal violations .
 In theory, one could close any remaining gaps by criminalizing (or attaching civil liability to) specific acts . For instance, creating a deepfake of a real person with the intent to deceive a viewer or listener, with the expectation that this deception would cause some kind of harm .
 But it could be hard to make these claims or charges stick in practice, says CNN.com.com . "It's not easy to make claims and charges stick"
 It will likely prove very difficult to attribute the creation of a deepfake to a particular person or group, it will likely be impossible to attribute .
 Even if perpetrators are identified, they may be beyond a court’s reach, as in the case of foreign individuals or governments . And even if a court can’t find them, they could be beyond the reach of a court .
 Another legal solution could involve incentivizing social media platforms to do more to identify and remove deepfakes or fraudulent content more generally . Social media platforms could also be incentivized to remove fake content .
 Companies anxious to avoid legal liability would likely err on the side of policing content too aggressively . Users themselves might begin to self-censor in order to avoid the risk of having their content suppressed .
 It is far from obvious that the notional benefits of improved fraud protection would justify these costs to free expression . It is not clear that the benefits would justify the costs of fraud protection .
 Such a system would also run the risk of insulating incumbent platforms, which have the resources to police content, against competition from smaller firms .
 The unavoidable conclusion is that deepfakes spell trouble . LIVING WITH LIES: Deepfakes spells trouble .
 The result will be a rising tide of false yet realistic audio and video content, ready to be weaponized for political purposes and spread on social media . The result of this will be the result of false audio, video content being weaponized by politicians .
 Although deepfakes are dangerous, they will not necessarily be disastrous, they won't be disastrous . Deepfakes may be dangerous, but not necessarily disastrous, say experts .
 Social media platforms will gradually get better at flagging and removing fraudulent content . Detection will improve, prosecutors and plaintiffs will occasionally win legal victories against creators of harmful fakes .
 Digital provenance solutions could provide a more durable fix at some point in the future . And digital provenances solutions could, if widely adopted, provide a better solution .
 On the one hand, this will mean accepting that audio and video content cannot be taken at face value . The other, it will mean fighting the descent into a post-truth world, in which citizens retreat to their private information bubbles .
 Western governments have had to relearn the forgotten art of deterring attacks and protecting their countries’ borders . Western governments must relearn how to deter attacks and protect their countries' borders .
 They have failed to see that the attacks can also be aimed at their democratic institutions . They fail to see, however, that they must see that they can be targeted by the attacks .
 Liberal democracy may remain the world's preferred model of governance, but it is under pressure from threats both internal and external . Liberal democracy remains the world’s preferred model for governance .
 A poll released by Dalia Research in 2018 highlighted just how much citizens of democracies have lost faith in their governments .
 Sixty-four percent of respondents living in democracies said their governments rarely or never act in the public interest . Only 41 percent of those in autocracies said the same .
 Malign foreign powers have worsened the problem by weaponizing infrastructure that underpins democratic societies, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen.com . Russia has been accused of destabilizing the infrastructure of democratic societies .
 They have hacked the Internet, media, and even voting databases to sow discombobulation, discontent, and disunity, they say . They have also hacked the media, media and social media to sow discontent, discontent .
 Foreign meddlers have systematically sought to skew the democratic debate . From the 2016 U.S. presidential primaries and general election, to the 2017 French presidential election, they have systematically tried to skewer the debate .
 Michael Chertoff is Co-Founder and Executive Chair of the Cher toff Group . He says he is proud of his work in Washington, D.C. He says the U.S. needs to be on the forefront of America's future .
 ANDERS FOGH RASMUSSEN is Founder and Co-Chair of the Alliance of Democracies Foundation . He is also co-chair of the Foundation's Board of Directors . Anders FOGh Rasmussen is the founder and co-Chairman of the
 Denmark's former Prime Minister was Secretary-General of NATO from 2009 to 2014 . He was Prime Minister of Denmark from 2001 to 2009 and NATO Secretary General .
 They are Co-Chairs of the Transatlantic Commission on Election Integrity . They are co-chairs of the Commission on Elections Integrity .
 Only in recent years has it begun following that playbook in western Europe and the U.S. Only recently has it followed that playbook .
 The attacks are an assault on every citizen’s fundamental right to elect his or her own representatives. ‘The attacks are a ... assault on the fundamental right’ to elect your own representatives,’ says David Cameron .
 Democracies on both sides of the Atlantic have been targeted, but their responses have lacked urgency and coordination . Yet even though democracies in both countries of Europe are targeted, their response has lacked urgency .
 Meddlers have sought to undermine mainstream political parties on both the left and the right . The question of what to do about this interference remains a partisan issue, especially in the United Kingdom and the United States .
 Governments and technology companies keep talking past each other, with the former preferring overzealous state edicts and the latter inadequate self-regulation . Meanwhile, governments and tech companies often prefer to avoid self-regulating .
 In the next two years, more than 20 elections will take place across Europe and North America . The elections will be held in Europe, North America and Europe .
 Many candidates will offer voters a stark choice between openness and multilateralism, populism, and nationalism . Many of them are candidates who advocate isolationism and populism . Many voters will be able to choose between candidates who support multilateral and isolationism .
 Russia and other autocratic regimes have a clear stake in these elections, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is every indication that they will continue to interfere in them"
 A bipartisan, transatlantic response to foreign meddling is necessary, says Julian Zelizer . Individual countries and political campaigns can do more to protect themselves, he says . A collective effort to defend democratic institutions is necessary .
 Countries must work together to assess vulnerabilities of their electoral systems . Countries must look at broad assessments of the vulnerabilities of electoral systems, says Julian Zelizer .
 Foreign governments and civil society groups should provide direct support to help protect countries that are particularly vulnerable to foreign meddling, such as Ukraine . Foreign governments should help protect Ukraine from foreign meddling .
 Policymakers should collaborate with technology companies to give citizens the tools they need to inoculate themselves against false information . Policymakers need to collaborate with tech companies to help inoculate citizens against false stories .
 Politicians should work to address the root causes of societal cleavages that Russia and other malign actors are trying to exploit . Politicians, finally, should address the causes of society cleavage that Russia is exploiting, he says .
 Foreign meddling in elections is not a new phenomenon, experts say . Foreign interference in elections has long been a problem in American politics .
 During the Cold War, both superpowers relied heavily on information warfare . The Cold War was dominated by information warfare between Washington and Moscow .
 The Kremlin spread false conspiracy theories claiming that the cia was the source of hiv, the virus that causes aids, and that it assassinated U.S. President Kennedy .
 The fall of communism led many Western countries to believe that Russian interference had been consigned to history . Russia's involvement in the Ukraine has been a major problem since then .
 The new Russian meddling combines tried-and-true methods with modern technology . The new campaign combines tried and true methods with new technology .
 Kremlin has new tools for manipulating social media, such as armies of robotic accounts and paid trolls . But now, the Kremlin has more tools to manipulate social media than ever before .
 The scope of Russia’s social media campaigns is staggering . Because of the scale of the campaign, it has significantly reduced the costs and risks of election meddling .
 Foreign meddling operations tend to be carried out in an operational gray zone . Adding to the difficulties of preventing interference, foreign meddling operations often take place in a gray zone, experts say .
 This makes it hard to attribute responsibility to one specific government agency . This is not the only government agency responsible for the problem .
 APT28, Fancy Bear, or APT24, develop and deploy the malware used in election meddling . Meanwhile, hacking collectives and criminal networks such as Fancy Bear develop the malware . The malware is used to spy on American voters in the 2016 presidential election .
 There are some links between the intelligence agencies and the hacking collectives, but their exact nature remains unclear . The exact nature of the links remains unclear.
 The scope of Russia’s social media disinformation campaigns is staggering . Russia's social media campaigns are staggering, say experts . CNN's John Sutter says it's not surprising that Russia is spreading social media misinformation .
 In the lead-up to the Italian election in March 2018, bots were responsible for 15 percent of Twitter activity promoting farright candidates . In the past year, bots have been used to promote far right candidates in Italy .
 Fake Twitter accounts generated 30 percent of the tweets and retweets about the August 2018 assassination of Alexander Zakharchenko, a pro-Russian rebel leader in Ukraine . Fake accounts generated more than a third of the messages about the killing .
 Automated accounts mostly encouraged voters to boycott the referendum, suggesting that they were part of a Russiansponsored voter suppression effort . Automated Twitter accounts encouraged people to vote against the referendum .
 Similar spikes in bot activity occurred in the lead-up to elections in Sweden in September and Bosnia and Herzegovina in October .
 In some cases, foreign meddlers have tried to directly boost whichever candidate or party was most likely to adopt a soft stance on Russia . Some cases have been seen as a result of foreign interference in Russia .
 "Most cases are simply to discredit the entire democratic process. However, in most cases, their strategy is simply to undermine the democratic process," he says .
 In the 2016 U.S. presidential primaries, Russian operatives supported both the Republican candidate Donald Trump and the Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders . The goal of radicalizing the political debate is to radicalize the political discourse, the Kremlin says .
 Hackers’ efforts to thwart French President Emmanuel Macron’s campaign undoubtedly hardened his stance toward Moscow . In France, hackers have repeatedly tried to thwart Macron's election campaign .
 In the United States, meddling in the 2016 election caused Congress to strong-arm the Trump administration into adopting a more aggressive posture toward Russia . Congress also introduced new sanctions against Russia, and increased funding for United States troops in Europe .
 There is growing evidence that other states are gravitating toward Russia’s high-impact, low-cost strategy . But there is no guarantee that Russia will continue to pursue the strategy .
 Bot accounts on Twitter shared stories that cast doubt about presidential candidate Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador’s grasp of economics and spreading news that his opponents had already lost . Bot accounts shared stories about the presidential candidate and his economic skills .
 In August, John Bolton announced that there was a “sufficient national security concern about Chinese meddling, Iranian meddling, and North Korean meddling” and said that the U.S. government was working to crack down on it .
 The discourse surrounding the Catalan independence referendum in 2017 saw an unprecedented level of trolling on social media and spreading of distorted facts, all originating in Venezuela . The discourse around the referendum in Catalonia was a form of trolling .
 For now, foreign meddling operations remain largely the preserve of state actors and their proxies . New technology and artificial intelligence will lower the barriers to entry .
 So-called deepfake videos or audio files are fast becoming the new frontier in information manipulation . Deepfake videos are created by an algorithm rather than a video production team .
 Right now, producing deepfakes requires sophisticated video-editing skills and software . It also requires a convincing voice actor and convincing voice .
 New technologies could enable a programmer to feed a computer a public figure’s speeches to synthesize voice patterns and create a convincing fake video . Within a few years, a programmer could be able to feed the computer a speech .
 Given the scale of the threat posed by foreign meddling, the response of the transatlantic community has been woeful . The response to the threat of foreign meddling in the U.S. is woeful.
 In the United States and Italy, denial at the highest levels of government has impeded progress . In the U.S. and Italy it has been hard to find a solution to the problem .
 Trump has spent considerable energy denying any interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election . He fears recognition of Russian meddling in his favor may be interpreted as a tacit admission of collusion between Russia and his campaign team .
 Italy’s Matteo Salvini, the deputy prime minister and head of the governing right-wing party, Lega Nord, has similarly denied Russian meddling in the March 2018 election or fundraising for his party .
 Salvini's publicly avowed appreciation for Russia has stymied any progress in fortifying Italy’s electoral infrastructure . In the case of Salvini, his avowed admiration for Russia stymies any progress . Salvini has been criticized for his views on Russia .
 Europe's leaders have approached the challenge through the outdated and simplistic 2016 lens of fake news . Across Europe, leaders have been approached by the 'fake news' lens of 2016 .
 When they have taken action, their efforts have been uncoordinated and often geared toward fighting the last pattern of interference rather than the next one . When they take action, they have often been more focused on the last patterns of interference than the last one .
 The result is a patchwork of remedies that have either come short or been overzealous . The result of the patchwork is that the government has come up short or has been too aggressive .
 As of October, eight electionrelated bills, many of them bipartisan, were still languishing in Congress . Many of the bills are still pending in the Senate .
 Local officials’ resistance to what they perceive as federal interference in their states hampers uniform planning . Local officials say federal interference is federal interference .
 Eu’s team tasked with countering propaganda and disinformation in eastern Europe is limited by its miserly budget of $1.1 million per year . The Eu's team is funded by $1 million a year .
 The European Commission has proposed a code of conduct for social media platforms that would commit them to taking prescribed action to fight fake news . Eu-funded, pan-European political parties to follow a common set of practices designed to protect against interference .
 France and Germany have passed legislation that civil society and the media have criticized as overzealous . Civil society has criticized the legislation, but it has been criticized by the media and civil society .
 Each country has taken its own piecemeal actions and failed to coordinate with its allies . In typical eu fashion, each country takes its own piecesmeal actions, says the EU .
 Lawmakers have criticized technology companies for their inaction and de facto complicity in spreading fake news . Meanwhile, lawmakers have criticized tech companies for not responding to the spread of fake news and misinformation .
 Some companies have begun to accept responsibility for reducing the amount of disinformation on their platforms . Some platforms have now begun to take responsibility .
 Microsoft launched the Defending Democracy Program in April 2018 to prevent hacking, increase advertising transparency online, and explore technological solutions to protect elections and identify cyberattacks .
 Facebook, Google, and Twitter have also stepped up their efforts to police their platforms . Facebook and Google have stepped up efforts to prevent the spread of violence .
 They have removed more fake accounts, taken more domains offline, and thwarting more hacking efforts . They have made some progress, removing fake accounts and taking domains offline .
 Politicians’ lack of understanding about how technology platforms work impedes collaboration with the private sector . Politicians need to be able to work together with private sector, say experts . Technology platforms work together, they say .
 Earlier this year, Mark Zuckerberg, the ceo of Facebook, appeared before the U.S. Congress for a hearing on Facebook’s treatment of user data .
 At the hearing, senators asked simplistic questions about Facebook’s business model instead of diving deep into its sophisticated data practices, revealing the limits of their understanding of the technology . Senators asked Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg simplistic questions .
 The advent of artificial intelligence offers an array of possible solutions to the threats posed by meddling . Artificial intelligence offers a range of possibilities to solve the problem .
 Machines are able to scan the Internet more accurately and faster than humans, processing and synthesizing macro-level patterns in a way humans cannot . Machines can scan the internet more accurately than humans and faster .
 New technologies themselves will remain vulnerable, say politicians and entrepreneurs . But without cooperation, politicians must enact laws and build security measures into software, they remain vulnerable .
 This could exacerbate the challenges that new technologies pose rather than solve them, experts say . New technologies could be used to solve the challenges of new technologies, they say .
 With the future of democracy in the United States and Europe at stake, it's time to start developing a more forward-thinking strategy for dealing with foreign interference .
 As they head into election season, they must understand that foreign meddlers are targeting them . Phishing attacks (fraudulent attempts to obtain sensitive information by impersonating a trusted entity) and server hacks are common .
 All it takes to bring down an entire campaign is a single employee clicking on one malicious link . The attack can be traced to a single person clicking on a malicious link on a website .
 Smart cyberdefense is as critical to today’s political parties as clever campaign slogans and billboards . Smart cyberdefence is critical to political parties today as well as campaign slogans, billboards and slogans .
 Individual countries, let alone parties and organizations, can do only so much to protect themselves . But individual countries can do so much so much, they can't protect themselves themselves .
 What is required is a collective, bipartisan, transatlantic response to foreign meddling, says Julian Zelizer . What is needed is a joint, bipartisan response, he says . Zelizer says .
 Leaders from politics, media, academia, academia and business from a cross section of parties and backgrounds on both sides of the Atlantic to create the Transatlantic Commission on Election Integrity . This is why, in June 2018, we brought together .
 The aim is to bridge the gaps that have so far prevented a collective response to election meddling, the group says . It wants to avoid relitigating past elections and instead focus on future ones .
 At the June 2018 G-7 meeting in Quebec, leaders took an important first step in agreeing to better coordinate national efforts to fight election meddling . Leaders agreed to coordinate efforts to combat election meddling in 2018 .
 The commitment to this fight remains limited, and the concern, too low on the priority list of transatlantic business. But the commitment to the fight remains .
 At a meeting cohosted by the Atlantic Council and the Transatlantic Commission in mid-July, we brought together a bipartisan group of United States senators from the Senate Intelligence Committee and a dozen European parliamentarians . For the hrst time, United States and Euro .
 These recommendations would bring together diverse parties, including civil society and technology companies, to monitor and report on activities that spread disinformation . They would also promote the sharing of best practices among governments .
 Too many governments are either still in denial or don’t fully understand the extent of the threat posed by election meddling, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says too many governments don't fully understand extent of election meddling .
 Most have a surprisingly vague sense of the vulnerabilities of their own democratic infrastructure . Most of the world's democratic infrastructure is vulnerable to cyberwarfare .
 National intelligence agencies may be better positioned than governments to assess and follow the threats . But their findings do not reach the rest of government or civil society and political parties .
 The Transatlantic Commission will conduct national assessments of democracies with critical upcoming elections . To help fill these gaps, the commission will conduct an assessment of democracies .
 These assessments will analyze different factors related to elections and democratic processes in each country, including legislation, the vulnerability of cyberspace and social media platforms, and the presence of anti-Western groups within the country .
 The purpose of these assessments is not to embarrass governments or fuel opposition parties, but to help prevent foreign powers from exploiting weaknesses . The purpose is to help keep foreign powers out of exploiting weaknesses, the authors say .
 Its presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for 2019 will be critical for the country . The country is in the midst of its biggest political transformation since it achieved independence in 1991 .
 Moscow is almost certain to take all possible measures to undermine the validity of the elections and skew their results . This point is surely not lost on Moscow, which is sure to take measures to thwart the elections . Moscow is not likely to be satisfied with the results of the upcoming elections, says
 The Transatlantic Commission is working with a group of experts to monitor and actively report interference activities in the lead-up to Ukraine’s election . The group is also working with experts to report interference .
 The commission is also seeking to bridge the gap between the public and private sectors . The commission will also seek to build bridges between the private and public sectors .
 We have deployed technological tools to monitor real-time disinformation, tracking the number of bot accounts created on social media, the messages they are disseminating, and their country of origin .
 With these insights, political leaders and civil society can fight back against disinformation campaigns more effectively . Political leaders can use these insights to combat disinformation campaigns .
 One of the best ways to defend against meddling is for citizens to inoculate themselves against disinformation . Citizens should be inoculated against disinformation by inoculating themselves against it .
 The Transatlantic Commission is partnering with companies such as Asi Data Science to develop an algorithm that can distinguish deepfakes from real videos . The algorithm will allow citizens to identify machine-generated content .
 All these efforts should help prevent adversaries from exploiting the cleavages that exist in democratic societies, says Julian Zelizer . All efforts should be taken to prevent adversaries exploiting cleavage, he says .
 Kremlin-sponsored interference may help populist parties, it does not create them . But it is important to remember that although Kremlin-backed interference may . It does not help create populist parties .
 Populism is typically a symptom of a failing political system, not its cause, says Julian Zelizer . "Populism" is a symptom, not a cause, he says, of a failed political system .
 The greatest challenge for mainstream politicians is to tackle societal cleavages at their source by addressing the issues that drive antipathy toward mainstream parties . Mainstream politicians need to address the issues driving antipathy to mainstream parties, says Simon Tisdall .
 Citizens and governments can either sit back and accept foreign meddling in elections as an uncomfortable side effect of the digital age or they can safeguard their electoral systems . Citizens must either accept foreign interference in elections, or they must safeguard their systems .
 If history has taught anything, it has shown that individual countries cannot face such challenges alone . The U.S. will not be able to rely on the strength of the U.N. to solve the problem, it says .
 The goal of election meddling is to sow confusion and fear, which, in turn, drive support for candidates and parties that break down alliances, undermine values that have kept the West free, prosperous, and relatively peaceful for 70 years .
 Unless the transatlantic community stands together, malign foreign powers will continue to pick off democracies one by one . The United States is one of the most powerful countries in the world . The U.S. should stand together, says President Obama .
 Kazakhstan was historically interlinked with major communication routes and paths of trade that are known today as the ancient Silk Road . Strategically located between East and West, Kazakhstan was strategically interlinked . The Silk Road is today known as the Silk Road and the Silk Way .
 Experts argue that the route along Kazakhstan's vast land carried more than just merchandise and precious commodities . Experts say the route was used to carry more than simply merchandise and commodities .
 Kazakhstan was one of the epicenters of the first waves of globalization . Connecting eastern and western markets spurs immense wealth, spurring immense wealth .
 The vision for engaging the world in recreating the ancient Silk Road was presented by President Xi Jinping in Kazakhstan in September 2013 . Xi Jinping presented the vision for the Silk Road to the world .
 President Nursultan Nazarbayev has been a strong champion of Eurasian integration and increased economic connectivity since the very early days of the country's independence . This initiative was supported by President Nazarayev .
 Belt and Road Initiative set the stage for a sprawling network of railroads, highways, gas and oil pipelines, cities and re-ructure to re-build the Silk Road .
 Kazakhstan's foreign policy has proven effective in balancing international interests . Kazakhstan continues to forge its path in international and regional organizations . In the past several years, the country's foreign policies have been effective .
 Kazakhstan is a textbook example of how a multi-ethnic nation can live in peace and stability as well as secure a major standing on the international arena, thanks to its balanced and multi-vector foreign policy .
 As the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, the newly independent Kazakhstan emerged overnight as the fourth-largest nuclear power in the world . The country's nuclear power could pose a serious threat to humankind .
 "I'm a firm believer in confidence-building measures, dialogue and partnership. Instead, I want to focus on confidence building measures and dialogue," she says .
 President Nursultan Nazarbayev laid down a comprehensive long-term strategy aimed at the complete dismantlement and removal of one of the world's largest nuclear arsenals . The Kazakh leader wants to establish his nation as a reliable global partner .
 Years on, this decision is still highly praised by the members of the international community . The decision was made to allow the use of the country's most powerful weapon, a weapon of choice .
 The 69th U.S. Secretary of State RexTillerson noted positively that Kazakhstan is a particularly illustrative example of the wisdom of relinquishing nuclear weapons . Kazakhstan is making a substantial contribution to regional and international peace and prosperity .
 As a member of the UN Security Council for 2017-2018, we have continued our pioneering model to address issues with worldwide implications . We have continued to be a pioneering model for addressing issues with global implications .
 President Nazarbayev was the first country from Central Asia ever elected to the UN Security Council in January 2018 . He said he was the voice of his people in this high office and laid down a comprehensive conflict prevention strategy . The Kazakh president said that as a member of the council,
 For the first time this strategy included the issue of non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . The strategy includes early warning, preventive deployment, mediation, peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding, and accountability measures .
 Kazakhstan continues to play a major role in stabilizing Afghanistan . Kazakhstan is committed to promoting global peace and prosperity . The country continues to promote global peace .
 Acknowledging that only an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process will bring stability and security, Kazakhstan remains at the forefront when it comes to consolidating international efforts . Kazakhstan is committed to a long-term peace process in Afghanistan .
 Astana hosted the Regional Conference on Empowering Women in Afghanistan last month . The conference was aimed at elevating voices and perspectives from across all sectors and levels .
 The United States firmly supported this initiative by sending top State Department officials . The special address was made by the Assistant to the President Mrs. Mrs. Michelle Obama .
 Ivanka Trump acknowledged the efforts of Kazakhstan's government for championing this important cause . Ivanka Trump also thanked the Kazakh government for its efforts .
 Kazakhstan will not cease to work closely with the international community and all actors involved in putting forward these important initiatives . Kazakhstan is committed to working closely with international community .
 The U.S. was the first country to establish diplomatic relations with Kazakhstan after its independence 25 years ago .
 American and Kazakhstani officials and companies have continued to work well together in a cooperative partnership . This relationship has grown in large part because of the cooperation between the two countries .
 The United States was indeed the first country to recognize Kazakhstan's independence and open its Embassy in Kazakhstan . The U.S. was the first to recognize the independence of Kazakhstan .
 Relations between the two countries have grown profoundly both in substance and significance, says President Obama . "Throughout the past twenty-six years, relations between our countries have grew profoundly"
 President Nursultan Nazarbayev made an official visit to Washington, DC early this year to meet President Donald Trump, Vice President Mike Pence and a large number of America's top business executives . The Kazakh-American relations have been on the rise in recent years .
 "These meetings cemented our country's commitment to foster our cooperation in many areas of mutual interest," says President Vladimir Putin .
 The visit reinforced close commercial and trade ties between Kazakhstan and the U.S. It is an important way to create jobs and accelerate economic growth in both countries .
 The two countries signed numerous deals with far-reaching implications for each other worth more than 7 billion United States dollars .
 Almost a year on since this high-level visit, I am delighted to see that both countries are continuing to unlock the immense potential for mutually beneficial cooperation with great enthusiasm . I'm pleased to see the potential for mutual beneficial cooperation continues to be unlocked .
 In just the past 9 months, both countries have exchanged an unprecedented number of successful bilateral visits and B2B communication in healthcare, agriculture, education, trade, culture and sciences .
 Wilbur Ross will lead one of the largest certified trade missions to Kazakhstan . The U.S. Secretary of Commerce will lead a certified trade mission .
 Kazakhstan opens Consulate General in San Erancisco to boost cooperation in tech, startups, innovation and tech policy . Kazakhstan is also expanding its presence in the United States by opening Kazakhstan's Consulate in U.S.
 I am positive that the spirit of enhanced partnership and cooperation that exists between our nations will continue to thrive. As we look forward to continue working together for shared growth and prosperity, I'm positive that this spirit of cooperation will continue .
 U.S. foreign policy community has embarked on an extended voyage of soul-searching, filling the pages of publications like this one with essays on the past, present, and future of liberal international order .
 Big questions are up for debate in ways they have not been for many years . Big questions have been raised in ways of debate in the past few years .
 Jake Sullivan is a Senior Fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . Are you a war hero? Share your thoughts with iReport.com .
 Stephen Walt and John Mearsheimer discuss the failures of U.S. foreign policy with renewed ferocity . Walt: "The failures of foreign policy are the failure of America's foreign policy" Mearsheim: Walt and Walt discuss a new book on foreign policy .
 Mearsheimer s is The Great Delusion: Liberal Dreams and International Realities . He is a former New York Mayor of New York City .
 Walt s contains an extended attack on the foreign policy community, painting a dark picture of a priesthood gripped by various pathologies, leading the country astray .
 Mearsheimer turns to political theory to explore the relationship among liberalism, nationalism, and realism . He also explores the relationship between liberalism and nationalism .
 Liberalism cannot alter or abolish nationalism and realism, he says . He says where the three meet, the latter two will prevail over the former . Liberalism, realism and nationalism will prevail, he adds .
 For Mearsheimer, analysis of the three isms ultimately provides an alternative route to arrive at the conclusion that a strategy of liberal hegemony is bound to fail .
 They also too frequently succumb to the temptation of caricature, playing up interventions and playing down institution building, which was a more persistent and widespread feature of the U.S. post-Cold War approach .
 The biggest disappointment is that neither author really engages with the new debates currently preoccupying the foreign policy community or the vexing questions about U.S. strategy going forward . Neither author engages with new debates or questions about the future of the United States .
 Walt and Mearsheimer have been fixtures in the foreign policy debate for a long time . Walt has been a long-time supporter of the Obama administration . He says he has 'bad faith' in America's foreign policy .
 The two have provided the sort of iconoclasm that is essential to public discourse . They have forced proponents of a forward-leaning foreign policy to sharpen their arguments, think about mistakes .
 Mearsheimer has been especially powerful, including in this new book, in pointing out that too many liberal internationalists have failed to contend with the enduring power of nationalism and identity .
 Recent history has proved him more right and the U.S. foreign policy community more wrong . Recent history proves him more wrong and the American foreign policy .
 On this and many other points, practitioners owe these scholars (and the academy in general) a fuller hearing and more thorough consideration . Even if they don’t agree with them, they should be given more of a hearing .
 Academics owe policymakers a presumption of good faith and honest service, even if they find plenty of fault with their decisions . By the same token, these scholars (and the academy in general) owe policymakers good faith, honest service .
 Walt fills pages with lists of think tanks, advocacy organizations, foundations, and individuals who compose ‘the Blob’ The Blob is a term originally coined by Ben Rhodes, who was deputy national security adviser in Obama administration .
 "Good intentions" appears in the title of his book, but he ascribes anything but . The phrase “good intentions” appears in his book . He ascribes himself to anything less than good intentions, he says .
 The busier the U.S. government is abroad, the more jobs there will be for foreign policy experts . The greater the share of national wealth that will be devoted to addressing global problems, the greater their influence .
 A more restrained foreign policy would give the entire foreign policy community less to do, reduce its status and prominence . It might even lead some prominent philanthropies to devote less money to these topics .
 In this sense, liberal hegemony and unceasing global activism constitute a full-employment strategy for the entire foreign policy community . The U.S. should continue to engage in liberal hegemony in the Middle East, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Walt has not spent time working in the Pentagon, State Department or Situation Room, he says . Foreign Service officers and civil servants believe that an active foreign policy serves the national interest .
 Pm. convinced he would revise his view of what drives these officials . Pm convinced he'd revise his views on what drives them .
 Walt would learn how much practitioners struggle with the decisions they face, and how they earnestly debate the merits of doing something more, less, or different . Walt would be surprised by the challenges he faces, but he would learn much more .
 He would be surprised, contrary to his claim, that unorthodox ideas really do get a hearing in Washington . Walt s own ideas about pulling back from the Middle East, he says .
 Practitioners do themselves no favors when they caricature academic critics . The same applies in reverse . Practitioner does not do himself no favors by caricathetically caricatizing critics .
 Walt's assignment of bad faith to the Blob causes him to miss the churn in the community since 2016 . Walt s assignment of good faith to Blob means he misses the community . Walt has been missing from the community for two years .
 He makes reasonable points about the ways in which the Washington foreign policy conversation has too often been gripped by groupthink . He also points out how conventional wisdom can harden and why departing from it can be difficult .
 Foreign policy professionals are wrong to say their views are immutable, that they cannot learn, adapt, and grow . But he is wrong that the intentions and motives of foreign policy professionals should be immutable, he says .
 Both Walt and Mearsheimer have neglected the recent shifts in the center of gravity of the Washington foreign policy consensus .
 Their passionate case against the U.S. invasion of Iraq, for example, seems frozen in time . Their passionate arguments against the Iraq invasion seem frozen in the past .
 Most in foreign policy community would oppose another conflict of choice in the Middle East . Most in the foreign policy world would oppose a war of choice .
 The debate now is over how to pursue an effective counterterrorism strategy that relies less on direct military force . The debate is over whether to pursue a less reliance on direct force .
 It s often hard for policymakers to know what to do with Walt and Mearsheimer, says John Avlon . He says policymakers often don't know what they will do with them . Avlon: It's often hard to say what's wrong with Walt or Mearsheim .
 They make promises about their approach, including rosy results from drastic actions such as military withdrawal from Europe, with a certitude that resembles the exaggerated portrait they paint of liberal internationalists . They paint an exaggerated portrait of internationalists. They paint themselves as liberals internationalists, they say .
 Sins of commission count, whereas sins of omission don't, or at least not very much, so that action leading to unintended consequences is treated differently from inaction leading to consequences . Sins of omission count, while actions leading to unintentional consequences count less .
 The intervention in Libya contributed in unanticipated ways to the refugee crisis in Europe . But the lack of intervention in Syria may have done so, too, too .
 If Washington hadn’t expanded nato, would what is happening in Ukraine today be happening in the Baltics or Poland instead? Would what happened in Ukraine happen in Baltics, Poland? Would it happen in Poland or Baltics?
 Mearsheimer downplays the cases of postwar Germany and Japan, which he downplays with a fleeting reference halfway through his book . The book is published by John Sutter, a Pulitzer Prize winner .
 Imagine the second half of the twentieth century if the U.S. had followed Mearsheimer’s prescriptions for these countries in 1945, by withdrawing United States forces and letting Europe and Asia solve their own problems . Imagine the United States had followed Walt‘s and Mears
 Walt’s and Mearsheimer argue that U.S. withdrawal would probably make the world more dangerous . But given its geography and its power, the United States could avoid the resulting risks and manipulate them to its advantage, they say .
 Setting aside the grim quality of this logic, it's not at all clear that it’s right . It's not all clear the logic, but it's right .
 It is difficult to embrace an approach that counts the 1930s as a success, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 There are other reasons for the Mars-Venus quality of the conversation between policymakers and scholars .
 Walt and Mearsheimer glossed over the cost of bringing U.S. troops home from around the world . Policymakers have to take those costs into account, they say .
 Walt and Mearsheimer can downplay the instability that would come from a country like Iran acquiring nuclear weapons . But policymakers think about worst-case scenarios, including a regional arms race and the possibility of terrorists getting involved .
 The United States’ system, and not just its strategy, points toward liberalism, points to liberalism . They can argue for stripping liberalism out of U.S. foreign policy, but policymakers have to deal with the fact .
 The battle lines between the realists and the liberal internationalists have been so well drawn, the debates so well rehearsed, that it is hard to add much to them now . The realist internationalists and realists have the battle lines well drawn .
 Fighting over how things would have looked today had Washington adopted the Walt and Mearsheimer approach over the last 25 years is not as productive as debating what it should do next 25 .
 Both authors have remarkably little to say about the central debates in U.S. foreign policy today . And even as they insist that it would be easy for policymakers to get things right if only they followed a few simple rules, both authors have nothing to say . The Blob has been
 The first is how to shape a deteriorating U.S.-Chinese relationship so that it advances U.K. interests without turning into confrontation . The first step is to shape the relationship so it advances American interests without outright confrontation .
 The “responsible stakeholder” consensus in the American strategic community, premised on integrating China into a U.S.-led order, has come apart . The ‘responsible stakeholders’ consensus in America’s strategic community is gone, writes Andrew Hammond .
 It has been disorienting to watch the pendulum swing so fast from a benign view of China to a dark one . China has been a source of tension in the region for years, but it has not always been a problem .
 The books are surprisingly short on guidance for how to proceed in this new context . The books on how to deal with the new context are short of guidance for the public .
 If Walt has to carve out an exception for the biggest national security issue of our time, this suggests that his overall approach may need rethinking .
 Mearsheimer, who was a China hawk before it was fashionable, has argued in the past that realism and restraint have to diverge when it comes to China . He has argued that realism must be balanced between realism and realism .
 In his most recent book, he is so fixated on destroying ‘liberal hegemony’ that he comes close to rooting for Chinas continued rise . He sees an increasingly powerful China as less of a threat to international stability than sustained American unipolarity .
 U.S. policymakers are looking out for national interests, but that's not particularly useful for them . That may or may not be sound as an argument from the perspective of the international system, but it's not sound .
 Neither author helps policymakers prepare for competition on an emerging field of play that is as much about economics, technology, and ideas as it is about traditional security considerations .
 Geopolitics is expanding across an expanding range of domains, including cyberspace, space, economics and energy . That is a serious gap in their analysis, as geopolitics unfolds across a range of domain .
 To what extent are the United States’ main competitors systematically exporting their illiberalism, and what are the implications for U.S. strategy .
 Progress are increasingly emphasizing that both China and Russia have an overriding objective of maintaining their authoritarian models . This creates incentives for them to increase the pressure on liberalism abroad as a means of reducing the pressure .
 China and Russia “share the objective of targeting free and open societies to make the world a safer place for authoritarianism” U.S. foreign policy needs to privilege the defense of democracy in the context of greatpower competition, says Thomas Wright .
 Both Walt and Mearsheimer presume that the U.S.’s major competitors are acting largely according to realist dictates . That domestic politics isn’t a major factor, they say .
 They offer a backward-looking critique of the American ‘impulse to spread democracy,” as Mearsheimer puts it . As a result, they don't address the challenge of defending democracy against increasingly ambitious, organized, and effective dictatorships .
 The foreign policy community’s emerging diagnosis may be wrong or overstated, but if it is, neither of these two authors explains why . Neither of these authors explain why .
 They don't deal with the range of practices that U.S. competitors are pursuing to put pressure on the American economic and political system, from direct election interference to the strategic use of corruption and state capitalism .
 The war on terrorism was hardly a liberal project, but the war on terror is a domestic issue . Obama's example of domestic consequences relate to the “deep state” of spying .
 Both Walt and Mearsheimer develop an elaborate caricature of a bloodthirsty foreign policy community dragging a more pacifistic public into foreign military adventures . The writers create a caricature of the war-loving foreign policy .
 When it comes to fighting terrorism abroad, the public sees terrorism as an urgent, even existential priority that requires the use of military force . The public is encouraged by politicians who themselves are skeptics of liberal internationalism .
 The foreign policy community is increasingly responding to that demand rather than driving it . Foreign policy is increasingly driving the demand, not driving it, says Obama .
 He had taken a page out of the Walt/Mearsheimer playbook by pulling every last U.S. troop out in 2011 . He had pulled every last United States troop out .
 ISIS swept into Mosul in the summer of 2014 and shot to the center of the U.S. public consciousness . The Islamic State, or ISIS, has been fighting for years in Iraq and Syria .
 Those on the president’s national security team had vigorous debates about whether and how to respond with U.S. military force, they say . Those of us had vigorous debate about whether or not to respond to the situation .
 In that instance, the public was more right, more quickly than the professionals . In that case, it was more important to the public than the professional community .
 In debates about strategy and resources in the years ahead, figuring out how to manage this dynamic will be essential . It will be crucial to the U.S. government to manage its resources, experts say .
 Cooperation is required to tackle climate change, pandemic disease, the spread of weapons of mass destruction, and the risk of another global economic crisis . Cooperation is needed to tackle these issues, says U.S. President Obama .
 Mearsheimer misses that the motivating theory for many in the foreign policy community may actually be closer to classical republicanism . The emphasis on institutions, interdependence, and the rule of law is more important than to classical liberalism, he says .
 Neither Walt nor Mearsheimer provides a convincing explanation for how cooperation will come about without U.S. leadership or without sound rules rooted in sound institutions .
 A significant U.S. retrenchment would enhance, rather than detract from, the United States’ ability to conduct diplomacy, writes Aaron Miller . Miller: Both pay homage to effective diplomacy, but neither gives a credible account of how a significant retrenchments would be beneficial .
 Walt, for example, seems to like the Iran nuclear deal, but he gives little credit to the role that crippling sanctions, combined with the credible threat of military force, played in helping bring it about .
 Walt and Mearsheimer offer surprisingly little guidance on the future of humanitarian intervention . The final area where they offer little guidance is on future humanitarian intervention, they say .
 Criticizing past interventions is a central pillar in both scholars’s cases against liberal internationalism . Criticizes past interventions are a central part of both scholars' cases .
 Neither comes out and says that such interventions should never be attempted . And yet neither comes out to say such interventions never should be attempted.
 Mearsheimer’s critique of the Libya operation is not that the U.S. shouldn’t have intervened to stop a massacre, he says . He says the United States shouldn't have intervened in the country's response to a massacre .
 President Obama declares that the threat of a massacre was a “false pretext” and that it was all made up . Instead, he simply declares it was a "false pretext" for a massacre .
 These are the same criteria that policymakers have applied to each of the humanitarian interventions the U.S. has pursued over the last quarter century .
 The various post-Cold War interventions mainly met the first three criteria, including the Cold War era . The post-cold war interventions were mainly met with the first criteria .
 Walt provides no more guidance on the fourth, which is where most of the debate over whether to act or not act takes place . Walt: "Most of the difficult tradeoffs lie" in the fourth place .
 Neither scholar considers that humanitarian interventions can also have strategic motives . There is also the problem that neither scholar considers humanitarian interventions as strategic .
 Walt and Mearsheimer: Letting Syria burn risked destabilizing two areas (Europe and the Persian Gulf) that both consider vital . Leting Syria burn not just risk a massive loss of life, but also destabilizing Europe and Persian Gulf, they say .
 The Trump era, along with broader changes in the international environment, has put many assumptions back up for debate . "The Trump era" has put a number of assumptions back into question .
 Walt sees this moment as a golden opportunity for progressives, libertarians, and academic realists to join together to defeat the liberal internationalists . Walt, especially, sees this opportunity as an opportunity for libertarians and libertarians to join forces .
 A number of recent meditations by Sen. Bernie Sanders and Sen. Elizabeth Warren point to a kind of convergence of the left and the center . Julian Zelizer: The left and center are converging .
 Many successes of the liberal project have been profoundsuch as the advances against global poverty and disease and the enduring peace between France and Germany, which formed the European Union rather than being doomed to compete . Perhaps most important, the left and the center share a growing recognition and appreciation of the
 Walt and Mearsheimer can and should play in the debates to come, he says . None of this is to discount the role that they can play, he writes .
 First principles are especially important at a moment when so much is up for grabs . Their focus on first principles is especially important in a world of political turmoil .
 Their admonition to think differently is useful in a time of rapid change . The admonition of thinking differently will be useful in the future of the world .
 Policymakers should read these books carefully, consider their arguments carefully . Policymakers need to consider the arguments carefully, they say .
 Walt and Mearsheimer should welcome the chance to engage with policymakers on the difficult questions about how to approach the decades ahead . They should welcome a chance, in good faith and with goodwill, to engage . Walt: "It's a good time for the world to think about the decades
 The choice is crucial, because it affects how readers receive their work . The choice of the publisher is crucial to the success of the book .
 They faithfully present the wide range of views professional economists hold, acknowledging the pros and cons of each of them .
 Authors do their best to hide their personal biases and admit that there is still plenty that economists do not know . Author: "There are still plenty of things to learn about economics"
 According to this perspective, reasonable people can disagree; it is the authors job to explain the basis for that disagreement and help readers make an informed judgment . It is the author's job to help readers understand the basis of that disagreement, and help them understand it .
 From 2003 to 2005, he was Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers under President George W Bush . He was chair of the council of economic advisors under President Bush .
 Economists advance a point of view while recognizing diversity of thought among reasonable people . In this case, economists advance a view of view but recognize the diversity of views among reasonable .
 They use state-of-the-art theory and evidence to try to persuade the undecided and shake the faith of those who disagree .
 They acknowledge that their intellectual opponents have some serious arguments and respond calmly and without vitriol . They say they acknowledge that opponents have serious arguments, and respond to them calmly .
 Rah-rah partisans do not build their analysis on the foundation of professional consensus or serious studies from peer-reviewed journals . Rah-Rah partisans don't build their analyses on the basis of serious studies .
 They deny that people who disagree with them may have some logical points and that there may be weaknesses in their own arguments . They deny they have some of their own flaws .
 In their view, the world is simple, and the opposition is just wrong, wrong . In the opposition's view, they say the world's simple is simple and wrong . The opposition is wrong. In the world, it's simple.
 Stephen Moore and Arthur Laffer wrote Trumponomics in their new book . Moore and Laffer chose the last voice they chose in writing the book . The economists' new book is called Trumpomics .
 The books over-the-top enthusiasm for U.S. President Donald Trump s sketchy economic agenda is not likely to convince anyone not already sporting a “Make America Great Again” hat .
 Trump promoting his tax cut package in Hialeah, Florida, April 2018 . Trump learned the importance of flattering the boss .
 Moore and Laffer can reasonably hold policy positions and political values to the right of those of Obama, Laffer says . Laffer: Moore and Moore can reasonably be reasonably right to Obama .
 Jason Furman, Austan Goolsbee, Alan Krueger, Christina Romer, and Lawrence Summers are some of the top economists in the U.S.
 It's not tenable to suggest that with all this talent, the administration made only wrong decisions . Obama administration made wrong decisions simply because those who made them were Democrats, he says .
 Moore and Laffer want lower taxes, especially on businesses, to promote faster economic growth . Moore, Laffer say lower taxes would promote faster growth . Laffer: Lower taxes would be good for businesses, but not lower for the economy .
 The debate over taxes reflects a classic, ongoing disagreement between the left and the right . The debate is a classic disagreement between left and right .
 Okun argued that by using taxes and transfers of wealth to equalize economic outcomes, the government distorts incentives . Okun argues that the harder the government tries to ensure that the economic pie is cut into slices of a similar size, the smaller the pie becomes .
 Moore and Laffer aren't willing to admit that making policy requires confronting such difficult tradeoffs . Yet they won't admit that such tradeoffs are difficult, they say . Moore, Laffer say, "I don't want to admit it's difficult"
 Laffer is famous for his eponymous curve, which shows that tax rates can reach levels high enough that cutting them would yield enough growth to actually increase tax revenue . Laffer's curve is based on his belief that cutting tax rates would yield more growth .
 In that scenario, the tradeoff between equality and efficiency vanishes . In that case, the cost of efficiency and efficiency will be lessened .
 The government can cut taxes, increase growth, and use the greater tax revenue to help the less fortunate . The government should cut taxes and increase growth to help those less fortunate, says David Cameron .
 There is certainly some level of taxation at which cutting tax rates would be win-win-win, says David Cameron . Cutting tax rates at all levels would be a win for the UK, he says .
 Few economists believe that tax rates in the U.S. have reached such heights in recent years . But few economists believe they are likely below the revenuemaximizing level . Tax rates are likely to be below that level .
 In practice, the big tradeoff between equality and efficiency just wont go away . In practice it's not easy to say equality or efficiency, but it's a tradeoff .
 The authors offer no credible evidence that the tax changes passed will lead to such high growth . The authors say they offer no evidence that such growth will be beneficial .
 The Congressional Budget Office estimates that the tax cuts will increase growth rates by 0.5 percentage points per year over the first five years . The tax cuts are expected to boost economic growth by about 0.6 percentage points .
 A study by Robert Barro (a conservative economist at Harvard) and Furman (a liberal economist) published in 2018 estimates that the tax bill will increase annual growth by 0.13 percentage points over a decade .
 Barro and Furman estimate that as the legislation is written, with many of the provisions set to expire in 2025, it will increase annual growth by a mere 0.04 percentage points over ten years . The legislation is set to be passed by Congress .
 It is conceivable that standard economic models underestimate the impact of tax cuts on growth . Standard economic models could be underestimating the impact on growth, experts say .
 Trump s tax cuts will increase growth over the next decade by as much as half a percentage point per year . One might reasonably argue that the tax cuts could increase growth by half a percent per year in 10 years .
 Moore and Laffer quote without explanation, caveat, or apology . But that is a long way from the oneto four-percentage-point boost that the president and his associates have bragged of .
 Moore and Laffer are ardent free traders; as such, their views are well within the mainstream of modern economics . Laffer: Moore and Moore's views are very well within modern economics; they are right to be free traders .
 Adam Smith took on the mercantilists in The Wealth of Nations in 1776 . Most economists have come to believe that international trade is win-win .
 They reject the idea that a trade imbalance between two nations means that one of them must be the loser . They applaud agreements, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement, that reduce trade barriers around the world . The U.S. is one of the world's largest economies .
 Moore and Laffer recognized early in the campaign that Trump rejects this consensus . Laffer: Trump rejects the consensus that this consensus.
 To their credit, they do not back down from their views in Trumponomics . To be honest, they don't back down, but they do .
 Trump's belligerent approach toward U.S. trading partners will lead to better deals and freer trade, some say . But they also give Trump the benefit of the doubt by expressing hope that his approach will somehow lead to improved deals .
 The Council on Foreign Relations is seeking talented individuals who are considering a career in international relations . The Internship Program is based on the work of international relations professionals .
 An intern's duties generally consist of administrative work, editing and writing, and event coordination . An intern’s duties include administrative work and editing .
 The Council considers both undergraduate and graduate students with majors in International Relations, Political Science, Economics, or a related field for its internship program . The Council will offer internships to students in the International Relations and Political Science majors .
 A regional specialization and language skills may also be required for some positions .
 In addition to meeting the intellectual requirements, applicants should have excellent skills in administration, writing, and research . Applicants should have a command of word processing, spreadsheet applications, and the Internet .
 To apply for an internship, please send a resume and cover letter including the semester, days, and times available to work to the Internship Coordinator in the Human Resources Office at the address listed below . The internship is required to be completed by the end of the semester .
 When Obama was a senator, he opposed many free-trade initiatives advanced by the administration of then U.S. President George W Bush . The Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement was among those he opposed .
 When Obama ran for president in 2008, he spoke about the need to renegotiate nafta . He quickly put that goal aside after moving into the White House . Obama quickly put it aside as soon as he became president .
 Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont made hostility to free trade a central tenet of his platform . Free trade was a key plank of Sanders' platform .
 The bottom line is that for a politician seeking election, opposing free trade is a lot easier than supporting it . Opposing free trade in the U.S. is easier for politicians seeking election than supporting free trade .
 Many voters are more likely to view foreign nations as threats to U.S. prosperity than as potential partners for mutually advantageous trade . Many voters see foreign countries as threats rather than potential partners .
 Economists have a long way to go to persuade the body politic of some basic lessons from Econ 101 . Economists need to learn from the basics of the concept of the economy .
 To be fair to Trump and other antiglobalization zealots, amid all their misinformation and bluster, there is a kernel of truth . Trump and others are right to blame for global warming, but it's not always true .
 The United States produces a lot of intellectual property, including movies, software, and pharmaceuticals . The U.S. produces a large amount of intellectual content .
 The failure of countries, especially China, to enforce copyrights and patents that protect intellectual property constitutes a loss to the U.S. similar to outright theft . China's failure to enforce intellectual property is a loss of the United States similar to theft .
 The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property puts the loss at up to $600 billion per year . The loss of American intellectual property is estimated to be $600 million per year in the U.S.
 If Trump were able to negotiate trade deals that solved this problem, the accomplishment would be significant . Trump has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the economy .
 U.S. intellectual property is not protected by the United States . But a negotiated solution is unlikely to come easy, especially in light of how other nations benefit .
 Trumponomics is largely silent on crucial issues on which the authors are largely silent . The authors of the book give the president a pass .
 They offer no cogent plans to deal with global climate change, longterm fiscal imbalance from growing entitlement spending, or the increase in economic inequality that has occurred over the past half century . They also offer no plans to address climate change or long-term economic inequality .
 Many reasonable Republicans would support a tax on carbon emissions, including Republicans . Many Republicans would back a carbon emissions tax, but that's not true .
 Such a policy would slow climate change by incentivizing the movement toward cleaner energy, as well as provide revenue that could be used to close the fiscal gap or to help those struggling at the bottom of the economic ladder .
 Moore and Laffer seem to hope that a much more rapidly growing economy will provide the resources to address all these problems . They seem to believe that this growth will follow ineluctably from the lower taxes and deregulation that lie at the heart of Trump s agenda .
 Trump appears eager to avoid most of the economic problems facing the nation . Trump has been criticized for his handling of the nation's economic woes .
 By banking on so much growth from cutting taxes, Moore and Laffer are, in effect, giving him a pass . Laffer is kicking the can down the road to a future leader more interested in confronting hard policy choices, he says .
 Pupils of Miss Higgins’ School in Calcutta lined up neatly for photograph . Girls’ shoulders draped by braids, boys’ knees peeping below shorts .
 Their tropical uniforms blazed brightly in the black-and-white photograph . They were taken in the tropical uniforms .
 I knew nothing about his brother John Bicknell Auden, Anita's father, until reading The Last Englishmen by Deborah Baker .
 Auden is one of the leading characters in this group biography of young British men who set out for India in the 1920s to work as imperial administrators . Auden was a member of the British imperial administrators in India .
 Joseph Conrad in a Global World. do their bit maintaining the ‘jewel in the crown’ of the British Empire .
 Long nationalist struggle culminated in 1947 with the partition of British India and independence of India and Pakistan . They found themselves witnessing the demise of the British Raj .
 Fighting for independence from oppressive imperial rule can look in retrospect like one of those black-and-white choices . Resisting fascism is another where it seems obvious what stand anyone with principle would take .
 The Last Englishmen is about how muddled these world-historical changes actually look when you’re living in the middle of them . What the deeply researched, marvelously portrayed life stories recounted in the film show is just how mudded these changes look .
 The book is a valuable supplement to the more conventional accounts of decolonization as a process driven by clear-eyed activists and historical logic . That makes the book a valuable supplements to the conventional accounts .
 If anything, histories like Baker’s may be precisely what are needed in the present heated moment, as a reminder of the many ways in which people find their way through political transformation .
 John Auden was fresh out of Cambridge when he traveled to Bengal, the most populous province in the Raj, in 1926 . Auden is the author of a novel in India's most famous novel .
 His first assignment had him surveying steamy, smoky coalfields north of Calcutta . But he dreamed of exploring the fractured peaks of the Himalayas .
 Auden was one of many young Europeans fired up by an intensifying competition among European powers to be the first to summit Mount Everest . Auden says he was inspired by an intense competition among young Europeans to summit the mountain .
 Baker finds a perfect foil to Auden amid the incestuous ranks of the British upper-middle class . Baker finds the perfect narrative foil for Auden in his new novel .
 Michael Spender trained in mapmaking and aerial photography in the Alps . He was chosen as the chief surveyor for an expedition to reconnoiter Everest in 1935 .
 Auden and Spender weren’t simply among the last Englishmen to be employed by the colonial state . They were among those who worked for the British government .
 They were among the last propelled into adulthood on a tail wind of imperial self-confidence . They were part of the last generation of imperialists propelled by imperial confidence .
 They came of age after World War I, when the British Empire was larger than ever on paper . Former Ottoman and German colonies transferred into British hands as League of Nations mandates .
 Self-government had been extended to the so-called white colonies of Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and Ireland . The Empire was being managed more liberally, too, with self-government extended to Canada and Australia .
 Britons at the end of the war supported independence for tropical colonies . Eew Britons supported independence .
 If anything, they may have expected that a new era of enlightened administration was just getting under way . But they may not have expected it to be under way, they did .
 In practice, however, the imperial edifice was cracking under pressure from nationalists . India was the biggest, most valuable colony of all, and it was the most valuable .
 India contributed massively to the war effort, and in exchange, Indian political leaders hoped for substantive steps toward home rule . India had contributed heavily to the effort, but also hoped for home rule in return .
 British administrators granted only moderate reforms, which were offset by enhanced policing of dissent . Instead of reforms, the British administration granted only modest reforms, they increased policing .
 The massacre galvanized the first India-wide protest led by Mahatma Gandhi, who applied his philosophy of nonviolence to the nationalist cause . Gandhi applied his nonviolence philosophy to the national cause .
 The 1920s and 1930s would be marked by a cat-and-mouse game of protests, crackdowns, and compromises . The 1930s and 1920s were marked by protests and crackdowns .
 British authorities jailed independence leaders, then freed them under duress . British authorities freed independence leaders from jail, then imprisoned them . The leaders were freed by the British government, but were released by duress.
 Gandhi orchestrated ever-larger civil disobedience campaigns and won further legislative reforms . Gandhi led the civil disobedience movement in the 1930s and '60s . Gandhi was a pioneer of civil disobedience in the early 1900s .
 British authorities unilaterally brought India into World War II, without promising independence in return . The thread of nationalist patience snapped when British authorities brought the war into India without promising home rule .
 In 1942, Gandhi called for the British to ‘quit India’ and deliver immediate home rule . Gandhi called in 1942 for India's independence . In 1942 he called for India to be given immediate home-rule .
 Subhas Chandra Bose was gathering an army, with Japanese support, to drive out the British by force . By then, the Bengali militant had gathered an army with Japan support .
 In any history of British India, these events appear as milestones on the road to independence . In India, the events were seen as milestones in the country's history of independence .
 In The Last Englishmen, they’re pebbles in the streams of the protagonists’ lives . They’ve been a pebble in the characters’s lives .
 King George VI inspecting Indian troops in 1940s . He wrote as a kind of therapy .
 Spender met the Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung on a ship from India and began a course of Jungian analysis . Spender was inspired by the Jungian theories of his life .
 Audens and Spenders self-examinations reflected a more general crisis of confidence in the imperial system . Audens, Spenders' self-examination reflected a general crisis in the Imperial system .
 Michael Carritt, a member of the Auden-Spender social circle, became a minor district officer in Bengal . Carritt grew disgusted with the performance of white supremacy in Bengal, he says .
 His trajectory from imperial servant to anti-imperial activist aligns with a broader turn in British opinion . His specific trajectory aligns to a wider turn in UK opinion .
 It wasn't only the British who underwent transformations during these fraught years . It wasn t only those who underwent transformation during this fraught period .
 Baker introduces readers to Sudhindranath Datta, a member of Calcutta’s English-educated Indian elite, whose family fortunes had grown in step with British imperialism in Bengal . Baker also introduces .
 In 1929, Datta toured the United States with Rabindranath Tagore . He returned disgusted by Western Orientalism and Calcutta’s decay .
 He started a literary magazine and an adda in his family mansion in North Calcutta . He started the magazine and adda at his family home .
 Bengali intelligentsia (and a suspected English police informant) gathered to debate Indian politics and world affairs . On Friday nights, between bookshelves with serried volumes of Sir Walter Scott and Alfred Lord Tennyson, Bengali intellectuals gathered to discuss Indian politics .
 Auden and Spender are nominally the books' centerpieces . Perhaps the most compelling figure to animate The Last Englishmen is the Englishwoman who connected with them both .
 Nancy Coldstream, nee Sharp, was the daughter of a Cornish country doctor . She moved to London in 1928 to enroll as a student at Slade School of Fine Art .
 Canny about the reality that a womans path to fortune depended on attaching herself to the right man, she swiftly married the most promising artist in the class .
 Almost equally promptly, the couple ran out of money and into marital difficulties . The couple ran into difficulties and ran into financial difficulties .
 Nancy s time for art making got consumed by caring for an infant daughter . Nancy's time for making art was consumed by the care of her daughter .
 Auden and Nancy became fast friends, and through him, Nancy met a series of men who would change the course of her life . Auden was Auden's best friend, and Nancy met him at the age of 16 .
 When John returned to India, his place was taken by another man to whom he himself had introduced Nancy . It was an impossible calculus, and when John returned, he had to take his place .
 For all the women’s liberation of the interwar years, her career was curtailed by marriage and childbearing . Her career was a classic case of a career irretrievably curtailed . For all, the right to vote and a relaxing of divorce laws in women
 Baker notes that Nancy was “one of the most underrated painters of her generation” The story of her life is the story of the men she loved, he says .
 Baker has a gift for scene writing and designs the book accordingly . He breaks each chapter into segments headed by an address and a date, as if in a play . Baker's book is set in a world of words .
 A trove of wonderfully candid diaries and letters lets Baker get deep inside the characters’ heads and hearts . Baker gets deep inside characters' minds and hearts.
 Reading The Last Englishmen, one can almost screen the television adaptation in one’s head . Reading The last Englishmen is almost like a television adaptation .
 It s a rhetorical technique that can be very effective in ramping up anticipation or nailing down a point, but here it reads too often as an interruption or an irrelevance .
 This is a particular liability when it comes to extracting what, if anything, from the owner of the property . This is not the only liability, but it is a liability for the owner, says the owner .
 "One promise of this book lies in its potential to explore how people make sense of their roles in a system that is failing," says author .
 For all the vividness of their professional and romantic travails (or perhaps because of it), it is rather difficult to glean how self-conscious Auden and Spender really were about their positions as agents of British power in a period of escalating opposition .
 History happens to people far more than people happen to make history . Maybe the lesson is a timeless one, that history happens more often than people make history, says CNN.com .
 Maybe it s that political scruples alone seldom stall the complex engine of life, greased by love, ambition, curiosity, desire, loyalty, anxiety, and hope . Or maybe it s . that political . scruplies alone rarely stall the engine of a life . life
 Famine devastates Bengal, killing more than three million people . Datta will see the starving straggle into the stairwells of his apartment building to avoid being scooped up by vans sent to drive them out to the countryside .
 To give away specific characters’ endings would spoil the plot, but it wont surprise anyone that the book wraps up with independence .
 For all that Gandhi had charted a course to freedom on the principle of nonviolence, the independence of India and Pakistan was accompanied by mass migration and horrific violence . For all of that Gandhi's path to freedom was marked on principle, it was also accompanied by violence .
 It was neither an Auden nor a Spender who saw the transfer of power up closest; it was their acquaintance MacNeice .
 bbc sent by the bbc to report on the transition to Pakistan . He watched celebratory fireworks in New Delhi and interviewed Jawaharlal Nehru .
 Early in 1939, Datta had introduced Auden to the woman who finally became his wife . Auden was married to Datta in 1939 .
 She was a vivacious Bengali painter named Sheila Bonnerjee . She had recently returned from studying in London .
 The couple’s daughter Anita was born in 1941; a second daughter, Rita, in 1942 . The couple also had two other daughters, Anita and Rita .
 I wonder if they would have looked back at a photo of their schooldays and seen it as I did, as empire’s shadow in a postcolonial dawn . I wonder how they would look back at photos of their school days .
 Polish villagers dress up as Hobbits from The Lord of the Rings, Gandalf and Gollum . In private life a farmer who receives EU subsidies receives European Union subsidies .
 There are hundreds of thousands of communist-era bunkers in Albania, some of them now being demolished by men in search of rebar .
 Dancing Bears, the latest book by the Polish journalist Witold Szablowski, is never dull . Dancing Bears is a new look at the Polish author's work . The book is published by Polish-Polish journalist and author Witold Szablowski .
 This is Tom Wolfe meets Franz Kafka, or perhaps a Milan Kundera remake of Dances With Wolves . This is a Tom Wolfe meet Franz Kafka and a Kafka-style remake .
 The excellent English version by Antonia Lloyd-Jones, a leading translator from Polish, perfectly captures Szablowski's pithy, staccato prose .
 Report from the wilder corners of the postcommunist world . As a collection of vivid, skillfully crafted reportage .
 Animal-rights activists persuaded the last remaining bear keepers to hand their animals over to a reserve . The Dancing Bears Park, in Belitsa, in southwestern Bulgaria, is a reserve in the region .
 Szablowski heard about this story, it occurred to him that the bears were in the same condition as the people of eastern Europe . Szablowowski: "The bears are in a similar condition to the people in eastern Europe" The bears are now in a stable condition, Sz
 Szablowski whizzes around the postcommunist world, from Cuba to Ukraine, Albania, Serbia, Kosovo, Estonia, Georgia, and that Polish Hobbit village .
 Szablowski takes an unexpected turn to Greece, where he finds a young architecture student, Maria, protesting for an end to capitalism . At the end of his tour, Szablowowski finds Maria, a student protesting against capitalism in Greece .
 Szablowski's previous reporting received the Polish Press Agency’s Ryszard Kapuscinski Award . No wonder he received the award for his work .
 Kapuscinski is the founding father and presiding deity of the contemporary Polish school of reportage . Szablowski is now a leading practitioner of the school of journalism .
 There are the same short paragraphs, punchy prose, surreal stories, and first-person narration . The same devotion to showing, not telling, as well as the same devotion .
 The maestro played fast and loose with the facts; he borrowed anecdotes and turned them into what looked like his own reporting . He embroidered, fabricated, and fabulated, he embroidered and fabricated .
 A resident of Addis Ababa complained that Kapuscinski s celebrated book about the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie is “like a tale from The Thousand and One Nights” The biographer showed the former Bolivian guerilla Osvaldo Peredo what
 Distinguished wordsmiths still defend Kapuscinski on the grounds that this was Literature, with a capital L, not mere reporting .
 We writers of nonfiction need to guard the bright line between fact and fiction with every weapon at our disposal . Nonfiction writers must guard the line between fiction and fact, writes the author .
 This is not to suggest that Szablowski willingly distorts facts or misleads his readers as Kapuscinski did . This does not mean Szablowowski deliberately distorts the facts . It's not the same thing Kapuscinksi did in his book .
 CNN's John Sutter operates within the loose conventions of the Kapuscinski school of reporting . But he certainly operates within a loose school of journalism .
 Leave aside, as enjoyable ludic ursology, several passages in which he tells us what individual bears ‘probably’ thought and felt. Leave aside . Several passages in this book tell us what bears “probably” thought .
 Why include this figure if it represents an unfounded and obviously ridiculous claim? Why include it if it’s an unfounded or obviously ridiculous figure?
 As someone who hitched several rides in Kosovo immediately after the 1999 nato invasion, I beg to differ . As someone . hitched a ride in Kosovo after the invasion .
 Taken together, these exaggerations contribute to a narrative in which everything becomes wilder, more extreme, and more exotic . However harmless these individual exaggerations may be, taken together, they contribute to the narrative of everything becoming wilder and extreme .
 There is a long tradition of western Europeans orientalizing eastern Europe . Voltaire did with Russia and Rousseau did with Poland, Rousseau with Poland .
 Szablowski is orientalizing his own region, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "What is unusual is that he is Orientalizing his region," says Sutter.
 Szablowski is writing his account at a time when eastern Europe—or at least east-central Europe, from Poland to Bulgaria—has never been closer to the West . Odder still, Szablowow is writing this account as part of a growing trend in eastern Europe .
 All of its states have some version of the political and economic system prevalent in the West . Most of them are members of the same political, economic, and security communities as their western neighbors . This is unprecedented in European history .
 Westerners are reassured that they are still on a higher plane of civilization, reason, and Enlightenment . Eastern Europeans remain, under their UOreal-smoothed skin, the same old dancing bears .
 Very few of the protagonists in Szablowski s political reportage seem to fit this bill . Szablowski's reportage seems to be a bit of a throwback to the past .
 Bosnians and Serbs are not nostalgic for Karadzic, even in his capacity as a faith healer . The Kosovar Albanians are pining for the days of domination by Serbia, but not for Serbia .
 Szablowski is rightly critical of the early years of Estonian policy toward the country’s Russian minority . Some of the ethnic Russians the author meets in Estonia are indeed nostalgic for the Soviet Union, he says .
 Even among that minority, we encounter the figure of “Asyas mom” a presumably middle-aged or elderly Russian woman who passes her Estonian language exam on the seventh attempt .
 To be sure, some people in postcommunist Europe will say that they miss some good things about the bad old days .
 They may, for example, mention a kind of rudimentary security—“we pretend to work, and they pretend to pay us”—or say that their lives were once less stressful .
 Others recall a sense of equality and solidarity among those below the small communist ruling class, the nomenklatura . Others may recall the sense of solidarity and equality .
 "There’s an interesting subject there, one for another, less colorful, but perhaps deeper, book," he says .
 As we approach the 30th anniversary of the revolutions of 1989, leaders such as Viktor Orban in Hungary and Jaroslaw Kaczynski in Poland have achieved high levels of electoral support while systematically eroding the checks and balances .
 Assistant Editor is a full-time paid job offering exceptional training in serious journalism . The Assistant Editor position is a paid job with exceptional training .
 Previous Assistant Editors have included recent graduates from undergraduate and master’s programs . Previous assistant editors include recent graduate students .
 Candidates should have a serious interest in international relations, a flair for writing, and a facility with the English language . Candidates must also have an interest in the role of international relations .
 For an author, it is always supremely irritating to be criticized on the grounds that you did not write a different book— the one the reviewer would have liked to read . The author says it is "supremely irritating" for an author to criticize his work .
 The American publisher gave Szablowski’s book that subtitle about nostalgia for tyranny, suggesting a thesis the book does not advance, let alone sustain . I raise the alternative here only because the book's subtitle suggests a thesis that the book doesn’t advance .
 The original Polish edition had no subtitle, whereas a more recent Polish edition has a subtitle that translates roughly as Freedom Means New Challenges, New Smells, New Sounds, and a New Great Adventure . The original . Polish edition of the book was originally published in Poland .
 There's no mention of nostalgia for tyranny, a notion that most Polish readers would laugh out of court . Notice that there’s no mention in the book of tyranny, though .
 A skilled reporter could potentially do a fascinating job of talking to the voters for Kaczynski’s Law and Justice party in his own country . Szablowski is a skilled reporter who could do a great job of unpacking voters' discontents .
 The explanation of what is happening in eastern Europe today lies not in dancing bears but in stationary people who feel the world is dancing around them . The explanation for eastern Europe's troubles lies perhaps, perhaps, with stationary people .
 In an ideal world, citizens would ground their identity in their shared humanity . In the ideal world of citizens, citizens should ground their identities in their humanity .
 People seeking recognition in narrow identity groups, based on nationality, religion, sect, race, ethnicity, and gender . But now, people are seeking recognition based on national, religion and sect .
 Identity politics has always existed, but leaders on the left and the right have exploited the fears created by economic and social upheavations to build coalitions around particular groups and their demands for recognition . Identity politics is a form of identity politics that has been exploited by both sides in the past
 Vladimir Putin in Russia, Xi Jinping in China, Viktor Orban in Hungary . Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping are seen to be expressing resentment in their own countries .
 As Fukuyama writes, a sense of nation is essential for liberal democracy, precisely because it speaks to the human desire for identity and respect . The nation is an essential part of liberal democracy .
 The challenge is to foster an inclusive and civic-minded nationalism that appeals to humanity’s most generous spirit, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Leaders and people across the liberal democratic world must turn it into an active political project . Great forces of history are arrayed against that endeavor, so leaders and people must turn that into a political project, says Julian Zelizer .
 In this short study, Frantz provides an illuminating guide to today's authoritarian wave .
 It can take the form of strongman rulers, as in sub-Saharan Africa, or hereditary dictators . It can also be led by a party or the military, or led by party or military, in Latin America .
 Frantz is at her most insightful in her description of the ways authoritarian regimes have taken on “pseudo-democratic” characteristics in order to survive . Frantz: authoritarian regimes take on ‘pseudo democratic’ characteristics to survive to survive.
 Military or elite coups are out of fashion, replaced by more gradual usurpations of power carried out through rigged elections and biased political rules . Military coups out of style, replaced with gradual usurps carried out by rigged elections .
 Turkey and Philippines fit this model, with elected populists slowly dismantling the institutions of democracy . Turkey and the Philippines fit the model, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 "It is harder to fight back against this subtle democratic subversion, because a single moment of truth never occurs," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "It's harder than fight back, because it's harder to say 'truth'
 This sprawling set of 32 short essays is one of the first scholarly efforts to reckon with the Trump administration s assault on the international liberal order . The book includes 32 essays from 32 essays .
 Jervis argues that the Trump years provide a chance for political scientists and historians to test their theories .
 The essays show that scholars differ on the sources of the crisis and scope of it . Scholars differ on whether President Donald Trump is the cause or the effect of it, and the scope .
 Others focus on Trump and the institution of the presidency, examining how the national security state constrains its leader . Others look at the role of the state of the president .
 Scholars of international institutions see Trump s presidency as a test of the theory that institutions and long-standing strategic bargains will prove resilient . Scholars see the president's presidency as test of his ability to deal with the world's most powerful .
 Michael Barnett suggests that Trump is so unusual that he escapes the confines of most international relations theory . Barnett: Trump's unusual behavior makes him unique in the world of international relations . Barnett says that Trump's behavior is unusual enough to escape the confines .
 The book also features a good debate over the resiliency of the liberal order . It hinges on each authors assumptions about the sources of political order and whether domestic coalitions can be rebuilt around internationalism .
 Chowdhury makes a convincing case for the reality, not the myth, of international order . He argues that international order is a myth, not a myth .
 He notes that most countries in the world are weak, with wobbly central governments that fail to provide basic economic and social services . Yet they muddle through thanks to the international order that protects all sovereign territorial states against their rivals .
 The myth that Chowdhury exposes is the realist narrative in which countries compete for survival in a state of Hobbesian anarchy, he says . The myth is that countries compete against each other for survival, he writes .
 As Chowdhury shows, this classic model fits the European experience but little else . The classic model is a classic model of a classic European experience . It is available on sale in the UK, Europe and Australia .
 He argues that modern Europe convinced citizens to support centralized power and pay high taxes . States outside of the West, because they developed later, did not go through this cycle of war making .
 Chowdhury is surely correct that state building is harder now than a century ago . State building is hard now than it was 100 years ago, he says . He says .
 In this ambitious book, Katzenstein and Seybert argue that scholars need to rethink their assumptions about knowledge and uncertainty in world politics and equip themselves with new ideas about power .
 Theorists tend to see a world in which uncertainty can be reduced to calculable risk . But theorists see uncertainty reduced to a world of calculable risks .
 Katzenstein and Seybert argue that the world is just too complex and contingent for this kind of social inquiry .
 T his masterly exposition of the history of economic thought— and the context in which it developed— goes back to the seventeenth century .
 Classical economics sketches the historical background to the emergence of classical economics, monetarism . It sketches the history of the rise in classical economics and the rise of the modern era of the dollar .
 Skidelsky wrote a biography of John Maynard Keynes, so it s not surprising that his interpretations of Keynes’ thought are especially subtle .
 Keynes emphasized unknowable uncertainty about the future, a contrast to the deterministic way that his theory is presented in textbooks . Keynes' theory is usually presented as the origin of modern macroeconomics, but is usually taught to students .
 Skidelsky also offers an illuminating treatment of the 2008 financial crisis . He discusses the ways in which economists were blindsided by it, the monetary and fiscal policies .
 This speculative book attempts to describe the future of work and explain how to prepare for it . The book is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Cambridge .
 Baldwin lays out various different attributes of working life, according to the different talents and industries involved . Baldwin explains the benefits of working in the workplace, such as working in a variety of industries . Baldwin also discusses the importance of working for a company .
 He characterizes what kinds of things intelligent robots and remote workers can and can t do today and what they’ll be able to do within the next few decades .
 He matches the two up to see which tasks and jobs will fall to automation . Finally, he matches up the two to see what jobs will be automated by robots .
 Baldwin argues that in the last century, most people moved from relying on their hands in their work to relying on heads . Baldwin argues most people relied on their heads in the work to rely on their head . Baldwin: In the past century, people have moved from using their hands to their
 Machines wont be able to replicate such human abilities as nonverbal communication, compassion, creativity, and face-to-face contact . In the future, they will have to rely on their hearts, because machines won't replicate these abilities .
 Many jobs that rely on these attributes will be safe from robots for decades, experts say . Many jobs are still at risk of being replaced by robots in the future .
 Artificial intelligence excels at classifying what it sees, searching huge databases, and recognizing patterns, but it cannot copy other, more human qualities . Artificial intelligence can only copy other human qualities, such as intelligence .
 For more than half a century, the World Economic Forum has organized an annual gathering of politicians, business executives, experts, and policymakers in Davos, Switzerland . The World Summit of Davos will take place on January 20, 2018 .
 The wef has no formal authority, but it has become a major forum for elites to discuss policy ideas and priorities . It is a forum for elite to discuss policies and priorities, with no formal powers .
 Garsten and Sorbom explore both the inner workings and the communication strategies of the wef. In this informative study, Garsten . Garsten explores both the . inner workings of the . wef .
 It is difficult to replicate democratic institutions such as elected parliaments in international bodies . They are troubled by its lack of democratic accountability, but it is hard to replicate . It is a difficult task to replicate such institutions in international body .
 As appealing as an international parliament might be, the world is not likely to see one anytime soon . Not one can discuss complex issues in a common language rather than simply make speeches designed for domestic constituents .
 In the end, the authors conclude that the wef does perform a useful service, even if it is biased toward elite perceptions .
 Bacchus is a former United States congressman and former chair of the appeals court of the World Trade Organization . He is a strong advocate for international law, which he views as necessary for sustained global economic growth . Bacchu says international law is necessary to sustain sustained global growth .
 In this book, he champions free foreign trade and free foreign investment, as long as they are subject to international rules and the right institutions are set up to settle inevitable disputes .
 He argues that rules should be formulated to ensure sustainability . He suggests they should accord with the UN s Sustainable Development Goals, which set global targets for development by 2030 .
 Intelligence Squared will bring together leading economists, best-selling authors, and a Federal Reserve Bank president to debate whether the system has shored up its weaknesses, or if in the face of a booming economy, the U.S. is repeating the mistakes of the past .
 This trenchant and personal book describes the powerful benefits of bringing ultrafast fiberoptic Internet cables directly to households and small firms . It describes the benefits of delivering ultrafast broadband to homes and businesses .
 Singapore, Stockholm, Tokyo, and parts of South Korea have done this . Singapore and Stockholm are the first cities to do this .
 She berates them for their high prices, which they can charge because they often operate as local monopolies . She says they can't charge because of their local monopoly, which she wants to preserve .
 Crawford calls for a new federal initiative to install fiber-optic cables throughout the U.S. Crawford ends her indictment of the current state of affairs and the political system that permits it . Crawford: A new initiative should be modeled on past infrastructure programs, such as rural electrification and
 Two books show the two world wars from the perspective of the defeated Germans . M.I. litary history tends to be seen through the eyes of the victors, but these two books do so .
 Boff* has managed to fill some of the gaps by supplementing standard sources with the detailed diaries of Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria .
 Rupprecht ended the war as a field marshal in the German army . He was a constant presence on the western front, from the failure of the original German offensive of 1914 to the final push in 1918 .
 This led to the Allied offensive that ended with Germany’s capitulation . The Allied offensive ended with the German capitulation in 1945 .
 Recent historians have argued that the Allies adapted well to the demands of this attritional warfare .
 Hitler left no memoir of his own, and those of his generals were self-serving . Hitler's memoir was published in 1939, but he died in 1945 .
 Germany’s professional soldiers struggled to cope with the Fiihrer s manic interference . So a narrative has emerged that Germany's professional soldiers .
 Fritz s original and compelling account of Hitler s military strategy demonstrates that, as often as not, his judgment was as good as those of his senior commanders . Fritz's original account shows that as often not, he was more likely to be able to rely on his judgment .
 He could be well informed and imaginative and had flashes of real strategic insight . He could also be well-informed and imaginative, he said .
 Fritz shines a new light on Hitler s arguments with his generals, from the early preparations for war to his determination to fight to the bitter end . By avoiding caricature, Fritz avoids caricature .
 Early on, he could be realistic about the obstacles and, at times, cautious . Early on on, however, he was realistic and cautious .
 He refused to abandon his ambitions and fought on in Russia when all hope of victory had gone . But he refused to give up and fought for his life in Russia .
 He was prepared for the Third Reich to go down in flames, regretting only that he would not die fighting . He regrets that he was not fighting for the Nazis .
 Two books take on a familiar topic but manage to be original and thought provoking . These two books are very different from each other .
 Hastings covers the war from the Communists’ uprising against the French in 1945 to their victory over the South in 1975 . Hastings also covers the Communist Party’s victory in the South from 1945 to 1975 .
 In this masterly and engrossing account, he uses the same techniques that have served him well in his histories of the two world wars, exploring the war from the bottom up as well as the top down .
 He is scathing about delusionary U.S. decisionmaking and the hopeless efforts to compensate for the South’s political weakness by military means, he says .
 He is harsh in his depiction of the callous North Vietnamese and the Vietcong . But he is also harsh in depicting the North Vietnamese as callous and callous .
 The strengths of the book lie in Hastings’ ability to describe, with extensive use of diaries, memoirs, and interviews, the chaos of battle in a war without obvious frontlines .
 VanDeMark is returning to a story he has told before, notably in partnership with former U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, but now with new material . VanMark is back at the helm of a new series of stories .
 He focuses on the Kennedy and Johnson administrations . He asks how smart men could have misread the conflict so badly .
 He opens with the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, in 1961, in Cuba, which might have served as warning enough of how schemes that sound great in a briefing can go horribly wrong in practice .
 He then moves through the assassination of South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem, the United States bombing campaign, the Tet Offensive, and the first tentative peace negotiations .
 VanDeMarks' extensive use of research on the psychology of decisionmaking can be interesting, although it sometimes interrupts the flow of his narrative . VanMarks often uses research on decisionmaking to make his point .
 The sense of introspection it provides adds poignancy to the records of meetings and field trips by U.S. leaders, who never quite came to grips with the tragedy .
 Despite the overwhelming focus on al Qaedas role in the 9/11 attacks, far less has been written about the group s attacks against the U.S. embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam three years earlier .
 She describes how she had pressed for a more secure embassy before the bombing . She describes the experience of the day itself, and the painful aftermath .
 The book is an autobiography, an investigation into the origins of the attack, and a lament about bureaucratic failings at the U.S. State Department . It is also a discussion of how these might be addressed with better leadership .
 Bushnell was told that she was overloading the circuits by pressing for better security . The sloppy departmental response to the blasts still stings, she says .
 She makes a compelling case that good diplomats can make a difference in the world . Yet she also makes a case for good diplomats to be a diplomat .
 Woodward s 12 books of instant history based on insider access to the White House . Author spotlights the struggles of the often dysfunctional Trump administration . Woodward's book is the latest of 12 books based on inside access to White House insiders .
 Some divisions pit professional staffers against Trump family members . Some of the divisions he chronicles pit professional staff against family members.
 Others reflect personality clashes typical of every high-pressure workplace . They are more acute than usual in the Trump White House because the president s inner circle includes so many egos .
 Woodward: The most significant battles were those between a protectionist, “America first” president and his like-minded staffers on one side . The more globalist and pro-free-trade officials on the other side were pro-protectionist . Woodward: "America first"
 Trump sought to make policy choices that filled his staff with horror, including withdrawing from the World Trade Organization, that filled them with horror . Trump's staff was horrified by his decision to withdraw from the WTO .
 Like Sir Humphrey Appleby in the British television show Yes Minister, the internationalists did what they could to delay him . The internationalists are doing what they can to delay his arrival in the UK .
 Woodward finished Woodward's book, but since then, it appears he's been busy . Woodward has been working on a book of his own, Woodward says . Woodward: "There matters rested when Woodward finished his book; since then it appears."
 For almost a century after the Civil War, white southerners and their allies dominated the study of Reconstruction . The study was dominated by the white people who dominated Reconstruction . This week's episode marks the 50th anniversary of Reconstruction in Washington .
 Southern whites uniting to overthrow corrupt and incompetent governments that were maintained by federal bayonets . Their narrative was received almost everywhere as gospel. Their narrative of southern whites overthrowing corrupt, incompetent governments was received as gospel .
 Guelzo offers a concise, clear, and temperate account of one of the most complex periods in U.S. history . The author offers a clear account of the complex period .
 Unlike earlier historians, he never loses sight of the cause of the newly free, says historian . "Unlike earlier historians," he says, "Never loses sight" of his work .
 Reconstruction-era southern governments were vulnerable to pressure from wealthy and wily white oligarchs, says historian . But he points to the lack of political experience that left them vulnerable . The lack of experience in the South's Reconstruction era has led to political turmoil .
 Guelzo also underscores the collapse of political will in the North for a long-term occupation, which is what a serious Reconstruction strategy would have required . The collapse of the North's political will is what is needed for a serious reconstruction strategy, he says .
 The British Labour government that took power in the summer of 1945 soon concluded that keeping as much of the Middle East s oil as possible under British rule offered the best, perhaps the only, hope of maintaining the United Kingdoms place in the first rank of world powers .
 Pro-British monarchs ruled in Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Libya, and the Gulf kingdoms . Pro-Britain monarchs rule in Egypt and Iraq .
 Arab nationalists wanted no part of British rule, and the United States was willing and able to displace the United Kingdom as the dominant regional power . The U.S. was able to take over the Arab Spring from the British rule .
 Barr describes how the United States gradually marginalized the United Kingdom in the Middle East . Barr says the U.S. did indeed gradually marginalize the UK in the region .
 This is a gripping story, and Barr, a gifted narrative historian, tells it well, casting light on both the history of the United States presence in the modern Middle East and the dilemmas United States policy continues to face there today .
 Contemporaries experience the history of their times as full of chaos and improvisation . Historians try to find patterns in the maelstrom. Historians experience the chaos of the times .
 American public opinion strongly favored rapid demobilization and military withdrawal from Europe . U.S. military withdrawal would be a major priority in Europe, according to public opinion . Public opinion strongly favors rapid military withdrawal .
 Leebaert attacks view that postwar period saw smooth handoff of world power from London to Washington . History of U.S.-British relationship from V-E Day to Suez crisis highlights complexity .
 In his telling, far from ceding the world to the Americans, the British fought tenaciously to preserve their strategic independence . The British fought very hard to preserve strategic independence, he says .
 American strategists were ambivalent, confused, and lacked the coherent grand designs for a liberal international order that historians would later attribute to them . Historians would attribute the lack of a coherent grand plan to the U.S. for liberal international relations .
 Leebaert s revisionism is not always convincing, but he is right to challenge the narrative of a seamless transition . A sentimentalized vision of this history will make it harder for policymakers to deal with the challenges facing the U.S. in the twentyfirst century .
 She offers a brisk walk through the American intellectual tradition, from New England Puritanism to modern pragmatism . She offers an insight into America's intellectual tradition .
 Ratner-Rosenhagens determination to incorporate the full spectrum of American thought clashes with her desire to impose order on her procession of thinkers . Some of her assessments, such as the high place she gives the critic and journalist Margaret Fuller in American intellectual history, would be more convincing
 Her curiosity about ideas and her determination to understand a diverse set of authors and points of view on their own terms, make this book a stimulating read .
 The eu quietly coordinates European policy on development, human rights, sanctions, policing, policing and human trafficking, external border control, military missions, diplomacy and diplomacy .
 Even limiting the exercise to mere political rebranding requires changes in the legal form or underlying substance of thousands of rules, regulations, and procedures . Even if it's only political rebrandeding, it requires changes to thousands of laws, regulations and procedures to be changed .
 The result has been a series of deadlocked talks between London and the other 27 eu members . It would be unacceptable for London to pick and choose when and how it cooperates with its neighbors .
 The authors show that sober negotiations could preserve most current cooperation under another name . But they say that the changes that must occur will generally disadvantage the United Kingdom .
 Berlin under the Weimar Republic was a crucible that helped forge modern society and politics . Berlin was the crucible of Berlin's history and culture . Berlin is now a city of its own .
 Its violent partisan conflicts, extreme disparities between social classes, floods of rural and foreign migrants, and fluid cultural and gender identities set the tone for urban life ever after . It was the beginning of urban life in the U.S.
 Lutes, a legendary artist, devoted two decades to this magisterial graphic novel . Lutes dedicated two decades of his life to creating the book .
 Its multilayered story line follows a set of loosely connected characters in Berlin between 1928 and 1933 . The film is set in Berlin and follows a series of loosely-connected characters .
 A young girl from the provinces arrives in Berlin and is swept up in a world of convinced Communists, militant Nazis, disillusioned Social Democrats, conservative businessmen, impoverished workers, and impoverished workers . As well as cruel police, tortured drug addicts, wounded veterans, black jazz musicians, and closet
 Some of the events Lutes portrays are grim, others inspiring, and still others confusing and troubling . Lutes: "Some of the world's greatest moments are grim and some are inspiring"
 Throughout the film, one is constantly aware of the eerie resemblance to today's world .
 The imperialism through which France, Spain, the United Kingdom, and other European countries came to dominate the globe was not simply a function of superior military technology, naval power, or administrative organization, it was a result of superior naval power .
 Europeans rarely in a position to dominate the world solely by means of their military might . Europeans were rarely in position to . dominate the . world solely through means of military might, says historian John MacKinnon .
 They subtly co-opted foreign elites by trading with them, hiring them as mercenaries, supporting them in their struggles against local enemies . If all else failed, bribing them or blocking their ports, they blockaded their ports .
 Sharman does admit that informal imperialism ran out of steam in the late nineteenth century, when Europe simply rolled over Africa . This adds up to a more nuanced story than one might think, Sharman says .
 Few nations have ever been strong enough to dominate all those around them through brute force alone . Yet in an era when great-power competition seems to be on the rise, this book reminds readers that few, if any, modern nations are strong enough .
 The organization encompasses one-third of the world's population in its 53 postimperial member states . Formally, the organization encompasses a third of world s population .
 Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, are freshly minted Commonwealth youth ambassadors . Prince Charles is Prince Harry's presumed successor, Prince Harry . Prince Harry is Prince Charles' presumed successor .
 Euroskeptics believe that the UK will reembrace the Commonwealth, thereby unleashing a bonanza of trade and investment . Eurosceptics say it is a golden opportunity for Britain to re-embrace Commonwealth .
 Murphy argues all of this is little more than pomp and circumstance . Murphy argues that all of the events in Washington are little less than pomp-and-drama .
 Commonwealth members disagree about almost everything, even basic human rights . Commonwealth member nations disagree on almost everything . Commonwealth members are divided on basic rights .
 Decades ago, citizens of member countries could immigrate to the United Kingdom, but no more . Citizens of the UK could have immigrated to the UK in the 1970s, but now they are banned .
 Murphy ends by encouraging the U.K. to shed its postimperial delusions . Murphy ends up saying that the UK should shed its delusions, even though that may put him out of a job .
 This sober and detailed analysis of Islamist terrorism in Europe generalizes not just from the attacks that have succeeded but also from the over twothirds of planned attacks that've been foiled . This sober analysis is based on the number of foiled attacks in Europe .
 Nesser shows that although their basic goals are constant, Islamist terrorists adapt their tactics with the times . Nesser: "Islamist terrorists are always trying to get their objectives met with the time"
 In recent years, heightened security has made complex bombings and aircraft hijackings all but impossible . Terrorists have gone minimalist in the face of heightened security .
 Attacks today tend to be one-man operations, carried out with vans and knives . Attacks are often carried out by one man with vans, knives and vans .
 European death toll from terrorism is far below what it was during the 1970s and 1980s . However, the number of attacks is higher than ever in Europe .
 Nesser concludes that military operations abroad do less to quash terrorism than sound policing at home . Nesser: Military operations abroad are less effective as sound policing in America .
 Police should focus on stopping “entrepreneurs’—skilled jihadist activists who assist perpetrators— through aggressive surveillance . Police, he says, should stop ‘entrepreneur’s’ and ‘terrorist’ activists helping perpetrators .
 In Lindskoog s view, prolonged detention violates international norms of human rights and U.S. constitutional guarantees of due process . Lindscoog says prolonged detention, rather than release into the community on parole, violates human rights .
 Lindskoog examines the precedents for the system of mass incarceration of immigrants in U.S. policies toward Haitian immigrants since the 1970s . He examines the use of Guantanamo Bay for extraterritorial detention .
 Both Democratic and Republican administrations have resorted to detention to enforce immigration laws and deter additional waves of undocumented immigrants . Both parties have used detention as a way to deter more undocumented immigrants.
 Lindskoog provides a valuable road map of the tangled law and politics of U.S. immigration policies . He offers an overview of the law, politics of immigration policies in the United States .
 He fails, however, to detail more humane alternatives to cope with the burgeoning flows of immigrants .
 Immigration Policy in the Age of Punishment argues that immigration policies in some late-capitalist countries exemplify broader trends toward bureaucratic authoritarianism . The 15 essays argue that contemporary immigration policies exemplify trends toward bureaucracy authoritarianism.
 The volume s sociologists (following the French social theorist Michel Foucault) view detention and deportation as disciplinary measures designed to foster law-abiding behavior and productivity .
 They detect a strong emotional and theatrical theme in punitive anti-immigrant policies and racially tinged vindictiveness among administrative judges and other law enforcement officials . Anticipating U.S. President Donald Trump, they say they detect strong emotional, theatrical theme .
 Tanya Golash-Boza names former U.S. President Barack Obama “the Deporter in Chief” since his administration expelled some three million immigrants . Obama's administration expelled 3 million immigrants from the United States .
 Essays on Australia, Canada, France, and the United Kingdom find a global trend of more restrictive attitudes toward immigrants, including asylum seekers . Not all the case studies are fully convincing, but not all the cases seem to be convincing .
 This book tells the inspiring story of the rapid response by Andres Andres, a celebrity chef and restaurateur, to the humanitarian crisis in Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria .
 Andres’ preferred model of social enterprise is social enterprise . Although it isn’t a full-blown business school case study, it illustrates Andres' preferred model .
 Andres employed 20,000 volunteers across 24 kitchens, relying on seven local food trucks for distribution . The Andres food truckers also distributed food from Andres kitchens .
 The book is more than the story of Andres Andres' heroic efforts to feed Puerto Rico . It's more than a book, it's a life story of his heroic efforts .
 It offers a forceful indictment of the actions of the Trump administration and the Federal Emergency Management Agency . It also offers an indictment of various nongovernmental organizations .
 Andres accuses U.S. President Donald Trump of carrying out misleading celebrations of the government’s grossly inadequate relief efforts and of cronyism in awarding fema contracts .
 In 1992, a negotiated peace concluded El Salvador’s prolonged, bloody civil war . The peace paved the way for an electoral democracy . El Salvador is now a democracy .
 The leftist insurgents emerged as a political party and eventually took the presidency . They emerged as an insurgent party and became a party of sorts . The leftist party eventually won the presidency in 2008 .
 Sprenkels used his grass-roots contacts to conduct revealing interviews with wartime combatants . He used to conduct interviews with guerrilla forces during the war .
 The book gives a nuanced, humane assessment of the lives of former revolutionaries in peacetime .
 Sprenkels avoids the simple tropes of postrevolutionary political disillusionment and moral decay . The book is published in New York, New York and London .
 Vladimir Putin s Russia has unleashed “hybrid war” against the West, according to U.S. and Europe . Putin's Russia is believed to have unleashed ‘hybrid . war’ against the Western .
 Fridman does not deny that Russia does all these things, but he is more interested in scraping away the misunderstandings surrounding the concept itself . He explains where the notion of hybrid war comes from, how Americans and Russians understand it differently .
 The modern concept of war fought by multiple means, on and off the battlefield, originated with the United States military over the course of several wars . The idea of combining military force with other resources to sap an opponents will to fight is as old as war itself .
 The current, more expansive Russian version reflects what its authors believe were the West s own methods of waging the Cold War, which they now see being used against Russia once again .
 World War II has been written about the relationships among these three leaders . Documenting their wartime communication in such detail gives new depth to this history .
 Stalin’s more cordial attitude toward Roosevelt than Churchill, for example, is unmistakable . The subtle shift in the dynamic among the three in Stalin's favor beginning in 1943 began in 1943 .
 In the 1950s and 1960s, the U.S. and other Western countries attempted to foster economic development in newly independent but poor countries . In the 1960s and '60s, Western countries tried to foster development in new but poor nations .
 In the Soviet Union, something similar occurred in the less developed regions of the country, not least because Moscow wanted to prove that it could engineer economic development better than its capitalist competitors . The Soviet Union wanted to show that its economic development could be better than any other country .
 In this original contribution, Kalinovsky outlines the calculations of the national and local figures who led the effort . Then looks at the case of Tajikistan to explore how it worked in practice .
 He assesses specific elements of Soviet plans, such as the Nurek Dam, and their effects on the lives of those involved and the broader population .
 Early illusions about how easily the Western or the Soviet model of economic modernity could be cut and pasted onto traditional cultures had faded . By the 1980s, in both the West and the East, early illusions about the model of modernity had faded.
 Soviet policymakers came to the awkward realization that instituting markets and preserving local traditions promised better results than state planning . As Kalinovsky shows, in the Soviet case, this is not the case .
 As the country came apart under Premier Mikhail Gorbachev, this belated awareness quickly succumbed to recriminations over the entire enterprise . But as the country as it came apart in the 1990s, this quickly succumbed .
 Judeo-Bolshevism is the notion that communism was, and remains, a Jewish plot . The notion is that communism is, or remains, an anti-communist plot, remains .
 Hanebrink follows the myth twisted course from its European origins in the immediate aftermath of the Bolshevik Revolution, through the jaundiced politics of the interwar period to the Nazi Germany .
 World War II did not kill it, and he picks up the story with its reappearance in postwar Eastern European politics, where it was exploited by those on both sides of the ideological divide . He picks up with his story with the reappearance of the story in post-war Eastern European
 He argues that it survives today in the resurgent right-wing nationalism cropping up in many Western countries . He says it survives in the resurgence of right-right nationalism in the West .
 From the start, the fantasy held that an alien element -- the Jews -- aimed to subvert the cultural values and national identities of Western societies . The fantasy was that an . alien element—the Jews— aimed to . subvert . Western societies' cultural values, national identities, Western
 As Hanebrink points out, this theme is echoed in modern anti-Muslim conspiracy theories . The theme of conspiracy theories has been echoed in anti-Islam theories .
 The writers, politicians, and shills whose poisonous ideas he exhumes have many contemporary admirers . The writer's poisonous ideas have many modern admirers.
 Even a reader not enamored of the spy stories will have trouble putting this one down .
 Oleg Gordlevsky was a true child of the KGB; his father and his brother were both dedicated lifelong officers . Oleg's father and brother were dedicated lifelong KGB officers .
 In 1973, while posted in Denmark, he was recruited by British intelligence . In 1973 he was posted to Denmark, while serving in Denmark .
 He provided information to the West, bringing down Soviet spy operations in several European countries . In one instance, he alerted London and Washington to Moscow’s misreading of a NATO war game that could have led to nuclear disaster .
 The whole story, including Gordievsky s return to Moscow, unfolds with a pace and drama that recall the novels of John le Carre . The film, based on the book, is directed by Robert De Niro and directed by Simon Cowell .
 Hill offers a balanced history of the sad devolution of relations between Russia and the West . From the high hopes in the years after the Cold War to today s fractured situation, Hill offers the history of Russian relations .
 Often leaders were oblivious to ‘unforeseen and unintended’ consequences . Often leaders are oblivious to the consequences of their actions, experts say .
 Hill traces more thoroughly than any other historian what has happened inside Russia and in its relations with NATO, the EU, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe over the last 25 years . Hill uses abundant examples to trace more thoroughly what happened .
 If Russia and Europe are to recover from their failures and build a system that includes Moscow, he concludes . These institutions will have to be either refurbished or replaced, he says .
 W. ehrey brings the eye of a military professional, a scholar, and a journalist to this vivid depiction of the Libyan conflict .
 He describes the places and people at the center of the struggle, from jihadists to secular feminists . He also describes the people and places in the struggle for freedom of expression .
 Stevens' account of the death of U.S. Ambassador Chris Stevens, in 2012, shows that Stevens was aware of the dangers he faced in Benghazi . Stevens took a calculated risk to go there anyway, says Stevens .
 Wehrey gives a good sense of Libya’s division into two dominant factions . One based in Benghazi and aligned with Khalifa Haftar, the head of the Libyan National Army . The other based in Misurata and Tripoli and with a major Islamist element .
 Wehrey shows that the Islamic State has managed to establish a foothold in Libya between the two factions . On top of the domestic conflict, Libya has also seen a rise in Islamic State militants .
 Although he explains this mess effectively, Wehrey offers no way out of it . Wehry offers no . way out .
 In 1910, Mehmed Talaat, a leader of the Young Turks movement and future grand vizier (essentially, the prime minister) of the Ottoman Empire, began planning the extermination of the Armenians .
 Kieser s portrait of Talaat shows this architect of genocide as a charming monster, brilliant tactician, and fanatical ideologue . Kiesers' portrait of the genocide architect shows him as charming monster .
 Kieser s prose is sometimes tangled, and his narrative can be confusing, but his tale is gripping and well researched . The novel is a gripping tale of a young woman and a young man .
 Talaat traded a wartime alliance with Germany for German silence in the face of an estimated 800,000 Armenian deaths . The Armenian state traded a war alliance with German silence for silence .
 His actions left Weimar Germany morally blemished . His actions scuttled the possibility that the Ottoman Empire might turn in a more liberal direction .
 Talaat was assassinated in 1921 by an Armenian militant . After fleeing to exile in Berlin, he fled to France, where he was assassinated .
 He also debunks the notion that the rise of Kemal Ataturk in the 1920s marked a rupture with the Young Turks . Rather, it was a continuation of the Young Turkish movement, he says .
 Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan invokes the Ottoman nationalist themes popularized by Talaat . Likewise, today, Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan also invokes those themes .
 This concise guide to Syria’s intractable conflict provides a nuanced analysis of Syrian sectarianism and national identity .
 Van Dam chronicles the efforts since 2011 to find a negotiated solution to the civil war in Syria . The civil war has claimed at least 450,000 lives and displaced some six million people .
 He dismisses the possibility of an insider coup against Assad by the Alawites themselves . He deplores the excessive idealism and lack of realpolitik displayed by outside forces .
 Van Dam sees no way out in the short term, but nor does he feel that Assad can sustain a military victory even if, with Iranian and Russian help, he achieves one . Van Dam: "I don't think that Assad's military victory can be sustained even if ... he achieves
 This survey of Iranian politics and society relies on secondary sources, so offers little new material . It is based on second-hand sources and relies heavily on the internet .
 The current supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, bridges both camps but favors jihadists . Khamenei is a former member of the Iran-controlled regime .
 Saikal gives a good explanation of Iran’s illiberal pluralism and the checks and balances that operate among its institutions . The author also gives an account of the Iranian state of state of Iran .
 Iran’s relations with regional and global powers have been strained in recent years . Iran's relations with the world has been described as one of the world's most powerful powers .
 Throughout, he rightly stresses the country’s resilience in the face of conflict and sanctions . Throughout the film, he says the country's resilience is evident .
 For any foreign country, war with this middle power would be extremely costly, he says . War with the Middle East would be very costly for any country, he adds .
 He does not anticipate regime change, only shifts in the balance of power back and forth between the, jihadists and the ijtihadists .
 Many of the essays in this interesting collection are only tenuously linked to the overall environmental theme . The essays include essays about the environment .
 Francis Ghiles and Eckart Woertz analyze Tunisia’s phosphate-rich region of Gafsa . The region is vital to Tunisia's economy but neglected by the central government . It consistently produces labor activism and jihadism .
 Other contributors examine the illegal charcoal trade between Somalia and the United Arab Emirates . They examine the oil-rich dictatorships around the Caspian Sea, the dynamics of cross-border environmental protests, and the new social contract within the Gulf states .
 The collection offers no big takeaways; indeed, there is no concluding chapter . The collection of this year's film, "The Dark Side of the Dark Side," was released in October .
 Shen and Xia reveal harsh conflicts between the leaders of China and North Korea during the Korean War . They reveal who would command the two countries’ troops, who would control Korean railways, and how far to chase the Americans as they retreated .
 Mao later came to regard Kim as a loyal son, to the point of promising him that if the U.S. attacked the North, Kim could use Chinas northeastern provinces as a rear area under his own command . Mao also promised Kim if the United States attacked, he could use
 Relations between Beijing and Pyongyang were strongest in the first half of the 1970s . Mao and Zhou Enlai took advantage of their negotiations with the United States to press North Korea’s case .
 Chinese aid helped North Korea reach what turned out to be the height of its prestige as a development model among some Third World nations . In those years, Chinese aid was used to help North Korea .
 Li and Xia track each twist and turn in the painful and public divorce that China and the Soviet Union underwent in the 1960s and 1970s . The pair chronicles the painful divorce between China and Russia in a new documentary .
 The big puzzle is that both countries lost more from the split than they gained, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The collapse of the Soviet-U.S. alliance put pressure on Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to move his domestic policies leftward . It also encouraged Mao to launch the disastrous Cultural Revolution .
 Li and Xia argue that state-tostate relations in the socialist camp during the Cold War differed from those in the capitalist world . They argue that the two countries pursued a seemingly irrational split .
 Communist parties saw themselves not just as national parties but as members of a global movement guided by a scientifically correct ideology . Communist parties were seen as part of a scientific correct ideology in the 1960s .
 Communist party leaders could not compromise for the sake of mere national interests . When divergent personalities, domestic politics, and state interests gave rise to disagreements on ideological principle, communist party leaders couldn't compromise .
 This second and final volume of Guhas huge, definitive biography of Mahatma Gandhi draws on every imaginable source . Includes recently opened archive of letters to and from Gandhi .
 "The narrative is dramatic and detailed, with little explicit judgment or analysis," says author . "It's a great story, but there's little clear-cut analysis," she says .
 Guha reveals Gandhi’s inconsistencies and confusions, as well as his titanic self-regard . Guha also reveals Gandhi's inconsistencies and . confusions .
 Many other talented contenders for leadership in India disapproved of his behavior and politics . Many of his critics have expressed concern about his behavior .
 Gandhi had remarkable success promoting his idiosyncratic views on economics, caste, diet, sexuality, and political action . Gandhi's success in promoting his views was largely due to his unique views of life .
 He failed to heal the tragic rift between Hindus and Muslims . But he did much to create the overarching sense of national identity that has so far held India together .
 Smith looks at how legacy candidates fared in Japan before and after 1994 . The country reformed its system for electing delegates to the lower house of the Diet in 1994 .
 Under the pre-1994 system, each district elected more than one representative to the lower house, which enabled candidates to win with less than a majority and thus advantaged those with strong networks based on family connections .
 Legacy candidates were less numerous after the switch in 1994 to single-member districts . Legacy candidates became less numerous in 1994 .
 legacy candidates who make it to the Diet still have a better chance of being promoted to cabinet posts . legacy candidates still have better chance to be promoted to Cabinet posts . Legacy candidates make it into the Diet .
 This book describes the international advocacy movement that has emerged over the past two decades to combat human rights violations in North Korea . This book is published by the International Human Rights Watch .
 The movement is made up of North Korean defectors joined by activists from not only South Korea but also Canada, Japan, the U.S. and Europe .
 They pursue a range of goals, from humanitarian assistance to regime change . They use a variety of methods, including smuggling information to the North Korean population .
 Seoul and Washington support activists when they want to put pressure on Pyongyang . But they regard them as an inconvenience when it wants to negotiate with North Korea .
 Despite the movement’s lack of coordination, it has had some successes . The movement has had a few successes, but it has been criticized for being too small .
 In 2013, the UN created a commission of inquiry on human rights in the country, which issued a devastating report on the abuses . The report was published by the UN in 2013 .
 Pyongyang has responded with diplomatic and propaganda pushback and some cosmetic legal changes . North Korea has responded to diplomatic pushback with some cosmetic changes to the law .
 The real impact on conditions on the ground awaits a political breakthrough in the North . But as is often the case with human rights work, the real impact is still to be seen .
 Koss also shows that strong local party organizations are correlated with lower levels of tax evasion . Koss: Strong local party organization is correlated with higher tax evasion rates .
 Powerful local cells may also resist central policy more effectively than weak ones, as happened during the Great Famine of 1958-61 and the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s .
 Local party strength can be traced back to the Sino-Japanese War of 1937-45 . peasant resistance to the Japanese spurred strong party growth in the areas immediately threatened by Japanese troops . Those areas outside the war zone did not have the same catalyst .
 Koss adds an important dimension to scholars’ understanding of how the Chinese system works, and of its vulnerabilities, he says .
 China formed communes to organize agriculture at the start of the Great Leap Forward in 1958 . At the time, communes organized agriculture in China .
 Historians have given the communes a bad name . Because of the huge famine caused by the campaign, historians have given them a bad reputation .
 Eisenman argues that after the famine, and especially in the early 1970s, the reorganized communes fostered a green revolution . He says it laid the basis for the rapid economic growth of the post-Mao era . Eisenman: The communes' green revolution laid the
 The communes enabled the state to take most of the farmers’ profits away from them, thereby suppressing rural consumption, and reinvesting it in an effective agricultural extension program that popularized the use of new seeds, fertilizers, and machinery .
 Starting in 1978, Deng Xiaoping’s faction wanted to remove the cap on peasant consumption in order to generate support for economic reforms, Eisenman argues . Eisenman: The communes were dissolved in 1978 because of a cap on peasants' consumption .
 Eisenman’s analysis implies Western scholars who once held up Maoist practices as a model for developing countries were not entirely wrong, at least when it came to lifting traditional peasant farmers out of the trap .
 The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission was set up in the wake of the 2007 Kenyan election violence . The commission was created in the aftermath of the violence surrounding the 2007 presidential election .
 It was always likely to come under enormous pressure from Kenya’s corrupt and entrenched political class . That meant that it was always . likely to . come under . enormous pressure .
 This book delves into the fissures that emerged among the commissioners, why the international members of the commission issued a dissent from some of the findings, and the broader implications of the work for Kenya .
 Slye s book makes for compelling reading, whether he is discussing the personal foibles of the commissioners, the backroom negotiations and compromises that mark such work, the legal issues involved, or the broader context of Kenyan politics .
 Although taxes are a fundamental part of any modern economy, taxation in Africa remains poorly understood . Taxation in Africa is poorly understood, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The authors of this concise and masterly introduction to the topic go some way toward filling that gap . The authors are a master of introduction to this topic .
 Book starts by showing how international tax law disadvantages African governments . International tax law disadvantageates African governments, says author .
 African states are trying to tax multinational corporations, especially in the oil and mining sectors . It then discusses the attempts by African states to tax corporations .
 It has a tendency to gloss over the variation among countries, but it does provide powerful evidence for several important generalizations . The study is often glossed over the variations among countries .
 Foreign companies, especially in extractive industries, pay remarkably little in taxes in the U.S. First, foreign companies, such as extractive industry, pay much less in taxes, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Second, the richest Africans also pay very little and have managed to park enormous sums abroad . Third, they also have been able to park their money abroad .
 Third, African fiscal systems have done much better at taxing average Africans than they get credit for . African tax rates are much higher than they are given credit for, says the author .
 African tax systems are highly regressive, with poorer citizens paying much higher rates than richer ones . Poor African citizens pay higher rates of tax rates than rich ones, says African Tax Expert .
 Fair s superb social history of cinema in Tanzania is rich with keen insights into urban life in East Africa throughout the twentieth century . Fair s film history is rich in keen insights to urban life throughout the twenty century .
 From the late 1910s onward, Tanzania had more cinemas than any other country in Africa, except South Africa . Whites, Africans, and South Asians were able to attend the same shows .
 Fair recounts efforts by South Asian businesspeople to import films from India in the early twentieth century to show on Tanzanian screens . Fair recounts attempts by businessmen to import Indian films from the entire world .
 By the 1950s, eight movie theaters catered to 16,000 people a week in the capital, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania . The theaters became the city's center of social and cultural life .
 Indian films, with their singing and dancing, were long local favorites, although American westerns were popular, as well . Indian westerns, such as Westerns, were popular in India .
 In the 1970s, blaxploitation movies, such as Shaft and Hell Up in Harlem, arrived and began to shape the fashion tastes of the young .
 Fair s impressive versatility means she is equally at ease discussing midcentury international film distribution networks as she explains the local appeal of obscure Indian movies .
 This concise history of warfare in Africa in the twentieth century covers a large number of conflicts . It covers the wars of colonial conquest waged by European armies in the earliest parts of the century . African troops participated in World War I and World War II, to interstate wars since decolonization .
 Some of the wars to quell rebellions during the colonial era get little academic or popular attention . Some of these conflicts are well known; others are well-known .
 The long section on the Second Boer War, from 1899 to 1902, is rather more detailed than the books cursory treatment of several bloodier conflicts, most notably the First and Second Congo Wars, from 1996 to 2003 .
 Stapleton offers a useful introduction to an important topic . Although maps of the different campaigns would have made the book easier to follow .
 Sy, a former career International Monetary Fund economist, lays out the optimistic vision of how economic growth could transform Africa . Sy: "Africa's economic growth is the future of the continent"
 Sy offers interesting prescriptions for how Africa can overcome constraints to faster growth . The book is partly cobbled together from a blog Sy wrote at the Brookings Institution . It offers ideas for improving infrastructure and addressing structural unemployment .
 Sy often returns to the problem of mobilizing enough foreign and domestic investment, as capital shortages remain the most significant constraint on the rapid growth he thinks Africa can achieve .
 He is so bullish about the returns on investment in Africa that he does not view the rising debt burdens of countries such as Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia as posing serious problems . He says he is bullish about returns on returns on investing in Africa .
 There is no discussion of what is in fact a very high nuclear threshold in a U.S.-Chinese confrontation or conflict . She then goes on to make a case against remaining complacent .
 Talmadge argues that in any conflict with China, the U.S. would launch a full-scale air and missile assault against military targets in mainland China and against Chinese attack submarines at sea .
 The U.S. will inadvertently hit either Chinas ballistic missile submarines or its mobile nuclear missiles, she argues . In so doing, the United States will hit either missiles or submarines .
 Chinese leaders may well decide to launch a nuclear attack against the United States . That, in turn, will present Chinese leaders with a “use it or lose it” dilemma .
 Such a scenario is extremely unlikely; indeed, I would say the odds are somewhere between nil and zero . The odds of such a scenario are between zero and zero, he says .
 A U.S. and Chinese conflict would be a maritime campaign in which the two sides tried to conquer or defend islands . The two sides would be trying to conquer, defend islands in the region .
 Attacks on land targets beyond the contested islands would be aimed at military installations and systems that supported the maritime campaign . U.S. military bases would be targets, such as ports, air bases, and command-and-control centers .
 The intercontinental nuclear deterrent forces of both countries are physically separate from these facilities . Both countries are located in the United States and Canada .
 U.S. planners are very mindful of the danger of attacking any state s nuclear arsenal and take extraordinary precautions to avoid doing so .
 It is in fact possible to distinguish nuclear-armed submarines from conventional ones, it is said .
 It is possible to distinguish the shorter-range, dual-use missiles that threaten Taiwan, Chinas neighbors, and U.S. bases in the Pacific from the intercontinental missiles that threatens the United States .
 China unlikely to respond by launching a nuclear attack against the U.S. If by mistake a United States strike destroyed a land-based medium-range nuclear missile or a ballistic missile submarine, China would be greatly concerned .
 Chinese leaders would wait to see if a concerted, sustained U.S. campaign against their nuclear arsenal was under way . Rather than violating their long-held “no first use” doctrine, they would wait for a concerted campaign against them .
 The U.S. has no incentive to attempt such a campaign and would take every precaution to avoid it . The United States would not attempt such an attempt to stop it, he says .
 U.S. planners are aware of that danger and would seek to manage the end of a maritime conflict with China in a way that minimized the incentives for escalation . The United States would want to avoid the risk of escalation .
 Dennis Blair s letter reflects the conventional wisdom about a potential U.S.-Chinese war . China would understand that the war was limited, and nuclear weapons would be irrelevant, he says .
 Everyone should hope that Blair is right, but amid the fog and suspicion of war . Blair should be right, he says, but there are suspicions that he is wrong .
 Chinas views of both U.S. intentions and nuclear deterrence could change radically . Chinas view of both the United States intentions and nukes could change dramatically .
 A U.S. campaign to erode significant components of Chinas deterrent capability, Chinese leaders could conclude— reluctantly— that limited escalation, such as a demonstration strike at sea, was a viable option .
 Blair downplays growing linkages between Chinas nuclear forces and its conventional forces . Blair says there are growing links between the two countries' nuclear capabilities . Blair also downplays links between Russia and China's nuclear forces .
 With respect to a land-based conflict, I agree with Blair that the U.S. can distinguish Chinas intermediate-range nuclear missiles from intercontinental nuclear missiles .
 The question is whether the U.S. can distinguish among different types of intermediate-range missiles, attacking only conventional ones while leaving the nuclear ones untouched . The question, however, is if the United States can distinguish between different kinds of missiles .
 If China does not worry about the security of its small force of nucleararmed intercontinental ballistic missiles, the question becomes whether it will worry about their security . If China cannot do that, and as I explained in an article, it probably cannot, it may not worry .
 Where we depart, however, is on how China might react to such a mistake, one that would eliminate a quarter of the country’s naval nuclear deterrent .
 My article explicitly notes that the likelihood of Chinese nuclear escalation is not high in absolute terms . The likelihood of a nuclear attack on China is not very high, he says .
 The likelihood of a nuclear confrontation will grow if the U.S. assumes, as Blair does, that Chinas behavior will be both predictable and proportional . Yet the likelihood of such a confrontation is growing, Blair says .
 An article by Darren Walker misnamed the Chinese organization to which the Ford Foundation has provided seed funding . The Ford Foundation is providing seed funding for the organization .
 It is the China Foundation Center, not the China Global Philanthropy Institute . The center is based in Beijing, China, China .
 U.S., Canada, Canada, $66.95; other countries via air, $89.95 per year via air . U.N. membership costs $54.95 .
 We permit certain carefully screened companies to send our subscribers information about products or services that we believe will be of interest . From time, time to time, we allow certain carefully-screened companies to contact us .
 If you prefer not to receive such information, please contact us at the Congers, NY, address indicated above . If you wish to avoid this information, email us at our local address .
 Foreign Affairs Brain Trust asked experts whether they agreed or disagreed that the U.S. should stop trying to solve the regional problems of the Middle East . Experts say the United States should not try to solve regional problems .
 Madawi al-Rasheed Visiting Professor at the Middle East Centre, London School of Economics . “Consider the United States’ previous record, in which diplomatic and military interventions proved to be futile,” he writes . STRONGLY AGREE, CONF