 Up to February 6th, 2012, we had every circumstantial proof that such crisis was not real but a staged sham . For the first time in February 2012, there was every evidence that the crisis was a hoax .
 Now we can ascertain and prove, without a shred of a doubt, that indeed the alleged crisis was a staged sham, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "Now we can ... prove" without a doubt that indeed, the alleged crises was a sham"
 World never was at the edge of a nuclear war as every talking head in the world claim . It was a 'sham' because the world never was . at the brink of a . nuclear war .
 President Kennedy knew with absolute certainty that he could push Khrushchev as far and as hard as he wished, so complete was the information possessed by the United States command about the leadership of the Soviet Empire . Yes, missiles were in Cuba; yes, Khrushche was doing this to
 A NOTE, added at the end of this document, dated February 6, 2012, will explain the details of such overwhelming confirmation .
 We realized that we had not been clear enough about the message that we convey in this document when originally published in 1999 . We are happy to clarify that this is not the case for the first time .
 The opportunity arose or, as it is being published by German sources, was allowed to arise, to stage a needed crisis . German sources say it was staged to stage crisis .
 Five important and clarifying NOTES are posted at the end of the document . The author of this article provides a summary of the contents .
 October 16, 2002, September 8, 2007, October 21, 2008, December 28, 2009 and February 6, 2012 . The list was published in 2002 and 2009 .
 President Kennedy endorsed the Bay of Pigs invasion to Cuba in April 1961 . President Kennedy ended the invasion with a visit to Cuba .
 President Kennedy acknowledged his personal responsibility for the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion . President Kennedy addressed the Cuban community in exile later that day .
 He apologized and handsomely made it up to the Cuban community in exile . He apologized for his actions .
 Weather, was not placed on alert as it should have been by those who were responsible of doing so, had the crisis been a real one . Weather was not put on alert by those responsible of putting it on .
 Weather was to allow the U.S. government to function in case of a nuclear threat/attack thus ""preventing our return to the stone age" Mr Bourassa said weather was to protect the United States from a nuclear attack .
 The Missile Crisis of October 1962 allegedly took the world to the brink of nuclear war . The Crisis is on the news again .
 We have just learned that the Soviet Union had a nuclear bomb in their Embassy at Washington, D.C. in 1961 . In 1961, it was discovered that the Soviets had the bomb .
 Even if there were indeed missiles in Cuba, the ""Crisis"" was just a staged act like the world may be witnessing again today . Another concrete proof that, even if there was indeed missiles, the 'Crisis' was just staged .
 We have providentially encountered a third physical confirmation that the Missile Crisis of October 1962 was staged .
 This third physical confirmation is in the form of a listing found in the Clock Timeline . This third confirmation comes from October 16, 2002 . This is the second physical confirmation of this information .
 This Global Security & News Analysis page is not your average ""Internet Tabloid"" as you will see when you visit their page or review their Board membership . It is a Global Security and News Analysis Analysis page .
 In this Clock Timeline page they indicate their assessment as to how close the world is to Midnight Midnight being the time for a nuclear holocaust . The Clock Timeline is based on their assessment of the time the world would be at risk .
 As you will see, there is no listing for the year 1962 although they have many other events/years listed when much less important events that impacted the probabilities for a nuclear holocaust, took place .
 President Kennedy's temperament has been defined by his ingenuity and cool head during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Obviously, he was part of the charade thus the uncharacteristic cool and steady hand . Obviously, it was for him to keep his cool .
 Providentially, we stumbled upon a book which factually confirmed that the Missile Crisis was no more than a staged act .
 Time magazine reported that the Emergency Command Center of the U.S. is located at Mt. Mt. Olympus . The emergency command center is located in Mount Olympus . Time magazine also reported that Mount Olympus has been evacuated .
 Weather, was not placed on alert as it should have been by those who were supposed to activate it were the crisis had been a real one . Weather, not as well as those who should have placed it on alert, failed to do so .
 Oleg Penkovsky, a top military Soviet intelligence officer, is a former KGB officer . In his new book, we meet him for the first time ever, in a book called 'Meet Oleg'
 Oleg Penkovsky went from World War II military hero to U.S. intelligence asset in Soviet Union . He was best intelligence asset for the United States during the Cold War . He became a CIA officer in the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 He believed that Nikita Khrushchev's leadership was taking the Soviet Union onto the path of destruction .
 Penkovsky was the highest level Soviet officer to ever spy for the U.S. or British Intelligence . He was one of the most successful spies in the world for the United States or Britain .
 The Penkovsky case is considered to have been the most successful Cold War espionage operation . The case was considered to be one of the greatest Cold War spy operations .
 Penkovsky allowed the administrations of President Eisenhower and President Kennedy to bypass the bluster and rhetoric of Nikita Khrushchev . He knew the true facts concerning Soviet military preparedness .
 The files indicate that Penkovsky's acts of espionage were able to accurately define for the United Sates the limitations of Soviet power . The files show that the U.S. could accurately define the limitations .
 The U.S. learned of the number of nuclear missiles the Soviets held and where, as well as their many technical difficulties . Penkovsky was the first to tell the United States of the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles . The United States learned of many of the nuclear missiles held and
 Documents provided by Penkovsky to the U.S. exposed friction among the Soviet high command over long term Soviet military strategy .
 This was known by the U.S. top command since July 1962 . Kennedy acted out the drama on a televised statement on October 22 .
 Kennedy was on very solid ground when he issued his ultimatums to Khrushchev . Kennedy's ultimatum was on solid ground, he says, when he made it clear of the threat .
 As gesture of good will towards Khrushchev, Kennedy agreed to remove the United States missiles from Turkey . No wonder the Emergency Command Center was not activated as we pointed out .
 Kennedy also promised, in exchange, to keep his hands off Cuba which, of course, has been used as the excuse as to why the United States has never booted the Castro brothers and their pathetic revolution from Cuba .
 A power failure darkened much of the Northeast in 1965 . The Northeast was hit by a power failure .
 Bourassa also put the facility on a high state of readiness following Kennedy's assassination in 1963 . The facility was put on high alert following the Kennedy assassination .
 Mount Weather was not put on alert during the Cuban missile crisis, though the situation was monitored closely .
 Board membership of Global Security & News Analysis . See NOTE added on October 21st, 2008 Board membership .
 Should you have reason to doubt the authenticity of the document, we recommend that you access our server again and click on the ""Refresh"" or ""Reload"" button of your Browser to view the original document .