 In October of 1962 the world came dangerously close to nuclear destruction; arguably as close as it had ever come . May 7,1994 r , . :3 An Introduction to an Era .
 The political, economic and ideological differences between the Soviets and the Americans only served to heighten the apparent suspicion each felt toward the other . The Soviets and Americans were seen to be suspicious of each other .
 Many nations, either willingly or not, came under the economic, ideological, and military umbrellas of the two dominant superpowers . Following the Second World War, many nations, or willingly, came into the economic and ideological umbrella of the superpower .
 The two camps tested each other's mettle in several theaters of operation around the globe throughout these formative years .
 Some of these incidents involving the new superpowers and their allies resulted in spilling the I blood of men and the blood of theory . Though some of the incidents involving these superpowers resulted in spills of the blood .
 None held the breath of the world with the fear of total and swift annihilation as did the confrontation which came to be know as the Cuban missile crisis .
 Shortly thereafter the United States continued economic relations with Cuba, who lay only ninety miles of the U.S. southern shoreline . Shortly thereafter, Cuba was only one of the countries with economic ties to the United Nations .
 The following January the United States Ambassador to Cuba formally protested the seizure of American property by the new Cuban government . The U.S. ambassador to Cuba said the seizure was a violation of Cuban law .
 The U.S. embargoed all exports to Cuba with exceptions to medicine and food provisions . The embargo was in response to the Soviet policy of containment of communism outside the Soviet Union . The United States reacted to this support by imposing an embargo .
 By January 3,1961, the United States had officially severed all diplomatic relations with CUba . The Russian support continued, and the U.S. cut off all diplomatic ties .
 A Cuban IRussian trade agreement was finalized and put into operation . Just over one month later, a Cuban trade agreement with Russia was finalized .
 The President of the United States was advised by his top military counsel as well as by the C.I.A. that there was a solution to the latest move by the Soviets to extend their influence into the western hemisphere . The president of the U.S. was advised .
 President Kennedy, who only a year earlier had defeated staunch Republican conservative and adamant anticommunist Richard M Nixon in a close preSidential race, was advised that if only the people of Ii Cuba were given the chance to oust Castro and his Revolutionary government they would take up such
 If the Cuban exiles from the Battista regime who II I were in the United States were trained and supplied by the U.S. They would be able to launch such an initial revolution against Castro, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Once the exiles hit the beaches of Cuba the people would rise up and join them in their cause, or so the C.I.A. and the military 2 claimed . Once the people of Cuba would join them, they would join their cause .
 A sight for the landing was chosen on the southern coast of Cuba, once again to help extinguish any suspicion of U.S. involvement .
 The operation went anyway but the way the C.I.A. and the other military counsel Ii lead the President to believe it would go . Ii Ii led the president to believe that the operation would go well .
 The people of Cuba did nothing close to the eager overthrow of Castro that had been predicted . Castro's overthrow was not as eager overthrow as predicted . The Cuban people did not expect the overthrow of the Castro regime .
 The United States advisors pleaded with Kennedy to utilize American air support to help the operation . The U.S. advisors pleaded for Kennedy to use air support for the operation.
 No direct involvement of the U.S. military was said to be needed, it would not be risked now . The U.N. military has not been involved in the fight in Syria .
 Fidel Castro formally announced formally that he was a socialist on May 1, 1961 . A few weeks later, as if to add insult to injury for the Americans, Fidel Castro announced he was socialist . Fidel Castro was born in 1961 .
 U2 spy planes flying high over Cuba were able to verify the presence of SAM defensive missiles stations . U2 planes flew over Cuba in 1962 to verify presence of missile defense stations .
 Kennedy warned Moscow not to introduce any offensive missiles into Cuba under threat of U.S. reaction . Wary of how the Soviets might be treating their fellow traveler Castro, Kennedy warned the Soviets .
 Khrushchev denied the Soviets had supplied or will ever supply Cuba with offensive weapons . Khrushchevs denied the Soviet Union had supplied Cuba with weapons .
 On October 14 of 1962 U2 photographs disclosed Medium Range Ballistic Missile and Intermediate Range Missile launching stations under construction in Cuba .
 The combination of missiles would be able to strike most of the continental United States, parts of Canada, as well as some of South America . Once operable, the combination of these missiles could strike most 3 r of U.S.
 Included in the group were Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and CIA Director John McCone . Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Vice President Robert Kennedy and Attorney General Robert Kennedy were advisors .
 Ex Comm immediately began discussing several possible courses of action to be taken . Ex Comm. Ex Comm began discussing possible course of action .
 The choices range from a surprise invasion of the island to not doing anything whatsoever . The choices ranged from surprise invasion to not even doing anything .
 The group met at all hours and in secret during the first few days . Sometimes it met several times in the course of twenty four hours . Sometimes the group met in secret .
 The only items that would be excluded from entry into Cuban ports would be anything considered to a component of, or an item necessary for, the completion of, the offensive weapons . The only item excluded would be items considered to be part of the .
 The term ""quarantine"" was used as opposed to ""blockade"" for the latter is considered an act of war . The term "quarantine" was used instead of "blockade" The term was used in the aftermath of the Second World War .
 On October 22, 1962 President Kennedy went on television to inform to public of the presence of the missiles and to announce the quarantine . President Kennedy announced the quarantine of missiles in October 1962 .
 For two days Soviet ships plowed toward Cuba and the awaiting American blockade . Soviet ships made their way toward Cuba . The blockade lasted two days .
 The Kremlin denied any and all claims made by the Kennedy administration . The Kremlin has also denied the claims .
 In the two days before the Russian ships were to reach Cuba there was much debate and accusation on either 4 r p p side .
 The United States accused the Russians in the United Nations of secretly placing missiles in Cuba, severely altering the nuclear status quo . The U.S. accused Russia in the U.N. of placing the missiles in Cuban territory .
 The U2 photographs were shown by the U.S. and denounced by the Russians as fakes . U2 photos were taken by the United States and denounced as fake by Russia .
 It was finally proven that MRBM and IRBM silo launchers were being constructed in Cuba . The construction was being performed and supplied by the Soviet Union .
 On October 24 the Soviet ships finally reached the United States quarantined area . The Soviet ships arrived on October 24, 1945 .
 Ex Comm. and President Kennedy waited for the next move to be made by the Soviets . Ex Comm . and President . Kennedy watched as the Soviets made their move .
 On October 28, after receiving two contradictory offers from the Kremlin, Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba . Khrushchev agreed to remove all the missiles from the sites . Kennedy agreed to the removal of the missiles .
 In private Kennedy allowed removal of United States Jupiter missiles stationed in Turkey to be part of the negotiations . Kennedy allowed the removal of U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey in private .
 The administration maintained that the removal of the Jupiters was already being discussed before the crisis as they were of questionable operable status . The administration maintains that removal of them was already discussed before .
 November 20, 1962, the U.S. announced the removal of the last Russian MRBM and IRBM missiles from Cuba . The removal was announced in 1962 . The last Russian missiles were removed from Cuba by the United States .
 The traditionalist interpretation condemns the placement of missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union as an act of direct provocation .
 Traditionalists applaud the actions taken by President Kennedy and the members of Ex Comm as intelligent, necessary and correct . The traditionalists applaud Kennedy's actions .
 They portray the outcome of the crisis as an American foreign policy victory . The U.S. government says the crisis is a "victory"
 Kennedy himself won praise from the public as well as from the press in the days immediately following the Soviet arms withdrawal . Kennedy was praised for his role in the withdrawal of Soviet arms .
 Revisionist interpretation claims Kennedy administration was merely playing a domestic political game . Kennedy administration played a domestic game, says historian John Avlon .
 It condemns the actions taken by the American government as mere diplomatic fumbling . The U.S. government has been accused of 'fumbling'
 A more indepth look at these interpretations can give insight into how history is viewed, interpreted, and remembered . It can also provide a compelling detail on how the broader subject of history in general is viewed .
 The traditionalists seem to find in President Kennedy at the resolution of the crisis the great leader they thought was within JFK and had yet to emerge . The Traditionalist Interpretation: JFK was a great leader .
 Supporters wondered if the charisma displayed during the debates against Nixon would translate into statesmanship . Incidents early on in his presidency, most notably the Bay of Pigs failure, had supporters wondering if it would translate to statemanship .
 Even before the crisis in Cuba some historians were making way for the predicted greatness of the administration to emerge . Even before that, some historians had been predicting greatness .
 Historian Herbert S Dinerstein even took the Bay of Pigs failure and made Kennedy's decisions look prudent and wise .
 Kennedy broke off the Bay of Pigs venture because, being basically prudent, he decided the game was not worth the candle . Dinerstein wrote, ·After a brief period of hesitation Kennedy broke .
 Traditionalists found in the deCision making process that surrounded the crisis in Cuba . It was this ·calculated caution· and ·deliberateness· that traditionalists found .
 The placement of missiles in Cuba by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics represented a clear and hostile threat, the U.S. said . The placement in Cuba was a clear threat and required a response from the United States, he said .
 The missiles placed so close to shores of the United States and placed there in the secretive manner in which they were placed there represented a glaring change in the nuclear status quo .
 Whether or not the missiles were to actually change the strategic balance between the superpowers is a debatable issue even among traditionalists themselves .
 Even Sorensen agreed that with the United States clear lead in the arms race at the time, the balance of power was more likely shifted in appearance only .
 The missiles represented some kind of threat to the safety of the role of the U.S. as a western hemisphere leader, its citizens and the effectiveness of its international foreign policy . Arguably then for the traditionalist, the missiles represented a threat .
 The traditionalist argument now moves into the question of what to do now that a problem of national security has been defined . The traditionalists argue that national security is now a problem .
 The military advisors sought either an all out invasion of Cuba, or surgical military strikes against the installations themselves . The Cuban government sought either surgical strikes or an all-out invasion .
 Other factions of the Committee pushed for the use of diplomatic measures utilizing the Organization of American States and the United Nations as mediators .
 In the early meetings of the group the concept of nonreaction was discussed as a way to halt Khrushchev from inflating the importance of the missiles . The concept was discussed in the early discussions of the non-reaction .
 Kennedy himself realized the difficulty in coming to a decision everyone in Ex Comm 8 could, at the very least, live with, if not completely support, he said . Kennedy: "Even Kennedy himself realizes the difficulty of coming to an agreement."
 A number of members had changed their minds quickly on the solution they felt was best . The decision was made by members of the House of Representatives . Members of the public had to make a decision quickly to make the decision .
 Kennedy was expressing concem for the correctness of the decision he would eventualy implement given the situation it was made under . Kennedy expressed his confidence in the decision made under the circumstances .
 Khrushchev time to rethink his actions while keeping any further weapons from entering Cuba . The Cuban government was able to keep the weapons out of Cuba .
 Traditionalists would claim, it left the United States in control of the situation . Most importantly, the U.S. was in control .
 For this school of thought the Russians would either have to pull back or take some kind of aggressor action . Russia would have to either pull back, or take an aggressive action .
 The quarantine would either make the Soveits look weak or extremely hostile . The quarantine is either a good idea or a bad idea for the world .
 The blockade was put in place and the Soviet ship acknowledged it soon thereafter on October 24, 1962 . The blockade took place in 1962 .
 For three days terse negotiations took place between the Russians and the White House in an extremely tense and anxious atmosphere . The White House and the Russians were in a tense atmosphere for three days .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed on terms for withdrawal of the missiles and retraction of the blockade . On 9 p the twenty eighth of October of October Khrushvic and Kennedy . agreed to withdraw missiles from the Soviet Union .
 The crisis itself was not completely resolved at this time but the most intense segments had passed . Most intense segments of the crisis had passed. The crisis had not been completely resolved .
 Traditionalists reflect on this aftermath period as one of great success and perseverance for President Kennedy and members of the Executive Committee . Traditionalists say Kennedy's presidency was a success story .
 Some of those closest to John Kennedy during the crisis placed with him with him praise which equalled him with the great men of history .
 Prime Minister Macmillan, though not directly involved in the negotiations, was a NATO member . The negotiations took place in the 1960s .
 His country would have most definitely felt the shock waves of the crisis, possibly including a nuclear strike, had the situation accelerated from the blockade into full scale military engagements . The situation was likely to have been accelerated by the blockade .
 This is the context in which the traditionalist crisis view holders use the Prime Ministers statements . This is in the context of the Prime Minister's statements .
 The traditionalists maintains the notion that, viewed overall, the Cuban missile 10 r p p crisis is to be considered an American triumph .
 The actions of the President are to be praised as cautious, firm, and courageous . The President's actions should be praised for being cautious and firm, says the PM .
 He consulted with intelligent and appropriate individuals who returned to him thoughtful, useful, and largely correct information which he used in formulating responses to the aggression presented him . He consulted . He used the information he received to formulate responses .
 JFK's decision to enforce a naval blockade of Cuba was the best of all possible tactics presented . JFK and the Executive Committee with regards to their diagnosis of the Soviet build of missiles in Cuba as a threat to the United States .
 The American government showed its allies and foes alike that it would not allow its policy to be compromised so close to home . The U.S. government showed it was committed to remaining firm .
 The traditionalist school claims that the Soviets provoked and the Americans persevered . Traditionalist school says that the U.S. did not engage in the fight against the Soviets .
 The West was once again safe due to the efforts and actions of President John F Kennedy and the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . President Kennedy's actions were the result of the efforts .
 Revisionist Cuban missile crisis theorists dispute each of the claims made by the traditionalists concerning the success of the crisis . They also bring to light other 11 r p symptoms that lead to their conclusion that the crisis was not the sweeping American foreign policy success story .
 The revisionists hold fast to the claim that Kennedy needlessly risked war to satisfy doubts about his own international foreign policy image and to bolster his own popularity which would help return a Democratic Congress .
 They question the threat of the missiles and hold the naval blockade to be an inept and clumsy decision . They say the blockade is an inept decision to block the missile launch .
 Revisionists believe that overall the crisis was resolved due to a moderate Soviet military attitude and sheer luck on the side of America . The use of the Executive Committee during the crisis is also questioned by revisionists .
 The first area of U.S. policy toward Cuba during the crisis to come under fire by the revisionists was the decision by JFK and Ex Comm that the IRBM and MRBM missiles were a large enough threat .
 He supported his position with the Horelick Air Force Study . The study looked at the strategic importance of the missiles .
 The Horelick study went on to say that the number of silos constructed in Cuba were far too small to constitute Soviet first strike capability . The study also said that the silos were too small for Soviet first strikes .
 The study maintained that given the available technology of the time, the Soviets would have had difficulty in timing the launches of the missiles in Cuba with that of the Soviet Union .
 Even Secretary of Defense McNamara candidly remarked that • ... a missile is a missile. McNamara .
 The question of the true nature of the missiles actual or perceived threat capability did not rest in the domestic sphere . The question is whether the missile capability is real or real threat capability in Russia .
 Revisionists point to possible perception European nations might have to the reaction of the U.S. to the situation . Revisionists also point to the possibility European nations may have to react to the United States' reaction .
 The Kennedy administration claimed that the missiles were of an offensive nature . Another point in regards to the actual or perceived threat of the Soviet silos comes as an attack on the Kennedy administration's claim .
 New Left writer and Canadian philosopher Leslie Dewart argues that these so called offensive weapons were nothing of the kind . Dewart: These weapons are not offensive weapons, but they are just the kind of weapons .
 He goes on to give an example of a rifle or pistol being offensive in relation to an unarmed man . He also gives a description of a gun being offensive to an armed man .
 This school of historic thought also takes issue with the way Ex Comm had operated throughout the crisis . Ex Comm also take issue with how it had operated through the crisis.
 Traditionalists applaud the fact Ex Comm operated without an official leader . Traditionalists long have applauded the fact that Ex Comm . operated without official leader.
 On the occasion when the presence of Kennedy, merely by the nature of his pOSition, made such open discussion difficult, he would make himself conspicuously absent .
 The revisionists condemn this leaderless style and the fact that few men on the Committee had either military or diplomatic relations experience as a wholly preposterous way to run negotiations, especially given the nature of the ones being run .
 Traditionalists say the effectiveness of the decision to quarantine Cuba falls under heavy revisionist scrutiny . The view held by traditionalists about the effectiveness and intelligence of the quarantine is under scrutiny .
 The blockade is charged with being wholly ineffective towards the apparent goal of missile removal . The blockade has been charged with failing to remove the missile .
 For Acheson the quarantine did not remove the cHance of military aggreSSion, it merely postponed it, and in doing so made it possibly more potent . In doing so, the quarantine made it possible more potent for the war .
 Acheson argued that the quarantine first allowed the Soviets time to finish the launch sites already in progress, and then gave the Russians the option of ramming the blockade . The quarantine allowed the Russians time to ram into the blockade, he said .
 It left the Soviets in ·control of the future· , not the United States. The Soviets left the U.S. in the future, not the . United States .
 They called the quarantine a ·blunt instrument that was entirely adapted to the purpose of removing the Kremlin weapons . The quarantine was called a ‘quarantine instrument’
 For the revisionists the quarantine 15 r was not warranted, not effective, and certainly not legal . For the . revisionists, the quarantine was not . not warranted . It was not effective or legal, it was not legal, and was not necessary .
 The final major point presented by most revisionists to further their critical examination of the crisis is not one usually addressed directly by most traditionalists, if it is addressed at all . It is not a major point that is usually addressed by most of the revisionists .
 If the court historians do pay attention to this issue it is usually done as a side note or as a retaliation due to some revisionist attack . If the historian does pay attention, it's usually done in response to an attack .
 This final major r point of contention centers around the idea that Kennedy took the stance he did in Cuba for domestic political purposes . Kennedy is accused of using Cuba as a political weapon in Cuba .
 JFK, it is charged, wished to return a Democratic congress to the Hill and improve his own' popularity standings . JFK's popularity is said to have been boosted by his efforts to help his own popularity .
 Sorensen and other traditionalists vehemently deny any domestic political motivations for Kennedy . Kennedy was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 2008 .
 If Kennedy was truly sO concemed he might have sacrificed his chances in the election to try and negotiate . Revisionists are quick to retort that if he was truly concemed, he might sacrifice his chances .
 Revisionists contend that if Khrushchev had not backed down when he did, he would have waited for the decision of a United Nations debate . Republicans would have accused him of being both gullible and weak .
 Accusations like that could have cost the Democrats their majority in the House of Representatives . Accuses of sexual misconduct could cost them their majority .
 Such accusations would be tough to climb in any time period of U.S. politics . Such accusations are tough .
 There are others in the revisionist school who agree that Kennedy did more than likely hold the question of the coming elections in his mind throughout the crisis negotiations .
 They do not feel that this was indicative of some kind of malice on the part of JFK, nor that it was inappropriate . They feel that JFK's behavior was not an act of malice .
 It is not to question the motives of those who took part in those meetings during those thirteen days . Nor is it to question those involved in the meetings, nor to question their motives .
 Steel seems to be the middle ground between the traditionalists portrayal of Kennedy as the political altruist and the hard core revisionists .
 The revisionist view of the Cuban missile crisis attacks the notions set forth by the administration at the time and those by the traditionalists to come directly afterward . It attacks the notion set forth in the administration .
 Russian missiles are technically not technically offensive in nature . They are thought to be a threat to Russia's enemies .
 They condemn Ex Comni structurally, procedurally, and on its decided courses of action . They condemn it structurally and procedurally . Ex-Comni's decision to terminate its contract with Comni was made in 2010 .
 The image of JFK cultivated by the traditionalists is tarnished with accusations of sheer political gain as motivation throughout the crisis . And finally the courageous image of the former president was tarnished by accusations .
 The Cuban missile crisis was an important event in the world of political negotiations . The times and current situations of pOlitical realms throughout the globe have changed so much as to put it into antiquity .
 Even given this trend in current diplomatic thought, an accusation such that the Viet Nam War, and Lyndon Johnson's decisions about that war, had begun to gestate during the Cuban missile crisis is a formidable one indeed .
 Kennedy refused to use traditional methods of diplomacy that would have resolved the crisis quietly, 2.2.3.5.4.5 . Kennedy refused traditional methods that would've dealt with the crisis, including diplomacy .
 He did so because he needed a foreign policy 'victory', the intelligence analysis and data interpretation had been obtuse, the administration did not understand why the Soviets would find it politically advantageous to put missiles in Cuba, and finally, the stakes were not so high as the public was
 Revisionists contend that the overall crisis was the best of therapies for Kennedy's nagging inferiOrity complex . The deeper reaches of the story are avoided, as if we feared to look too closely in the larger implications the affair in Cuba would bring out .
 These implications might, revisionists might say, reveal some flaw in the fabric of the porcelain complexion that is remembered to be one of the JFK administration .
 There have been a number of new developments concerning the Cuban missile crisis in the last decade . Recent Deyelopments have led to the collapse of the Cuban missiles .
 The governments of the U.S., the former Soviet Republics, and even that of Cuba itself have declassified literally tons of materials formerly unavailable to scholars .
 It has allowed those involved in the crisis to have a greater understanding of what the other side knew and how that effected the decisions made .
 Russia, Americans, Cubans, and Cubans are in the midst of a three-nation world war . Russia, the U.S. and Cuba are the two countries involved in the conflict .
 The declassification of material has allowed these govemments to see how their decisions were perceived and acted upon . The declassified material has helped these govmments see how they are perceived, acted upon.
 It has allowed them to judge whether or not the messages sent out were understood in the manner they meant .
 The Cuban missile crisis may now be looked at with greater objectivity and therefore as a kind of case study in brinkmanship . It may now look at the crisis as a case study of brinkmanship, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The conference featured the surviving members of Ex Comm, many department members from the Kennedy administration, and even a select group of statesmen from Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 They assembled to discuss the Cuban missile crisis in the context of its own time period as well as the lessons that may have been learned . They discussed its importance in regards to what it has to offer diplomats, politicians, and military strategists .
 The break up of the former Soviet Republics has also been useful in the understanding of the crisis . The break-up of the Soviet republics is also useful in understanding the crisis, writes Simon Tisdall .
 Up until this decade, the contribution by the Soviet government to the objective documentation of the crisis has been minimal . when there was information contributed it was characteristically biased . The Soviet government contributed only minimal information about the crisis .
 Within the last two years writers in the former Republics have been allowed greater freedom in workrng on the Caribbean Crisis, as it is called there . There is a relatively relaxed atmosphere in regards to the accessing of information .
 There have been a number of works by Russian scholars and those using information gathered from Russia published that are true historical records published in the last year .
 Both interpretations of the crisis offer thoughtful and thorough examinations . Evaluation of InterpretatIons is a thorough examination of both interpretations .
 Each overall argument made by the two schools is consistent with the viewpoint put forth by that particular school .
 Revisionists quickly dismiss the claim made by the Kennedy administration that the missiles were a threat warranting action . The revisionists quickly try to dismiss that claim .
 The missiles did not truly change the balance of power neither in fact, nor appearance, nor in appearance . First they argued that they did not change the power of the U.S.
 The 20 member of NATO and the Untie~ Nations argued that action by the United States toward the placement of these missiles would not be understood by the U.S. Secondly they argued that the action would not have been understood by NATO members .
 The reason for this misunderstanding would stem from the U.S. having its own Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The reason is that the United States has a Jupiter missile factory in Turkey, Turkey .
 One area that this view did not mention in this stage of its argument is the thought process going on in American foreign policy at the time .
 Kennedy defeated conservative Republican Nixon in the 1960 elections . Kennedy had defeated conservative Republicans in 1960s elections .
 Nixon had risen to prominence in his career partly due to his support of Senator MaCarthy's political purge of communism in the U.S. government in the 1950's . Nixon had supported Senator McCarthy's anti-communist policies .
 Any move by a government in the world toward becoming communist was seen as directed by the Soviets themselves . The Soviets themselves were seen as directing by the world's communist government .
 The war in Korea put the Communist backed North against the United States backed South in a perfect example of the kind of conflicts with which this policy dealt with . The North and the South were at the center of the conflict .
 For Kennedy not to have said that he and his administration considered this bold move by the Communists to be a threat could have meant the end of his career . Kennedy's career could have been in jeopardy if he hadn't said that .
 Those in the Republican party would have labeled him 'soft' on Communism . Those in GOP would have been labeled 'soft on Communism' on the Communist Party .
 This brings up the next part of the revisionist argument that needs to be pointed out . This is not the only reason to point out that this is the case of a revisionist .
 Kennedy used the crisis to increase his popularity and to return 21 r~-r , the Democratic majority back to the House of Representatives . Kennedy's popularity was boosted by the crisis, according to his supporters .
 It seems the information complied would not necessarily lead to the conclusion that is the major deciding factor motivating Kennedy . Kennedy is the president of the United States .
 Kennedy appears to be in the back of the mind of the up coming election . It does appear that the pOlitics of the election were, at the very least, in the . back of Kennedy's mind .
 The pOlitical motivation should not be seen as a necessarily incorrect or 'bad' one . The motivation is not necessarily correct or bad, it should be a motivation for a person to take action .
 If Kennedy had not returned a Democratic House in November of 1962 it would have made it extremely difficult to deal with the crisis had it persisted longer . Kennedy would have been able to get a Democratic majority in November 1962 .
 If more military action had been needed it would certainly be more difficult to get the supportive legislation needed from a House Republican majority .
 The Republicans could have certainly changed their attack on Kennedy once the elections were over if they had won . The GOP could have changed their attacks on Kennedy after the election if they won .
 They could have stopped saying Kennedy was 'soft' on Communism and begun to say he was needlessly endangering the U.S. They could've stopped saying he was soft on Communism . Instead, they could have said he was 'endangering the United States'
 Such maneuvers have been made by both parties throughout many different military conflicts in the U.S. history .
 RevisionistS seemed to want Kennedy to go from hardnosed statesmen to some kind of President-in-a-vacuum . The revisionistS wanted Kennedy to be President in a vacuum .
 Traditionalists said the leaderless nature of Ex Comm was an advantage to the decision making process . The traditionalists said it was a leaderless organisation .
 The revisionists used a number of examples to counter this claim successfully . The revisionistists were successful in their argument .
 First they argued the leaderless nature of the Ex Comm meetings were ineffective . Then they argued that they were ineffective. Then they said they were not leaderless . Now they say they want to lead the country in a democracy .
 Without someone to focus the debates, the arguments got off target or even were made to serve the interests of the departments involved . The debates were often off-target or even served to serve their own interests .
 With a definite leader the meetings could have had an agenda to follow and been more efficient . The meetings should have had a more efficient agenda, say organisers .
 22 efficiency was vital to correct decision making according to the revisionists . This efficiency was crucial for correct decision-making, they said .
 Revisionists say leaderless style of Ex Comm was dangerous . Another point for the revisionists is that it was dangerous to have a leaderless system .
 It is not to say that the men being consulted by the President were not of high intellect . It was not the case that the President was consulted by high intellects, it said .
 This is not to say that these men were not capable of giving thoughtful, useful advice . Nor is it that they were capable of . giving thoughtful and thoughtful advice .
 It is alarming that the people making the decisions in the crisis were not directly lead by the President in their discussions . Very few of these men outside Kennedy were accountable to the people by way of elections .
 The traditionalists seem to be caught up in the sentimental memory of Kennedy and Camelot . The traditionalist seems to be catching up with the sentimental memories of Kennedy .
 The revisionists sometimes seem to want to tarnish this image as much as the court historians wish to protect it . The court historians want to protect the image of the court historian .
 With the recent developments concerning the crisis a middle interpretation seems to be slowly emerging . With the . recent developments regarding the . crisis, a middle . interpretation is slowly emerging.
 It takes into account Kennedy's cultural contributions to the United States of the early 1960's as the traditionalist would like . The film is based on the Kennedy legacy of his cultural contributions .
 This new moderate school also takes the objective approach in evaluating his performance taking into account the sentimental frame of reference . This new school takes an objective approach to evaluate his performance .
 This view can be noticed in Steel's quotation in the revisionists section of this paper . Steel's view is noticed in his quotation in this article . Steel: "This view is a view that can be seen in the revisedists section"
 This interpretation has been made possible largely through the continued amount of information being made available, as well as the constructive use of hindsight . This interpretation was made possible by the continued availability of information made available .
 The main purpose of this paper was to reflect on the different ways in which noted scholars view of specific event in history for the purpose of detailing that event in itself .
 This study illustrates how history is recorded, sometimes subjectified, and then rebroadcast . In the process, this study illustrates the history of the American Civil War .
 Court historians and reviSionists attitudes offer opposing views about the Cuban missile crisis . The court historians and the revi
 The pursuit of history is as active and organic concept as an active, organic concept . Their ongoing disagreement demonstrates that history is alive and organic .
 It is not the discussion of dusty figures in the nonconsequential past. It's not the history of the past, it's the history . It's the future of the world's greatest power .
 It is what we as historians and students make it, for better or not . It is the history of the American Civil War, and it's what we make it .
 It's difficult to arrive at a conclusion on something like the Cuban missile crisis is only to prove the point . To say that it is difficult to come to a conclusion, it's only to point out the difficulty of finding a conclusion .
 Each time some event, person, or era, is returned to the light of contemporary academe, it is allowed a fresh start and a new appearance . Each time an event is brought back to light of modern academe it is given a new look .