 Sergei Khrushchev Cuba at a Crossroads, The New American Strategy, is the most detailed account of Cuba U.S. relations to date . It is also the most comprehensive account of the United States relations with Cuba .
 The book states that the U.S. embargo assists the Castros by creating a permanent state of emergency that links dissent to foreign interference . The embargo encourages the disaffected to abandon Cuba .
 The book chronicles the influence of the Mafia and the military in the military's role today . It chronicles how the military and the Mafia have influenced each other .
 Sergei Khrushchev was key to the consolidation of the Cuban Revolution and the rule of Fidel Castro after 1959 . He is the son of the late Nikita Khrushchchev, whose assistance was key .
 Khrushchev lectures on Russian economic and political reforms, United States Soviet relations, Soviet space program and Soviet space programs . Khrushchen lectures on Russia's economic, political and security reforms . The lectures will be broadcast at 9 p.m. ET on October 1, 2009 .
 He is profiled in Who's Who in the World, Who's who in the U.S. He's profiled as a writer, author, author and author . He's also profiled by Who's WHO in the United States, International Authors and Writers .
 He received the Lenin prize for scientific research, the Prize of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.R., the Hammer and Sickle Gold Star as well as several awards for achievements .
 We learned that when the Soviet stopped subsidizing Cuba and they didn't collapse, it didn't . The Soviet Union had to stop subsidizing the Cuban government, and it did not collapse . The U.S. government has been in touch with Cuba for decades .
 The aim of this book is break the stalemate in Cuba policy in 2009 . It's a domestic issue."" former National Security Advisor Brent Scrowcroft .
 This will mean abandonment of the embargo and normalization of relations without preconditions the Cubans are unlikely to accept . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for decades over the years .
 The end of the embargo does not imply a retreat of U.S. power or a passive foreign policy, as embargo sponsors would have us believe . Detractors will no doubt dismiss it as naive coddling of Castro .
 This book will not argue against the embargo on humanitarian grounds just as it rejects arguments for the embargo because of human rights violations in Cuba . The book will also argue against arguments for Cuba's human rights abuses .
 There were times when the embargo made sense and was plausible as a strategy to protect U.S. interests . The embargo is still relevant today, but it's not clear when it comes to protecting America's interests .
 In 1960, world trade was heavily skewed towards American firms . Cuba, a banana republic, was wholly dependent on the U.S. in Cuba .
 When the Soviets expired, Congress passed amendments called Mack, Toricelli and Helms-Burton to ensure Castro's demise . But by then his power, as queen of the Cuban Revolution, was institutionalized .
 If the embargo were going to oust Castro and company after the Soviet collapse, it would have done so by 1994 . The embargo was in place by 1994, but would have ousted Castro and others by that date .
 Actually, it does work, but not the way we have been misled to believe, says author . "It does work," he says. "But it does not work"
 It is used as a taxpayer sponsored, affirmativeaction welfare program by savvy exiles . The program has been used by savvy, savvy ex-lovers . It is now being used as an affirmativeaction .
 A bill is introduced and passed in Congress to fund the entity and appropriations are made for it . A bill introduces and passes in Congress is introduced to fund an entity . The bill is then passed and appropriations made for the entity .
 Government programs like Radio Marti also fit this description . Government programs such as the ineffectual radio Marti are similar to this . It is not the only example of Radio Martin .
 Felipe Sixto worked for the Center for a Free Cuba, a nonpartisan institution dedicated to promoting human rights in Cuba . He says he is committed to a transition to democracy and the rule of law in Cuba.
 Sixto was assigned to deal with state legislators, Native American groups and Hispanic officials on issues such as Cuba, Puerto Rico, health, labor, transportation, the environment and energy .
 In March 2009 Sixto was convicted and sentenced to 30 months in prison for the theft of $579,247 from the Center for a Free Cuba . The theft occurred in March 2009 . Sixte was convicted .
 Ali stood over Liston in triumph, capturing one of the most iconic moments in sports history . Photographer Neil Leifer captured Ali's victory over the world champion .
 Forty years later, this image is matted, framed and prominently displayed in your new Senate office suite . The image was matted and framed and displayed 40 years ago .
 Boxing legend Muhammad Ali understood how to unnerve opponents before a bout . Less powerful than Liston, Frazier and Foreman, he knew how to make his opponents uncomfortable .
 He retired his Anglo name, rejected Christianity and went to jail for refusing to serve in Vietnam . He went to prison for refusing Christianity and refused to serve .
 Ali traveled to Cuba with medicine supplies blacklisted by the U.S. embargo in 1996 and 98 . Ali traveled with medicine from Cuba in 1998 and 1999 .
 He did it because he understood that American conglomerates dominate the pharmaceutical and medical fields worldwide . He said that American pharmaceuticals dominate the medical and pharmaceutical fields worldwide.
 Stevenson knows that even if food and medicine were exempt from the embargo, the financial carnage the embargo leaves in its wake leaves Cubans like his friend Teofilo Stevenson, unable to buy . Stevenson: Even if food were exempt, it would be hard to buy for Cubans unable to
 Olympic gold medallist Stevenson turned down offer of five million dollars to go pro in 1976 because he would have to defect from Cuba to accept it . Stevenson was dubbed the Cuban Ali because of likeness and similarities .
 Mohammed Ali has called on the U.S. to end the embargo on Cuba . The UN ambassador for peace has called for an end to the embargo .
 The United Nations General Assembly has condemned the U.S. embargo on Cuba every year since 1992 . The U.N. has demanded the United States ""take the necessary steps to repeal or invalidate"" the embargo .
 The United Nations Population Fund condemned the embargo for deterioration of Cuban living standards . The U.N. Population Fund said the embargo has led to deterioration in Cuban living conditions .
 It notes that the embargo increases the cost of milk for children by 600% and puts medical equipment out of reach . It also says that it puts medical supplies out of the reach .
 The United States embargo against Cuba is described as ""the longest and most severe set of trade sanctions ever imposed on any one nation"" by international health organizations . The U.S. embargo is described by health organizations as the longest ever imposed trade sanctions against Cuba .
 Fidel Castro holds the world record for non-inherited longevity in power in power . Mr President, it is not a coincidence that the embargo is nearly fifty years old, Mr President says .
 "Now is the time, and I know of no better way to do it, than to boldly announce that the U.S. will heed the call made every year to drop the embargo on Cuba," says President Obama .
 Unable to dislodge Castro, the ever-frustrated embargo on Cuba has metastasized into an absurd, unsustainable policy . The embargo is at odds with who we are, and it's not working .
 Doomed to failure 8 because of its unilateral nature, the embargo has become an ersatz blockade . The embargo has been  ersaced blockade. Doomed .
 On February 28, 2004, James Sabzali, a Canadian citizen, was charged with seventy-five counts of violating a 1917 United States law the Trading with the Enemy ""Act"" and one count of conspiracy . He was charged in 2004 with 75 counts .
 He was convicted of selling water purification supplies to Cuba mostly from Canada, but also from the U.S. in violation of the embargo . He sold supplies from Canada and the United States mostly from Cuba .
 Sabzali, a Canadian, ended up with a criminal record for violating U.S. law even though he lived in another country when he sold goods to Cuba . He was charged with violating American law in Cuba .
 When he visited the U.S. he was charged with smuggling, taken to court, given a year's probation and fined $10,000 . He was also charged with a year-long probation, and was taken to a federal court in New York .
 Sabzali spent three years in the U.S. under strict travel restrictions, including 14 months when forced to wear an electronic monitoring bracelet and restricted to no more than an hour drive from his home even to visit his family .
 The extended family of Osama bin Laden was allowed by the Bush White House and State Department to leave the United States immediately after 9/1 1 on private jets even as the FAA ordered all aircraft grounded . The irony is that bin Laden's extended family left the U.S. on private
 American intelligence never got the chance to question the bin Ladens about the attack on the W.T.C. and Pentagon . U.S. intelligence never had the opportunity to question bin Laden's family .
 I think you will agree, Mr President, that safe drinking water is a human right . I think . Mr President. Mr President . Mr Obama, Mr . Obama, said safe drinking . drinking water was a 'human right'
 Proponents of the embargo would have seized upon it as proof of Castro's disregard for human life . Certainly, had a water borne epidemic appeared, proponents of embargo .
 Sabzali's crime was to sell Cubans the wherewithal to provide clean water, defeating the U.S. embargo . At the same time, they zealously condemn businessmen like Sabzli, who sold Cubans clean water .
 Unable to speak in public, he is reduced to photo ops with visiting dignitaries and reflections in Granma, Granma .
 Fidel, Raul and the Cuban government don't have the military or economic might to challenge the U.S. The Cuban government doesn't have enough military might to take on the United States . Fidel and Raul have no military, economic might, but do they have economic might?
 Castro has no corporate public relations mouthpiece to compete for influence in the media outside Cuba . He has no entertainment empire to shape values and perceptions of young people . No recording industry or marketing gurus to shape public opinion outside Cuba about anything .
 When Oliver Stone, Kevin Costner or Naomi Campbell do lunch with Castro, the embargo crowd goes ballistic . But when Oliver Stone does lunch with the Castro, it's not surprising that the embargo goes on .
 With the exception of sunshine in December, Cuba doesn't produce anything of value that could threaten U.S. market share of world trade if embargo were lifted . Cuba's production doesn't threaten United States market share if embargo lifted .
 Cuba has little of importance to sell but needs everything, and that alone is why the embargo has been able to persist for so long . Cuba needs everything to sell, but that alone, is why it's not selling anything . Cuba has nothing of importance but needs to sell everything, says
 Cuba's peasant cuisine won't lure Americans away from Boston Market and Popeye's . Cuban cuisine is known for its peasant cuisine, but it's not a big draw .
 The truth is that U.S. foreign policy is un-burdened with such trifles, says John Avlon . Castro was a dictator and a stain on human rights, Avlon says .
 Republican and Democratic presidents and congress-people have advocated cruel dictators, hard-line Communists, petro-monarchs and rude oligarchs... and won accolades for doing so .
 55,000 Americans were killed to keep the dominos from falling in south-east Asia . When that failed, an economic embargo was applied to make sure the Communists never recovered . Nike has three footwear factories and Dominoes pizzas are falling on dinner tables in Vietnam .
 Prominent churches on Havana's key 5th Avenue are open for worship seven days a week . Havana's main church is located on the island of Cuba .
 Jimmy Carter visited Cuba in 2002 and called for the embargo to be lifted . Jimmy Carter is outspoken on human rights issues everywhere . He visited the island nation in 2002 .
 Mr President, it is inconceivable that, against the better judgment of these men, the embargo could have value as a tool to change Cuba for the better, Mr President says . Mr President.
 Compensation claims in Cuba by nationals of Canada, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Spain, Spain and France were resolved long ago . Compensation claims were resolved by the Cuban government .
 The disruption of ties between the U.S. and Cuba, codified by the embargo, makes a compensation plan impossible . Using circuitous logic, the embargo serves as justification to continue the embargo .
 Cuban losses sustained by Cuba as a result of the embargo give Cuba a claim for damages and impede its ability to pay . Complicating matters further, losses sustained from the embargo can also be lost in Cuba .
 Cuba's automotive fleet is the world's oldest in the world, a rolling museum . 60,000 specimens of battered, pre1960 Detroit muscle and chrome roam the island, lost in a time warp .
 Maintained by home made spare parts, infinite patience and strong will, the ancient fleet has become a source of pride and a tourist attraction .
 Cuba is a metaphor for Cuba's political system and U.S. policy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . It is also a symbol for Cuba and the United States policy, he says .
 The ancient fleet, Cuba's political system and the U.S. embargo are all obsolete . Cuba's politics and the United States embargo are also obsolete, says President Obama . The U.N. embargo is all obsolete, he says .
 To help answer this question, we need to get a grip on Cuba's past and present . Cuba has a history of violence and violence, but it's still not clear what happened .
 For far too long, Cuba has been distorted through the monochrome lens of Cold War and Florida domestic politics . Cuba has never been seen as a viable option in the U.S.
 Florida is home base of the Cuban diaspora . The Magic City is touted as the segunda capital of the cubanos .
 Cuban political upheaval and exiles it generates were common hitherto the EastWest conflict or the 20th century itself . But Cuban exiles were common in the past, as well as in the East-West conflict .
 Uncovering this remote history is essential to have an informed discussion about Cuba and the Castros today, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Maine was blown up in Havana harbor in 1898 under questionable circumstances . Maine, which is named for Maine, is a Cuban ship that was later blown up .
 These wars were certainly much more pivotal and costly than the Spanish-American War . The Spanish American War was the most costly of all the wars .
 The statue is flanked by equally impressive bronze behemoths of Bolivar and San Martin . The statues were gifts from Venezuela and Argentina in 1916 and 1950 . The statue was given to the city of San Martin in 1950 .
 On January 20, 2009, in Washington, D.C., I stood on Pennsylvania Avenue and observed a remarkable lady walk down the center of the street . The remarkable lady walked down Pennsylvania Avenue .
 She wore a lemongrass yellow wool lace shift dress with matching overcoat designed by one Isabel Toledo, a Cuban native .
 The unlikely prospect that Michelle Robinson of Chicago, better known as Michelle Obama, would make such a walk was not lost upon me . The symbolism of her attire and her attire were also not lost .
 If I were a babalao, I would divine the near presence of Ochun, ruler of the sweet waters of the world, its brooks, streams and rivers, and the embodiment of love and fertility . I would say, "If I were  a babalaao
 The youngest of the orishas, she retains the title of Iyalode . She heals with her sweet waters and with honey, which she also owns .
 The rivers and streams she rules over always head towards her sister, Yemaya . But she does so on her own circuitous route, as rivers to the sea .
 She is the most beautiful of the orishas and once saved the world by luring Ogun out of the forests using her feminine wiles . She is also known to be the most powerful orangas in the world .
 In her manifestation as Ibu Ikole, she saved the world from drought by flying up to heaven . She is now living in a new home in Nigeria .
 Michelle Obama' s stroll in that yellow dress is an omen of great change coming to Cuba's relationship with the U.S. The former first lady wore a yellow dress to celebrate her visit .
 There is disagreement about whether the first Cubans left Florida and skipped down the keys or navigated to Cuba from the Orinoco Basin of South America .
 Tainos moved from Quisqueya as they engaged in a power struggle with the Arawak and Siboney . The Tainoans are still in the process of re-dying .
 Kubla Kahn was convinced he was on the Asian mainland, the name Cuba was adapted to Cuba . The name Cuba has since been used in Cuba .
 The Spanish empire's heavy-handed censorship makes fact-finding elusive . The empire's censorship makes it hard to find out what happened .
 In 1478 Spain's King Ferdinand V and Queen Isabella requested that Pope Sixtus IV permit the Spanish Inquisition . The benefactors of Colon's voyage requested the Inquisition .
 Thousands of Spaniards were burned alive and in 1492 the Jews were expelled from Spain . In 1492 thousands of Jews were burned out of Spain .
 By 1560 it was expressly prohibited ""to print or sell any book on the Indies ""without previous and special license"" of the Crown . The Holy Inquisition's ecclesiastical censorship of all printed matter was also prohibited .
 In 1641 the king of Spain decreed that no history books could be published in the Indies . King of Spain made a decree banning history books from the islands .
 The first Castillians to traverse the Antilles left with brief remarks of the first . The Castillian is known as the first to arrive in the Antillean .
 On August 2, 1492, three eighty-ton caravels set sail for the Canary Islands . The Spanish city of Sevilla was founded in 1492 . The ship set sail from Sevilla in Sevilla, Spain, and set sail to the Canary .
 After various ship repairs and other preparations, they headed west in search of westward passage to Asia . They headed west to search for the westward Passage to Asia in the early 1900s .
 The Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria spotted land on the night of October 1 1 .
 When Colon returned to Spain on January 4, 1493, several crewmembers stayed behind . Colon returned home to Spain in 1493 . Several crew members remained behind .
 Cristobal Colon began his second voyage to Cuba on September 25, from Cadiz .
 17 ships and 1,500 men, including missionaries, soldiers and laborers, brought 17 ships, including soldiers, laborers . He brought 1,000 men with him .
 There are about one hundred stowaways, as well as agricultural equipment, cattle and seeds . There are also stowedaways, including agricultural equipment and cattle .
 Among the crewmembers to return from the first voyage was Diego Velazquez de Cuellar, who would later become the Governor of Cuba and founder of both Havana and Santiago .
 In 1508 Sebastian de Ocampo circumnavigates Cuba and proves that it is an island . In 1509 Ponce de Leon begins the conquest of Puerto Rico .
 Juan de Esquivel, under orders of Cristobal Colon's son Diego, colonizes Jamaica . He colonized the island nation under orders from the Colonist's son .
 Christopher Columbus's first born son and 4 l Viceroy of the Indies, Velasquez defeated and captured the Taino commander Hatuey, putting an end to a two year guerilla campaign to roll back Spanish power .
 For these they fight and kill, for these they persecute us and that is why we must drive them back into the sea . For these, they fight, kill and kill and that's why we need to drive them out of the sea. For these these they kill and per
 These tyrants tell us they adore a God of peace and equality, but they take our land and make us slaves, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Before the execution, a Spanish priest asked him if he would accept Jesus and go to heaven . The indigenous leader's execution was the first of its kind in the region .
 Landowner Amador de Lares gets permission to bring four African slaves from Hispaniola . Landowner was allowed to bring the slaves to Hispaniola in order to save his slaves .
 Let's use this epochal transition around 1500 as our starting point for future projections . Let's see how the world has evolved since 1500 .
 In 1519 conquistador Hernan Cortes prepares his fleet in Cuba and sets sail for Aztec Mexico . Cortes set sail for the Aztec in 1519 . He was the first to arrive in Mexico .
 Havana is the natural stopping point for fleets returning to Spain . After the conquest, Havana becomes the natural stop point for the return of fleets .
 On December 17 the first Catholic mass in Havana was held under a Ceiba tree . In 1520 the first large group of African slaves arrive in Cuba to work in a mine named Jaugua .
 In 1533 the first recorded African slave revolt in Cuba takes place at the Jobabo gold mines . The first recorded slave revolt takes place in 1533 . The revolt took place in Jobabo, Cuba .
 Their heads were brought back to Bayamo to quiet the terrified colonists . The heads of the terrified tribesmen were brought home to quiet them down .
 The ""laziness"" was actually a form of passive resistance to colonization . The ""Laziness" was actually the form of resistance to colonisation .
 The reader may ask what this ancient, sordid history has to do with modern issues like human rights, elections, the embargo, the Castros' reign and U.S. relations .
 Cuban identity, religion, language, culture, culture and attitudes are the product of this history . Cuban identity is a product of Cuba's history, diplomat, businessman and others who would understand Cuba today must know it .
 Hatue's legendary martyrdom would make actor Will Smith proud . Hatuey would make his martyrdom proud. Hatue was a hero of the day for the U.S. Army .
 Today, he is considered the 'First National Hero' of Cuba . His personality has reincarnated itself through the centuries . He is considered Cuba's first national hero and considered a national hero .
 We will return to Hatuey and his conditioned power as we dig into contemporary Cuban attitudes . We will also return to the question of whether or not Cuban women are women .
 For two and a half centuries after the Spanish conquest of Cuba, the colony remained under Castilian control . For two-and-a-half centuries, it was under Spanish control .
 Hernan Cortes launched the conquest of the Aztec empire from Santiago de Cuba . Spanish galleons laden with thousands of tons of gold and silver made their way to Spain via Cuba .
 Factoria was formed in 1715 to purchase all Cuban tobacco at fixed prices and sell it abroad . In 1715 it was formed to purchase tobacco in Cuba at fixed rates and sell abroad . Factoria purchased all tobacco and sold it to the world .
 In 1717 the Estanco de Tobacco was established in Havana with offices in Bayamo, Trinidad and Santiago de Cuba . It was founded in 1717 . The Estanco is the largest tobacco company in Cuba .
 In 1727, three hundred slaves cast off their chains at Quiebra-Hacha, west of Havana, Cuba . The slaves were freed from their chains .
 Massive force is used to beat back and prevent the revolt from spreading . Massive force was used to stop the spread of the revolt .
 In 1740, the Compania de Comercio, another Mercantilist royal monopoly, is created to handle the booming import/export business in Havana . The Compania is created in 1740 to handle Havana's booming business .
 Cubans complain they are being fleeced and that commerce is restricted in order to keep prices high . It soon acquires a bad reputation with Cubans .
 It is plain to see that conquest, colonialism, exploitation, exploitation and power struggle define Cuba's past .
 Broad trends and mood swings revolve around these themes even if Cuban individuals today are oblivious to them . Broad trends are based on these themes, even though Cuban individuals are unaware of them .
 Cuba has a competitive advantage in agriculture . Because of its topography and latitude, Cuba has an advantage in farming . Cuba's latitude and topography gives it an advantage .
 For centuries it produced a surplus of sugar, tobacco and citrus . For centuries, it produced an export surplus . It is now a major source of sugar and tobacco exports .
 Cuba is a net importer of foodstuffs, much of it from the U.S. through loopholes in the embargo put in place to placate midwestern agricultural interests . Today, agriculture in Cuba is in a shambles, and agriculture in the country's agriculture is in
 Less than 5% of the products in Cuban stores originated in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Less than 5 per cent of Cuban stores in Cuba originated from Cuba"
 Imported foodstuffs are almost always high value-added, packaged and finished products . Imported foods are often high value added and packaged products .
 Elite Cuban consumers pay exorbitant prices with remittances sent to them from abroad . Elite Cuban consumer pays exorbitance prices with money sent from abroad.
 All remittances must be converted in to Cuban Convertible Pesos to become legal tender . Remittances need to be converted into Convertibles Pesos in order to be legal tender in Cuba .
 The CUC is pegged to a basket of real currencies including the Euro, Swiss Franc and the USD . It is reset daily by the Cuban treasury and banking authority . Cuba's currency is a benchmark for the dollar .
 Cuba's value is not affected by inflation, current account, reserves or credit rating . Cuba's current account has not been affected by its credit rating or inflation . The value of Cuba's credit rating is unaffected by inflation .
 It was created to supplant the USD in response to Bush Administration pressure on banks worldwide to refuse Cuban deposits in dollars . It is a creature of administrative fiat similar to tokens circulated in city transit authorities .
 Cuba credits are paid for via credits to Cuba granted by the government where the goods originate . The credits are given to Cuba by the country's government where they originate .
 Cuba must be on good diplomatic terms with a foreign government in order to purchase products from private companies located in the same country . This arrangement helps explain why Cuba must first be on diplomatic and political terms with the foreign government .
 The notable exception is the U.S. which requires all payments in cash up front to be paid in cash .
 Cuba plays ball to snub Miami and show the U.S. business community that Cuba is a worthy customer . The embargo should end in the name of greater profits, the Cuban government says .
 The Cuban domestic CUC market consists of the inflow of foreign products swapped for external funding transiting through the country while nominated as Cuban currency . CUC is nominated as Cuba's currency .
 Cuban labor productivity, wages, innovation, technology, savings and employment have no bearing on consumption, prices, quality or living standards in the CUC economy . CUC labor productivity is not a factor in consumption or quality of living standards .
 Cuban sugar production has collapsed in recent years .% of arable land remains fallow.% of land is fallow .
 Antiquated industry, lack of labor incentive and hurricanes are to blame . Hurricane Katrina was the first hurricane to hit the U.S. coast .
 The laborintensive sugar industry dominated the Caribbean and had an insatiable appetite for slave labor . The labor intensive sugar industry had a huge appetite for slaves .
 Over time, a majority of the inhabitants of English, French and Spanish Carribean colonies, including Cuba, were slaves or freed slaves . Over time a numerical majority of inhabitants of the colonies were slaves .
 The Negro Republic of Haiti was established in 1804 . Inspired by the French Revolution and the ensuing chaos in France, it was established by the Haitian Revolution .
 By 1839 little Cuba was the world's number one sugar producer and exporter . Cuba was a major sugar exporter and sugar producer in the world .
 Cuban ingenios and fierce Spanish Mercantilism succeeded in creating a cash cow for the empire . Spanish law guarded it jealously .
 Cuba was prohibited from trading with foreign powers and all Cuban products had to be exported on Spanish vessels . Cuba was also banned from exporting its products to foreign powers .
 The pale sweet granules are to this island what wine is to France and pasta is to Italy . They are to the island as much as wine and pasta are to France .
 The end of barter trade after 1990 and falling sugar prices plunged Cuba's sugar industry into an abyss . Outmoded production techniques and outmoded sugar production techniques led to the collapse of the industry .
 Much of Cuba's sugarcane is cut by hand with machetes . Modern sugar production employs state-of-the-art harvesting and processing techniques . Much of the sugar cane is cut using hand cutting techniques .
 Horse-drawn carts transport supplies and 100-year-old steam generators power mills . Horse drawn carts are used to transport supplies to the mills .
 Cuba spent 17 cents to produce a onepound bag of sugar worth 5 cents on the world market, one-third the price in 1985 . In 2001, Cuba spent just 17 cents per pound on a one pound of sugar .
 As we have seen, the cultivation of sugar in Cuba dates from the 1 6 century . The cultivation of the first crop dates back to the 1.6 century .
 Cubans readily and fondly say, part of the national identity . It forms, as Cubans say, "a form of national identity" Cubans are proud of their country's unity .
 Sugar dictated Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 21 land use and ownership patterns across the island . Sugar dictates Chapter 1 of the book, "Kubla Kahn"
 Sugar produced great wealth that made Havana and smaller urban centers such as Matanzas flourish, financing waves of architectural riches . Havana was the center of Havana's architectural boom .
 Cuba's sugar industry brought railroads and the latest technology to Cuba . The sugar industry helped bring the country to prominence in the sugar trade .
 Even at the turn of the 21st century, sugar was still being produced in nearly every municipality everywhere . Cuba's western tip, where tobacco dominates, is tobacco .
 By sustaining nearly half a million jobs, sugar was the livelihood of one in five Cubans . Sugar is a vital part of the economy in Cuba . Sugar was a key source of income for many Cubans in the country .
 In 2002, the chief executive of Cuba's food importing company said he was looking to sign contracts to import 5,000-15,000 tons of sugar from the United States . His words symbolized a paradigm shift in centuries-old patterns of economic activity .
 Cuba remains a net exporter of sugar, but the fact that it imports any sugar at all is a watershed in Cuban history . Cuba is now only the 10 l largest sugar producer in the world .
 The steep decline in the Cuban sugar industry should not come as a surprise . Cuba's sugar industry has been on the decline for years .
 Cuban sugar traded at the equivalent of 40 cents per pound, well more than double market prices at the time, yielding an effective subsidy of $3 billion per year . During the Soviet period of barter and coordinated Five Year Plans, Cuban sugar .
 In some years, Cuba could afford to re-export some of the oil that its sugar earned . Cuba could also afford to 22 re-examine some of its sugar profits .
 Between 1976 and 1990, sugar represented three-fourths of Cuba's exports and 20% of the economy's total investments . Sugar represented 3.4% of Cuban exports, 20% investment in Cuba .
 By the early 1990's, the sugar industry held 30 percent of the nation's industrial machinery . The sugar industry bought 20% of the production of the steel and machinery sector and 13% of production of ministry of basic industries .
 In light of the U.S. embargo, the demise of the Soviet bloc robbed Cuba of much more than favorable terms of trade . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the United States embargo, but it has grown in recent years .
 Cuba is dependent on a defunct, sole source of tractors, fuel, fertilizers and other critical supplies for a huge, mechanized sugar industry . Cuba's sugar industry was designed to barter with an extinct market . It left Cuba dependent on tractors and fuel, fertilizer and other
 The same scenario played out throughout all sectors of the economy, plunging Cuba into an unprecedented depression . Cuba's economy has been plunged into unprecedented depression by the government .
 Sugar production fell by three million tons, falling 39% between 1992 and 1993 . Sugar production in 1993 fell by 3 million tons .
 Lower revenues caused investment and maintenance to falter, leading to a downward spiral of de-capitalization and further drops in output . Lower revenues have led to a decline in output and investment in the company .
 During this period, the United States tightened the embargo with the Mack and Helms-Burton Amendments, compounding the depression . The U.S. increased the embargo against Cuba .
 Cuba's large-scale, oil-dependent farming, heavily mechanized farming, was now obsolete . Cuba's reliance on oil-driven farming has led to the demise of Cuba's sugar industry .
 After the embargo lifted, sorely needed capital investment will return to Cuba . The potential for Cuban ethanol exports to the U.S. market will be significant . The embargo is lifted .
 Cuba has one of the most sophisticated biotech industries in the developing world . Cuba has 23 scientists dedicated to drug research . With more than 7,000 people working on drugs, Cuba has a biotech industry .
 After Reagan reinforced the embargo in 1982, Cuba had to rely on its own biotech industry to produce unavailable drugs . Cuba's biotech industry has been key to its success .
 A Cuban Research Institute has patented a promising new lung cancer drug . The drug could be used to treat lung cancer patients .
 The drug is called CimaVax EGF and in clinical trials it has been shown to increase life expectancy in lung cancer patients by 4-5 months . In clinical trials, the drug is shown to be able to increase the life expectancy by 4 months .
 The treatment is administered in conjunction with conventional treatments of chemo and radiotherapy .
 After the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1688, the British and French empires became the pre-eminent military powers . Both rivals were determined to vanquish the other . Cuba was a Superpower Pawn Centuries before Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 The Union Jack flew over El Morro de la Habana and Cubans were British subjects just like their counterparts in the 13 colonies to the north . Cuba was ruled by the British government in the 1920s and 1930s .
 In 1763 Cuba was ceded back to Spain in exchange for claim over Florida . But in 1763 Spain ceded Cuba back to Cuba in return for claim to claim Florida .
 Of course, the Cubans were not consulted any more than the Florida Seminoles were . The Cubans are not consulted more than they are .
 The experience left Cubans with a new interest in the colonies that would soon become the U.S. But the experience left them with an interest in what would soon be the United States .
 The Criollos chafed under the same burdens as their British colonial counterparts . They fought for independence from colonial Britain in the 1920s .
 Cuban trader Juan de Miralles befriended George Washington and his wife Martha Custis Washington . He established himself in Philadelphia in 1778 and befriended the Washington family . He was a friend of George Washington's wife and family .
 He threw a ball in their honor and dreamed of 24 independence for Cuba . He threw it in honor of the Cuban people .
 Francisco Miranda, of Caracas Venezuela, led Cubans on an attack of the British garrison at Pensacola, Florida . Miranda was the leader of the attack .
 In April of 1782, Jose Antonio Aponte, a free Afro-Cuban and Havana native, captured Providence, Bahamas from the British with a battalion of mulatto and black troops . Aponte captured Providence in 1782 .
 Cubans donated money to the Continental Congress of the U.S. after George Washington's victory at Yorktown . Cubans contributed to the Congress after the victory of the Battle of Yorktown in 17th century .
 malaria infected French troops were unable to subdue forces led by Toussaint L'Ouverture . Spain itself was then conquered by Napoleon's armies in 1808 . France defeated Spain in Haiti but the victory degenerated into a Vietnam style rout .
 Revolution echoed across the Americas from Mexico to Argentina as an enfeebled Spanish Empire could no longer rule her colonies on the American continents . The Spanish Empire no longer ruled her colonies in the Americas .
 The small islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico remained under Spanish control . But the small islands were under the Spanish rule .
 Unlike the other newly independent states of the Americas, the U.S. became a global empire en route to super-power status . The United States is now a global superpower .
 As early as 1805, Thomas Jefferson wrote that Cuba should be controlled by the U.S. Thomas Jefferson said Cuba should have been controlled by Cuba . Thomas Jefferson: "Cuba should be owned by the United States"
 In 1809 Napoleon was on the move and the Spanish monarchy could not maintain control of Spain, let alone the Spanish colonies . The Spanish monarchy was overthrown by Napoleon in 1809 .
 Slave Power was determined to add Cuba as a slave state to help offset the growing number of Free States in the congress . Antebellum Slave Power added Cuba to the congress to offset the number of the Free States .
 After the Civil War, southern states resisted adding Cuba as a U.S. state because its population was too dark . The southern states added Cuba to the United States because it was a dark population .
 Both northern and southern states united in opposition to encroaching European empires in the western hemisphere . Both states were united against European empires .
 Monroe Doctrine has withstood the test of time and remains relevant today . The 1823 Monroe Doctrine was created in 1823 .
 It exalted the original Indo-Cuban resistance to colonization to colonization . Kubla Kahn was the crucible of Cuban political attitudes .
 It encompassed the formation of Cuban nationalism, the key to understanding Cuba today . It was a key part of the Cuban nationalism that is now being formed .
 Some French landowners fled to Cuba, creating more plantations with subsequent increased demand for slaves . Some of the French landowners escaped to Cuba to create plantations .
 To meet this demand, Spain allows foreign vessels to transport slaves to the island . To meet the demand, the Spanish government allows foreign ships to bring slaves .
 A slave revolt in Cuba frightens U.S. slave owners because whites and Negroes joined forces to demand emancipation . The revolt frightened the United States slave owners, but it was led by white and black .
 Over the next seven years, Cuban ports would be opened and closed to trade several times . Cuba would open and close ports several times during that period .
 During the Napoleonic era, trade between the U.S. and Cuba increased considerably as Cuba's sugar harvest grew in size . Trade between Cuba and the United States increased considerably .
 Thomas Jefferson sent General James Wilkinson to Spain to try and purchase Cuba . Thomas Jefferson tried to buy Cuba with General Wilkinson .
 The Spanish authorities use prison, exile, torture and death to quell insurrections . In response, the Spanish authorities have used prison and exile, and death, in response .
 President James Madison instructs his minister to Great Britain to warn the U.S. that the United States will not sit idly by if Britain were to try to gain possession of Cuba . Madison: "The United States is not sitting idly"
 Within two years, over half of Cuba's trade is with the United States . Cuba's largest trading partner is the U.S. and its largest trade partner .
 United States Secretary of State John Quincy Adams defines U.S. policy towards Cuba . Adams: "These islands are natural appendages of the North American continent, and one of them almost within sight of our shores"
 U.S. President James Monroe declares the Western Hemisphere as a United States sphere of influence . Monroe warns Europe not to interfere in the affairs of any American nations recently becoming independent .
 Governments in the recently independent countries of Mexico and Venezuela plan a military expedition to support Cuban independence . Governments plan to support Cuba's independence .
 Secretary of State Henry Clay warns that the U.S.A. will block any move to liberate Cuba from Spain . Henry Clay: "The United States will not allow Cuba to leave the country"
 The U.S. government believed that Cuba would become part of the United States . The United States government believed it would be part of Cuba . Cuba was ruled out of Cuba in 1961 .
 The Slave Power feared an independent Cuba would lead to the end of slavery that could have repercussions in the Southern states . The slave power feared that it could lead to an end in slavery .
 "Manifest Destiny" advocates Moses Beach and John O' Sullivan conspire with members of the Club de la Habana . President James Polk secretly offers to buy Cuba from Spain for $100 million . 1848: Against the counsel of Democrats opposed to extending slavery, United States Chapter 1
 In May, American Democrats nominate Senator Lewis Cass, who has publicly advocated the purchase of Cuba, for president . Cass is a Democrat who has expressed support for Cuba purchase .
 Starting in New Orleans, they soon have fifty chapters in eight Southern states with an estimated membership of 1 5,000 to 20,000 . Their goal is to incorporate Cuba into the United States .
 Order of the Lone Star plans to invade Cuba in the summer, in conjunction with the ""Conspiracy of Vuelta Abajo,"" a revolt organized by Francisco de Frias, Lopez's brother-in-law .
 Spain discovers the conspiracy and executes Frias, while some of the conspirators escape to the United States . This year Spain refuses a second request from the U.S.A. to sell Cuba .
 Marquis Juan de la Pezuela appointed Captain General of Cuba . Abolitionist Marquis de la Pazuela was the first Cuban to be Captain General .
 U.S. President Franklin Pierce offers to buy Cuba for $130 million . The Ostend Manifesto was signed by Franklin Pierce, the president of the United States .
 In April, influential Cuban slave owners meet in Havana with United States Consul William H Robertson . They urge him to persuade United States President Pierce to send American troops to Cuba .
 The victory of the north in the United States Civil War ends importation of slaves from the U.S.A. into Cuba . The victory in the Civil War ended importation into Cuba, ending slavery .
 Cuban landowners and businessmen import 28 Chinese coolies and Mexican Indians to work the fields . Instead of working in the fields, Cuban landowners import 28 coolies .
 Although the African slave trade to Cuba ends, slavery itself continues on the island until 1886 . Slavery itself continues until the end of slavery in Cuba .
 The Ten Years' War, or Cuba's First War of Independence, begins October 10 . Carlos Manuel de Cespedes, accompanied by 37 other planters, proclaims the independence of Cuba in the Grito de Yara issued from his plantation .
 On April 10, 1869, the first constituent assembly prepares the first Constitution of the Republic of Cuba . Carlos Manuel de Cespedes was elected the first president of the Cuban Republic .
 President Grant and his cabinet oppose recognition of the new Cuban government . President Grant's cabinet, led by Secretary of State Hamilton Fish, opposes recognition of Cuba .
 The United States House of Representatives adopts a resolution to recognize the new Cuban government by a vote of 98 to 25 but Grant ignores it . Grant ignores the resolution . Grant says the U.S. should recognize the Cuban government .
 President Ulysses S Grant rejects proposal that offers Cuban independence and the abolition of slavery . Grant rejected proposal that offered Cuban independence, slavery .
 Despite sanctions, American civilians profit by selling guns to the rebels . Despite official sanctions, U.S. civilians profit from selling weapons to rebels in Syria . The rebels have been fighting for years to overthrow President Obama .
 Late in 1872, Spanish officials board the Virginius and arrest Americans for running guns to the rebels . Americans ran guns to rebels .
 Colombian Foreign Minister Don Gil Colunje proposes all Latin American republics and the U.S. work together for Cuban independence and the abolition of slavery .
 Following the death of Cespedes, Cuban rebels ask for and are denied U.S. recognition . Cuban rebels asked for and denied United States recognition .
 United States Secretary of State Hamilton Fish asks England to lead a European force to restore peace in Cuba . U.S. secretary of state Hamilton Fish wants a force in Cuba to restore the country's sovereignty .
 The remaining Cuban forces surrender to Spain and the Ten Years' War officially ends . The Spanish-Cuban war officially ends with the surrender of Cuba's remaining forces .
 William Randolph Hearst published sensational and inflammatory stories about Cuba in the 1890s . Hearst covered the island nation in a series of sensational stories published by Hearst in Cuba .
 The Detroit Free Press writes: Cuba would make one of the finest states in the Union . If American wealth, enterprise and genius once invaded the superb island, it would become a veritable hive of industry .
 There is a strong party growing up in the island in favor of reciprocity with and annexation to the U.S. The island is home to a strong anti-American party .
 The U.S. government detains three Cuban ships laden with $58,000 in arms and supplies for the rebels . The ships are a major setback for the Cuban rebels, dealing them a setback .
 President Grover Cleveland proclaims neutrality in the conflict between Cuba and Spain . U.S. firms sell munitions to Spain . President Cleveland declared neutrality in Cuba .
 The United States and Spain discuss granting Cuba autonomy, but not independence . The U.S. and Spain want to grant Cuba autonomy but not an outright independence .
 U.S. President William McKinley will not recognize Cuban independence . Despite the rebels' success and their declaration they had won the war, President McKinley refused to recognize them .
 Spain's queen regent offers autonomy to Cuba, but both rebels and Cuban loyalists reject the offer . In November, Spain's Queen Regent offered autonomy to Cuban rebels and loyalists .
 Maine sent to Havana during the Second War of Independence on a ""friendly visit"" to protect American citizens and business . Maine is sent to Cuba on a "friendly visit" to protect citizens and businesses .
 President McKinley and the Congress needed for intervention and the SpanishAmerican War began . McKinley's intervention was the cause for intervention, and the war began .
 Spain concedes to every United States demand except Cuban independence . To no avail, Spain concedes every U.S. demand except Cuba independence .
 In April, the United States Congress declares Cuba has the ""right to be free and independent" Congress authorizes the president to use military force to oust Spain from the island .
 President McKinley declares a blockade of the northern coast of Cuba and the port of Santiago . The blockade was imposed on Cuba's northern coast and Santiago, Cuba .
 Assistant Secretary of State Theodore Roosevelt, a neophyte, urges U.S. intervention in Syria . Roosevelt: "Theodore Roosevelt was not a war veteran, but he was a hero of the day"
 They will be American soil from the moment the Stars and Stripes float over Chapter 1 . Kubla Kahn will be the first time the U.S. troops have landed on American soil .
 The United States attacks and sinks several Spanish ships attempting to break the blockade and captures 1,670 Spanish soldiers . The U.S. attacks and attacks Spanish ships and sinks Spanish ships .
 In December, the Cuban Educational Association declares that only some Cubans are fit to be Americanized . Dark skinned Cubans could not gain admission to many American universities .
 Treaty of Paris formalizes U.S. control of Cuba, Puerto Rico, the Philippines and Guam . Treaty formalizes United States control of Cuban Islands . Treaty also formalizes control of Philippines, Philippines, Guam and Puerto Rico .
 Although the treaty grants Cuba independence, the United States flag is raised over Havana . The U.S. flag is flown over Havana every day .
 Piatt would later write, ""Cubans are incapable of stable self-government," he said . Piatt later wrote that Cubans were unable to form a stable government .
 The restricted Cuban electorate elects Tomas Estrada Palma as Cuba's first president . Cuba's restricted population voted for the first time in a presidential election .
 The naval base at Guantanamo is opened and Cuba is paid $2,000 a year in gold coin . Cuba pays the nation's government a total of $1,500 a year to buy gold coins .
 Cuba and the U.S. sign a commercial reciprocity treaty in March . Cuba and Cuba signed the treaty in a joint effort to counterbalance each other .
 In July a treaty was signed to allow the U.S. to create coaling and naval bases in Cuba . In July, the United States signed a treaty to allow it to do so .
 Tomas Estrada Palma invokes the Piatt amendment and requests U.S. intervention . Tomas Estrada Palma is accused of election fraud and requests United States intervention . He invokes Piatt Amendment and requests the United States .
 The United States sends 2,000 Marines and 5,600 soldiers to re-occupy the country . Military rule extends until late 1908, overseen by Secretary of War William Taft .
 President Teddy Roosevelt issues an executive order that Cuba's provisional governor comes under the direct supervision of the Secretary of War . The order was issued in response to the Cuban government's failure to negotiate with the United States .
 Magoon establishes a commission to organize and compile Cuban law . Law was previously a jumble of Spanish codes, military orders and decrees . Magoon established a commission in order to organize law .
 Taft and Knox adapt a ""preventive"" interpretation of the Piatt Amendment to allow diplomatic intervention to avoid the necessity of military intervention . Taft was president of the United States and Secretary of State Philander Knox of the U.S.
 Maine determines the cause was likely an accidental fire inside a coalbunker that spread to a nearby powder magazine . Maine officials say the cause of the fire was likely a fire that started inside the mine .
 Cuban president General Jose Miguel Gomez suppresses the Agrupacion Independiente de Color with the help of United States Marines . U.S. Marines took control of the group .
 Cuban Negroes are excluded from much of Cuba's national life . They have access to government jobs in the Rural Guard and the army .
 United States Marines land in Cuba and two battleships dock at Havana . U.S. battleships arrive in Cuba in Cuba .
 President William Howard Taft declares this act does not constitute intervention . Taft declared this act was not an act of war against the U.S. President Taft later declared it not intervention .
 General Mario Garcia Menocal of the Conservative Republicans wins the presidential election via fraud and intimidation . General Menocal wins the election via voter intimidation and fraud . Menocal won the election by fraud, intimidation .
 President Woodrow Wilson sends United States troops to Cuba to ""protect American interests"" and Menocal . Wilson sent troops to protect American interests in Cuba . Wilson: "Menocal. Menocal"
 Cuba enters World War I one day after the U.S. enters the war . Cuba entered the war one day before the United States did . Cuba was one of the first countries to enter the war in 1918 .
 I boom, sugar soars to 22 cents/pound, followed by a plunge to less than four cents . I boom. Sugar soars . Then it plunges to just four cents, then soars again .
 Cuban plantations go bankrupt and are scooped up by U.S. investors at bargain prices . Cuban plantations sell for bargain prices after going bankrupt and go bankrupt .
 President Wilson sends General Enoch Crowder to organize new Cuban elections . General Crowder was sent to Cuba to organize elections .
 He goes on to become the personal representative of the new U.S. President, Warren Harding . Harding was the president of the Harding administration .
 Morgan loan to Cuban government and named permanent ambassador to Cuba . Morgan loaned the loan to the Cuban government . Morgan was named permanent Ambassador to Cuba in 2009 .
 In March, the United States Senate ratifies the 1903 treaty to return the Isle of Pines to Cuba . The treaty was ratified by the U.S. Senate in March .
 Crowder, with historian Charles Chapman, writes A History of the Cuban Republic: A Study in Hispanic American Politics .
 United States heiress Irene Dupont purchases several hundred acres at Varadero Beach to build the mansion Xanadu . Dupont purchased the property for $1.5 million . The mansion was built by Dupont and Dupont's daughter .
 The Cuban Congress passes a bill stating ""any Cuban who seeks the intervention or interference of a foreign power in the internal or external development of the national life" will be imprisoned for life .
 Carlos Manuel de Cespedes is appointed provisional president . With the support of the United States Ambassador Sumner Welles, he appoints him as provisional president of Argentina .
 In September, the Sergeants' Revolt breaks out, supported by students and led by Sergeant Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar . The Revolt is the first of its kind in the Spanish capital .
 He establishes an eight-hour workday with a minimum salary, maternity benefits, and paid vacations . He establishes a minimum of eight hours a day, including paid vacations and maternity benefits .
 President Batista is president for 32 hours before putting Carlos Mendieta in power . Batista was president for only 32 hours .
 Batista remains army chief and continues to appoint new presidents until 1940 . Batista continues to be army chief until he dies in 1940 .
 The Guantanamo Bay lease is extended to 99 years at an annual rate of $ 4,085.000 . President Roosevelt abrogates the 1903 treaty with Cuba that gives the U.S. the right to intervene to preserve internal stability or independence .
 Batista offers Meyer Lansky and the Mafia control of Havana's racetracks and casinos in exchange for kickbacks . Batista offered Lansky control of the racetrack and casinos . The Mafia took advantage of the Batista deal .
 Cuba joins United Nations on the day the United Nations Charter takes effect . Cuba joins the U.N. on the first day of the new charter .
 Cuban students train to invade the nearby Dominican Republic and depose the brutal Trujillo . Cuban students were inspired by the uprising against the dictator .
 Washington learns of the plans and pressures the Cuban army to clamp down on the students and stop the operation . The operation was stopped after Washington learned of the plan .
 Batista runs in Cuban senatorial elections from his home in Florida and wins . Batista was Cuban president of Cuba from 1959-1962 . He ran for office from his Florida home and won the election .
 Meyer Lansky offers President Carlos Prio a bribe of $250,000 to step down . Lansky offered to give Prio $500,000 for his removal from office .
 Batista organizes a nearly bloodless coup and is recognized by the Truman Administration . Batista's coup is a nearly bloody coup and a successful coup .
 Batista awards contracts to dozens of U.S. corporations for massive construction projects like HavanaVaradero highway in return for kickbacks . Batista's Batista administration is accused of accepting kickbacks from the United States for massive projects .
 On July 26, Fidel Castro and his men attacked the Moncada barracks in Santiago . Fidel Castro's men were killed in the attack on July 26 .
 Seventy rebels were killed and the rest tortured or imprisoned, including Fidel and Raul Castro . The rest were imprisoned or tortured, including Raul and Fidel .
 United States Vice President Richard Nixon visits Havana to congratulate Batista on winning presidential elections in which he ran unopposed . Batista won the election in 1953 . Nixon visited Havana in 1953 to congratulate the Batista .
 Nixon is photographed with Batista and Mafia personalities at a lavish party . Nixon was photographed with the Batista, Mafia personalities . Nixon is believed to have been in touch with the Mafia .
 The C.I.A. and its director John Foster Dulles maintain strong ties to the United Fruit Company . Dulles and Dulles maintained strong ties with the Fruit Company in the 1950s .
 He organizes the Granma expedition with Raul and Che Guevara, an Argentinian . Raul is the leader of the expedition to Granma .
 Castro and his eighty-one men sneak in to Cuba to start arevolutionary war and seize power . Castro's men sneak into Cuba to seize power and take control of Cuba . Castro was captured by Cuban troops in 1959 .
 Castro and the survivors flee to the Sierra Maestra . Most are killed or captured, but most are killed . Castro is captured or killed .
 Senator John Kennedy is allegedly entertained by three prostitutes in Havana . Trafficante observes through a two-way mirror as he observes .
 United States Ambassador Arthur Gardener recommends the assassination of Fidel Castro . Ambassador Gardener: "The assassination is not a success story"
 Fidel Castro and his forces defeat the Cuban army in several small battles . Fidel Castro's forces were defeated in several battles . The Cuban army was defeated by the Cuban government .
 In February, the United States indicts former Cuban President Carlos Prio on charges of conspiring to violate U.S. neutrality laws . Prio is accused of financing and taking part in military expeditions to carry out from United States territory against Batista .
 In December, William Pawley, an emissary from the Eisenhower Administration, meets with Batista to suggest exile in Daytona Beach . Batista's exile was suggested by Pawley .
 Santos Trafficante meets with future Lee Harvey Oswald assassin Jack Ruby in Havana . Trafficante and Ruby met in Cuba at the time of the Cuban Revolution . Ruby was one of the assassins who assassinated Oswald .
 Castro imprisons Trafficante and in June deports him to the United States . Manuel Urrutia, a Cuban judge, takes over as president and Miro Cardona, head of the Havana Bar Association, as Prime Minister . In June, Trafficante was deported to the
 Castro and Urrutia resigns after increasing friction over Communist influence in Cuba . Castro was Castro's first Cuban leader to resign from the post . Castro had been in charge of Cuba since 1961 .
 C.I.A. King recommends "dirty tactics" to destabilize Cuba . King is head of the Western Hemisphere Desk of the CIA's Western Hemisphere Department . King: 'dirty tactics' are used to destabilise Cuba .
 Castro made an unofficial visit to the United States in April . Castro made the trip to the U.S. last month . Castro is the prime minister of Cuba .
 At a luncheon of newspaper editors broadcast on radio and television, he complains about unfair sugar trade . He says sugar trade is unfair in the U.S.
 Castro tells Nixon, ""Dictatorships are a shameful blot on Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 37 America and democracy is more than just a word" adding that there is no democracy while there is hunger, unemployment and injustice .
 The Cuban government passes its first Agrarian Reform Law and puts limits on land ownership . The law is the first of its kind in the country's history . It is also the first in a long line of land ownership laws .
 It expropriates holdings and offers a 20-year bond at 4.0 percent as compensation . The government offers the bond as compensation for expropriation of holdings .
 United States Senator George Smathers proposes a reduction in the Cuban sugar quota . Senator Smather's proposal would reduce the sugar quota in Cuba . U.S. President Barack Obama has called for a reduction of Cuba's sugar quotas .
 The United States government rejects the Agrarian Reform Law and the bond as insufficient . Che Guevara becomes president of the National Bank of Cuba in November . The U.S. government rejected the law .
 Cuba expropriates 70,000 acres of U.S. property, including 35,000 owned by the United Fruit Company . The U.N. Fruit Company is one of Cuba's largest agricultural expatriates .
 U.S. oil companies refuse to refine Soviet oil . At the request of the United States State Department, United States oil companies refused to refine .
 In response, the United States cancels Cuban sugar quotas and prohibits most exports to Cuba . The U.S. cancels sugar quotas, prohibits most export of Cuban sugar to the island nation .
 The plan calls for a ""massive propaganda offensive,"" including radio broadcasts . The plan includes radio broadcasts and a massive propaganda offensive .
 The C.I.A. created the Democratic Revolutionary Front, the first of many Cuban exile political front groups . The front group was created by the Cuban government in 1959 .
 U.S. pilot Robert E Frost was killed while bombing a sugar mill in Matanzas province . Frost was the pilot of a plane that bombed a sugar factory in the area .
 The United States State Department acknowledged the flight originated in the United States . The State Department expresses regrets for the flight .
 A consortium of Western European banks cancels a $100 million loan to Cuba . The U.S. pressured the banks to cancel the loan . The banks say the loan will be canceled .
 Cuba nationalizes all remaining U.S. business and commercial interests in Cuba . Cuba nationalises all remaining remaining United States business interests . The Cuban government nationalizes the remaining US business interests of Cuba .
 China agrees to buy 500,000 tons of Cuban sugar annually for five years . China also agreed to buy sugar from Cuba in exchange for $1.5 billion .
 The United States government advises its citizens living in Cuba to return . The U.S. government has urged its citizens to return to Cuba .
 Prime Minister Castro responds by urging U.S. citizens to stay . Castro: "We're not going to let the United States go away. We're not here to take advantage of it"
 The Cuban delegation to the United Nations provides a list of 20 terrorist incidents . Cuba asks the Security Council to stop U.S. aggression .
 Castro's Cubana Airlines plane is impounded for debts to American creditors . Castro's plane was impounded on September 29 for debts owed to U.S. creditors .
 Johnny Roselli and Sam Giancana meet with Allen W Dulles about assassinating Fidel Castro . The men discuss assassinating Castro with Dulles .
 A chief of covert operations, indicating Hoover's knowledge of Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana's plot to assassinate Fidel Castro . Hoover was Hoover's top covert operations chief . Hoover also knew about the plot to kill Castro .
 In October, the United States imposes an embargo on exports to Cuba, food and medicine excepted . Food and medicine are exceptions to the embargo imposed by the U.S.
 The United States also blacklists vessels carrying United States government-financed cargo to and from Cuba . The U.S. blacklists ships carrying government-funded cargo to Cuba .
 In October, President Eisenhower endorses the embargo and bans all exports to Cuba . The embargo was partly to assist Richard M Nixon's presidential bid . Eisenhower ended the embargo in October .
 President John Kennedy approves an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . 500 Cuban exiles land on Cuba from United States -funded and supplied training camps in Nicaragua .
 Before the invasion, U.S. -based terrorists burn thousands of acres of Cuban sugar cane and blow up a Belgian ship in Havana harbor . Before the . invasion, United States-based terrorists burned thousands of . acres of sugar cane .
 Cuban exiles would call Kennedy's failure to provide combat forces a betrayal and subsequent to J.F.K.'s assassination, evidence would surface of their involvement in his murder .
 The C.I.A. had predicted that the invasion would spark a popular uprising and overthrow Castro . Twelve hundred exiles were captured and one hundred and fourteen killed at the Bay of Pigs .
 Clearly, the C.I.A. had not studied Fidel's 195354 prison letters, which I analyze in this book . Fidel Castro's prison letters are among the letters he sent to Fidel Castro in prison .
 In January, the United States breaks off all diplomatic relations with Cuba . The U.S. will no longer be allowed to hold diplomatic ties with the island nation .
 President Kennedy launches a verbal attack on Cuba at the American Society of Newspaper Editors . President Kennedy was speaking at the meeting .
 One quarter of Cuban buses are out of operation for want of spare parts by late 1961 . One-quarter of the Cuban buses were out-of-operating for want .
 The C.I.A. and the Catholic Church launch ""Operation Peter Pan,"" the largest 40 exodus of children in the Western Hemisphere . Operation Peter Pan was the largest exodus of 40 children in Western Hemisphere ever .
 From December 26, 1960 through October 22, 1962, 14,048 unaccompanied children between 6 and 18 years old were sent to the U.S. The C.I.A. alleges that the Cuban government takes children away from their parents for indoctrination in Communist schools .
 Cuba is expelled from the O.A.S. on the grounds that Marxist-Leninist ideology is incompatible with the inter-American system . Cuba was expelled from Cuba on the basis that Marxist ideology was incompatible with U.S.-inter-American relations .
 Cuba asks the United Nations Security Council to suspend O.A.S. measures but the U.N. doesn't intervene . Cuba asks for the suspension of the measures . Cuba says the measures are necessary to protect its sovereignty and human rights .
 There was even suggestion of blowing up a U.S. ship in Guantanamo Bay to create a similar incident similar to the Maine in 1898 .
 Leaflets are dropped over Cuba offering rewards for assassinating Cuban leaders $150,000 for Fidel, $120,00 for Che . Leaflets also offer rewards for assassination of Fidel Castro and Che .
 In August, United States President Kennedy escalates attacks against Cuba, which include strafing tourist hotels and British ships .
 This provision is further amended the following year to withhold foreign aid from countries that allow ships under their flag to carry goods to or from Cuba . This provision was further amended in 2012 .
 By 1962 only half of Cuba's 1,400 railroad passenger cars are operational . By 1962, Cuba had 1,500 rail cars operational . Cuba had one of the world's largest rail networks .
 The sugar industry is particularly affected by the failure of transport systems and mill breakdowns . Kubla Kahn: Sugar industry is especially affected by transport systems failure and mill breaks .
 Cuba releases the remaining 1,000 prisoners from the U.S. -sponsored invasion at the Bay of Pigs in exchange for $53 million in baby food and medical supplies . Cuba releases 1,500 prisoners from United States-sponsored invasion of the Bay .
 In early 1962, U.S. military leaders proposed 'Operation Northwoods' plan to commit terrorist acts against Americans and blame Cuba to create a pretext for invasion and ouster of Fidel Castro .
 The Northwoods plan also proposed that if the 1962 launch of John Glenn into orbit were to fail, resulting in the astronaut's death, the U.S. government would publicize fabricated evidence that Cuba used electronic interference to sabotage the flight . The plan was proposed in 1962 .
 President Kennedy prohibits travel to Cuba and makes financial transactions illegal . Travel to Cuba is illegal under President Kennedy .
 All Cuban-owned assets in the U.S. are frozen . The president authorizes the C.I.A. to renew support for exiles' attacks on selected targets .
 Castro uses Soviet equipment to jam anti-Cuban broadcasts from U.S. soil . Castro used it to jam broadcasts from the United States . Castro also uses Soviet technology to jam American broadcasts .
 The C.I.A. used a Cuban operative to try to poison Castro at the Havana Libre Hotel . Castro was killed in the Cuban assassination attempt in 1959 .
 Cuban dissident and exile, Rolando Cubela, develops poison pen to use against Castro . After that fails, they develop a poison pen for use by Cubela .
 Kennedy prohibits shipments of cargoes paid for by the U.S. government on foreign ships that have called on a Cuban port . Kennedy prohibits cargues paid by the United States .
 He also encourages maritime unions to boycott ships named on a U.S. government blacklist because of their trade with Cuba . The blacklist includes ships that are on the blacklist because they are Cuba-owned .
 All Cuban assets in the United States (about $33 million) are frozen . Invoking the 1917 Trading with the Enemy Act, all Cuban assets are frozen in the U.S.
 Enforcement of Cuba sanctions is transferred from the Department of Commerce to the Treasury Department . The U.S. Treasury Department now oversees enforcement of the Cuba sanctions .
 Under United States pressure, N.A.T.O. countries agree to an arms embargo on Cuba but continue other trade . Under U.S. pressure, they agree to arms embargo but continue to trade other trade with Cuba . Cuba is one of the world's most isolated countries
 The blacklisting of cargo ships increases Cuban freight costs by $50 million annually . Blacklisted ships are banned from carrying Cuban cargo ships .
 White House papers declassified in 2003 showed Kennedy was planning a secret meeting with Fidel Castro to negotiate normalization of CubanAmerican relations . The meeting was scheduled to take place in 1961 .
 Castro attempted to restart the talks with Lyndon Johnson, but was rebuffed . Johnson didn't want to appear "soft" on Communism .
 Under U.S. pressure, the O.A. also adopts sanctions against Cuba and demands all members sever diplomatic and trade relations . Under United States pressure, Cuba must sever diplomatic, trade relations with the United States . The U.N. has imposed sanctions on Cuba and demanded
 In December, anti-Castro Cuban terrorists fire a bazooka at the United Nations in an attempt to assassinate Che Guevara while he delivers a speech to the U.N. In the past, terrorists have attempted to assassinate Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 CIA frogmen plant two bombs on a Cuban navy vessel at the Isle of Pines . CIA. frogmen planted bombs on the Cuban navy ship .
 Commerce Department revokes general licenses permitting the export of food and medicine to Cuba . The licenses were revoked by the Department of Commerce Department .
 Department policy is to deny license requests for commercial transactions and only approve humanitarian donations . The Department of Public Safety denies commercial transactions .
 O.S. calls for mandatory sanctions covering all trade with Cuba except food and medicine . The O.A.A.'s call for mandatory trade sanctions .
 Under U.S. guidance, the O.A. recommends severing diplomatic relations with Cuba . Chile, Bolivia, Uruguay, Uruguay and Mexico dissent . Chile and Bolivia are among those who dissent .
 Cuba opens fishing port of Camarioca to allow foreign boats to remove anyone wanting to leave the island . Cuba opens the fishing port to allow foreigners to remove people wanting to depart the country .
 In December, the Cuban airlift allows more people to leave about 45,000 flee Cuba in the next year . About 7,500 refugees leave for the United States .
 President Lyndon Johnson signed a law exempting Cuban immigrants from general U.S. immigration laws . Cubans who reached United States territory since January 1, 1959 to become eligible for permanent residency after two years .
 In December, U.S. Air Force pilot Everett Jackson was shot down over Cuba after dropping arms and equipment meant for counter-revolutionaries . Jackson was the first pilot to be shot down in Cuba .
 Che Guevara is captured and executed in Bolivia by Felix Rodriguez, a Cuban born C.I.A. officer unsuccessful at killing Castro . Gueverara was killed in Bolivia .
 Castro announces a campaign to produce ten million tons of sugar in the next harvest . Castro announces plans to produce 10 million tons in next year . Castro says sugar production will be the biggest in the world .
 In solidarity with Cuba, American students and workers form the Venceremos Brigade to visit Cuba and assist with the zafra . Every year thereafter, the V.B. sends a delegation of Americans .
 Rumor has it that a young man from LA, Tony Villar, was an early participant in the event .
 Antonio Villaraigosa is the mayor of Los Angeles . He is better known today for his role as mayor of the city . He was born in 1961 in Los Angeles, California .
 Newly elected President Richard Nixon directs the C.I.A. to intensify covert actions against Cuba . New President Nixon orders the action, ending the hiatus in harassment .
 Cuba's economy contracts at 1. percent per year over the 1960-71 period . Cuba's economic growth rate was 1.5 percent in the 1960s to 1971 .
 Castro visits newly elected Chilean President Salvadore Allende in Santiago . Castro visited newly elected leftist President Allende . Castro was elected president of Chile in 1972 .
 Cuba and the U.S.A. begin formal negotiations over the problem of airline hijackings and an accord is signed in early 1973 . The accord was signed by the Cuban government in 1973 .
 Swine flew ravages the Cuban pork industry, resulting in the loss of half a million animals . Swine flies ravages Cuba's pork industry resulting in losses .
 A total of 260,561 Cubans have now received asylum in the United States since 1965 . 260,000 Cubans now have been granted asylum in U.S. since then .
 Cuba's human rights abuses and repression follow, compromising the U.S. position vis-a-vis human and civil rights in Cuba . Severe human rights abuse and repression are often followed by severe human and political abuses .
 Senators Claiborne Pell and Jacob Javits visit Cuba, the first American elected officials to visit the island since diplomatic relations were severed . They are the first U.S. lawmakers to visit Cuba since the country severed diplomatic relations .
 In November, American officials conduct secret normalization talks with Cuban officials, but deadlock over Cuban involvement in Angola . U.S. officials hold secret talks with Cubans, but they fail to reach an agreement on Angola .
 Orlando Bosch asks Orlando Bosch to unite all the Cuban exilesthe ""Miami mafia,"" into one organization . He asks for the unification of all Cuban ex-mafia in Miami .
 The Marxist Angolan government requests Cuban military support from Castro . Castro agrees to send troops and equipment to Angola . Castro also agreed to send equipment and troops to the country .
 Washington defends South Africa's move as self-defense against Communism . Washington says it was self-defence against communism .
 The United States will allow foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies to sell products to Cuba . It will also no longer penalize other nations for trading with Cuba . The move will also allow other nations to trade with Cuba without penalty .
 Gerald Ford warns that Cuban involvement in Angola prevents the restoration of diplomatic relations . However, U.S. President Gerald Ford says that Cuba's involvement prevents the return of diplomatic ties .
 U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger reiterates that there is no possibility of relations while Cuba has troops in Africa . Henry Kissinger: There is no possible of relations with Cuba while it has troops . Kissinger: "There are no possibilities of relations"
 The United States threatens military action if Cuba sends troops elsewhere . U.S. threatens to take action if Cuban troops are sent to other countries . Cuba has a history of sending troops to Cuba .
 Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau visits Cuba, the first of many visits both officially and unofficially . Pierre Trudeau visited Cuba in the 1950s and 1960s . The visit was the first official visit to Cuba .
 Trudeau was the first N.A.T.O. leader to visit Cuba after Castro took power . He led the way in challenging U.S. trade sanctions against Cuba . Trudeau was first to visit the island nation in Cuba .
 Luis Posada Carrilles and his men bomb a Cuban airliner, killing all 73 aboard . All 73 aboard were killed in the bombing .
 Interest Sections are opened in Havana and Washington and discussions are initiated on a broad range of issues . Interest Sections also opened in Washington and Havana and Havana . Interest sections opened in Cuba and Washington .
 Congress repeals provision of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1 96 1 banning aid to countries that trade with Cuba . Congress also repeals the provision of a ban on aid to Cuba trade with the country .
 Anti-Castro terrorists bomb the Cuban mission to the U.N., the Cuban Interests Section and the Soviet United Nations Mission . The Cuban interest section was bombed by the Soviet Union in the 1970s . The U.S. mission to Cuba was bombed at the time .
 The United States puts Cuba on the list of nations that support terrorism . The U.S. government says Cuba is a terrorist state . Cuba has been accused of supporting terrorism .
 Castro announces that anyone who wishes to leave may do so from the port of Mariel . 5,000 Cubans flee to the U.S. over several months . Castro: Anyone who wants to leave can leave from Mariel port .
 In September, anti-Castro terrorists assassinate the Cuban attache to the United Nations . Junta Patriotica Cubana replaces C.O.RU. as the selfproclaimed central organizational structure of the anti-Cuba community .
 Anti-Cuban terrorist group Omega 7 bombs the Cuban consulate in Montreal, Canada . Omega 7 bombed the Cuban embassy in Montreal in 1994 .
 Reagan accuses Cuba of fomenting Communist control in Nicaragua and insurgency in El Salvador . Reagan accuses Cuban government of trying to foment Communist control of Nicaragua . Reagan also accuses the government of attempting to kill dissidents in Nicaragua .
 8,000 U.S. troops storm Grenada shortly after a coup by a pro-Castro Marxist leader . The coup took place in the Caribbean island nation of Grenada .
 In Reagan Wald, the First United States Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously rules that U.S. restrictions on travel to Cuba are invalid . The court ruled that travel restrictions on Cuba were invalid .
 President Reagan appoints Jorge Mas Canosa as chair of the President's Advisory Board for Broadcasting to Cuba . Canosa was appointed in May by President Reagan to head the President of the Advisory Board .
 Anti-Castro Cuban exiles get the support of U.S. President Ronald Regan to broadcast hard-line anti-Cuba news and information from the United States to Cuba . Radio Marti funded by American tax dollars .
 Reagan bans travel to the United States by Cuban government or Communist party officials or their representatives . In protest, Cuba cancels existing immigration agreement with the U.S. Bowing to continued pressure from right-wing lobbyists, Reagan bans Cuba travel .
 Cuba bought sugar on the world market and resold it to the Soviets at a profit, then used the profits to purchase Soviet oil . Cuba then sold the oil to the Soviet oil, then bought the sugar and sold it back to Cuba . Cuba bought Soviet oil and sold sugar at a
 The United States proposes a motion at the United Nations criticizing Cuba for human rights violations . The U.S. proposes the motion . Cuba has been accused of human rights abuses .
 Cuban General Rafael del Pino defects to the U.S. and speaks out on Radio Marti . General Pino defections from Cuba to the United States to join forces in Cuba . Pino is a former Cuban general of the armed forces .
 Trade between U.S. foreign subsidiaries and Cuba averaged $260 million a year from 1982 to 1987 . The Treasury Department says the average trade between the United States and Cuba was $260million .
 In December, after the Cuban Army's victory at Cuito Canavale, Angola and South Africa reach an agreement that Cuban troops will leave Namibia and withdraw from Namibia . The agreement was reached in December .
 A 1988 study estimates that the United States embargo has cost U.S. firms $30 billion in lost exports over the past 25 years . The embargo is estimated to have cost the U.K. firms billions in lost export sales .
 Castro offers to cooperate in drug enforcement and other matters of mutual interest . Castro: "I'm looking forward to working with the U.S. to cooperate" Castro also offers to work with Castro on drug enforcement .
 Nobel Prize-winning writer Gabriel Garcia Marquez advises Castro to retire his fatigues and put on a business suit . Marquez: "Put on your business suit. It's time to be a businessman"
 Cuban Museum of Arts and Culture is bombed for exhibiting work by artists living in Cuba . Museum of Art and Culture was bombed for showing work by Cuban artists living abroad .
 He had served time for a 1968 bazooka attack on a Polish ship in Miami . He had sent death threats to French, Italian and Spanish heads of state . He was also convicted of sending death threats .
 Two armed anti-Cuban terrorists from Miami infiltrate Cuba via Santa Cruz del Norte with orders to commit acts of violence . Two armed men from Miami are ordered to commit violence in Cuba .
 Mack Amendment bans all trade with Cuba by subsidiaries of U.S. companies . Mack Amendment also bans aid to any country that trades with Cuba . Mack amendment was passed by the United States Congress in 1953 . Mack amendments were passed by Congress in 1964 .
 Canada and the United Kingdom express their strong opposition to the extraterritorial nature of the legislation . Canada and U.K. express their opposition to legislation .
 Mikhail Gorbachev announces the withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Cuba . Gorbachachev announced the withdrawal from Cuba in a televised broadcast on October 31, 1987 .
 President Bush authorizes three U.S. Air Force 0-2 aircraft, the military version of the Cessna 172, for the group . President Bush also authorizes a Cessnna 172 aircraft .
 Cuban officials estimate that U.S. sanctions have cost $15 billion from 1961 to 1991 . Cuban officials say the cost of the sanctions has been estimated as much as $20 billion .
 Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton endorses the ""Cuban Democracy Act"" while on a Florida campaign stop . Bill Clinton endorsed the act while campaigning for president in Florida .
 The U.K. and Canada bar U.S. subsidiaries located in their countries from complying with C.D.A. provisions . U.N. subsidiaries based in those countries must comply with the law .
 Russia signs a series of trade agreements with Cuba, including a new oil-for sugar barter agreement . Russia and Cuba have signed several trade agreements, including oil and sugar agreements .
 U.N. General Assembly votes 59 to 3, with 79 abstentions, to lift economic sanctions against Cuba . U.S. votes to lift Cuba's economic sanctions with 79 other abstentions .
 Only Romania and Israel join the U.S. in opposing the measure . Only Romania, Israel and Romania oppose it .
 Only Israel consistently votes with the United States . Total trade turnover between Cuba and former Soviet bloc countries has fallen to $830 million .
 Cuba ends military backing for revolutionary movements in other countries . Cuba ends its military backing of revolutionary movements . Cuba endorses Cuba's right to freedom of expression in Cuba .
 The 1992 Constitution and new laws provide limited property rights to foster international investment . The new 1992 Constitution was created to encourage international investment in the 1990s .
 References to atheism and the Soviet Union are purged from the constitution . References to atheist and Soviet Union have been removed from the country's constitution .
 In Miami, Tony Bryant, leader of Comandos L, gives a press conference announcing plans to carry out more attacks against Cuba, especially its hotels . Tony Bryant says he plans to attack Cuba's hotels, especially in Cuba .
 Brothers to the Rescue publicly encourage attempts on the life of Fidel Castro and violence against Cuba . The group also encourage attempts to kill Fidel Castro . The organization has no affiliation with Cuba .
 Andres Nazario Sargen, head of Alpha 66, announces that his organization had recently completed five operations in Cuba . Sargan announces that he has completed the operations .
 Alpha 66 spokesman Humberto Perez announces that its war on Castro would be extended to tourists visiting the island . Alpha 66 says the war would also extend to tourists .
 Cuba ends the ban on the use of the U.S. Dollar and it quickly becomes the preferred currency . Cuba is the first country to use the US dollar .
 Castro gives French spirits corporation Pernod Ricard a monopoly on island's rum manufacturing . The monopoly will bring in more than $20 million in profit annually until 2004 .
 Brothers to the Rescue fly over Havana at low altitude and drop smoke bombs . Aircraft owned by brothers to the rescue fly over the city at low altitudes .
 In October, a group of armed men land on the causeway to Cayo Santa Maria near Caibarien, Villa Clara, and kill a Cuban national .
 Terrorist Luis Posada Carriles and five accomplices smuggle weapons to Cartagena, Colombia, during the Ibero-American Summit in a plot to assassinate Castro .
 Attacks on Freedom of Expression in Miami's Cuban exile community (Cuba) details attacks on academic freedoms and other serious restrictions on freedoms of expression in CubanAmerican community .
 Cubans flee; many are picked up by the Coast Guard and detained at Guantanamo . Unbearable living conditions lead to protests in Havana . Many Cubans pick up by Coast Guard picked up and detained .
 The U.S. agrees to grant at least 20,000 immigrant visas at its diplomatic offices in Havana each year . That's up from an average of 11,000 issued annually over the previous decade .
 In Cuba, two U.S. residents and anti-Castro terrorists were caught with 51 pounds of C-4 explosives and other equipment . The U.N. citizens were arrested in Cuba on suspicion of smuggling .
 All sectors except health, education, and defense are open under the new regulations . Health, education and defense sectors will be open under new rules .
 President Clinton eases restrictions on travel to Cuba for educational, religious, and human rights purposes . Travel to Cuba is allowed for educational and religious purposes, including religious and religious .
 Anti-Castro members of Congress pledge to redouble efforts to tighten sanctions on Cuba . The move has been strongly criticized by anti-Cuba members of congress .
 Bill Clinton signs the Helms-Burton Act, allowing lawsuits against foreign companies that invest in the U.S. owned properties seized by the Cuban government . The act was passed by President Clinton in 1994 .
 It also denies entry of executives and major shareholders, as well as their immediate families, of firms found to be ""trafficking"" in expropriation .
 The legislation also restricts U.S. aid to independent states of the former Soviet Union in the event they provide assistance to intelligence facilities in Cuba or for completion of the Juragua nuclear facility .
 The Cuban Air Force shoots down two Brothers To the Rescue planes over international waters . The planes violated Cuban airspace . The incident was the first time the planes had been shot down .
 President Clinton condemns the shoot down and suspends charter travel from the U.S. There are twenty-five violations of Cuban airspace in twenty months by anti-Castro groups .
 Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton announces that Canada will seek consultations with the United States under the North American Free Trade Agreement regarding the legality of the Helms-Burton Acta . Eggleton says the U.S. will also seek consultations over the legalities of the act .
 Canadian officials also say they will try to include provisions in the Multilateral Agreement on Investment that would prevent the U.S. from imposing secondary sanctions on its trading partners . The deal would also prevent secondary sanctions from being imposed by the United States .
 The European Union suspends discussions with Havana on an economic cooperation agreement . Cuba's failure to enact political reforms and economic liberalization is cited as reason for the suspension .
 The U.S. denies visas to some shareholders and senior executives of Canadian mining company Sherritt International under the Helms-Burton law . The law prevents visas for some of the company's senior executives .
 President Clinton invokes the national interest waiver and imposes a moratorium of at least six months on the filing of suits . President Clinton imposes a six-month moratorium .
 State Department threatens to ban executives of Mexican telecommunications company Grupo Domos from entering the United States under the Helms-Burton Act . The State Department says the company's executives will not be allowed to enter the U.S.
 The Mexican Congress overwhelmingly approves a Helms-Burton ""antidote"" law . The law imposes fines of up to $301,000 on Mexican companies that comply with the U.S. legislation .
 Hurricane Lili inflicts considerable damage on the sugar harvest in Cuba . The sugar harvest was devastated by the hurricane .
 Estimated losses for the affected provinces are 20 percent, or a minimum of 70,000 tons . Estimated losses are estimated to be 20 percent . Estimated loss is 20 percent or about 70 percent .
 Washington announces that aircraft carrying emergency relief supplies to Cuba will be allowed to fly directly from U.S. territory .
 The European Commission approves a $10.6 million humanitarian aid package for Cuba . The package includes $10 million worth of food and medicine . The aid package was approved by the European Commission .
 The European Union Council of Ministers approves anti-boycott legislation that forbids compliance with the Helms-Burton Act . An E.U. firm receives a waiver on grounds that refusing to comply will seriously injure either a company's . or the E.u.'s interests .
 United States court awards under Helms-Burton will not be recognized and can be recovered in the E.U. if a successful American claimant has property there . U.S. court awards will be not recognized in the U.K.
 The World Trade Organization agrees to establish a dispute settlement panel to review the E.U.'s complaint about the Helms-Burton law . The panel will be reviewed by a panel of experts .
 The Canadian Parliament passes anti-Helms-Burton legislation . It penalizes companies for obeying the United States law . The attorney general can block U.S. court judgments and allow Canadians to recoup penalties .
 President Clinton waives Title III of the Helms-Burton Act for another six months . President Clinton responds by waiving Title III . Title III was waived by President Clinton for six more months .
 Dutch bank ING pulls out of Cuba and does not renew $30 million in loans to Cubazucar . ING's subsidiaries have substantial interests in the U.S. The bank pulls out .
 The United States Congress passes a bill to compensate anti-Castro exiles and their families by selling previously frozen Cuban assets . The U.S. Congress passes the bill in a bid to compensate exiles by selling assets .
 Cuban exiles bomb seven hotels and the Bodeguita del Medio restaurant in Havana . Exiles bomb hotels and restaurants in Havana, Cuba, in an attempt to topple Cuban government .
 Raul Cruz Leon, a citizen of El Salvador, admits being paid U.S. $4,500 for each bomb . Cruz Leon admits to being paid United States $3,500 per bomb .
 The Cuban American National Foundation offers unconditional support of bombings in Cuba . The foundation offers support for bombings in the country .
 Walter Van der Veer, an American, caught in possession of incendiary devices in Cuba . He was arrested in Cuba on suspicion of possessing incendiary devices . He has been sentenced to life in prison .
 The U.S. administration releases a report on Cuba's economic aid . The report describes the economic aid that would be available to Cuba once Castro is out of power and the island moves toward a multiparty democracy .
 World Trade Organization's Director General Renato Ruggiero names a threemember panel to rule on the Helms-Burton dispute . The panel will rule on a dispute between Helms and Burton . The World Trade Organisation has named the panel of three .
 Cuba's government establishes a new central bank as part of its modernization program in the finance and banking sectors . Cuba denies that the bank reflects a move toward a market economy . The bank is part of a modernization program .
 The European Union extends by six months its freeze on cooperation with Cuba . Cuba has failed to improve its human rights record, the EU says . The EU says Cuba has not been able to improve human rights violations .
 Mexican company Grupo Domos relinquishes its investment in Cuba's telecommunications system . Citing financial problems, the company cites financial problems . The company says it will not continue to invest in the Cuban network .
 Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen introduces legislation that would deny foreign aid and trade preferences to countries that sign free trade agreements with Cuba . The legislation would deny aid and preferences to those that sign trade agreements .
 Caribbean Community and Common Market countries protest and warn they will not allow the proposed U.S. legislation to affect their relationship with Cuba . Caribbean Community countries protest against the legislation .
 The U.S. government agrees to ease temporarily its travel ban and embargo against Cuba during the visit of Pope John Paul II to Cuba in January 1998 . The United States agreed to ease the restrictions during the Pope's visit to Cuba .
 Catholic churches and charities will be able ship supplies and equipment to help organize the visit . Catholics will be allowed to travel to Cuba from the United States from the U.S.
 Group of Israel has violated Helms-Burton Act and bars officials from U.S. territory . Group's officials are barred from United States territory .
 Marti' s broadcasts switched from VHF to UHF in an effort to strengthen the station's signal in Cuba . Marti broadcasts are switched to VHF instead of UHF .
 The Government of Cuba gives the F.B.I. and other agencies of the United States information on terrorist activities and groups working in the U.S. against Cuba . Cuba gives other agencies the information about terrorist activities .
 President Bill Clinton says Cuba no longer poses a threat to U.S. national security . President Clinton's intelligence advisors tell him that Cuba is no longer a threat . Cuba is now considered a major ally of the United States in Cuba .
 Eleven Cuban political prisoners, whose release the Pope requested, are freed and sent to Canada . Eleven political prisoners are freed . Pope: The release of 11 political prisoners was requested by the Pope . The Pope also requested the release of Cuban prisoners .
 Sherritt International announces it will build a $150 million natural gas generating plant and invest $38 million in a cell phone company in Cuba . The company was sanctioned under the Helms-Burton law . The law was passed by the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Clinton administration eases controls on humanitarian shipment of food and medicine . Cuban-Americans can send up to $1,200 a year to relatives in Cuba . Clinton administration also reinstates provision allowing Cubans to send $1.200 to relatives .
 Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina says Havana will refuse all direct humanitarian aid from the United States . Robaina: Cuba will refuse aid as long as the U.S. government maintains the embargo .
 Forbes lists Fidel Castro as 11 on a recent list of the world's richest ""Kings, Queens and Dictators'"" with an estimated personal fortune of $100 million . Fidel Castro is 11 on Forbes' list of richest 'Kings and Queens' with a personal fortune .
 The United Nations Commission on Human Rights fails to pass a resolution condemning the Castro regime for its human rights violations . For the first time in seven years, the U.N. commission fails to condemn Castro regime . Castro regime has been accused of human rights abuses in Cuba .
 Cuba and the Dominican Republic normalize diplomatic relations . Diplomatic relations had been broken off in 1959 . Cuba and Dominican Republic had diplomatic relations since 1959 .
 This move follows Cuba's restoration of diplomatic relations with Guatemala in 1996, and Haiti and Spain in 1998 .
 Clinton administration and E.U. officials reach an agreement that provides for penalties to be imposed on companies that invest in expropriated property . Penalty includes denial of government export credits and other assistance, other assistance .
 In exchange for E.U. action on expropriation property, U.S. officials agree to seek changes to Helms-Burton law . United States agrees in exchange for changes to law that expropriates expropriated property .
 An international registry is established for claims on expropriated property to serve as the basis for government action against subsequent investors . In addition, an international registry has been established in place of expropriation property .
 Opponents say the U.S. -E.U. agreement is not effective enough in preventing investment in expropriated property in Cuba . Opponents in Congress maintain that the agreement does not work enough to prevent expropriate property .
 World Food Program Executive Director Catherine Bertini calls for $20.6 million in drought assistance to Cuba . World Food Programme Executive Director calls for assistance to help Cuban people in drought .
 The United States says it will contribute only if the aid is not disbursed through the Cuban government . The U.S. says it won't contribute if aid isn't disbruited through the government .
 The United Nations General Assembly passes a resolution calling for an end to the U.S. embargo against Cuba . For the sixth year in a row, the resolution is passed . The U.N. General Assembly passed the resolution last year .
 A number of senators and a group of former foreign relations officials urge President Clinton to authorize a bipartisan commission to review U.S. Cuba policy . Henry Kissinger and Lawrence Eagleburger are among the former Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger .
 President Clinton rejects the plan for a bipartisan commission to review Chapter 1 . Clinton also allows the resumption of direct postal service and increased air service .
 A U.S. citizen can send $1,200 a year to Cuba . He authorizes sales of food and agricultural inputs to private and nongovernmental organizations .
 The Baltimore Orioles play an all-star Cuban team in Havana in a game authorized by the Clinton administration as part of its effort to improve relations with the Cuban people . The game will only be played after assurances that the Cuban government will not receive any revenues from the game .
 The lawsuit, filed in Havana, identified war crimes such as the Bay of Pigs invasion, the use of biological warfare, bombings and air attacks . The lawsuit also identified military provocations from the United States Naval Base .
 In May, U.S. drug czar General Barry McCaffrey declares that Cuba is not an accomplice of drug traffickers . Cuba has been accused of aiding drug traffickers in recent years .
 President Bill Clinton eases sanctions and allows shipments of food and agricultural products to Cuba for the first time fourty years . Bill Clinton: "It's a good thing for the Cuban people to see the U.S. to see a change in their lives"
 Panamanian authorities arrest Posada Carriles and former member of Omega 7 before the tenth IberoAmerican Summit of Heads of State and Government .
 Weapons, explosives and sketches of the Cuban President's route and scheduled public appearances are seized . Weapons and explosives seized from the Cuban government .
 The Cuban American National Foundation finances the team of lawyers hired to defend the terrorists . The foundation finances the legal team hired by the terrorist group .
 Cuban security announces it has investigated, documented and neutralized 63 8 plans to assassinate Fidel Castro . Cuban security says it has found plans to kill Fidel Castro were thwarted .
 Congress votes to release $90 million of frozen Cuban assets to pay a $187. million judgment against the Cuban government in favor of the families of the pilots killed in the 1995 downing of the Brothers to the Rescue planes .
 Havana hosts the United States Healthcare Exhibition in January . It is the first American trade show in fourty years in Cuba . Havana will host the U.S. Healthcare Exhibition .
 In April, World Bank President James Wolfensohn praises Fidel Castro for providing for the social welfare of the Cuban people . The World Bank says Fidel Castro has done a great job in providing social welfare .
 A U.S. court orders the Cuban government to pay $7 million in damages to a Miami woman for unknowingly marrying a Cuban intelligence agent . A Miami woman says she unknowingly married the agent .
 The Cuba Working Group releases a nine-point plan calling for specific changes in U.S.-Cuba policy . The plan was created and released by the group of Cuba Working Groups .
 The plan includes lifting the travel ban and allowing unrestricted sales of food and medicine . The plan also recommends increased security cooperation with Cuba including efforts to thwart international crime .
 Southern Command chief says he has seen no evidence that Cuba has biological weapons . Gary Speer says there is no evidence of Cuba having biological weapons in Cuba .
 James Cason, top U.S. diplomat in Havana, meets publicly with dissidents . He meets publicly and often with dissidents in Cuba .
 Dissident Oswaldo Paya wins Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought . Paya is the author of the Varela Project, author of a book about dissidentism .
 The Project collected 10,000 signatures required to call a national referendum on the economic and social reforms needed to turn Cuba into a democracy . The project collected the signatures needed to call for the referendum .
 In February, the World Trade Organization rules in Cuba's favor in the Havana Club trademark dispute between the U.S. and the European Union . The dispute was resolved in February .
 The United States exports $300 million in food to Cuba, becoming the island's top food trading partner . The embargo notwithstanding, the U.S. is the top food trade partner in Cuba .
 Bush also announced the United States would incite and encourage illegal immigration from Cuba . Bush also said the U.S. would better inform Cubans of the many routes to safe and legal entry into the United .
 Earlier this year, we launched a new satellite service to expand our reach to Cuba . We launched a satellite service in Cuba earlier this year to expand its reach .
 Third country companies promoting travel and trade with Cuba are in violation of the embargo . The U.S. Treasury Secretary John Snow announced the ban in February . The ban was lifted in March .
 Treasury Department freezes assets of several companies including Canadian Hola Sun Travel . The Treasury Department has frozen the assets of the companies . The U.S. Treasury Department is investigating the company .
 In late 2004, Castro bans the United States dollar citing Bush Administration harassment of businesses worldwide . Castro cites Bush administration harassment of business worldwide .
 The embargo is estimated to have caused $79 billon in losses to Cuba and caused more than 3,500 deaths . The embargo was estimated to be caused by more than $79 billion in losses and caused 3,000 deaths .
 The Spanish Main in general and Cuba in particular 'attracted privateers and pirates for two reasons' The Spanish and Cuban Main attracted pirates and privateers .
 First, Spanish galleons laden with gold from Mexico and Peru would rendezvous in Cuba before heading to Spain . First, they would arrive in Cuba to collect gold from Peru and Mexico .
 British, Dutch and French privateers had enormous incentive to capture Spanish treasure . Privateers captured Spanish treasure in Spain .
 By employing privateers, European powers could harass Spanish hegemony in the New World without committing an act of war . Privateers could harass Spain without committing a war .
 The spoils and glory of war paid off for privateers such as Sir Francis Drake . Privateers were able to take advantage of their position in the sea .
 Drake's fleet of seven large ships and twenty-two smaller vessels set sail from Plymouth, England, on September 14th, 1585 and reached Santiago in the Cape Verde Islands on November 17, which was sacked .
 On New Year's Day, 1586, they captured Santo Domingo and extorted a 25,000 ducat ransom . They captured the city and demanded a ransom from the Spanish king .
 Cartagena (present day Colombia) was captured and occupied until March 26th . The Spanish city was captured on February 9th, and was occupied until the end of that month . The city is now located in Colombia .
 Here again the town was plundered and a ransom of 1 10,000 ducats was collected . The town was attacked by the same group of thieves .
 Spanish Mercantilism restricted commerce to royal monopolies, giving the inhabitants of Cuba incentive to break Spanish law and trade with pirates . Cuban people broke Spanish law by trading with pirates, breaking the law .
 A Cuban black market emerged long before chronic shortages of consumer goods associated with Soviet inspired 20th century state planning . The black market is a precursor to chronic shortages associated with state planning.
 Dutchman Piet Heyn commandeered Spanish treasure ships without firing a shot . Spanish galleons gorged with treasure that blocked gun ports were sitting ducks .
 Heyn made off, or should I say Madoff Chapter 2, with over thirtyfour tons of silver . On one such expedition, he made off from Mojito • 61 .
 He went back to the Netherlands with fifteen captured Spanish ships and his original fleet intact . The Dutchman returned with 15 captured ships and the original fleet .
 Alejandro Selkirk, abandoned by his crew on Juan Fernandez Island, became the inspiration for the 1717 novel Robinson Crusoe .
 Instability in Cuba was exacerbated by the War of the Spanish Succession . Instability was exacerbated in Cuba by the Spanish-Spanish War of Spain .
 The decades long struggle, known as Queen Anne's War in the British American colonies, was waged primarily by England to preserve the balance of power between Spain and France under a single Bourbon monarch would upset .
 Combined French and Spanish amphibious forces used Cuba as a base to launch assaults on Charles Towne in present day South Carolina .
 England retaliated with letters of marque for buccaneers like Sir Henry Morgan to wage war on Spain in Cuba .
 After the 1776 American Revolution and incipient industrialization of North America in the 19th century, the United States became Cuba's major export market . American banks provided increasing amounts of capital and credit to Cuba .
 The colonial dependency on Spain, long in decline, made less economic sense . Spain's dependence on Spain has long been a dependency on the continent .
 Bolivar and San Martin were the new heroes of the era and Cuba wanted independence too . Cuba was looking for independence too, and wanted independence from the South .
 Spain was determined to hold on to the bitter end as Cuba increasingly demanded self-determination and the abolition of slavery . But Spain remained in power until the end of the century .
 Supporters of independence from Spain were usually abolitionists as well and vice versa . In Cuba, the two issues were intertwined .
 Civil unrest was the norm from October 10, 1868, when Carlos Manuel de Cespedes freed all his slaves and called on all Cubans to unite against Spanish colonialism . Spain surrendered Cuba to the United States on January 1, 1899 .
 Nominal independence was granted on May 20, 1902, but the Piatt Amendment limited its meaningfulness . The Piatt amendment limited it to a maximum degree of autonomy .
 Thirty years' of independence struggles capped by U.S. armed intervention to oust Spain depressed sugar exports . Property owners deep in debt, mostly to American creditors, left Cuban property owners .
 The Cuban-American Sugar Company and Cuban government dominated the sugar industry and the Cuban government . Milton Hershey and James Post, who became the president of the National Sugar Refining Company of Jersey, dominated the industry .
 Numerous labor concessions were granted and the government was obliged to build infrastructure to benefit foreign interests, even while basic services were lacking for the population . The government built infrastructure for foreign interests while the population lacked basic services .
 Under American management, the Cuban sugar industry became more efficient than ever . The industry was more efficient under U.S. management .
 resentment has built up against the Cuban government and its American backer . Over time and under increasingly right wing and repressive rulers, resentment built up .
 In 1920 the Noble Experiment, better known known as Prohibition, became law across the United States . For Cuba it was the beginning of a thriving international bar culture and eventually, Mob culture .
 On the day Prohibition went into effect, numerous companies outfitted ferries for the overnight booze cruise from Florida to the island .
 By the time the Noble Experiment was repealed as a failure in 1933, the Mob and its vice industries were firmly entrenched in Cuba . General Fulgencio Batista was in charge of the Cuban government .
 American gangsters had to earn their place at the gaming tables and brothels fair and square . But taking Cuba over was not a cakewalk . The Cuban government had to work hard and earn its place at gaming tables .
 Wiseguy 'Lucky' Luciano tried and failed to take control of Havana booze and narcotics but was run out of Cuba . Luciano, who tried to take over Havana booze, narcotics, failed to get control of the city .
 Batista already knew Lansky from his bootlegging days running liquor to speakeasies up north in the 1920s . But Meyer Lansky held the Ace of Spades . Lansky was known by Batista from bootlegging days .
 With Lansky' s help, Batista returned from retirement in Florida, ran for the presidency . On the eve of his projected loss, he staged a military coup in 1952, staged a coup .
 Instead of running from the law, gangsters now had the power of government on their side . Gangsters now have the power to control their own lives, police say .
 Cuba's real status as an underworld haven was well portrayed in American cinema of the time . The real status of Cuba was portrayed in U.S. films of the era .
 In John Huston's Key Largo, a small time counterfeiter and mafia capo is ordered to leave the United States as an undesirable alien . He plans on escaping to Cuba from the Everglades to make a fresh start and plan his return .
 A World War II vet who, unarmed and against terrible odds, single handedly saves his fallen war buddy's girl and stops Rocco and his minions before they reach their Cuban paradise . Unarmed, he saves the girl from Rocco .
 The nocturnal vice industries in Cuba needed live entertainment, boosting the careers of incomparable artists like Beny More, Celia Cruz and Damaso Perez Prado, the original mambo king .
 They helped create the backdrop for an indelible part of Americana with I Love Lucy . They also helped create a backdrop for the iconic TV show .
 Ricky Ricardo (Desi Arnaz) played the exotic, drum-banging husband of mastermind as dimwit Lucille Ball . Ricky Ricardo played Ricky Ricardo as the exotic husband of mastermind Desi Araz . Ricardo also played the dim-witted dimwit Lucy Ball .
 I Love Lucy became a smash success on the new medium of television and a nostalgic 1950's American icon loved by millions . The show was a classic American icon of the 1950s American icon .
 Rum distilled from sugarcane, cigars from Vuelta Abajo, mulatas in skimpy clothes, baseball and rhumba .
 The Cuban rap group Orishas and salsa group Charanga Habanera tell the contemporary story in their music .
 You probably haven't read a chapter about pirates that digresses into how to make a chic cocktail . But in a book about Cuba there is a connection .
 The Mojito originated in Havana in the late 1800s and gained popularity with Americans during Prohibition . It was popularized during Prohibition and became popular with Americans .
 Legend has it that a precursor to the Mojito may have existed as early as the late 16 century . Legend has also been said to have existed in the 16th century . The Mojito is a traditional version of a Mojito made from scratch .
 Richard Drake made a concoction similar to the Mojito by mixing aguardiente, sugar, mint leaf and lime . He coined the drink El Draque after his commander Sir Francis Drake .
 El Draque is still popular in Mexico, Columbia and Venezuela, Drake's old stomping grounds . Drake is known for his work in Venezuela, Colombia and Venezuela .
 It became a popular with the Cuban working-class in the early 19th century .
 Cuban fiction writer Ramon de Palma referred to the Draquecito in an 1838 book involving a character that drank one of the cocktails daily to keep the doctor away . A character in the book drank the drink to keep him from the doctor .
 Some historians believe that slaves working in Cuban sugar cane fields in the late 19 century created the Mojito .
 The word guarapo, of which the Mojito is made, is of mixed African and Spanish provenance . The word is made from the word 'guarapo', of which Mojito makes .
 Slaves laboring in sugar cane fields longed for a familiar sweet drink from their homeland, made from yucca . Slaves were forced into slavery in the 1930s to work in sugarcane fields .
 Thinking that the slaves were saying ""guarapo,"" this word became a part of the vocabulary . The word was used by slaves in the 1800s .
 Apart from drinking guarapo, slaves often drank aguardientiente as an escape .
 Strong rum is prominent in everyday Cuban culture, but alcoholism is uncommon . To this day, strong rum is still prominent in daily Cuban culture .
 Angel Martinez opened La Bodeguita del Medio in 1942 as a general store . He converted it into a restaurant and bar in 1946 . The Mojito gained popularity in Havana .
 Ernest Hemingway, Bridget Bardot and Nat King Cole were frequent visitors to the bar . The bar was frequented by students, musicians, musicians and celebrities .
 Another well-known drink, the Cuba Libre, was allegedly so named in the 1890s when a group of off-duty American soldiers gathered in a bar in old Havana drinking rum and Coca-cola .
 In 1955, Lansky took over as operator of a newly established casino at the Hotel Nacional, which was managed by International Hotels, Inc., a subsidiary of Pan Am . The following year he started building his own hotel-casino, the Hotel Riviera .
 The Riviera Hotel opened in December 1957 with a floorshow headed by Ginger Rogers that was carried in part on U.S. network television .
 He did not know that he would have to abandon it three years later . Of course, he did know that .
 The popular, wide-eyed 1950's love affair with Cuba as a playground was over . The '50s love affair' with Cuba was over in Cuba in the 1950s .
 In the days following Batista's flight into exile, enraged mobs sacked and looted the casinos, which they considered symbols of decadence amidst gnaw-upon poverty .
 The new Cuban government was ideologically opposed to gambling, vice and the pursuit of profit of any kind, legitimate or not . Cuba's new government was opposed to vice and gambling .
 Castro took a dim view of tourism, which he felt polluted his project . A new, intellectually, physically and spiritually superior Cuban was to be molded, Castro said .
 Tourism collapsed and by 1975 reached 12,000 visitors annually, most of them from the Soviet bloc . Tourism collapsed after tourism collapsed and tourism collapsed . By 1975, tourism had peaked at 12,500 visitors annually .
 The hermetic wall around Cuba could not have been maintained by refusing passenger planes of tourists entry and jamming radio and television broadcasts alone, as was done by East Germany . Of course, the wall could not be maintained by simply jamming radios and TV broadcasts .
 The U.S. embargo and quarantine unwittingly helped subdue non-conformist influence . The United States embargo and . quarantine unwittingly . subverted non-American influence considerably by inviting . it abroad .
 Cuba's Riviera Hotel, like all hotels in Cuba, is the cornerstone of Cuba's feeble economy . Today the Riviera hotel is a cornerstone of the Cuban government's economy .
 I have visited the Riviera numerous times and it never fails to impress. I have been there numerous times. The Riviera is a must-see destination for the first time .
 The Cuban government has been careful to preserve the original terrazzo floors, banquet halls and interior decor . Even gold plated china and silverware were still used in the private dining room of Lansky .
 The Copa Room was dubbed the 'Palacio de la Salsa' in the 1990s as Cuba legalized the United States dollar and attempted to bring back the hedonistic Cuba of old, warts and all . Cuba was desperate to stave off total collapse and starvation after the
 If ever there were the time when the United States Embargo would have forced Castro out of power, it was the summer of 1994 . The U.S. Embargo led to the fall of Castro Castro in power .
 Unable to pay for Mexican gasoline, cars and buses were idled . Cubans relied on 25 kilo ""Flying Pigeon"" Chinese bicycles for transport .
 Unable to pay for chlorine to purify the water supply, water borne pathogens thrived . Water borne pathogens thrive in the city's water supply .
 Without crude, Cuban power plants shut down and Cubans were eaten alive in fetid, un-air conditioned apartments as mosquitoes had a field day in the still, midnight air unperturbed .
 Tens of thousands of Cubans tossed themselves in to the sea on inner tubes to drown or be rescued by the United States Coast Guard . U.S. Coast Guard rescues tens of thousands who tried to drown .
 Had the U.S. embargo been lifted after all this misery failed to dislodge the government, Cuba today would at the very least have a mixed economy and the Castros' rule would not be as absolute . Had the United States embargo had been lifted, Cuba would have had a
 Cuban government dictate over the economy became absolutely critical to maintaining political control . Without a socialist trade and barter bloc to rely on a la COMECON and with the introduction of a dollar economy and all the inequality that brings, internal Cuban government dictates over the country's economy .
 Cubans are aware that the U.S. is the primary refuge of the exiled Cuban moneyed class and does its bidding, even against its own commercial interests . Cubans know that the United States is a primary refuge for the exiled moneyed .
 Cubans know they will never be able to compete with their Miami cousins in a privatized Cuba . Cubans will not compete with Cuban cousins in the privatized Cuban economy .
 The U.S. embargo plays a vital role in neutralizing the threat of compensatory power represented by Cuban exiles and private finance in general . The United States embargo is a vital part of the Cuban embargo, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Where the U.S. embargo does not apply the Cuban government puts up barriers to mimic the embargo . Where the United States embargo doesn't apply, Cuba has put up barriers in place to mimic it .
 Canadian and European entrepreneurs who invested in Cuba in the 1990s were obliged to work within partnerships that allowed them minority stakes without ultimate control over the enterprise .
 There is no legal or judicial framework for private enterprise in Cuba . Private enterprise is not allowed to be run by the Cuban government .
 How much of it is by design and how much is sheer incompetence and bureaucracy, is difficult to gauge . How much is it by design or by sheer incompetence, it's hard to gauge.
 Without perpetual economic privation and a political/military state of siege, the population would be unwilling to accept the awful living conditions, sacrifice and heavy handed restrictions that ensure dependency on the government for the basic necessities of life .
 A relaxation of tensions and growth in trade would raise living standards and force the way to economic and political plurality, says David Cameron . A relaxed tension and trade growth in the Middle East would raise standards .
 Cuban government to maintain a war footing in the face of new realities would de-legitimatize its policies among core supporters . Cuban government is already on the defensive in face of absurd restrictions and harassment of the population .
 Castro's only option for Castro and company will be internal policy shift to the right, i.e. liberalization . The only option is to shift the Cuban government's policy to a more conservative stance .
 Now is the time for Congress and President Obama to act on internal Cuban realities without hecklers who haven't been to Cuba in fifty years screaming in the background .
 Chapter 2: Mojito 67: LA HISTORIA ME ABSOLVERA . Chapter 3: "Mojito 67" Chapter 1: "I am a survivor of the Mojito" Chapter 2. "I was a member of the original Mojito family"
 Every Sunday there's a book fair, and in one of the few examples of sanctioned non-governmental employment, independent, open-air booksellers sell old books and memorabilia for hard currency .
 An original copy of Fidel Castro's collected letters from prison was found in the book . Castro's letters were found in a copy of the Castro letters he collected from prison .
 The 94page pamphlet was published in April, 1959 . It featured on its cover a photograph of a baby faced Fidel Castro with a Department of Corrections serial number around his neck .
 The pamphlet was in remarkably good condition for its age . It was purchased for two or three dollars, suspecting that I might have discovered important historical material .
 The seller, on the other hand, seemed wholly uninterested in the book's contents . The seller seemed to be unconcerned about the contents .
 Ernest Hemingway and Camilo Cienfuegos from the 1950s and 60s . He also had a number of original photographs of Fidel, Raul, Che, Fidel and Raul .
 I snapped those up for few dollars more as I tried to hide my excitement . I snapped them up for a few dollars .
 I hurried back to the rented RV camper that served as my home during my stay . I hurried to examine my find in more detail .
 I took them back to the U.S. and kept them safe until 2007 as I prepared this book . I kept them in the United States until 2007 .
 In 1959, American decision makers examined a freely available pamphlet and how relations between the two countries could have been different . I wondered how different history might have been had the pamphlet examined .
 Maybe it's more expedient to just dismiss him as a Communist stooge to be gotten rid of . Maybe it was more . than just dismissing him as . a Communist . Stooge .
 President Eisenhower refused to meet with him on his victory tour after the 1959 triumph over Batista .
 Vice President Nixon met with him and privately called him naive afterwards . Vice President Richard Nixon called him "naive" after meeting him .
 Studying the prison letters would have significantly reduced the uncertainty about Fidel Castro's true intentions . Studying prison letters could have significantly helped reduce uncertainty about his true intentions, author says .
 They put a vulnerable, solitary and uncensored Fidel on display years before he actually wielded power . Fidel Castro was a vulnerable and solitary man on display before he became president .
 As a political prisoner accused of treason, he was at the complete mercy of the Batista regime . He could have been killed at any moment .
 Fidel depended upon his wife, sister and comrades in arms like Aguero for material and emotional support .
 He nearly lost his mind while in solitary and poured himself into his letters to hold onto his sanity . He poured himself in letters to try and hold on to his sanity in solitary confinement .
 Fidel Castro's moral compass is on exhibit for all to see and his actions during the next 50 years can more or less be predicted or better understood after reading his prison letters . Fidel's actions during his 50 years in prison letters can be predicted .
 Fidel's moral compass is on exhibit for all to see and his actions during the next fifty years can more or less be predicted or better understood after reading his prison letters . Fidel's actions during his fifty years in prison can be predicted by reading his letters .
 Havana's Hotel Nacional is unsurpassed in opulence and a magnet for movers, shakers and the glitterati of the world . Havana is a tourist destination for those yearning to breathe free from restrictions .
 Among the Hotel Nacional' s first illustrious guests were artists and writers such as Johny Weissmuller, Buster Keaton, Jose Mujica, Jorge Negrete, Agustin Lara, Tyrone Power, Romulo Gallegos, Errol Flyn,
 The guest list includes well-known American gangsters Santos Traficante, Meyer Lansky, Lucky Luciano and Frank Costello . The event is held in New York City .
 Winston Churchill, the Duke and Duchess of Windsor, scientist Alexander Flemming, and innumerable IberoAmerican heads of state and European monarchs backed the hotel's reputation .
 General Machado, veteran of the war of independence against Spain, seized power in 1928 . One Angel Castro had a son in 1928 with one Angel Castro . It was during these prosperous and heady times that General Machados seized power .
 President Machado soon had problems governing the country as Cuba's primary export, sugar, plummeted in price, causing massive unemployment and hardship . Cuba's main export of sugar, Cuba's first export, fell in price causing unemployment .
 Angel Castro sent his young, illegitimate son and brother Ramon to live with an impoverished Haitian family in the big eastern city of Santiago . From Biran, a tiny outpost in sleepy but wild Oriente, the Castro family lived in the town of Biran .
 The Haitian consul Louis Hippolyte Hibbert, Angel Castro's conduit for plantation laborers, would become young Fidel's godfather . The Cuban consul would become the Cuban president of Haiti .
 With the stock market crash of October 29, 1929, Cuba, an appendage of the U.S. economy, fell into depression . Cuba's economy suffered a severe recession in 1929 .
 The General Strike of 1933, known as the Revolution of 33, forced Machado out of power in August . Machado had been in power for eight years after eight years in power .
 The United States Sugar Act of 1934 created a large quota for Cuban sugar imports . To his credit, he tried to diversify exports . The U.S. Sugar Act was passed in 1934 .
 While in office, Machado traveled frequently to the United States . He spoke of his determination to ""civilize"" Cuba so that it could one day govern itself . Machado is a former Cuban president .
 He took credit for the assassination of Julio Antonio Mella while exiled in Mexico . He persecuted Cuban labor leaders and persecuted labor leaders .
 Cuba was completely dependent on fruit exports and sugar monoculture backed by American investment . Cuba was dependent on American investment and distribution . Cuba's fruit exports were largely dependent on sugar .
 The Piatt Amendment, which preceded Machado, gave the U.S. government the right to intervene in Cuba as necessary and, to the horror of Cuban nationalists, ceded Guantanamo Bay to the United States Navy as 74 a coaling station .
 The Spanish Civil War began and the Japanese Empire commenced hostilities in Manchuria, igniting World War II in Asia . Hitler came to power during this deeply troubled period of world history .
 To many around the world, the 1930s deflationary depression heralded the end of Capitalism and the fulfillment of Marx and Lenin's prophecies . The 1930s depression was the beginning of capitalism .
 Following Machado, Carlos Hevia was chief of state for all of 72 hours . Machado was Machado's replacement . Hevia has been in office since Machado took over the job .
 San Martin was replaced by Carlos Medieta y Montefour, who served for eleven months . San Martin is the current president of the Spanish Republic .
 He was followed by Jose Barnet y Vinejeras and Miguel Mariano Gomez in turn succeeded him . He was the first president of the country .
 Grau San Martin had attempted to appease the labor movement's demands by supporting legislation such as an eight-hour workday . Grau had tried to appease labor movement by supporting an 8-hour dayday . San Martin was assassinated in 1992 .
 He encouraged collective bargaining, forced utilities to lower their rates . He insisted that fifty percent of all employees of foreign firms be Cuban . He also insisted that 50 percent of employees in foreign firms should be Cuban.
 San Martin's brief government was never recognized by the United States . His brief government never was recognized by U.S. government .
 I have always been amazed how I constantly run into the same people whenever I'm in Havana . I'm amazed how many people I run into in the same way whenever I visit Havana. I'm always amazed how often I get stuck in the city .
 So does nepotism, fratricide, internecine warfare and the personalization of politics . So does the personalizing of politics and its personalization, politics . The U.S. has a long history of corruption .
 In October 1948, Fidel married Mirta Diaz-Balart, daughter of the mayor of Banes, Oriente . Fidel's wife is now the president of Colombia .
 Mirta was the sister of Rafael Lincoln Diaz-Balart, member of the Cuban House of Representatives . She was born in Havana, Cuba .
 He appears to spend every waking moment, not on issues affecting his constituents, but on how to take down Fidel Castro . "He seems to spend most of his life trying to take over Fidel," he said .
 In 1955 Rafael Lincoln Diaz Balart opposed his brother in law Fidel's release under Batista's general amnesty . In 1955 Fidel's brother was opposed to his brother's release . Fidel was released under the Batista amnesty .
 Had he prevailed, Fidel may have remained incarcerated and the history of Cuba would have taken an entirely different course . Fidel may still be in prison, but the history would have been different .
 Rafael Lincoln Diaz-Balart became a senator in the Cuban legislature in 1958 . He served as a senator until Batista fled the island the following year . He was a member of the Cuban parliament .
 Born in Spain, he is now a naturalized United States citizen . In 2006, he was appointed to the Florida Supreme Court by Gov. Rick Perry .
 Fidel Castro Ruz's younger sister is a United States citizen . Fidel's sister Juanita is a U.S. citizen . Juanita Ruz is Fidel's youngest sister .
 It is alleged that Miami exile Francesca Castro is one of Fidel's many illegitimate children . She resides in Miami and it is alleged to be one of the Castro's children . Francesca has been accused of being an illegitimate daughter of Castro .
 Cuban politics in 2009 follow the old patterns and are still intensely personal . Cuban politics is still intense personal, and it's not always easy to predict .
 In March, Cuban leaders were summarily fired without due process of any kind . The two most visible and important figures in the Cuban government were fired . They were seen as successors to Raul .
 Cuban officials say Perez Roque and Lage conveyed false expectations about how the country would change . They say they had conveyed to foreign politicians false expectations . Cuban officials said they had become too visible and that they had been in control of its direction .
 The men were involved socially with a Cuban named Conrado Hernandez, who was surreptitiously recording their conversations during reg76 ular parties at his ranch in Matanzas . Hernandez recorded the men's conversations with him at a private ranch .
 Cuban officials recently discovered a series of recorded conversations with Fidel and Raul Castro . Some of those conversations included acerbic criticism and off-color jokes about various government leaders .
 Rumor has it that he purchased his first Marxist classics during this period . Rumor: He purchased Marxist classics at this time .
 Fidel traveled to Columbia in 1948 to agitate for a Youth Congress . He was caught up in the Bogotazo after the assassination of presidential candidate Gaitan in April, 1948 . Later in 1948, he was involved in the insurrection known as the Bogotaazo .
 Fidel had come to believe that he was destined for great things; everyone around him told him so . Early on in life, Fidel believed that he had been destined for greatness . Fidel believed he would be a great man .
 He knew that university politics would be a stepping-stone to a larger stage . University politics is a stepping stone to a bigger stage, he says . He knew he would be successful in university politics .
 Now Fidel could organize an armed struggle in the name of the republic, of democracy, and in defense of the Constitution of 1940 . Fidel could be able to organize a struggle for democracy, he says .
 In early speeches and writings, Fidel spoke of... the duty of free men to rebel against an unjust government... and... the obligation free people have to force change on their government . Fidel spoke .
 The most filthy, cowardly, indecent, and the most vile, and most intolerable, are the most intolerable . The most disgusting, cowardly and disgusting, the most disgusting. The most vile and disgusting .
 No matter how desperate her economic situation, Mirta is too smart to be induced to work for the government . She is a smart woman, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "I will set the record straight and defend against this cowardly insult whatever the cost. I will set it straight," he said .
 I ask you to help me in this and to do in my name what you would do if you were in my situation . I ask for your help . Do you know the truth? Call the National Suicide Prevention Hotline on 1-800-273-8255 .
 "I authorize you to make whatever declarations necessary and to take any decision necessary in my name," says President Obama . "You can make whatever declaration necessary in your name," he says .
 I am ready to summon my own brother-in-law to court and fight him at the first opportunity . I'm ready to fight my brother in-law, says the author of the book .
 Fidel confides to Luis Conte Aguero that he never imagined that Rafael (Fidel's brother-in-law and Batista's Under Secretary of the interior) was such a scoundrel and was so corrupt . Then in a letter dated July 31, 1954, Fidel conf
 These passages refer to an incident in which Fidel's brother in law, the uncle of his baby son, surreptitiously issued a press release that Fidel's wife had been fired from her job as a government informant . The release implied that the wife of Cuba's most famous rebel
 The announcement drove Fidel mad with rage and exemplifies perfectly the impossibility of separating the personal from the political in Cuba . Fidel Castro was furious at the announcement, and it drove him mad .
 The spats and bickering between Fidel and his in-laws continues to this day . It forms the nucleus of the political hatred and intrigue across the Florida Straights today . Fidel's in-law relationship with his wife remains a source of tension .
 "He is in a perpetual state of indignation and outrage at historical injustice and slights, real and imagined," he says . "He's in a state of outrage and outrage"
 Cuban radio host shot himself dead to protest Batista's coup d'etat in 1952 . He spoke out against social injustice, and in one of the most sensational episodes in Cuban history .
 This was a progressive party that wanted to address the social and economic problems of the country . The party was famous for demonstrations and agitation against the endemic corruption of political life .
 Chibas had his own radio program and for years used it as a soapbox to talk about the burning issues of the day in this era before television .
 He became very popular, and with his popularity became very influential . With his popularity, he was very influential. He was influential .
 The conditioned power of Chibas was transformed into the organizational power of the Orthodox party . The Orthodox party made it a force in Cuban politics . It is now a major party in Cuba .
 Self-immolation of a Tibetan monk in South Vietnam circa 1967 was captured on the American nightly news and seen by millions . A parallel familiar to more readers would be the self-immolated of a Buddhist monk in 1967 .
 It had a major psychological impact and was a blow against support for continuation of the war in Vietnam . It had been a blow for support for continuing the war .
 On October 15, 1953, in what would be known as the Moncada Program, Fidel put the Cuban government under Batista on trial as a usurper in violation of the 1940 constitution . Fidel turned the accusations against Batista upside down and put the government under that regime on trial
 For Cuba, La Historia Me Absolvera has the historical weight of Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address . For Cuba it has the history weight of the Gettysburg address . For Cuban citizens, it will be the first time they've seen this type of address .
 "They get absolute moral impunity without any voice accusing them. Moreover, they get moral impunity," she writes . "They are also entitled to moral impunity"
 In Cuban history, this incident reminds one of Kent State in 1970 and the Boston massacre of 1770 in American history . The importance of this incident is similar to Kent State, Boston massacre in 1770 .
 Fidel's writings are drenched in obsession to defend the independence of Cuba, restore its honor and the sacred principles of revolutionary valor embodied by Jose Marti, the intellectual father of independent Cuba . Fidel Castro's writings include an obsession to restore the honor of Cuba .
 Cuba devolveed into a country run by one man for fifty years . No matter that Cuba devolved into a nation run by a man for 50 years . Cuba has been ruled by a single man since 1961 .
 Inside Cuba and out, Fidel Castro is the Revolution and the Revolution is Fidel and by blood and history it is Raul, but in a much more circumspect way . Raul is the son of Fidel Castro, who is the brother of Fidel .
 Cuba's dependency on one mortal is the Cuban government's biggest political liability . Structural dependency on a single person is Cuba's biggest liability .
 "Without a foreign military and political existential threat, this liability will become unbearable," says President Obama . "The liability will be unbearable," he says .
 The theme of death as a great cause nobler than living an unremarkable life permeate his speeches and expectation . The theme is "death as a noble cause nobier than living unremarkable" than living a life, he said .
 "They did well because they were not born to surrender to the miserable and hypocritical life of this time," says Pope Francis . They did well," he says .
 These contemplations remind me of the manly thoughts that agitated their restless brains, the indignant rebellion against such selfish and repugnant mediocrity . That desire to become a great example for their fatherland, that desire to be an example .
 He refused to compromise with the Batista dictatorship to secure his own release . His intransigence would continue during the most difficult challenges he faced during ten U.S. administrations .
 La Historia MeAbsolvera's reputation for asceticism was crucial as he molded the new national character to accustom itself to perpetual hardship and privation . Chapter 3: His eschewal of material things was crucial in shaping the national character .
 In characteristic form, Fidel turned poverty, want and scarcity into an endurance test of the will . The result of a suffocating embargo and the population's total dependency on the sclerotic state run economy, he says .
 The capacity for suffering and ability to resistir served the Cuban state as an ideological Cold War bulwark against the decadent, shameful consumerism represented by the U.S. in the Cuban media and imagination .
 The irony is that unionized, government workers do not enjoy a subsistence wage . Such is the irony of a country with a constitution founded on the principles of Marxism, whose ideal is superior living standards .
 Cubans labor and sweat, albeit very inefficiently, with the knowledge that their needs will go unmet month after month, year after year . Cubans work and sweat in the hope of their needs being met, but their needs are not met .
 Washington's wishful obsession with bringing down Castro, dressed up in theories about rational actors, is naive . Washington needs to know that Castro is not a dictator, but he is a dictator .
 December 12, 1953 My dear brother Luis Conte, It is with the blood of my dead brothers that I write this letter . It is a letter from Conte to Conte's brother Luis .
 Justice, in this case, is not a monument to heroes and martyrs who fell in battle or who were murdered after battle . Justice is not to be a memorial to heroes or martyrs, it's not to a monument of martyrs .
 It isn't even possible to speak of peace for the dead in an oppressed land . Not even is it a tomb where they rest in peace along with the others who lie sprinkled through the fields of Oriente .
 Posterity will raise the symbols and the generations of tomorrow will relive the tribute ode to those who rescued the fatherland's honor in these times of infinite shame . Posterity .
 He's writing from prison where it would seem improbable that in seven years he would be the Cuban head of state . The Cuban president is imprisoned in a Cuban prison .
 Not even he, as we will see in other letters, knows or is certain of this . "Not even he" knows or not certain of the truth," he writes .
 He's serving twenty six years and many of his comrades have been killed or jailed . Many of those comrades have died or jailed, many of them have been jailed or killed .
 Te expongo todo todo esto, para que sepas que llevabamos un programa valiente valiento y avanzado . Te expongongo tote esto para que señas that llevas un programas valientes
 Nada pudo conocer el pueblo, porque adoptamos el criterio de no tomar las estaciones de radio hasta no tener asegurada la fortaleza para evitar .
 After the reestablishment of the 1940 Constitution, six basic revolutionary laws would be decreed . The participation of colonos in 55% of sugar cane profits would be in favor of small colonos .
 Fidel Castro's agenda went far beyond reestablishing the 1940 constitution . Clearly, Fidel's agenda was to reestablish a constitution . Fidel was not interested in re-establishing his country's constitution . He wanted to create a new constitution .
 President Obama wanted to restructure Cuban society to give the state a major role in the economy . He wanted the state to take a bigger role in Cuba's economy .
 Finally there would be a law confiscating all wealth of embezzlers of all times under a summary investigative process . The law would also confiscate all wealth, all at once, under summary investigative processes .
 At the age of twenty-seven Fidel has one foot in the Rights of Man and the other in left-wing nationalism . Fidel has a foot in rights of man and one in nationalism . He is one of the world's most powerful men .
 Communism and Moscow are not on his agenda but he would be obliged to choose and take sides after taking power . He would have to choose between Russia and the West if elected .
 Hitler's attempted takeover of Germany in 1924 (during Hitler's attempt to take over Germany) Hitler says his group is not just a bunch of armed men trying to take power's sake .
 The Director should never have taken seriously sterile or ridiculous theories about a Putsch or a revolution, when it was really the time to denounce the monstrous crimes of the government, killing more Cubans in 4 days than they had in 1 1 previous years .
 In Santiago de Cuba cayeron cien jovenes valorosos, eso no significa sino que hay en nuestra patria cien mil jovens dispuestos .
 He says that if a hundred men can give up their lives, then there's a hundred thousand who can also die . "All they need is a leader who can show them the right path," he says .
 The attack on the Moncada garrison was the 10th of October of 1868, the beginning of thirty years of war . The attack was the start of 30 years of fighting .
 Fidel as a young man is fixated on the bloody history of Cuba, and committed to the historic mission of completing Marti' s task as he sees fit . Fidel is committed to completing the historic task .
 For Fidel, rebellion is elevated to a historic duty to overturn unjust government and resist an illegitimate usurper of power . Fidel Castro says rebellion is a duty to overthrow unjust government . Fidel: "Rebelism is a historical duty to resist unjust government"
 His issues are agrarian reform, political reform and the 1940 Constitution . He says he wants to reform the system of agriculture .
 Kennedy authorized the Bay of Pigs disaster because he thought Cubans would revolt against Castro . Kennedy authorized Bay of Pigeas because he was misled and thought Cuban rebels would revolt .
 Castro is not released until July 24, and Che Guevara is released a week later . Castro is released on July 25, and Gueverara a week after Castro is .
 On a 60-foot yacht named Granma, eighty-two men led by Fidel Castro depart for Cuba . Fidel Castro led the group to Cuba on the 60-ft yacht .
 In Santiago de Cuba, three hundred young men led by Frank Pais in olive green uniforms and red and black armbands with the July 26 emblem attack police headquarters, Customs House and the harbor headquarters .
 The Granma lands in Las Coloradas, Oriente province, after being delayed by weather and logistical problems . Poor communications between the expeditionaries and the Cuban underground delayed the arrival .
 The rebels are surprised by Batista's troops while resting on the edge of a cane field at Alegria de Pio . The rebels were resting in the field not far from the Sierra Maestra . Batista troops were surprised by the rebels' surprise .
 The majority of the revolutionaries are killed or captured, but a few escape to the Sierra Maestra . Che Guevara, Juan Almeida, Calixto Garcia and a handful of others .
 Twelve survivors of the Granma expedition regroup at Purial and organize the first guerilla unit . Twelve survivors were able to regroup and form the first Guerilla Unit .
 At this point the Rebel Army consists of fifteen fighters with seven weapons, and they begin to move higher into the Sierra Maestra Mountains . At the time, the rebel army consists of 15 fighters . The Rebel Army has seven weapons .
 Members of the 26 -July Movement meet secretly to discuss support for the rebels in the Sierra Maestra .
 Cuban Defense Minister Santiago Rey visits Washington as an official guest of the U.S. government . Santiago Rey is the Cuban defense minister for Cuba .
 In Santiago, four youths are found dead in an empty building, including 14-year-old William Soler . Four youths were killed in Santiago, including four youths from Santiago .
 They were arrested as suspects in revolutionary activities and tortured . They had been arrested and tortured for their part in the country's anti-Islamist movement .
 The war opens with a successful rebel attack on a small army garrison at the mouth of the La Plata River .
 Angel Sanches Mosquera leads a company of elite Batista troops into the Sierra Maestra mountains to search for the rebels . The Batista government was overthrown in 1953 .
 Rebels are attacked by the Army at Altos de Espinosa and disperse for three days . Rebels disperse after three days of fighting . Rebels attack by the army and disperse after the attack .
 In Santiago, Frank Pais was arrested for his participation in the November 30 uprising . He was arrested in Santiago, Chile, for his role in the anti-government protests .
 Student leader Jose Echeverria and a small group take over a radio station in Havana . The students take over the radio station from a student leader .
 In a simultaneous attack on the presidential palace, thirty-five rebels and five palace guards are killed . Five palace guards also killed in the attack .
 Batista tells the press that there are no guerrillas in the Sierra Maestra Mountains . Batista inaugurates the new Shell Oil refinery in the mountains .
 The Havana Hilton opens with a party attended by half of Batista's cabinet . Havana Hilton opened in 1959 with the arrival of half the Batista cabinet .
 Police Captain Esteban Ventura guns down four of the surviving student leaders of the March 1 3 Palace attack . Under orders from Batista, Ventura killed the four .
 In the Sierra Maestra, United States journalist Robert Taber interviews Castro on film . Taber interviewed Castro in a bid to gain access to the world's largest island nation .
 Judge Manuel Urrutia declares that all should be acquitted . In Santiago, Santiago, at the trial of ""Granma"" survivors, judge Manuel Urtia declares .
 Two other judges send men to prison for varying periods of up to eight years . The judges are also sending men to jail for varying lengths of eight years each .
 Arthur Gardner, U.S. Ambassador to Cuba and a close friend of Batista, is removed from office . Gardner, a friend of the Cuban dictator, was removed by Batista . Gardner was a close ally of the late dictator .
 The first major battle of the war is a rebel attack on the El Uvero garrison in a small town south of the Sierra Maestra range . The battle is the first major clash of the conflict between the government and rebels .
 After days of discussion in the mountains, the Manifesto of the Sierra Maestra is issued . Fidel Castro, Raul Chibas and Felipe Pazos signed by Fidel Castro .
 Ernesto Che Guevara is the first fighter promoted by Castro to Commander . He was the first to be promoted to Commander of the Armed Forces .
 Chief of police Colonel Jose Salas Canizares kills Frank Pais, a twenty-three-year-old leader of the July-26-Movement and a Castro ally . Pais was a member of the Castro-backed July 26 movement .
 The crowds are too large for the police to control and the city closes down for three days . Crowds are so large that the police are unable to control the crowds .
 Francisco Perez Rivas and Mercedes Urquiola Lechuga are among those who have been named mayor of Santa Cruz, Puerto Rico .
 At Palma Mocha, in the Las Cuevas region, the Rebel Army, lead by Fidel Castro, is victorious over Batista's army . Fidel Castro's army was defeated by the Batista army .
 Members of the July-26-Movement in Cienfuegos attack the naval police headquarters and the garrison of the Rural Guards .
 Augusto Fernandez Conde denounces the atrocities of the Batista regime at the World Medical Association meeting in Istanbul, Turkey . Conde says the atrocities were committed by the Batistas .
 El Cubano Libre, the newspaper of the Rebel Army, is published by Guevara in the Sierra Maestra . The newspaper was published by the rebel army in the 1960s .
 A weekly news magazine, Revista Carteles, reports that twenty members of the Batista government own numbered Swiss bank accounts, each with deposits of more than $1 million .
 Raul Castro and Juan Almeida leave the Sierra Maestra with a column of sixty seven men to open a second front in the mountains north of Santiago .
 In March forty-five civic institutions sign an open letter supporting the July-26-Movement . The letter includes lawyers, architects, public accountants, dentists, engineers, social workers, professors, and veterinarians .
 A national strike fails due to timing errors and lack of popular support . The strike is the first national strike to fail due to a lack of timing and popular support.
 Batista launches a vast offensive against the guerillas in the Sierra Maestra Mountains . Batista launched a vast operation against the rebels in the mountains . The offensive was the first of its kind in the country's history .
 In the Sierra Maestra Mountains, the Rebel Army holds the first peasant assembly attended by 350 people . The assembly is the first of its kind held by the rebel army .
 In Santo Domingo, on the Sierra Maestra Mountains, the rebels achieve a serious victory with many captured prisoners and supplies . The rebels capture prisoners, supplies and captured prisoners .
 The Battle of Jigue lasts about ten days and marks a turning point in the war . The battle was fought between the British and French forces in France .
 From the Sierra Maestra, Radio Rebelde broadcasts the text of the Caracas Pact, signed by Castro and others . The Pact was signed in Venezuela in 1992, signed in Havana .
 It calls for armed insurrection to establish a 90 provisional government and end for United States support of Batista . It also calls for an end for U.S. support of the Batista government .
 The Mariana Grajales Platoon participated in the battle to destroy Batista's military garrison in Cerro Pelado, Oriente .
 It states that tenant farmers and sharecroppers are entitled to the land they work . The land is the land where they work and where they live . It is also the land for tenant farmers .
 The Rebel Army captures the army garrison at Alto Songo in Oriente province . The army garrison was captured by the rebels in the province of Oriente .
 In mock general election, Andres Rivero Agiiero is declared the winner . Batista's presidential candidate is declared a winner in mock election .
 In Havana, William D Pawley meets with Batista for three hours, offering that the dictator retire to his home in Daytona Beach, Florida . Pawley offered Batista retirement to his Florida home .
 The rebels capture the towns of Guayos, Cabaiguan, Placetas, Manicaragua, Cumanayagua, Camarones, Cruces, Lajas, Sagua de Tanamo, Puerto Padre and Sancti Spiritus . The
 U.S. native Alan Robert Nye is arrested by the Revolutionary Army in Baire, near Jiguany, and charged with a plot to assassinate Fidel Castro . United States native Nye was arrested on suspicion of attempting to assassinate Castro .
 Che Guevara takes the city of Santa Clara and captures over 1,000 prisoners . The city was captured by the government of Argentina in 1968 .
 It was inconceivable to the U.S. policy makers that a revolution in Cuba could turn out badly for them . The United States policy makers feared a revolution would turn out bad for them if it happened .
 Force is a physical power; I do not see what morality one may derive from its use . Force is the physical power, he says . Force should not be used in politics, he writes .
 To yield to force is an act of necessity, not of will; at the very least, it is a prudence . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in the Middle East since 2001 .
 Total renunciation is incompatible with the nature of man and to take away all free will is to take . away all morality of conduct, he says . Total renouncing is incompatible . with the law, he writes .
 His name is seared into the subconscious of every Cuban man, woman and child . Both in Cuba and in exile, he is still revered in Cuba .
 The fetish around him is evident on television stations of both Havana and Miami . It creates headwinds for an objective analysis of the Cuban president .
 Fidelismo wields conditioned power in Cuba more substantial than all the accumulated American culture . Fidelismo is a value absorbed over the years and thrives in conflict with it. Fidelismo thrives with conflict with American culture, Cuban president says .
 Fidel Castro Ruz is the illegitimate son of a successful Galician immigrant and his Cuban servant girl . He was born in Cuba and is the son of an immigrant and a Cuban .
 Cuban prodigy Jose Capablanca beat Emmanuel Lasker to become world chess champion in 1921 . Raised in tiny Biran, Holguin, he is the historical heir to the liberators Antonio Maceo and Jose Marti... the dictators Machado and Batista .
 He is both pope to the poor of the world and a diabolical despot; David versus Goliath and a demagogue . The pope is both Pope Francis and a despot .
 Fidel began to speak in the first person plural whenever he delivered one of his legendary, interminable speeches . After the triumphal arrival of the barbudos in Havana on January 8 th 1959, Fidel began speaking in first person .
 It was a moment of conception, as it were, the real and imagined, holy and unholy melding of a revolution and its leader . It was the real-and-imagined, holy, unholy, melded of a revolutionary and his leader .
 For years following 1959 little was known about his personal life and out of security concerns he was of no fixed address . Nevertheless, for years after 1959 he had little to say about his life .
 Cuba's new ruler had no interest in self-aggrandizement and vanity of the common sort . After decades of corrupt politicians who pilfered the treasury and enriched their family and friends, Cuban president's new leader .
 'Any overt show of concern for himself would have been inappropriate even though he knew he was the sine qua non of the revolution' 'He knew he would be 94. He knew he had to be 94, even if he had been worried'
 As these pages are written the Grim Reaper is knocking and cannot be denied . Foiled assassination attempts fueled his youthful legend but now as these pages of this book are written, he is a legend .
 Even now in his retirement, the personality cult, sans the cult of personality a la Stalin, burgesses the quasi-religious faith of Cuba's loyal and ageing base . Cuba's loyalty to the Communist Party remains strong and loyal .
 It remains to be seen how long Cuban nation will soldier on, looking for cues from speeches of yesterday after he is gone .
 Fidel Castro is stubbornness, righteousness, egalitarianism and now senility . Fidel Castro was stubborn and righteousness, but now he's senility. Fidel Castro now is stubborn, righteousness and senility, he says . Castro is now stubborn, righteous, egalitarianist, now senile.
 Cubans adore and pity him while cursing the economic madness and political stagnation he has wrought . Cubans love and hate him, but Cubans curse him with economic madness he's wrought .
 The Cuban Adjustment Act is a key factor in the political longevity of Fidel Castro . It is the path of least resistance and is the key to his political longevity . Facilitated by the Cuban Adjustments Act, it is also a key part of his political legacy .
 "No nascent civil disobedience or counter cultural movement ever grew to threaten his power," he wrote . "No movement of protest or counter-cultural protest ever grew in his power"
 The Castro brothers have analyzed the Gorbachev experience and are determined not to have Cuba follow down the same road . Castro brothers are determined to avoid the same path as the Soviet Union .
 Their ultimate test will be how long they can influence events in Cuba from the grave . The ultimate test is whether they can continue to influence events from their graves .
 External pressure to force political plurality is a threat to the managerial and military elites . It will continue to retard reformers as long as the Cuban head of state, a Castro or not, sustains the belief that he will defend them against powerful moneyed interests from abroad .
 The first Cuban leader after Raul will have to be charismatic and swift on his feet if he is to resist Miami Cubans' pent up desire to rule the island . The first president of Cuba will be the first to lead the country .
 The answer lies in Fidel's conditioned power and the existential threat from the U.S.A.A., real and hyped up as needed . Fidel Castro has been in power in Cuba for decades .
 Cuban citizens compare their living standards to that of those of Polish, East German and Soviet citizens . Cubans have a predilection to compare their lot to the American way of life forty-five minutes away by plane .
 The privation was far worse than the Great Depression . Chapter 3 • La Historia Me Absolvera • 95 Depression of the 1930s. Chapter 3: The Great Depression of 1930s .
 Tens of thousands of Cuban's who hadn't had a decent meal in three years tossed themselves into the sea in 1994 . Spontaneous demonstrations broke out in Havana in 1994 after three years of starvation .
 Tensions were boiling and there was a danger that the army and police would use lethal force against civilian demonstrators . Tensions are boiling in the country and there is a danger of using lethal force, police say .
 Fidel Castro mounted an open jeep and spoke directly to protestors . Fidel understood how delicate the situation was, he said . Fidel understands how delicate it was, and mounted a jeep .
 The 1959 Revolution was an indigenous popular uprising against Batista . Batista was overthrown by the Batista government in 1959 .
 Washington needs to know that Fidel and the Cuban government have always been nationalist, Communist and internationalist . Fidel Castro's government has always been Communist, Communist, internationalist, in that order .
 The central European communist states did not have any of these factors in their favor . They were defeated by the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 The old Hungarian, Romanian and Bulgarian monarchies were puppets alongside Hitler's armies . The old Hungarians and Bulgarians are puppets of Hitler's army .
 For centuries the Poles suffered under Russian domination that even Lenin condemned . East Germany was the defeated, divided and indebted vassal state of Stalin and his heirs .
 The leaders of the ""People's Democracies"" were Communists first and last . Their allegiance was to the Soviet Union . The leaders were Communists .
 Communism was forcibly installed on bayonets. With the exception of Czechoslovakia, Communism was forced to be forcibly installed . Communism is forcibly installed in the hands of the Soviets .
 Subservience to Moscow de-legitimatized unelected rulers of people obligated to profess an ideology in conflict with their own nationalist tendencies . Subsibility to Moscow was de-elimatatized to unelected unelected leaders .
 Anti-communist uprisings in East Germany, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland were the natural response by people who felt smothered by an aggressive alien power . East Germany and Hungary were the victims of the Cold War .
 In Yugoslavia, a brilliant revolutionary similar to Fidel Castro united Croat, Serb and Bosniak . Fidel Castro commanded a legitimacy never achieved by Soviet satellites . In Yugoslavia he commanded a legitimization of Yugoslavia .
 The natural instinct to be free of outside control, paradoxically libertarian sentiment, works in the wily Fidel's favor as a Communist, but also a Communist second, nationalist first . Fidel Castro was a Communist first, but as a nationalist first, according to Fidel .
 Cuban Security Services 96 Cuba' s security and intelligence agencies are among the best in the world . Cuba's security and security services are one of the world's best, according to experts .
 They have infiltrated every dissident group in Cuba and every exile group in Miami, Miami, Cuba, says Cuban exile group . "They have infiltrated all dissident groups in Cuba," says Cuban dissident leader .
 In 1995 he defected to the United States as the sole pilot of one of Cuba's most advanced MiG fighters . He defected from Cuba to the U.S. in 1995 as the only pilot of a MiG fighter .
 He was inducted into a Miami church where a young single mother of two children who had left Cuba 30 years earlier fell in love with him . He is inducted in the church where the mother of his two children was also inducted . The Cuban-born man is a father of
 Ana Roque, his bride to be, said he was like a knight in shining armor . Ana Roques, his wife to be said to be like he was 'like a knight of shining armor' She said: "Ana Roque is like a princess of her own."
 He had been a major in the Cuban Air Force but was also a handy man . He had a master's degree in history and had been an air force major in Cuba .
 Brothers to the Rescue lost two Cessna airplanes to an air-to-air missile fired by a Cuban MiG on February 24, 1996 . The group was part of a violent anti-Castro group that lost two planes to a MiG .
 Miami exile leaders, many of whom counted him as a friend, were stunned . Miami exile leader: "Miami exile leaders" were stunned by his actions .
 She was left to mourn her loss but also to deal with an emotionally charged exile community grieving for the four men who died . The four men were killed in a car crash in November .
 He informed on Brothers to the Rescue and other Miami anti-Castro groups to the Cubans . The Federal Bureau of Investigation had him on its payroll since 1993 . He had been on the FBI's payroll since 1994 .
 Cuban American National Foundation published book, "Deserter," that was published by the foundation . He also told on the Cuban military to the exile groups, writing a book about the military .
 Ana Roque conceded that Mr Roque missed his two children in Cuba terribly . He talked to them twice a month and sent packages to them in Cuba . The couple argued over her refusal to have another child .
 She said he was frustrated, a former pilot working for $4.50 a hour in clerical and construction jobs . She said she was frustrated by his low wages and low wages .
 She said exiles suspected him of being a spy because of his military background . In newspaper interviews she said he suffered Chapter 3 • La Historia Me Absolvera • 97 rejection .
 He started working in the parts department at an aviation company and as a personal trainer . But doors had started to open in his final months in Miami and he started working again .
 She believed he had plans to revalidate his master's degree so he could teach . She believed that he had planned to return it to his masters degree .
 Mr Roque railed against ""right-wing rhetoric"" in Miami . In an interview from Cuba with C.N. he said: 'Right-wing' rhetoric is being used in Cuba .
 She insisted that the Roque' s life in Florida was not a sham . She insisted the three-bedroom house in western Dade County, with the wedding and family pictures in the living room and the half-done paint job her husband will never finish, is not a fake .
 Her children, an 11 -year-old son and a 12-year -old daughter, were estranged from their father . Mr Roque became a loving substitute, helping them with homework and picking them up at school .
 She said that as a husband he was faithful, affectionate and protective . She said he would call her if she was late from the supermarket .
 The acme of seduction is to leave a mark believing in you even after s/he has been played for a fool, says author . "The acme seduction" is to make a woman believe in you .
 American author Robert Greene has written incomparable tracts on this topic . American author Greene has been writing about this topic for decades .
 Ana B Montes, an American spy for Cuba, risked and lost everything for the Revolution . She risked everything for her country and never got a cent for her trouble .
 Ana Belen Montes was the Pentagon's top expert on Cuba . She admitted she spied for the Cuban government for 16 years . Montes opposed U.S. policy toward Havana .
 Montes, 45 years old in 2002, acknowledged in Federal District Court that she had revealed the identities of four American undercover intelligence officers . Montes provided the Cuban authorities with reams of other secret and top-secret military and intelligence information .
 She was not paid for her efforts, lawyers in the case said . She was just reimbursed for some travel expenses, lawyers said .
 Montes "engaged in the activity that resulted in this charge because of her moral belief that U.S. policy does not afford Cubans respect, tolerance and understanding," her lead lawyer says . Montes' lead lawyer: "United States policy doesn't afford Cuban respect"
 Montes sentenced to twenty five years imprisonment and five years probation . Montes was sentenced on a single count of conspiracy to commit espionage . He was sentenced to 20 five years' imprisonment .
 Cuba' s security and intelligence agencies are among the best in the world, Cuban officials say . She was obliged to submit to extensive debriefings and lie-detector tests by U.S. officials .
 Brothers to the Rescue welcomed Mr Roque as a pilot only to have him label them as terrorists . Brothers To the Rescue, which welcomed him to the rescue, was stunned by the reaction .
 Roque had met Roque at her Baptist church in 1992 only days after he fled Cuba by snorkeling over to the American base in Guantanamo . Roque met Mr Roque days after fleeing Cuba in 1992 .
 In newspaper interviews she said he suffered Chapter 3 . Chapter 3 • La Historia Me Absolvera • 97 3 .
 All the men sought asylum under the pretense of fleeing Cuba . They were long term United States residents who had sought asylum .
 The Five were arrested in Florida in 1998 and proclaim their innocence because their targets were violent Miami groups such as Alpha 66, Omega 7 and C.O.R.U. Not the U.S. government, the group says .
 Cuba maintains that terrorists based in and tolerated by the U.S. have killed 3,478 Cubans . The Cuban government maintains terrorists based on the United States have killed more than 3,500 Cubans since 2001 .
 The prosecution argued that the Five also attempted to infiltrate the U.S. Southern Command . The prosecution said the Five tried to infiltrate Southern Command in the United States .
 The Five will probably be swapped for jailed Cuban dissidents in the future . The Five are believed to be the Five of Cuba's dissidents .
 He was a decorated veteran of Angola and after immigrating to the U.S. he worked as flight instructor when he wasn't spying on anti-Castro groups .
 He was sentenced to fifteen years and his wife was deported to Cuba in 2000 . He and her wife were sentenced to 15 years in prison .
 Fernando Gonzalez Llort stated at his sentencing that the fanaticism, hatred and irrationality felt towards Cuba are generated and stimulated by only a minority segment of the CubanAmerican community living here, I would not have agreed to be represented .
 District Attorney's Office offered Mr Frometa a Stinger missile, C-4 explosive, grenades and other weapons from an undercover government agent . After all, that was what this same District attorney's Office said .
 Documents declassified by the U.S. government in 1997 and 1998 expose the decisions adopted by this country's top leaders . If there are still any doubts among those present in this courtroom, they need to take a look at the documents declassified in 1997 .
 Its strategy was to work towards the adoption in Congress of measures aimed at economically strangling the Cuban people, with the false hope that this would lead them to rise up against the revolutionary government . At the same time, a wave of terrorist attacks against Cuba would be organized and financed from Miami
 Terrorist Tony Bryant laughed over how he was questioned by F.B.I. officials after his boat was found near Havana with explosives on board . Bryant laughed about being questioned by officials after he was found with explosives .
 Bryant promised he would not do it again, and they let him go, Bryant told the newspaper . Bryant said he was let go after he promised not to do the same thing again .
 Ten explosions in one year would constitute a wave of terrorism in Miami, but not in Havana, expert says . Cuba has been hit by 10 explosions in a one-year period, says Mr Hoyt .
 Brothers to the Rescue provocation against Havana would be different thing if it were perpetrated against Washington, an air safety expert says . Air safety expert: It would be more urgent and verifiable if Washington were to blame .
 We have people who for forty years have publicly advertised themselves as terrorists, yet the prosecutors to my left only seem to have noticed it when they testified in this case for the defense . We have a group of 40 people who have been accused of terrorism for 40 years, yet prosecutors only seem
 Agents Angel Berlingueri and Hector Pesquera, the head of the local F.B.I.I., proudly appear as guests on the same radio stations, with the same people . They violate federal laws by openly raising funds to organize terrorist activities or defend terrorists around the
 By 1963 all commercial activity with Cuba was prohibited in an attempt to bring down Castro . By 1963, commercial activity was banned in a bid to topple Castro .
 What began as a strategic political move by a consummate military man to snuff out a successful insurgency morphed into a military defeat and apocalyptic Cold War brinkmanship for Kennedy . Kennedy then devolved into a domestic political football game .
 At about 2m, Batista, his family and closest associates, board a plane at Camp Columbia and leave Cuba forever . Batista's family and close associates, including his family, leave Cuba at 2m .
 This time, fortunately for Cuba, the revolution will achieve its true objective . The revolution will succeed in Cuba, Cuba's president says .
 Manuel Urrutia installed as President and Jose Mira Cardona as Prime Minister . Manuel Urtrutia is installed as president of the new government . Jose Miranda Cardona was Prime Minister of Spain .
 The United States government officially recognizes the new Cuban government . The U.S. government recognizes the government of Cuba .
 Throughout the island, Batista's henchmen and former police were executed in firing squads after being prosecuted in military tribunals . Batista was executed by firing squads throughout the island . The deaths were carried out in firing squad executions by firing squad .
 The group allegedly represents former police guards known for cruelty and violence . Former Senator Rolando Masferrer's private army allegedly represents the group . The group is said to represent members of former police guard known for brutality .
 Fidel Castro replaces Miro Cardonas as Prime Minister of the Revolutionary Government . Fidel Castro is Commander of the Rebel Army . Miro cardonas is Prime Minister .
 Major Jesus Sosa Blanco was executed at the ancient moat of La Cabanya Fortress . He was executed in the ancient fortress's moat .
 In Havana, two members of Rolando Masferrer's private army are captured after a shootout in which two policemen and a civilian are wounded . Two policemen, a civilian and two policemen are wounded in the incident .
 Castro announces that general elections will be held in Cuba in two years . Castro: General elections will take place in Cuba two years later . Castro also announces that elections will also be held .
 The Cuban government nationalizes the Cuban Telephone Company, an affiliate of I.T.T., and reduces telephone rates . The company is now owned by the government of Cuba .
 An editorial in the front page of Revolution calls for an end to the executions . The editorial calls for the executions to be stopped in Russia .
 Roberto Corral Miramon, Roberto Lopez Paz, Roberto Perez Merens, Jose Sosa Mojena and Andres Arango Chacon. Roberto Coral Miramon , Roberto Lopez and Roberto Perez Paz. Roberto Perez .
 Allegedly the plot also involves pro-Batista exiles Rolando Masferrer and Ernesto de la Fe . The plot is alleged to be a plot to overthrow the Batista government .
 Heriberto Bertematy Rodriguez is sentenced to death for trafficking and selling marijuana . Rodriguez was sentenced to the death for his role in the drug trade . Rodriguez is accused of trafficking, selling marijuana and trafficking .
 Alan Robert Nye, a lieutenant in the U.S. Naval Reserve, goes on trial in Havana . Nye is accused of being a member of the United States Naval Reserve in Cuba .
 Prosecuting attorney Lieutenant Jose Antonio Suarez asserts that Nye received $100,000 from the ousted Batista regime . Nye is accused of receiving $10,000 in cash from the Batista government .
 In Havana, after a public trial that lasts 7 hours, Alan Robert Nye (a thirty-one-year-old American from Chicago) is convicted in a plot to assassinate Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro . The trial lasted 7 hours .
 He is sentenced to death, but is allowed to leave the island as long as he never returns . He is given the chance to leave, but must never return to the island .
 Castro visits the U.S. as a guest of the American Society of Newspaper Editors . Castro is a member of the organization . Castro: "I'm not afraid to travel to the United States"
 Castro signs the Agrarian Reform Act, expropriating over 1,000 acres of farmlands . The act forbids foreign land ownership and expropriates foreign land . Castro signed the bill on June 1, 2009 .
 In Cairo, Che Guevara makes the first official Cuban government contact with the Soviet Union . The first official government contact was made with the Soviets in Cairo, Egypt .
 President Urrutia resigns, and Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado becomes Cuba's 1 9 th president . Urruti resigns as Cuba's president .
 Huber Matos resigns his post as military commander of Camaguey province, along with 14 officers, because of the ""rising influence of Communism"" in the revolution . Matos was a leading figure in the revolutionary war .
 Camilo Cienfuego's plane mysteriously disappears during a night flight . Plane mysteriously disappeared during night flight in Mexico . Plane disappeared during the flight .
 Huber Matos is sentenced to twenty years in prison for conspiracy and treason . Hubert Matos was sentenced to 20 years for his part in the conspiracy to overthrow the government .
 The Army announces that death sentences will not be carried out during the Christmas season . The Army will not carry out the executions during the festive period .
 The Soviets will also supply Cuba with crude oil, petroleum products, wheat, iron, fertilizers and machinery . The Soviets also will supply the country with oil and petroleum products .
 The Soviet Union fills the commercial vacuum left by the United States. The United States has been left behind by the Soviet Union .
 The French ship La Coubre explodes in Havana harbor, killing dozens of soldiers and workers . Dozens of soldiers, workers and workers died in the explosion .
 President Eisenhower approves a covert action plan against Cuba that includes the use of a ""powerful propaganda campaign"" designed to overthrow Castro . The plan was approved by Eisenhower in 1953 .
 By summer, several clandestine and C.I.A.-funded stations in the U.S. join Radio Swan in broadcasting to Cuba . Radio Swan broadcasts to Cuba by summer .
 In the U.S., the Frente Revolucionario Democratico is formed by Cuban exiles to oppose the government of Fidel Castro . In the United States, the party opposes Castro's government .
 U.S. companies, under pressure from the United States government, refuse to sell fuel to Cuba . At the same time, United States companies are under pressure to stop selling fuel to the island nation .
 U.S. diplomats Edwin L Sweet and Wiliam G Friedman arrested at a meeting of counterrevolutionary conspirators .
 They are charged with ""encouraging terrorist acts, granting asylum, financing subversibe publications and smuggling weapons" They are also accused of smuggling weapons and funding subversives .
 In response to these seisures, the United States congress passes the ""Sugar Act,"" eliminating Cuba's remaining sugar quota . The act was passed by the U.S. congress .
 Cuba retaliates by nationalizing all U.S. businesses and commercial property . Cuba also nationalizes all commercial property and businesses . Cuba retaliated against the move, nationalizing businesses and property .
 President Eisenhower cancels the 700,000 tons of sugar remaining in Cuba's quota for 1960 . Cuba's sugar quota for the year 1960 was reduced to 700,500 tons . President Eisenhower canceled the quota in 1960 .
 China agrees to purchase 500,000 tons of sugar from Cuba each year for five years . China agreed to buy the sugar in exchange for $1.5 billion in sugar .
 The planes belong to a Cuban delegation visiting the U.N. that includes Premier Fidel Castro . The planes are part of the Cuban delegation to the United Nations .
 Four boats set out from Miami to invade Cuba under the leadership of Rolando Masferrer Rojas . Four boats were launched from Miami and set sail for Cuba .
 U.S. imposes partial economic embargo on Cuba that excludes food and medicine . United States imposes partial embargo on Cuban citizens . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the embargo, including food, medicine and oil .
 Cuba nationalizes additional properties owned by American interests in response to the U.S. economic embargo imposed by the United States October 30 . Cuba nationalizing additional properties is a response to an American embargo imposed on Cuba .
 U.S. embassy: Popular support of the Castro regime has dropped markedly . Cable from Havana to Washington: "Popular support of Castro regime dropped markedly" Cable cable: "during the past three months the popular support of Cuba regime has decreased"
 A dozen Cuban children travel from Havana airport to the U.S. beginning Operation Pedro Pan . The operation began with a dozen children traveling from Havana to the United States . The U.N. has been working with the Cuban government in Cuba since 2003 .
 In the first two years of the revolution, Cuba loses more than 50% of its doctors and teachers . Cuba has a history of losing doctors, teachers, doctors, nurses, teachers .
 Cuba says the U.S. is preparing an invasion of Cuba . At the United Nations Security Council, Cuba charges that the United States is planning an invasion .
 Castro demands that U.S. embassy staff be reduced to 11, the same number as Cuba's embassy in Washington . Castro demands the number of staff at the United States Embassy in Washington be reduced . Castro: "The United States embassy staff should be reduced"
 Included are rocket launchers, truck-pulled field artillery, heavy tanks, antiaircraft and anti-tank guns .
 He says, "There will have to be a military decision on whether to help the people with a mass invasion or with a continuation of the infiltration by specially trained men. He says .
 Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo and members of the Second Front of Escanbray during the revolution arrive in Key West, Florida, on a fleet of three fishing boats . The revolution was a major event in the United States during the 1960s .
 It is true that at first the Communists distrusted me and us rebels. It is also true that . At first, at first, the Communist Party distratted me and me rebels, he says .
 It was a justified distrust, an absolutely correct position, ideologically and politically. It was the right position politically and ideologically, politically, to distrust the government .
 The Communists were right to be distrustful because we of the Sierra, leaders of the guerrillas, were still full of petty-bourgeois prejudices and defects, despite Marxist reading . The Communists had been right to distrustful .
 "The ideas were not clear to us, though we wanted with all our strength to destroy tyranny and privileges," says the author of the book . The ideas were "not clear" to them, though they were "destroyed by tyranny"
 "Then we came together, we understood each other, and began to collaborate," she says . "We came together and we understand each other," she adds .
 The Communists have given much blood, much heroism, to the Cuban cause . The Communists gave much blood and much heroism to Cuba's cause, the Cuban leader says .
 At least ten violations of Cuban airspace by hostile airplanes have been reported . At least 10 violations were reported by hostile aircraft .
 Major William A Morgan and Major Jesus Carreras Zayas, both former military aides to Castro, were executed in Havana for treason . Morgan and Carreas were executed for treason in Cuba . Morgan was a major aide to the Castro regime . Zaya was a member of
 A number of leaders opposing the revolution are arrested at a strategy meeting in Miramar . Humberto Sori Marin, Manuel Puig, and Regelio Gonzalez Corso are among those arrested .
 Immigration and Naturalization agents arrest Rolando Masferrer Rojas in Miami . Rojas is accused of illegally entering the U.S. illegally .
 The alleged attack violates the Neutrality Act that forbids the launching of any military expedition from United States territory against a nation with which the U.S. is not at war . The act violates the neutrality Act .
 Kennedy Administration opposes pro-Batista exiles while encouraging other anti-Castro groups . Kennedy administration opposes exiles, encourages other groups against Castro .
 Jose Miro Cardona, issues a statement that asserts, ""We are not, nor could we be, counterrevolutionaries" Jose Cardona issued a statement in which he said, "We are ... not counterrevolutionary" Cardona .
 We were revolutionists who fought against the previous regime, which had impoverished the whole country for the benefit of a minority lust112 ing for gold and power . We are revolutionists, we said. We were revolutionaries, we were revolutionaries .
 Rolando Masferrer Rojas is formally charged with violating U.S. Neutrality Laws in an attempt to overthrow Cuba's Fidel Castro . Rojas accused of trying to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba's attempt to oust him .
 Another explosion at the store El Encanto destroys the seven-story building . Another explosion destroys the building . The explosion is believed to have been caused by an explosion in the building's parking lot .
 Cuban airfields are bombed by ""mystery planes"" in order to destroy the Revolution' s air force . Cuban airfield is bombed by "mystery planes" in an attempt to destroy Cuban air forces .
 Eight B-26 bombers attack airfields at Ciudad Libertad, San Antonio de los Banyos and Santiago de Cuba . A total of eight bombers attacked Cuban airfields .
 After three days of lighting the invading force is defeated by the Cuban army . The invading force was defeated after three days .
 In Havana, 10 counterrevolutionaries, including Humberto Sori Marin, Manuel Puig, and Regelio Gonzalez Corso, are executed for treason . The executions take place in Havana .
 A record low rainfall creates one of the most severe droughts in the island's history . The island is experiencing one of its most severe drought in its history .
 James Luther Adams, Lillian Hellman, David Owen, David Riesman, Noam Chomsky, Timothy Leary and others. Noam . Leary was a member of the original generation of thinkers and thinkers .
 Five Cubans and one American executed by firing squad for ""counterrevolutionary activities"" during the Bay of Pigs invasion . Five Cuban and American executed during the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 At the White House, a program against the government of Fidel Castro is introduced by the name Operation Mongoose . The White House is introducing a program to combat Castro's government .
 The United States Federal case against Rolando Masferrer Rojas is dismissed without explanation . The case against Rojas was dismissed by the U.S. Federal Court of Appeals Court .
 He was charged with violating U.S. neutrality laws by financing a twenty-man invasion of Cuba . He had been charged with financing the invasion .
 Operation Mongoose aims to eliminate Fidel Castro and the Cuban Revolution . U.S. President John F Kennedy authorizes the operation . Fidel Castro was killed by the CIA in 1961 .
 Organization of American States suspends Cuban membership . Under U.S. encouragement, OAS suspends Cuba membership .
 President Kennedy broadens the partial trade restrictions imposed by Eisenhower to a ban on all trade with Cuba, except for non-subsidized sale of foods and medicines . The restrictions were broadened to include foods, medicines and food sales .
 U.S. naval vessels gather about the Cuban coastline . Cuban naval vessels gathered on the Cuban coast .
 The regime, with all the power of repression at its disposal, has shown that it can contain the present level of resistance activity; . 4) The regime's apparatus for surveillance and repression should be able to cope with any popular tendency toward active resistance; . The regime has shown it can
 "Any impulse toward widespread revolt is inhibited by the fear that the apparatus inspires," says the author . "Any expectation of liberation within the foreseeable future is not possible," he says .
 President Kennedy expands the Cuban embargo to include imports of all goods made from or containing Cuban materials, even if made in other countries . The embargo was expanded to include all goods from or from Cuba made in Cuba .
 Biryuzov, commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces, and a high-level delegation, arrive secretly in Havana to suggest the deployment of nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Between January and August, 5,780 counterrevolutionary actions reportedly carried out in Cuba . involve sabotage of important economic objectives . The Cuban government has been criticized for its anti-government actions in recent years .
 The United States Coast Guard impounds two boats in Marathon, Florida, after members of the Florida-based ""Student Revolutionary Directorate"" used them to fire automatic weapons at Havana beachfront buildings the night before . The U.S. Coast Guard has impounded two boats .
 Twenty three members of the expedition are not arrested, and no charges are brought against them . No charges were brought against the expedition members . The expedition members were not arrested .
 Discredit and isolate the regime; Harass the economy; Intensify intelligence collection . Assist Cuban exile groups and Latin American governments to take actions; Be prepared to exploit a revolt .
 United States senators George Smathers, Strom Thurmond and Kenneth B Keating propose direct aggression against Cuba . U.S. senators Strom and Kenneth Keating call for direct aggression .
 Soviet freighter Poltava arrives in Cuba with the second shipment of MRBMs . The shipment is the second round of the Soviet-built MRMs .
 In Havana, five C.I. A. agents were arrested and large quantities of weapons were confiscated . In Cuba, five of the agents were Cuban dissidents .
 United States government cables all Latin American governments and N.A.T.O. countries new measures to tighten the economic embargo against Cuba . U.S. government cables reveal new measures against Cuba to tighten economic embargo .
 In Washington, a memo from Edwin M Martin (Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs) to U Alexis Johnson outlines a two-track course of covert action against Cuba .
 President Kennedy demands withdrawal of Soviet missiles and imposes a naval blockade . President Kennedy demanded withdrawal of the missiles and imposed a blockade of Soviet territory .
 Khrushchev agrees on condition that Cuba receives guarantee of nonaggression from the United States . Jupiter missiles aimed at the Soviet Union are removed from Turkey . The agreement was reached on condition of a U.S.-Cuba agreement .
 President Kennedy states that as long as Cuba commits no aggressive acts against any nation in the western hemisphere, it was never the intention of the United States to invade Cuba . At a press conference, President Kennedy says as long if Cuba commits any aggressive acts, the U.S. will not
 The United States exchanges $53 million of medicines and baby food for 1,113 exiles captured in the ""Bay of Pigs" invasion . 1, 113 exiles were captured during the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 In Miami, President Kennedy meets with survivors of the 2506 Brigade in a ceremony televised from the Orange Bowl . President Kennedy met with survivors in Miami, Florida .
 Kennedy administration prohibits travel to Cuba and makes financial and commercial transactions with Cuba illegal for U.S. citizens . The Kennedy administration also bans financial transactions with Cuban citizens .
 President Kennedy objects to exile groups holding press conferences after illegal aggressions against Cuba . Meeting includes Cyrus Vance, Richard Helms, McGeorge Bundy and additional staff from the State Department and the C.I.A.
 Che Guevara, Raul Castro and Vilma Espin are opposed to any idea of rapprochement, she says . She adds that in her opinion Che . Guegara, . Raul . Castro, Vilma . Espin, Che. Gue
 The Second National Front of Escambray, Alpha-66, the Anti-Communist Liberation Liberation Fr ont, and elements of the People's Revolutionary Movement and the 30th of November Movement have reached a working agreement . The Second. National Front has reached an agreement .
 Working agreement is essentially action-oriented, but member organizations tend to the view that the original revolution promised by Castro should be reclaimed and redirected .
 The adherence of Manuel Ray's Revolutionary Junta would increase the influence of this grouping . It is probably has the most potential appeal to Castro's opponents within Cuba, but which is object of concern to more conservative exiles .
 Revolutionary Unity, Revolutionary Recuperation Movement, Christian Democratic Movement, Revolutionary Student Directorate, and other less well-organized center groups, have held aloof from attempts at unity . Revolutionary Unity is a major center group .
 The Alliance for Cuban Liberty and the Association for Economic Recovery of Cuba have had difficulty attracting adherents to Cuba . The two groups have struggled to attract adherents .
 They principally look to the return of their lost property, rather than action and politics . They look to return to the land, not action, rather to politics .
 Document states that efforts toward unity have been tentative and competitive . Further down the document states that "So far the efforts . toward unity" have been "tentive and competitive"
 Political divisions are deep and there appears to be little disposition or ability to effect a real accommodation of views . Political divisions, both ideological and personal, are deep, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The groups on the left distrust those on the right and vice versa; the center groups are wary of both . The left distrusts the right, vice versa .
 Any formula for unity would have to be so diluted as to be almost meaningless . Any formula would have been so diluted that it was almost meaningless, says the BBC .
 The plan renews support for exile attacks on selected Cuban targets . Targets include transportation facilities, power plants, fuel production and storage operations .
 President Kennedy asks French journalist Jean Daniel to tell Castro that he is now ready to negotiate normal relations and drop the embargo . Kennedy: Castro is ready to talk about normal relations with the U.S. and end embargo .
 Cuba becomes the first nation in the Western Hemisphere to jam American radio broadcasts . Cuba is first nation to jam U.S. radio broadcasts in Western Hemisphere . Cuba becomes first country in Western hemisphere to jam radio broadcasts.
 Castro tells American journalist Herbert L Matthews that Cubans had put forward the idea of Soviet missiles on the island . Castro says Cubans put forward a proposal for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Castro sends verbal message to President Lyndon B Johnson through Lisa Howard of ABC News . Castro sends message to LBJ via ABC news .
 Castro's sister, Juanita, defects, and becomes a prominent radio commentator in Miami . Castro's brother, Fidel Castro, defects and goes on to be a radio commentator .
 Cuba must end its dependency on the Soviets, and cease to support revolutionary groups in Latin America, the State Department says . Cuba must first end its dependence on the Soviet Union, the Department of State issues a sharp rejection .
 The Organization of American States adopts mandatory sanctions against Cuba . All members of the U.S. must sever diplomatic and trade relations with Cuba .
 Khrushchev is ousted as First Secretary and Premier of the Soviet Union . He was ousted from his post as the First Secretary of the USSR . He is now the leader of Russia .
 Che Guevara resigns his Cuban citizenship and leaves to wage armed struggle in Latin America . Che Che resigned from Cuban citizenship to join armed struggle .
 The port is opened to foreign boats, and within two months about 7,500 refugees have arrived in the U.S. December 1 . Within two months of arriving in the United States, 7,000 refugees have come in .
 In its first year, the airlift brings more than 45,000 refugees . Only about 5% require federal assistance, and only for a short time .
 Cuba announces new trade agreement with the Soviet Union that includes credits for $91 million . Cuba announces a new trade deal with the former Soviet Union . Cuba announced the deal in a joint statement on Monday .
 President Lyndon B Johnson signed into law the Cuban Adjustment Act . The act exempts Cuban immigrants from general U.S. migration laws .
 Any Cuban who has reached U.S. territory since January 1, 1959 is eligible for permanent residency after two years . 3,000 Cubans immediately apply for permanent status . Any Cubans who have reached United States territory since 1959 are eligible .
 Everett Jackson was shot down over Cuba and captured after dropping arms and equipment intended for counterrevolutionaries in Las Villas province . U.S. Air Force pilot Everett Jackson is captured by Cuban authorities .
 Rolando Masferrer Rojas and sixty-seven others are arrested in Marathon, Florida, for an alleged plot to invade Haiti and then Cuba .
 U.S. federal agents seize machine guns, handguns and knives . Among the weapons seized are machine guns and handguns .
 The first meeting of the Latin American Solidarity Organization opens in Havana, Cuba . Latin America Solidarity Organisation will meet in Havana .
 Che Guevara was killed in Bolivia by United States -trained rangers in the village of Vallegrande . Guevera was killed by U.S. rangers who were trained in Bolivia .
 The Cuban government announces petroleum rationing due to a cutback in deliveries from the Soviet Union . The rationing is due to the cutback of deliveries from Soviet Union deliveries .
 Two British journalists were arrested and then expelled after photographing military sites in Havana . They were then expelled from the country after they were arrested .
 In Havana, an American pilot is captured when his small plane is shot down after dropping a cargo of weapons for counterrevolutionaries . The plane was shot down in Havana, Cuba, after dropping weapons for the rebels .
 It is asserted that had the microfaction succeeded, ""it would have subordinated Cuban sovereignty"" to the Soviets . It is claimed that had it succeeded, it would have subverted Cuban sovereignty .
 In Miami, two businesses who regularly ship packages to Cuba are bombed before dawn . Two businesses regularly ship their packages to the island nation . The bombing occurred before dawn in Miami .
 Castro launches the ""revolutionary offensive" which nationalizes 55,000 small businesses and leads to state control of nearly all trades and services . Castro launched the 'revolutionary' offensive in 1953 .
 A new economic agreement with the Soviet Union reveals a 13% decrease from the previous year . The agreement was signed in 1991, and it was signed by the USSR .
 U.S. Senator Robert F Kennedy is shot in Los Angeles, California . Senator Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 Orlando Bosch and others fire a bazooka at a Polish freighter docked in the port of Miami . The incident happened in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Castro announces the start of a campaign to produce ten million tons of sugar in the next harvest . Castro hopes to produce 10 million tons in next year . Castro says sugar production will be the main focus of the campaign .
 The Boeing 727, with eighty passengers and a six-person crew, lands in Havana's Jose Marti Airport at 10:21m .
 The first contingent of the Venceremos Brigade, a group of volunteer workers from the U.S., arrives in Cuba to work on the sugar harvest . The group is the first of the volunteer workers to arrive in Cuba .
 A report of the Cuban Academy of Sciences asserts that the Cuban family is in a state of crisis . The report says that the family of Cuban citizens are in a crisis .
 The United States warns the Soviet Union to discontinue construction of a nuclear submarine base in Cienfuegos . The U.S. warned that the base will be discontinued .
 By this time, more than 85 percent of Cuban trade is with the U.S.R. and allies .
 Cuban exiles gather in Miami to dedicate a monument to the ten-year anniversary of the Bay of Pigs invasion . A few hundred Cubans gather to dedicate the monument . The monument was dedicated to the 10th anniversary of that invasion .
 In Puerto Rico, 80,000 people march through San Juan demanding independence . Albizu Campos' birth is celebrated on the eightiet anniversary of his birth .
 Castro arrives in Chile for a three-week visit, his first to a Latin American country since 1959 . Castro is the first Latin American president to visit Chile in 1959 .
 Castro begins tour of Africa, Eastern Europe, and the Soviet Union . Castro begins a sixty-three-day tour of Europe, Africa, and Russia .
 Cuba joins the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance . The Council is based on coordinated central planning and barter exchange . Cuba joined the Soviet trading bloc based on central planning .
 Cuba requests that in light of adopted resolution 1541 that the United Nations declare that Puerto Rico has a right to self-determination . Puerto Rico is a U.N. territory that has been declared a state of origin in Puerto Rico . Cuba requests the U.S. declare Puerto Rico
 Cuba accepts a U.S. proposal to begin formal negotiations over the problem of airline hijackings . Cuba accepts the United States proposal to start formal negotiations .
 Eastern Airlines flight 8894 lands at Miami International Airport at 11:55 A.M. with the last eighty-four passengers of the Cuban airlift . The flight lands in Miami .
 Since 1965, 3,049 flights had brought 260,561 Cubans to the U.S. since 1965 . This is the largest airborne refugee operation in American history . It's the largest flight of Cuban refugees to the United States ever .
 The 13 Congress of the Cuban Labor Confederation ties wages to productivity in an effort to improve efficiency . Wages are tied to productivity, the group says . The union says it is trying to make efficiency more efficient .
 The Committees for the Defense of the Revolution celebrates its 13* year . The Committees are celebrating their 13* anniversary .
 According to Cuba's official newspaper Granma, the total membership is now about 4,750,000 . Granma: The total membership now stands at 4, 750,000, according to Granma .
 OMEGA 7, an anti-Castro paramilitary group, was founded in the United States September 28 . The group is based in the U.S. and based in Miami .
 They are the first U.S. elected officials to visit the island since the break of diplomatic relations . They are also the first United States elected officials .
 Senator Edward M Kennedy urges the U.S. government to lift the embargo and normalize relations with Cuba . Kennedy says the embargo should be lifted and normalized relations between the two countries .
 Cuban exile leader Luciano Nieves is assassinated after coming out in support of dialogue with Cuba . Luciano was assassinated after he came out in a support for dialogue with the Cuban government . Nieves was assassinated in his native Cuba .
 Miami Mayor Maurice A Ferre asks Attorney General Edward H Levi for federal help to combat violence in Cuban exile community that police regard as politically motivated .
 Mayor Ferre sites the assassination of Luciano Nieves, and the bombings of T.V. station WKID in Dania, among other incidents . Mayor Ferez says the assassination and bombing of the station were among the incidents .
 Mayor Ferre estimates that the actual terrorists number less than two dozen . Ferre: "I'm not sure how many of the terrorists are actually involved in this country's terrorism."
 Government survey seeks to discover why so few women ran in 1974 People's Power elections . Survey seeks to find out why women were not elected in 1974 elections . People's power elections were held in 1974 and 1974 .
 The Organization of American States votes to end political and economic sanctions against Cuba . The vote was part of an effort to end the country's political, economic and political isolation .
 This opens the way for each member nation to decide whether to have diplomatic and trade relations with Cuba . Many had already established ties with Cuba, which many already had established .
 Cuba sends a large contingent of troops to help the Angolans repel an invasion by South African forces launched on October 23 . At the request of the newly-inaugurated Angolan government, Cuba sends troops .
 The report identifies over eight attempted plots to kill Castro between 1960 and 1965 . The report also identifies additional plans against other Cuban leaders .
 It adopts party statues, a programmatic platform, and approves the draft of the constitution . Party statues, programmatic platforms, and a draft constitution are adopted .
 President Ford announces that Cuban involvement in Angola prevents the possibility of restoring full diplomatic relations in the near future . President Ford: "Cuban involvement in Angolan prevents possibility of restoration of diplomatic relations"
 The 1988 Cuban/ Angolan victory at Cuito Canavale would mark the turning point in the war against apartheid regime .
 Among the changes is the establishment of new administrative division of the island . The island will become an administrative division .
 It seeks to preserve and strengthen families, promote social changes and increase the participation of women in Cuban society . It also seeks to promote social change in Cuba .
 Henry Kissinger states that there is no possibility of U.S. relations with Cuba while Cuba has troops in Africa . Henry Kissinger says that there are no possibility that the United States will be able to engage with Cuba . Kissinger: "There are no possibilities of United States relations" with Cuba
 Cuban troops in Angola would go on to play a decisive role in defeating the South African army and hastening apartheids demise .
 Cuban airliner crashes after an explosion nine minutes out of Barbados, killing 73 people, most of them teenagers . Most of the passengers were teenagers . Cuban plane crashes after a blast nine minutes after takeoff .
 In 1998, Carrilles admits to over a decade of anti-Castro terrorist activities funded by the CubanAmerican National Foundation . The foundation is Miami-based non-profit organization .
 Castro blames the sabotage on the C.LAOctober 6 bombing . Castro: At a mass funeral for the victims of the October 6 bombing, Castro blames C.A. for the attack .
 Orlando Bosch is arrested in Venezuela in connection with downing of the Cuban airliner that killed seventythree people . Bosch was arrested in . connection with the shooting down of the plane that killed seven people .
 Fidel Castro is elected president of the State Council . Under the new constitution, he consolidates the previous positions of president and prime minister . Fidel Castro becomes the new president .
 The new president serves as head of state, head of government, and commander in chief of the Armed Forces . He is the president of the United States and head of the government .
 President Carter drops the ban on travel to Cuba and on United States citizens spending dollars in Cuba . United States President Carter dropped the ban . President Carter also dropped a ban on Americans traveling to Cuba .
 Legendary jazz trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie travels to Havana to meet Arturo Sandoval . Gillespie meets his soon-to-be protege, Sandoval, at the hands of Arturo .
 The United States and Cuba sign a maritime boundary and fishing rights accord . The U.S. and Cuba signed an agreement on a maritime border and fishing agreement .
 The United States and Cuba open interests sections in each other's capitals . Cuba and the U.S. have a long history of diplomatic relations between the two countries .
 Somalia expels all Soviet advisors and breaks diplomatic relations with Cuba . Somalia cites presence of Cuban and Soviet advisors in Ethiopia . Somalia also breaks diplomatic ties with Cuba, citing the presence of Soviet advisors .
 Cuban troops helped repel a Somali invasion of Ethiopia . Thousands of Cuban troops supported and led by Soviet, East German and Cuban officers . At the request of the Ethiopian government, thousands of Cubans helped .
 U.S. Secretary of State, Cyrus Vance, does not foresee normalization of relations with Cuba due to presence of Cuban troops in Africa . Cyrus Vance says he does not see normalization due to the presence of Cuba troops in African Africa .
 Castro calls for removal of U.S. military bases from Guantanamo Bay . Castro also calls for the removal of United States military bases . Castro: "I want Guantanamo Bay to be a place of refuge"
 Bombings of Cuban U.N. Mission, Cuban Interests Section, and Soviet Mission by anti-Castro exile groups follow throughout the fall . Bombings continue throughout the year .
 United States government announces that the full force of the law will be used against those responsible for the July terrorist actions . U.S. government announces full force to use against those behind July terror attacks .
 Ted Weiss introduces unsuccessful legislation to end the U.S. trade blockade against Cuba and re-establish diplomatic relations . Weiss introduced unsuccessful legislation .
 Cuba develops close relations with the Sandinista government in Nicaragua . Cuba has close ties with the government of Nicaragua since 1979 .
 Castro is elected chair of the Nonaligned Movement in Havana, Cuba, in 1982 . At a meeting of the sixth summit of the nonaligned movement in Havana he is elected head of the movement . Castro serves until 1982, when he was elected chair .
 A new penal code takes effect, replacing the criminal code passed in 1936 . New penal code replaces a criminal code that was passed by 1936 .
 We had been given a little food and medicine, but we had no idea what it was like out there beyond the bars . We had to go to the bars to find out what life was like in the streets beyond bars .
 In the 1980s, he was a prize winning investigative journalist who traveled abroad frequently . He was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for his work .
 'From Dream To Reality', a report on the Soviet Space Program and its prospects in 1985 . From Dream to Reality', Soviet space program was published by the Soviet Union in 1984 .
 Ten years later, he was marooned in the squalor of centro Habana, Havana's most dilapidated and desperately poor neighborhood . He began writing a series of shocking vignettes about the decay engulfing Havana .
 The stories were brought together to form the Havana Cycle, better known as the Dirty Havana Trilogy . The trilogy was first published in 1998 in Spain after being turned down by Cuban printing houses . It is the first of three novels to be published in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro interview together while sampling Dirty Havana Trilogy to bring into relief the chasm between the high priest of the Revolution and the common people down below .
 I conduct this exercise not to mock Fidel Castro or discredit the genuine gains of the Cuban Revolution, but to juxtapose its lofty ideals and official pronouncements with the sheer madness of the 1990s as the country descended into pure hell . The Cuban Revolution's lofty ideals are juxtaposed with the
 I saw it with my own eyes and I have no doubt that Fidel Castro was fully aware of what was happening . Fidel Castro, Cuban president of Cuba, was aware of the situation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 With China, Vietnam and North Korea, Cuba is considered the last bulwark of socialism . The interview with Fidel Castro begins at 8 p.m. ET .
 They make up the assemblies of their respective municipalities, and nominate candidates to the provincial and national assemblies, the highest bodies of state power at those levels .
 The delegates must receive over 50% of the valid notes in their respective jurisdictions . The delegates, who are chosen through a secret ballot, are chosen by secret ballot . Delegates must receive more than 50% valid notes .
 Since her husband died, she was a filthy mess. She had recently been widowed, and now she lived in fear. She was recently widowed. Now she was living in fear .
 Even squashed flatter than a cockroach, she was still bossy and dictatorial as ever . Even her daughter avoided her .
 "The people can't be neglected this way. When I was at the door, she said, she said, "When I was . at the . door," she said .
 "This building is falling to pieces, there's never any water, or gas, or food," says survivor . "There is never any food or gas," she says . "This is a very dangerous situation," she adds .
 "We made a pact to live together and love each other forever, she with her sculptures and me with my novels," she says . "She and me made a deal: We love eachother forever, and she loves us all the time."
 In those days, she called me daddy and she was very longing and she'd say, ""I really need you, daddy," she said . "In those days she called him daddy"
 She'd had solo shows, been toasted with California wine, and sold her drawings for a thousand dollars each . She'd sold her paintings for a minimum of $1,000 .
 She pointed out the gallery owner and little fag who helped her hang the show, and her cousin and her neighbors, who were there too . And she pointed out that she also had a cousin and a little faggie .
 The U.S. has two parties that are so perfectly similar in their methods, objectives and goals that they have practically created the most perfect one-party system in the world . Fidel Castro — The United States, such a vocal advocate of multi-party systems, has a perfect one
 Over 50% of the people in that ""democratic country"" do not even cast a vote . The team that manages to raise the most funds often wins with the votes of only 25% the electorate .
 The political system is undermined by disputes, vanity and personal ambition or by interests groups operating within the established economic and social model . There is no alternative for a change in the system and there is no choice, says Labour leader David Cameron .
 They built flimsy rafts out of tires, board, and ropes . They set out to sea as merrily as if they were on their way to a picnic . Pedro Juan Gutierrez — They built rafts .
 For four years, people had been starving and going mad in Havana, but Havana suffered most . "For four years," says President Vladimir Putin . "Hague suffered most. For four . years"
 The developed capitalist system, which later gave rise to modern imperialism, has finally imposed a neoliberal and globalized order that is simply unsustainable . Fidel Castro says the order is unsustainable . Castro: The developed capitalism system is finally imposed by the globalized world .
 It has created a world of speculation where fictitious wealth and stocks have been created that has nothing to do with actual production . It has been created by speculators who want to create fictitious wealth .
 Pedro Juan Gutierrez talks to a taxi driver who lost his job in the crisis and now is gambling for a living . Gutierrez: "I went to see Joseito, a taxi . Joseito" is a former taxi driver . Gutierrez talks about the crisis in Mexico .
 The police made a sweep sometimes and wiped out two or three, locked everybody up for a few days, and then let them go, police say . The police often wiped out people and locked them up for several days, then released them .
 I had three hundred pesos in my pocket, and Joseito convinced me to play . "Joseito convinced him to play," says Juanito .
 "I never win anything when I gamble, but he was ranking it in from the start," he said of his gamble . "He never won anything when he gambled, but I never win nothing when I gambled," he added .
 Federico Mayor: "Despite all the difficulties it has had to confront, the regime that you established has endured" "Federico Mayor" says . Federico mayor: Despite difficulties, despite all of the difficulties the regime has endured .
 Fidel Castro: "The tireless struggle and work alongside the people and for the people" Fidel Castro was the leader of Cuba in the 1950s and 1960s . Fidel Castro is the Cuban leader of the Cuban Revolution .
 The fact that we have settled for convictions and acted accordingly that we believe in humankind and not in being our country's slaves and not its masters, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We believe in building upon solid principles, in seeking out and producing solutions, even in apparently impossible and unreal conditions . That is in preserving the honesty of those with the highest political and administrative responsibilities, that is, in transforming politics into a priesthood .
 This could be a partial answer to your question, setting aside many other elements related to our country and this historical era . This is not the only answer to that question .
 The poor man, or slave, it makes no difference what you call him, can't afford to have a complex ethical code or demand much from his pride, since he's always in danger of starving to death . "The poor man" is a slave or slave .
 Men make things more complicated, wanting to rebel, take stands, and all that. But we men make things a little more complicated . We want to rebel and take stands. We want men to rebel .
 Our national currency experienced an extraordinary devaluation, and the budget deficit reached 35% of our gross domestic product . The budget deficit in the country's budget deficit was 35% .
 "In spite of this, we did not close down a single heath care center, a single school or daycare center, or a single university, or sports facility," the mayor says . "We are not closing down any of these facilities," he says .
 Nobody was fired and left on his own without employment or social security, even when fuel and raw materials were most scarce . Nobody was left without social security or employment without employment .
 There was not even a trace of the customary and hideous shock policies so highly. There was even no trace of those so highly highly. 'There were not even traces of ... shock policies'
 Pedro Juan Gutierrez fell off a bus and they took him to the hospital!"" — I had to get hold of myself. "Pedrojoan fell off the bus," Gutierrez said . Gutierrez: "I had to hold myself. I'm not going to go crazy."
 "They told me which hospital he had been taken to, and I shot off like an arrow. They told me what hospital he was taken to," he said .
 It was the worst hospital in Havana, the dirtiest and most godforsaken of them all . It was Havana's worst hospital, Havana's 'worst' hospital . Havana hospital was the 'worst hospital in Cuba'
 The boy and a teacher had already been there for two hours, and no one had attended them . No one attended the boy and teacher after they had been there two hours .
 He had been hanging out the door of a crowded bus, when he started to lose his grip . He was hanging out of the door when he lost his grip on the door .
 Pedrojoan was head over heels in the street, the bus still going forty miles an hour. But the asshole said, ""So fall, what do I care?"" And then he said, "I'm falling. I'm falling.""
 Fidel Castro: "We have opened up the economy to the extent that it has been possible and necessary" Castro: Castro's government has opened up Cuba's economy . Castro: We have opened the economy, and it is necessary to do so, to open it up .
 We have not gone for the same insanity and follies as in other places, where recommendations of European and American experts have been followed as if they were Biblical prophets . We are not going for the 'insanity' and 'foolies' as some other countries have followed experts'
 This happened, as we all know, in both former socialist countries and in others that never were socialists, under the pious, tolerant, and complicit cover of the neoliberal philosophy that has become a universal pandemic . This happened in both ex-socialist countries and others who never were socialist
 The West is well aware of where the money is deposited and what has happened to the embezzled or stolen funds, but nobody has said a word about it . Nobody has said anything about it. The West knows where the funds are deposited and where they are deposited .
 It had been thirty-five years since vendors were heard in full cry in Cuba . The Cuban Revolution was the first major uprising in the country's history .
 Now they are starting up again, but fearfully, whispering in the customer's ears, sometimes so softly and rapidly they couldn't be understood . Now they were starting up . Now fearfully whispering .
 Once in a while a policeman would ""confiscate" a bag full of pizzas or hamburgers and take all the vendor's money for good measure . The incident occurred in the 1970s .
 The guy would hand everything over, terrified, because otherwise he'd be slapped with fines, a trial, and a criminal record . The guy was terrified to hand over everything, even though he would face a trial or criminal record, he said .
 Federico Mayor: The demise of the U.S.R. suddenly deprived Cuba of precious aid . He says the demise of Cuba has deprived the island nation of precious resources . Mayor: Cuba has been deprived of vital aid from the United States for decades .
 Fidel Castro: They were not trying to influence the Revolution but to destroy it . Fidel Castro — They were ... trying to ... destroy it. Fidel Castro . Castro: Fidel Castro was not a dictator, but a dictator .
 Pedro Juan Gutierrez: I was buying food outside the city and bringing it back and selling it in Havana . I was getting food from outside Havana and bringing back it back to Havana . He was buying and selling food outside Havana, bringing it to Havana, Havana .
 Anything would sell, from heads of garlic to lemons, even ox meat, whatever could be found . Anything would be sold, including ox meat and heads of lemons .
 The farmer could barely hold the men off, a crowd with machetes, knives, and sacks . The farmer had to hold on to a crowd of men who attacked the farmer . The incident happened in the village of Nairobi .
 The animal was sick when it died and that it was rotting quickly, farmer said . Farmer explained that the animal died when it was sick and rotting quickly . Farmer said the animal had been sick and was rotting rapidly .
 All they were asking was to be allowed to take a piece of it, and they would bury the head and the hooves themselves, and whatever else was left of the mangy, skeletal beast, covered in green flies .
 The Cuban people can easily overcome the embargo, says Federico Mayor . But, this does not mean that the continuation of the embargo is another test that the Cuban people must overcome .
 The blockade, of course, is a painful burden for each and every Cuban, says Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro: The blockade is a "painful burden" for all Cubans .
 The Third World nations, as well as most of the U.N. member countries, have repeatedly demanded lifting of the blockade .
 This just kept getting worse, and everyone was trying to get out however they could, go somewhere else . "This is not the end of the day," says one of the survivors . "We're going to try and find a way to get away from this situation," she says .
 Carlitos, born and raised in the midst of chaos, called his mother and brother every day, crying . Carlitsos called his mom and brother daily, crying, crying. "I love you, you love you," he says .
 'He was spending a fortune on phone calls and he wasn't concentrating his interests or energy on anything concrete,' says CNN's John Sutter . 'He wasn't doing anything concrete. He was ... not concentrating his energy and energy on something concrete,' he said .
 All conditioning becomes unacceptable when the inalienable principles of our homeland are involved . In any case, all conditioning become unacceptable when it becomes unacceptable . The U.S. should not be conditioning itself, it says .
 The political organization adopted by a sovereign nation cannot be subjected to conditions. It cannot be subject to conditions such as conditions. The political organizations adopted by sovereign nations cannot be .
 Cuba will neither negotiate nor sell out its Revolution, Cuba says . Cuba's Revolution has cost the blood and the sacrifice of many of its sons and daughters, says President Obama .
 Three weeks passed, and nothing strange happened . Pedro Juan Gutierrez was arrested and charged with drug possession .
 In the early hours of the morning, we tried to pick up a dirty old man . We tried to get a dirty man. We're trying to get him back to his old days . We're not afraid to get back to the streets .
 When I moved him so two of us could lift him and carry him to the truck, we saw he was lying in a puddle of blood . We saw him lying in the puddle, he said. When I lifted him up, I realized he was in a bloody puddle
 He vomited up some black blood; at the same time he clutched a sack of mangoes . "I'm not going to be surprised," he said .
 The sack was heavy, but he dragged it with him, vomiting black blood on mangoes . He vomited blood on the mangoes, vomitting black blood . He dragged the sack with him and vomited black blood all over his mangoes.
 Cuba will never accept political conditions from the European Union, and much less from the U.S. Cuba will not accept political demands from the EU, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . Cuba has a long history of anti-U.S.-Cuba relations with the United States .
 Pedro Juan Gutierrez started to ask everyone who passed by for money, muttering something indecipherable . He stuck out his hand and started asking everyone for money . He was muttering an unknown word .
 "When you're begging, you can't speak clearly, or try to make sense, or anything like that," says the mother-of-one . "When I'm begging, I can't talk clearly," she says .
 "You're pathetic vermin, a germ begging for a few coins for the love of God," says the man . "You are pathetic . You're pathetic . vermin," he says. "I'm sorry."
 Staring like a moron or an idiot, shoving my upturned palm in people's faces and babbling gibberish. Staring . Staring at people like morons or idiots. Shoving palm in faces and shoving up palm in peoples' faces . Shoving
 "They're all scraping bottom themselves, and they hate anyone who comes complaining to them," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They all scrape bottom themselves," says Sutter. "They hate anyone . coming complaining"
 Since the days of McCarthyism, Washington has tended to consider that the only regimes that are harmful and must be eliminated are the communist regimes . Federico Mayor: The only regime that can be eliminated is the communist regime . Mayor: Washington has always considered eliminating communist regimes as harmful .
 The White House has tolerated, without blinking, the likes of Somoza, Trujillo, Duvalier and others . But the White House tolerated, in the form of tolerance, the like of the likes . The U.S. has been in the throes of a
 Fidel Castro — It would be better not to delve into the hypocrisy and indecency of that policy . Fidel Castro would not be the best-known figure in the world for Cuba .
 The market will dry up some day for the industry of lies; it's drying up already . The market is drying up. The truth is already dry up already, he says. The industry is dying up already.
 The political conception of imperialism, as well as the neoliberal economic order and globalization process imposed on the world, is orphaned and defenseless when it comes to ideas and ethics . If you really delve into the truth, you will realize that the political conception . of imperialism . as well
 It is in this field that the main struggle of our times will be decided, says the president . It will be in the field of politics that the future of the country is decided .
 The final result of this battle, with no possible alternative, will be on the side of truth, and thus on side of humanity . And the final result will be the result of the battle, and that of truth .
 Pedro Juan Gutierrez The Chicano and I drank a lot of beers sitting at a table in the lobby of the Hotel Deauville . Pedro Juan Guellano was a member of the Chicano family in the 1970s .
 On a Sunday night in Central Havana it's dangerous to sit down to drink with a fat, rosy-cheeked white guy . It's dangerous for a fat white guy to drink in Havana, Cuba .
 The hordes of dollars circle around, ready to sink in their fangs . The hordes get a whiff of dollars and circle around .
 Children begging for coins, whores making advances, guys offering rum, tobacco, aphrodisiacs, everything on the black market, at very low prices . Everything on the market, including rum and tobacco, is available for sale at very little cost .
 After socialism and don't bite the hand that feeds you, it was every man for himself . After socialism, it's not only for himself. It's after socialism . After that, it wasn't only for him. After socialism .
 Hillary Clinton defended a social program for medical services, which are beyond the reach of millions of poor people in America, in a speech before Congress . Hillary Clinton has a long history of defending social programs, including health care .
 It was said there were epidemics of conjunctivitis, hepatitis, and who knows what else else . Private stands were closed and private stands were also closed .
 How lovely it must be to come visit for a week and admire the sunsets from a far-off, quiet place without getting too involved with the action .
 Some tasks are highly individual and often manual and craft-like; their large-scale production and technology is not fundamental . Some tasks may be highly individual, often manual, craft-based tasks are not fundamental to large scale production, technology .
 There are investments that require capital, technology and markets, in which associations with foreign companies can be highly advisable . However, there are investments requiring capital and technology that require foreign investments .
 The potential oil deposits in the 110,000 square kilometers of the Gulf of Mexico belong to Cuba . Cuba could not be explored or exploited by our country without technology and capital from abroad, Cuban president says .
 The guy next door was still making tin buckets, but he didn't want a helper . The next door man made tin buckets in his home .
 "If only I could get a job riding with a truck driver, that would be pure happiness," she says . "I would like to ride with a driver," she adds .
 "I'd sell a few joints for him and that way I'd make enough to keep on until who knows when," he says . He says he would sell joints for the man to make money .
 The work of dedicated and almost fanatical lovers of this type of farming should be manual and carried out on small plots of land . No machine or big company could replace the individual work, Fidel Castro says .
 Those with special qualities are given the land they need, free of charge, in order to farm it on their own . Those with these special qualities receive the land, free to charge, for their own use .
 Also procurement and marketing state enterprises have successfully developed . State enterprises have also successfully developed state enterprises in the past .
 He was living in a dump in Mantilla with a f. -up son who spent more time in jail than he spent selling the stuff he brought back from Baracoa .
 He sold coconut oil, coffee, and chocolate too, on the black market . But he made his real money dealing in excellent mountain weed, he says .
 Castro: Our ideology and our preference is socialist, which bears no relation whatsoever to the selfishness, privileges and inequalities of capitalist society . Fidel Castro: "Our ideology ... is socialist" Fidel Castro says .
 In our homeland, nothing will pass into the hands of a high-ranking official, says PM . Nothing will be given away to accomplices and friends, he says .
 "Nothing can be efficiently exploited for the benefit of our society will pass into the hands of either Cuban or foreign individuals," says Cuban President Obama . "We will not be able to efficiently exploit anything that can benefit our society," he says .
 The safest investments in the world are those authorized in Cuba, which are protected by law and by the country's honor . At the same time, I can assure you that the safest investments are in Cuba .
 At the rum dispensary, the line was around the block, but I sidled up, gave the worker a look, and handed him my bottle . Pedro Juan Gutierrez is a native of Puerto Rico .
 If you've got money, there's no reason to stand clutching your ration book and cooling your heels for two hours just to buy a bottle of rum . If you have money, you can buy a rum in a bottle at the end of the day .
 "It pisses them off when someone with money comes along and screws them," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not going to be surprised when someone comes along with money to screw them"
 Fidel Castro: "As to the reference you made to the dollarization of the economy, I should say two things. Fidel Castro says: "I should say that . Fidel Castro — As to the . reference you . made, he should say, "Yes, Fidel Castro" Castro
 After Bretton Woods, the United States acquired the privilege of issuing the U.S. reserve currency of the world economy . The United States is now the world's only reserve currency . The U.N. has the power to issue the world currency .
 There is a national currency in Cuba that is not ruled in any way by the International Monetary Fund . Cuba's national currency is also not ruled by the IMF . The country's currency is not governed by the Fund .
 As I noted earlier, that currency has experience a sevenfold increase in value, and in record time . The currency has experienced a record-breaking sevenfold rise in value .
 "I can say what I want, since now I'm so old they won't do anything to me," he says . "Since now I can . now I . can say whatever I want," he adds .
 "There's no place in the world where the government can take care of everything," says President Obama . Obama: "There is no place for the government to take care for everything"
 "I paid ninety pesos a month in rent, but it was worth it because she wouldn't let anyone fix anything themselves, not even a faucet," she says . "She wouldn't even fix anything herself," she adds .
 A convertible peso has been established, on a part with the dollar, whose free circulation was simply an unavoidable need, not the result of an economic conception, Fidel Castro says . Fidel Castro: "At the same time, a convertible . peso ... is a free circulation of the
 The currency's free circulation will only last for as long as the interests of the Revolution make it advisable . I believe that in the future it will never be necessary again to ban the possession of dollars or other foreign currencies .
 The little girls hustling in Havana are twenty-years-old, and they look like models . They are hustling like models in Havana, Havana, Cuba .
 Police, taxi drivers, hotel concierges and taxi drivers all have deals going with the police . Vicious, too, and they've got deals going to police, taxis and concierge . They've got a deal going with police, cab drivers and hotel conciersiers .
 Fidel Castro attended an international economists meeting in Havana, Cuba . Fidel Castro is a former Cuban president . Castro is the leader of Cuba's first state-run economy .
 Among the participants were representatives of financially distressed countries where debt servicing accounts for over 40% of budget spending . The participants included representatives of financial distressed countries with debt servicing for more than 40% .
 There is clearly a great sense of helplessness in the face of the challenges posed by an inevitable globalization process marked so far by the fatal sign of neoliberalism . The world's most powerful and most powerful nations are in the process of globalization .
 At that meeting, the representatives of the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank defended their points of view with complete freedom . For many of those present the conclusions were very clear regarding the unsustainable nature of the prevailing economic order .
 She's fat, in her fifties, her legs covered with cellulite and big, ugly, purple varicose veins . She is fat and her legs are covered in cellulite, covered in purple veins .
 She kept digging in her nose, absorbed in her boogers . Glancing at me, she raised her eyebrows and kept digging .
 Thank goodness her daughter's a little sex kitten and can take care of herself. Thank goodness she can take her own life, she says .
 Ancient, ugly, and pot-bellied he may be, but he doles out dollars like there's no tomorrow . He may be ancient, but doled out dollars .
 Fidel Castro: "It is not possible to continue along the path that widens the gap between the poor and the rich countries" Castro: It's not possible that the rich and poor will not be able to live together .
 Latin American and Caribbean integration is fundamental. At the moment, Latin American, Caribbean integration, is fundamental, says Carpies .
 It is only by joining together that we can negotiate our role in this hemisphere . The same applies to the Third World countries vis-a-vis the powerful and insatiable club of the wealthy .
 I went back to my room on the roof with its common bathroom, the most disgusting bathroom in the world, shared by fifty neighbors who multiply like rabbits, since most of them are from the east of the island . Pedro Juan Gutierrez is the author of the book, "Portugal's
 In Guantanamo a person joins the police force and then arranges to be transferred to Havana . The whole family is dragged along along with the police .
 Each day no fewer than two hundred people s***, pee, and wash in that bathroom . The bathroom is filled with more than 200 people a day . Each day the bathroom is used by more than 100 people .
 I s*** in a piece of paper and toss the bundle onto the roof of the building next door, which isn't as high . I toss the s*** onto the rooftop of a building that isn't so high, he tosses it onto another building's roof .
 Fidel Castro says the current world economic order is unsustainable and faces a catastrophic collapse . Castro says it faces a real danger of a 'catastrophic collapse' similar to the 1929 crash of the U.S stock market .
 Not even the enthusiastic and highly experienced Allan Greenspan, chairman of the United States Federal Reserve, would dare to claim that this danger does not exist . 50% of U.S. families have placed their debts and invested their savings in the speculative system .
 The remedy to prevent it has not been invented, nor can it be invented within such a system . The remedy is not invented, and can't be invented in such a situation .
 The mouths of the sewers were clogged where they opened onto the bay and s*** was flooding the street in front of the Los Marinos bar . S*** was flooded the street .
 In front of Los Marinos, a group of baby sluts were waiting for customers, very young, pretty, flirtatious, smelling of perfume . "Baby sluts" were waiting in front of customers at the bar .
 It had been a while since Cholo came by this way, but he supposed that one whore was the same as the next, just as it had always been . Cholo was not surprised to find out what had happened to him .
 The girl was surprised that such a disgusting old man would call for her . The girl had been in the care of an elderly man for a week .
 The changes will not spring forth from anyone's head, but the heads must be prepared for these inevitable changes . "The changes will take on a wide variety of forms and follow a variety of paths," says President Obama .
 From my point of view, the changes will fundamentally result from the action of the masses, which nothing would succeed in holding back . From my view of the future, nothing would be held back, he says .
 In its heyday it mimicked the massive banks of Boston and Philadelphia, with their solid, sober facades . The building dates back to 1936 .
 The Malecon's facade is still in good shape, and tourists are amazed by it and take pictures . In fact, tourists are always amazed by the facade, especially as photographed on stormy days .
 "Black men's quarrels and brawls" were common in the early days of the African-American settlement . "The streets were filled with makeshift rooms and makeshift rooms," the author says .
 The blindness, superficiality and irresponsibility of the so-called political class will make the road more difficult, but not impregnable . The blindness of the political class makes it more difficult to find a solution, says Julian Zelizer .
 In the back there was a tiny space for a kerosene stove, and I had to stand hunched over, because a wooden platform with a ladder cut the room in half .
 She put the boy down in one comer, and we took up the rest of the space, f*** frantically for hours . She put him down in a comer and we had to take up the space for hours, she said .
 She kept telling me that no man had ever f*** her that way. Or a little tenderly, at least . She told me that she wanted it to be a very special one .
 "Just as we were in the middle of things, stones and dust started to rain down on us," she says . "We're not going to be able to get back in the air," she adds .
 Fidel Castro: People forget the horrors of the holocaust and genocide that have taken place throughout the century . People forget that every year tens of millions of people starve to death or die of preventable diseases, he says .
 Third World countries can wield statistics of apparently positive growth but in the end things remain the same or even worsen in the Third World . They can wield stats of seemingly positive growth, but they can't be ignored .
 Growth often rests on the accumulation of consumer goods rather than contribute nothing to true development and a better distribution of wealth . Growth often resters on consumer goods than contribute to development .
 The truth is that after several decades of neoliberalism, the rich are becoming increasingly richer while the poor are both more numerous and increasingly poorer . The rich are increasingly richer and more numerous than the poor, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Isabel cooked it Italian style, with lots of garlic, and it was delicious . Isabel cooked the dish Italian style . Isabel said it was 'delicious'
 December came, and I was waiting for the first wind from the north to set out to sea again . December came to be the first time I set out sea again.
 Isabel had decided she wanted to play wife, claiming that Yankees made her sick . Isabel claimed she was sick of the Yankees, but she was not sick .
 They stood in the middle of the roof with Baldomero in his handcuffs carrying the plastic bag . They carried a plastic bag to the roof .
 All the neighbors were watching nervously and suspiciously from their doorways . All the neighbor's eyes were on the scene as they watched nervously .
 Day was dawning, a red-orange stain behind heavy, dirty-gray clouds . Pedro Juan Gutierrez is the author of a novel, "A Day of Days"
 "I had been fishing all night, floating thirteen hundred feet from shore, sitting in the hollow for a little raft made from an inner tube" "I was almost frozen. And I was almost ... almost frozen"
 September and October aren't good months for fishermen . September is a good month for fishermen, but it's not always good month .
 "I was like that old man from Cojimar who went fishing alone in his boat on the Gulf Stream and didn't catch a fish for eighty-four days" "I'm worn down to the bone but never vanquished. I was like a hero in the classic sense, worn
 These days, no one is as stubborn as he was or has such a sense of duty or devotion to their work . These days he was as stubborn and dedicated to his work . He is now a national treasure .
 The stuff heroes are made of gets scarcer every day . That's why politicians and clergymen talk themselves hoarse urging loyalty and solidarity .
 Politicians and clergymen think they can make everything change by sheer force of will, by spontaneous generation . The politicians and the clergymen believe they can change everything . The clergymen are trying to make things change, but the politicians are not so sure .
 We like to break off from the pack and keep watch from a distance, eluding the snapping jaws of our fellows . We are not afraid to break away from each other, but we like to watch from afar .
 Their economies sometimes appear to be doing well according to the macroeconomic figures . But they have fallen prey to major financial and technological powers .
 All of these economies are subject to flights of capital to the wealthy countries, in amounts that nobody fully knows or can calculate . Nobody fully knows how much money has been sent to the rich countries .
 Their weak currencies are defenseless against the attacks of speculators, says the IMF . The weak currencies will not be able to withstand the attacks, says IMF chief .
 The hard currency reserves with which they attempt to defend their economies, are lost in a matter of days when faced with any danger of devaluation . Idle funds that do not contribute to economic and social development are lost . The high cost of idle funds is to protect the country's hard currency
 Incomes earned through privatization that gives away national heritage are lost without providing the slightest benefit . Incomes are earned through a privatization that . gives away .
 The threat of a financial crisis or devaluation leads to overnight flight of all forms of capital, including shortterm loans and funds of nationals terrified by the imminent risk of seeing their savings dwindle .
 The night passed, me sitting slumped on the Malecon, not a cent in my pocket, no rum, no food or food, no joints to puff and get high on . Pedro Juan Gutierrez sat slumped slumped in his chair, not in his pocket, but no money in his
 "I went to bed early, but I slept very badly; it was anxiety, hunger, cockroaches wandering around, a rat gnawing, and a presence in Isabel's room," she says . "I was anxious, hunger and a lot of anxiety," she writes .
 Isabel is bad about caring for the santos, and that's why it's so murky in here . It isn't clear exactly what's wrong, but Isabel isn't sure exactly what it is wrong .
 "For two days there 'd been no water. Finally I slept a little, troubled by nightmares, fears, and a terrible stink of s*** coming from the bathroom"
 Latin America, like the rest of the Third World, is a victim of the international economic order imposed, says President Obama . Latin America's economic order is unsustainable, he says .
 Latin America is in danger of forever losing independence and of being annexed by the U.S., writes David Frum . The countries of Latin America are seduced by deceptive illusions of progress and development, he writes .
 Pedro Juan Gutierrez says he saw a slut in a tiny gold shorts with half her butt hanging out . He says she wore a tight little see-through shirt showing off her naked breasts .
 "There's no way. Lots of times, I've tried to recruit her for our rooftop orgies," she says . "There is no way," she adds .
 Fidel Castro: Living in a consumer society does not necessarily make people educated . Fidel Castro says living in consumer society doesn't necessarily mean people are educated . Castro: "Living in an environment doesn't mean you're educated"
 It is amazing, sometimes, how sometimes their knowledge can be superficial and simplistic . It's amazing how often people's knowledge can become simplistic and simplistic.
 Cuba has raised the average educational level on its people to ninth grade . This is just the beginning of the country's educational revolution . Cuba is raising the average education level to 9th grade .
 In ten years, their average cultural level will be that of a university graduate . That will be comprehensive, not simplistic knowledge, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 No one can prevent our people from achieving the goal of being the most cultivated, in addition to having a profound political culture that is neither dogmatic nor sectarian . A political culture is severely lacking in many of the world's wealthiest nations .
 WE will place at the service of this lofty goal the great technologies created by humankind, while avoiding commercial advertising . WE will use the technology as a service to promote freedom of expression and thought . We will not use commercial advertising.
 Some important event was coming up, maybe the anniversary of some historic occasion or the fall tourist season . Some important events were coming up . This year's events were going to be remembered as important events .
 Some things were important and others weren't important, some things were good and some were bad . Some things are good and bad, but some things are important and some are bad, says author .
 For several years now, we have seen an embryo of opposition being born on the island . Dissident groups are beginning to organize, says Federico Mayor . Mayor: "We have seen several years of dissident groups being born"
 A green Jeep came speeding down San Lazaro, mounted with two loudspeakers and two red flags . Two loudspeakers were mounted with a loudspeaker and two flags .
 It was broadcasting a protest speech, but it was moving so quickly it was impossible to understand . The speech was broadcast so quickly that it was difficult to understand to hear .
 Everything runs off into the ocean, but the kids, and some adults too, come anyway . Everything runs into the water, but some adults come anyway.
 They spend hours in the sun, drinking rum and eating ices, ignoring the sewer smell and enjoying themselves . They ignore the sewage smell and enjoy the sun .
 The tourists take pictures of them, and they stand stock still, laughing or making faces for the camera . The tourists stand still, making faces or laughing for the cameras .
 After each photo, they drop their poses, and the children run for coins . The children run to beg for coins after each photo is taken .
 Our country has been the target of dirty warfare, mercenary invasions and threats of direct military attacks, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin has been accused of using dirty warfare against his country .
 She lived alone on the eighth floor, second from the top, of a building on San Lazaro, in Central Havana . She lived on the 8th floor of the building in Havana, Cuba .
 It depressed her to go out on the balcony and look down on what resembled the aftermath of a bombing, she said . She said: "It depressed me to look down at what resembled a bombing. It depressed me"
 For a long time now, she hadn't even opened the balcony doors . More and more often she took refuge in the memories stored in her wardrobe and dresser drawers .
 When they met, she was a lovely eighteen-year-old girl, and he was a man of forty-nine, a widower, polished and paternal . She was a beautiful girl and a lovely widower when they met .
 She was dazzled by the glamour of it all, and five days later they were married . Five days later, they were engaged .
 It filled up with common people from the provinces, uncouth blacks, ragged, dirty, rude people . The city was filled with people who were "uncleouth blacks" and "ragged"
 The buildings crumbled since no one took care of them, and little by little, they became dormitories . Thousands of people crowded into them like roaches, skinny, underfed, dirty, unemployed people, drinking rum at all hours, smoking marijuana, beating on drums, and
 Nobody was sad or wanted to kill themselves or was terrified for fear the ruins would collapse and bury them alive . Nobody wanted to die or be sad or feared they would be buried in the ruins .
 In the middle of the debacle, they laughed, lived their lives, tried to enjoy themselves as best they could . In the midst of the tragedy, they tried to live their lives .
 Fidel Castro: "Before, they each dreamed of their own happiness, and today, they all dream of happiness for everyone" Fidel Castro says . Fidel Castro is Cuban president of Cuba . Castro says he is proud of his legacy and hopes to continue his legacy .
 All he had to wear was one pair of shorts and one shirt, both old and stained, and a worn-out pair of rubber sandals . He had no choice but to wear the clothes .
 His dream was to go to the United States and live in one of those cities where it snowed and it was cold, where a person could really bundle up . His dream is to live in the U.S. where it's cold and snowy .
 He would v e liked to work as a truck driver or bus driver, marry a blond, blue-eyed American woman, drive around in his super modern truck . He thought it was possible they might turn out like their grandparents, in which case they'd be even blacker than he
 His hair was kinky and he had a big mouth and dark skin, but he didn't quite look black . He had dark skin and hair that looked kinky, but it didn't seem black .
 Ever since he was a kid people called him ""The Moor" because he looked Arab . Ever since . He was called 'The Moor' by people who called him because he was Arab .
 He knew he was handsome, but he wanted to be white, suave, well-dressed, and have lots of money and a car . He wanted a car and a nice house, he said . He said, "I wanted to have a lot of money, a car
 Older men and women were nice, because they were like mothers or fathers as well as lovers, and he never had to worry about money . Older people were nice . Older men were nice. Older women were like their mothers and fathers, he said .
 A floating 1951 Chevy pickup with its drive shaft attached to a propeller is driven across the high seas towards Florida . The drive shaft is attached to the propeller to drive the vehicle across the ocean .
 Cuba's population is slightly more than Michigan's and is just 3.79% the size of the total U.S. population of 301,000,000 . The country is home to the largest population in the United States .
 A demographic crisis awaits Cuba as the working age population stagnates while the number of retirees soars . Cuba's working-age population has stagnated while its retirees are rising . The number of people retiring in Cuba is expected to rise in coming years .
 The U.S. faces a similar crisis as baby boomers retire en masse after 2010 . Baby boomers are retiring en masse in the United States in 2010 .
 Cuba's infant mortality rate of 6.04 per 1000 live births is on a par with infant mortality in the U.S. The rate of infant mortality is on the same level as that of the United States .
 American manufacturing and pharmaceutical companies dominate world markets . Life expectancy in the U.S. is 77. years compared to 77. in the United States .
 Health comparisons between the U.S. and Cuba are highly politicized and emotional issues for Cuban government and general population . United States laws that ban the sale of medicine and medical equipment ban medicine and equipment .
 Most Cubans know someone who suffered or died because for lack of a medicine patented or manufactured only by American companies . The medicine is out of reach of Cubans even if they could afford the oftenexorbitant price .
 The United States embargo foments a black market in prescription drugs that doubles the price of already expensive American medicine . The U.S. embargo is blamed for doubling the cost of prescription drugs .
 The U.S. embargo absorbs the blame and relieves the Cuban government of responsibility for any failures . Whatever shortcomings the Cuban healthcare system may have, the United States embargo absorbs blame . The Cuban government has been blamed for many of the problems .
 Health statistics are a matter of Cuban national pride and even of state security . With this background in mind it becomes clear why health statistics are important to the Cuban government .
 The fact that Cuban public health continues to hold on to its gains even under the crushing weight of the U.S. embargo is of incalculable value in generating internal cooperation in the absence of livable wages as well .
 Favorable public opinion translates in to credit and loans from democratic foreign governments . Public support for democratic foreign loans is key to credit from democratic countries .
 Cuba goes over the top by becoming the physician to the dispossessed of the world . Cuba has become a physician to those who have not been able to reach out to .
 Fidel thrives when the U.S. attempts to use starvation and misery to create intolerable conditions in Cuba . American policy makers have never understood that Fidel thrived when the United States attempts to create starvation and . misery .
 Most Cubans and Latin Americans see the embargo and trade agreements with the U.S. through the biblical parable of a third-world David versus an obscenely rich and immoral gringo Goliath . The embargo and increasingly, trade deals with the United States are seen as a biblical
 The infant mortality rate is a key measuring stick of the health and overall well-being of a population as defined by the United Nations . Infant mortality rates are a key measure of a nation's overall well being . The U.N. says the rate of infant mortality rates is a
 The political and economic capital obtained by Cuban medical missions abroad is measurable in the United Nations general Assembly votes condemning the U.S. embargo and is fungible for billions of dollars in trade, especially Venezuelan oil .
 Venezuela sells 100,000 barrels of oil a day to Cuba for just US$27 a barrel-on credit . Venezuela sells the oil to the Cuban state for just $27 per barrel on credit-on-credit .
 Cheap, high sulfur Venezuelan crude keeps Cuba functioning and her ancient fleet of pre-1960 Detroit muscle on the go . The Cuban government has a long-suffering reliance on Venezuelan crude .
 Cuba has some 20,000 doctors in Venezuela who are concentrated in the poorest sections of the country . The doctors are a big boost to Hugo Chavez's popularity in Venezuela .
 U.S. government under George W Bush is trying to entice Cuban doctors to defect to the United States . Cuban doctors attend to people who have been marginalized all their lives and never received any real medical care .
 It is difficult to overstate the damage this policy does to the image of the U.S. as a country that cares about people . The policy is damaging to the United States as a nation that cares for people .
 The U.S. forfeits the right to lecture others, including Cuba, about human rights when it does all within its enormous power to stop the poor of the world from taking care of themselves, says Julian Zelizer .
 President Obama, as the son of a man not unlike the people Cuba assists today, you can not permit U.S. policy to penalize those living on less than two-dollars a day . President Obama .
 Communist Cuba became dependent on the Soviet bloc, twelve time zones away . Cuba is now dependent on a very provocative leader and living in the shadow of an angry giant . Cuba has been a model of democracy in Latin America .
 Cuba pioneered medical diplomacy as a means to break through diplomatic and economic isolation while taking the high moral ground against the United States . For ideological as well as practical reasons, the Cuban government has taken a moral stand against the U.S.
 Medical diplomacy is the collaboration between countries to improve relations and simultaneously produce health benefits while creating excess returns for Cuba . For Cuba, medical diplomacy is a form of cooperation that helps improve relations between countries .
 Since the triumph of the Revolution, medical diplomacy has been a key element of Cuban foreign policy and foreign aid strategy . Medical diplomacy is a key part of Cuba's foreign policy since the Revolution .
 Cuba launched medical diplomacy in 1960 by sending a team to Chile to provide disaster relief after an earthquake . Despite Cuba's economic difficulties and the exodus of 90% of its doctors, Cuba launched its own medical diplomacy .
 Cuba sent a group of fifty-six doctors and nurses to Algeria with the U.S. embargo in effect . Three years later, Cuba began strategic medical diplomacy by sending the group of doctors to Algeria .
 Cuba has provided medical assistance to scores of developing countries throughout the world ever since . Cuba has since been providing medical help to developing countries in the past .
 After Fidel and after Raul, Chavez will be the new dean of world revolution and socialism of the 21st century . Chavez is Chavez's successor to Fidel Castro and Raul .
 This shift could lead to changes in the perception of the current barter arrangement between the two countries . The shift could change the perception that the countries are trading partners .
 As of early 2009, with the collapse in oil prices, the arrangement should remain stable . The arrangement is expected to remain stable as of 2009 .
 Political changes or improvements of health indices in Venezuela could alter the perceived value of Cuban medical diplomacy . Political changes in Venezuela may alter the value of Cuba's medical diplomacy, experts say .
 The Cuban government's internal stability is vulnerable to changes in the relationship and the political fortunes of Hugo Chavez . The relationship between the Cuban government and the Venezuelan government is fragile .
 Cuban medical diplomacy is looking for new horizons outside the Venezuela relationship . It threatens to destabilize the uneasy status quo in numerous needy countries . Cuba's medical diplomacy has been criticized by some in Venezuela and Venezuela .
 Cubans are upending the nature of doctor-patient relations wherever they practice . By serving the poor in areas in which no local doctor would work, they are making house calls a routine part of their medical practice and by being available free of charge 24/7 .
 A truly progressive U.S. government committed to human rights would finance Cuban missions . The Cuban missions would be funded by a truly progressive American government .
 Since 1960, Cuba's conduct of medical diplomacy has improved the health of the less privileged in developing countries while improving relations with their governments . Cuba has improved relations with developing countries through medical diplomacy .
 Cuban medical aid has improved the lives of millions of people, even in countries allied with the United States . Thousands of developing country medical personnel have received free classes, room and board in Cuba and train with Cuban specialists .
 Cuba does not miss a single opportunity to offer and supply disaster relief assistance regardless of whether or not Cuba is on good terms with a nation's government, even the U.S. Even the United States. Cuba has a long history of disaster assistance .
 Cuba offered to assist New Orleans with free medical care in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina . Cuba also offered to help New Orleans in the immediate aftermath of the storm .
 The Bush administration declined and Fidel knew he would, but the symbolism of the gesture brought him enormous prestige in the eyes of many . Of course, the Bush administration .
 The impact of Cuba's medical diplomacy on other countries has greatly improved its bilateral relations with those countries as well as its standing and support in multilateral organizations . Good health is vital to personal well-being and societal development, the Cuban government says .
 The creation of goodwill requires an initial investment of unrequited sweat equity, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The resulting I.O.U. may be accumulated, invested and spent just like money . It's possible to invest in I.I.U.-style investments .
 Even before the triumph of Revolution, Fidel made the health of the individual a metaphor for the body politic . Fidel made health of individual a symbol for health of body politic, even before triumph of revolution .
 He made the achievement of developed country health indicators a national priority . Therefore, he made it a priority to improve the country's health .
 Cuban health indicators are compared to those of other countries at a similar level of development . President Obama compared them with those of the United States .
 Infant mortality and life expectancy statistics took on enormous significance . Infants were born in the United States at the start of the 20th century . The statistics were important for the nation's first generation .
 Both are considered to be proxy indicators for socioeconomic development because they include a number of other indicators as inputs, including, nutrition, medical services, sanitation, housing and education .
 For internal political reasons, it is important for Cuba to compare favorably with the U.S. for political reasons . The Cuban way is to demonstrate the superiority of the Cuban way, says Josefina Gomez .
 Cuba's favorable socioeconomic indicators are the fruit of capital investments in the people . Cuba's positive socioeconomic indicators yield a more productive workforce, but also bolster the conditioned power of ideological belief .
 Fidel Castro says human rights are at the center of his rebuttal of U.S. objections by the United States . Fidel Castro: Human right's objections to human rights in Cuba are at center of Cuba's human rights .
 Fidel Castro has dedicated considerable time to discussing world-class health indicators in speeches . Fidel has dedicated much of his major speeches to discussing them .
 Cuba's infant mortality rate was 5. per 1000 live births, less than that of the United States, which was 7. per birth in 2002 . The United States had a rate of 7.per birth in the U.S. in 2002, the highest in the world .
 These achievements are watched closely and are worth billions of dollars in advertising . The success of these achievements is worth billions in advertising.
 Even more striking is the change in the ratio of doctors to population . Doctors to population has increased in the past few years .
 Fidel's 1984 family doctor plan was part of a plan to put a doctor on every block . Fidel Castro wanted to put every block in order to have a doctor at every corner . Fidel was assassinated in 1968 .
 Cuba's accomplishments in health are not just in primary care or in the graduation of doctors . Cuba's achievements in health include primary care, education and medical training . Cuba has a long history of improving its quality of health .
 Cuba shares its expertise through numerous international medical conferences that it holds every year and through scientific exchanges . Cuba shares expertise through international conferences and scientific exchanges, Cuba says .
 Cuba publishes fifty-four professional medical journals and makes itself a world player in the discovery of new medicines . Research is crucial to the operation of a health campaign and can lead to badly needed income, Cuba says .
 As early as 1982, the U.S. government recognized Cuba's success in the health sphere in a report that affirmed that the Cuban health system was superior to those of other developing countries and rivaled that of many developed countries .
 Cuba increased its spending on domestic health as a percentage of G.D.P. in order to shield the most vulnerable population from the worst effects of the Special Period . Despite economic hardship during the 1990s after the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the subsequent 75% plunge in trade along
 The initial deterioration in the population's health indicators was only temporary . Fortunately, it worked, and the initial deterioration of health indicators were only temporary.
 Even some U.S. analysts who oppose Fidel Castro agree that Cuba's health system has produced impressive results despite material shortages . Cuba has always been plagued by material shortages, but Cuba's system has always had a good system .
 Cuban medical diplomacy is producing positive effects in recipient countries, some critics say . Some critics also recognize, albeit reluctantly, that medical diplomacy has produced positive effects .
 Cuba's support for the Cuban government quickly translated into political backing in the United Nations . Angola, Iraq and other countries that could afford to pay fees for professional services rendered, albeit the charges were considerably below market rates . This quickly generated considerable admiration for Cuba .
 Fidel announced in 1984 that Cuba would train 10,000 new doctors specifically to increase the volume of international medical aid . Fidel made the announcement in 1984 . Fidel said in 1984 he would train doctors to increase international aid .
 Only Cuba trains doctors with the intent of sending them abroad like a cash crop . Only Cuba does this, sending doctors abroad to be sent abroad like cash crop.
 Fidel unsuccessfully sought financial support and oil from Venezuelan president Romulo Betancourt in 1959 . In 1959 Fidel unsuccessfully tried to get financial support from Venezuela's president . Cuba, Venezuela, Bolivia are all three countries in the Middle East .
 It would take forty years and many economic difficulties before another Venezuelan president, Hugo Chavez, would provide the preferential trade, credit, aid and investment the Cuban economy desperately needed . The Cuban economy would need preferential trade and credit, credit and investment .
 This partnership is part of the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas to unite and integrate Latin America in a social justice-oriented trade and aid block under Venezuela's lead . This partnership will be part of a block of Latin America to unite .
 It also has created an opportunity to expand Cuba's influence well beyond anything hitherto . Cuba has created a chance to expand its influence beyond anything previously seen .
 The most impressive Cuban medical mission ever attempted is the present one with Venezuela . The mission is the most impressive medical mission to date .
 Cuba-U.S. oil-for-doctors trade agreements have paid off for Cuba . Cuba is a key ally of the U.S.-Cuba relations with the Latin American nation .
 The accords allow for preferential pricing for Cuba's exportation of professional services vis-a-vis a steady supply of Venezuelan oil . They also allow joint investments in strategically important sectors for both countries .
 An additional agreement included the expansion of the Western Hemisphere wide ophthalmologic surgery program to perform 600,000 eye operations over ten years . The agreement also includes an agreement to expand the program in the Western hemisphere .
 By 2007 there were over 35,000 medical personnel providing services through Barrio Adentro I, the primary health care program of Venezuela . By 2007, there were 35,000 doctors providing services .
 They made 30 million house calls, something previously unheard of on that scale and in those locales . It was a first time that such a large number of house calls had been made .
 During the same period, under Barrio Adentro II, 10,856 histological exams were conducted, 84. million clinical laboratory exams were done, 808,153 CAT scans and 47,454 nuclear magnetic resonance exams were performed, among others .
 The newly established Comprehensive Diagnostic Centers handled 886,609 emergency room visits and performed 7. million diagnostic exams . Comprehensive Rehabilitation Wards also established under Barrio Adentro II handled 520,401 rehabilitation consultations .
 Over 1,500 Cuban doctors provide pro-bono care in Bolivia, particularly in impoverished rural areas . Bolivia's second largest medical community operates with over 1,000 doctors .
 Cuba has provided the National Ophthalmologic Institute in La Paz with modern equipment and specialists . Bolivian doctors and recent graduates from the Latin American Medical School have treated over 3,000 patients .
 New accords stipulate the opening of two additional ophthalmologic centers . One in Cochabamba and another in Santa Cruz will open .
 The La Paz center will permit doctors to attend to one hundred patients daily . Each one will be able to treat fifty patients a day . The center will also allow doctors to treat one hundred people daily .
 Bolivia will have the ability to perform ophthalmologic operations on a minimum of 50,000 patients annually . Bolivian doctors will be able to perform operations on at least 50,00 patients a year . Bolivia will also have the power to perform eye surgery on a maximum of 50
 Cuban sources indicate that by the end of 2008, their medical teams had assisted one million Bolivians free of charge and performed 23,000 ophthalmologic operations . Cuba's medical teams have assisted 1million Bolivian free of all costs .
 In 2008, there were some 1,500 Bolivians studying at the school . Another 3,000 have started the pre-med course . Bolivian students are also studying in the school.
 Cuba provides the six-year medical school free of charge to low-income students . Students commit to practice medicine in under served communities in their home countries upon graduation . Cuba also provides medical education free to students .
 The benefit to millions of underserved people worldwide will be incalculable and the political payoff Cuba and Venezuela will be huge . The political payoff for Venezuela and Cuba and Cuba is huge, says President Obama .
 Students trained by Cuba and Venezuela will ascend the ranks of academia, media and government in their own countries . Like a high-yield bond that keeps paying, the geopolitical benefits will be reaped for years to come .
 Medical students who Cuba trained as doctors in the 1970s are now in positions of authority and increasing responsibility . Today, medical students who trained in Cuba now hold positions of responsibility . Cuba's medical students are now leading doctors in Cuba .
 Cuba has provided free medical care in its own hospitals for individuals from all over Latin America regardless of political affiliation . During this time, Cuba has also provided free health care for all over the region .
 In 1998, under Haitian President Rene Preval, Cuba began its medical mission with Haiti . Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the Western Hemisphere .
 The U.S. government must learn from it and emulate it to earn the title of leader of the free world . This marvelously cost-effective operation brings medical attention to people who would otherwise not receive it, he says .
 Jamaicans too have been going to Cuba for free eye surgery as part of Operation Miracle . Operation Miracle is part of a program that aims to improve the quality of eye surgery in Cuba .
 A spokesperson for the Jamaican Health Ministry indicated that patients reported positive feedback on the surgeries that had been administered in Cuba . A spokesperson said that patients had positive feedback about the surgeries .
 The number of patients who subsequently reported complications amounted to less than three per cent of the 2,300 patients who were treated in Cuba as of 2008 .
 Cuba has offered disaster relief over the years to every country that has experienced a catastrophe . Cuba has been offering disaster relief to all countries that have experienced a disaster .
 Women in the remote highlands of Pakistan began naming their newborns Fidel . Women in Pakistan's highlands are known as Fidelis .
 Cuba now has a long, successful track record in raising health and quality of life indicators at home and abroad, often under difficult circumstances . Cuba has a track record of raising health, quality and life indicators in difficult circumstances, experts say .
 Wealthy donor governments feel comfortable financing Cuban medical missions to third countries in what is called triangular trade in aid in aid . Wealthy donors feel comfortable with financing Cuban missions to other countries .
 Japan stepped up and provided two million doses of vaccines for 800,000 children . US$ 57 million to equip a hospital in Honduras where a Cuban medical brigade works . Japan also provided US$57 million for medical equipment in Honduras .
 Multilateral agencies, such as the World Health Organization and the Pan American Health Organization also finance medical services provided by Cuba for third countries .
 Both organizations provided funding for Cuba's medical education initiatives . Both organizations were involved in funding for Cuban medical education .
 Cuba's Comprehensive Health Program is supported by 85 NGOs and through triangular trade in aid has received US$ 2.97 million in support . Cuba's comprehensive Health Program has received more than US$2.97million in support from NGOs in recent years .
 In the 1970s and 80s Cuba dispatched large civilian assistance programs in Africa to complement its military support of Marxist governments in Angola and Ethiopia . In the 80s and 70s, Cuba dispatched military support to support Marxist governments .
 With the fall of the Soviet bloc, Cuba's program was scaled back severely, but not disbanded . The program has since been scaled back, but never disbanded .
 South Africa began importing Cuban doctors in 1996 . South Africa has suffered a post-Apartheid brain drain since apartheid .
 On the African continent, South Africa finances some of the Cuban medical expeditions in third countries . South Africa also helps fund some of Cuba's medical missions .
 This South African-Cuban alliance is much more limited in scope than the Venezuelan and Cuban arrangements . The South African alliance is more limited than that of Venezuela's . South Africa-Venezuela alliance is less limited to scope than this .
 Comprehensive Health Program was in Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chad, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, GuineaConkary, Equatorial Guinea, Mali, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
 Cuban medical teams have also worked in East Timor since 2004 to create an independent healthcare system . Cuba has also worked to create a free healthcare system in the island nation of Dali .
 Cuban disaster relief medical missions are still providing assistance in post-tsunami Indonesia and post-earthquake Pakistan .
 Cuba sent a medical team and equipment to provide disaster relief . Shortly after the tsunami, Cuba sent medical teams to help with relief .
 They also were providing some preventive as well as curative care on their visits to refugee camps .
 Less than a week after the devastating October 2005 earthquake in Pakistan, Cuba sent a team of highly experienced disaster relief specialists to Pakistan . The team comprised of 2300 doctors, nurses and medical technicians .
 The rest worked in thirty field hospitals located across the quake-estricken zone .
 The team brought everything they would need to establish, equip, and run those hospitals . The team also brought equipment to establish and equip the hospitals .
 In May 2006, Cuba sent fifty-four emergency electrical generators as well . Cuba sent 50,000 emergency generators in May 2006 .
 Cuba has consistently offered or provided aid to Armenia, Iran, Turkey, Russia, and all Latin American countries that have suffered natural or man-made disasters . The Cuban government has consistently provided assistance to those affected by natural disasters .
 In 1990 I visited a Havana hospital and met Ukranian children recovering from the 1986 Chernobyl disaster . In 1990, I visited Havana hospital where I met children from Chernobyl . I visited the children in the hospital and told them they were recovering .
 They continued to receive care throughout the worst of the Special Period . Incredibly, they continued to be treated throughout the most serious period .
 Free medical education allows Cuba to inculcate its values in young people worldwide . Among other things, free medical education is a key to Cuba's success .
 Cuban medical specialists have either established medical schools or lectured in medical faculties in Angola, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, Nicaragua, and Yemen . They have lectured at universities in both countries .
 Graduation levels peaked in the 1980s before the fall of the Soviet bloc . Graduation rates peaked at the peak of the 1970s and 1980s .
 The Latin American Medical School was established in 1998 specifically to train students from poor communities in Latin American and African countries . It was set up specifically specifically for poor students .
 There were 10,661 foreign medical students from 27 countries studying in Cuba at the ELAM during the 2005-2006 academic year .
 As I have traveled across Latin America, I have observed the health and welfare of parents and children from Buenos Aires to Monterrey, I realized I could quickly deduce much about a person by good or bad teeth .
 In Cuba, everyone seems to have perfect teeth and gums . Cuba is home to the world's best teeth and teeth .
 Graduates from these medical schools take the National Final Cuban Examinations at the end of their program . They then do an internship in their home countries . Graduates take the national final Cuban Exams and then do internships .
 They then take their home country's qualifying examination to become licensed to practice medicine . Then they take their own country's qualification examination to be licensed to practise medicine .
 The training of foreign future leaders in the medical field who owe their success to Fidel's Cuba ensures that the U.S. embargo will never work . The United States embargo will not work. It will never stop the training of future leaders .
 Cuba's medical diplomacy forms the bedrock of Cuba's charm offensive to isolate the United States and it has succeeded . Cuba has succeeded in isolating the U.S. by using medical diplomacy .
 United Nations action on issues critical to Fidel's Cuba is overwhelmingly in Fidel's favor . U.N. action on Cuba's human rights abuses and an end to the U.S. embargo is in favor of the Cuban leader .
 Cuba was elected to the United Nations Human Rights Council by direct, secret ballot in which all member states were elected individually and not in blocs . All member states of the U.N. Human rights council are elected individually, not in blockings .
 The State Department is aware that in 2005 General Assembly votes, only Israel, the Marshall Islands and Palau supported the U.S. embargo on Cuba .
 Among Cuba's trading partners, voting coincidence with the United States ranked between 6 and 22 % during 2005 . Among the U.S. trade partners, Cuba's trade partners ranked 6 to 22 % .
 President Obama, you said you would go before the United Nations to let the world know America is back . President Obama said he would go to the U.N. to show the world how much of America has come back .
 Clearly, Cuba's medical diplomacy is a contributing factor to this pattern, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Rather than isolating Cuba, it is the U.S. that is out of step . Rather than isolate Cuba, the United States is not isolating it, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Cuba is an influential member of the Non-Aligned Movement and was elected its leader . Far from being marginalized by Washington's anti-Castro offensive, Cuba is influential in non-aligned world .
 The amount of trade between Cuba and MERCOSUR is small, but the agreement was geopolitically important for its timing . It was released just before the release of the Commission for a Free Cuba's tough report .
 Cuba's export earnings from medical diplomacy are now a key source of income . Cuba's medical diplomacy is now a major source of revenue for the island nation .
 Data on the breakdown of benefits is difficult to establish, not least of all because the Cubans are understandably circumspect in providing information . Data on benefits is hard to establish .
 Rates paid to Cuba for doctors have ranged from zero to some rate well below U.S. market prices . Rates for doctors in Cuba have been well below United States market prices for doctors .
 Rates depend more on the recipient's ability to pay than any other factor . Rates depend on whether the recipient is able to pay more than other factors . Rates vary depending on how much money you have to pay .
 The amounts are no doubt truly significant and rival earnings from tourism . Nonetheless, the amounts are truly significant, and rival tourism .
 The Economist Intelligence Unit estimated that the increase in non-tourism services exports between 2003 and 2005 was US$1. billion . Non-Tourism services are ahead of gross tourism receipts of US$2. billion in 2005, the report says .
 Official data for export earnings from medical products (medicines and equipment) were below US$100 million in 2004, but there have been press reports citing a figure of US$300 million for such products .
 Cuba also exports biotechnology products to 40 countries but does not release sales data . Cuba does not reveal sales data for biotechnology exports .
 Two important earnings streams are the licensed manufacture of Cuban medicines in other countries and as well as joint venture production facilities abroad .
 Havana officials emphasized the importance of these ventures but do not provide details . Havana officials say they are working on a similar project in the city .
 Cuba has licensing agreements, including one in the U.S. for anti-cancer drugs . Cuba also has a joint venture production facility in China .
 Treatment facilities have been built in other countries, particularly in the field of ophthalmology, under agreement with Venezuela . Treatment facilities were built in Venezuela under agreement .
 The oil-for-doctors barter is critical to Cuba's economy because of preferential and stable pricing for Cuba's professional services exports . Venezuela insulates Cuba from any escalation of oil prices, like the U.S. did .
 In late 2008 oil prices collapsed and remain low as of this writing, but low oil prices are a temporary condition resulting from the deflationary financial crisis . Low oil prices have been a temporary state of the economy .
 Between 2002 and 2006 OPEC authorized US$50 million in grants for a range of Cuban physical development programs abroad . OPEC also authorized $50 million for Cuban physical education programs .
 He offered Cuba's wealth of experience in health and education to support that agenda . Cuba's experience in education and health is key to Cuba's future, he said .
 In these remarks, he laid down a gauntlet not only for the Bush Administration, but also for the U.S. President .
 The export of Cuban doctors also provides a safety valve for disgruntled medical professionals . Cuban doctors earn much less at home than less skilled workers in the tourism sector .
 Their opportunities for enrichment abroad are high both within the parameters of medical diplomacy and even more so beyond it . Their opportunities are high in medical diplomacy, and beyond it, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Bush Administration changes Cuba policy to facilitate immigration to the United States for Cuban doctors sent abroad by Cuba . The change is an effort to break the oil-for-doctors trade that supports the Cuban economy .
 Bush administration was to tempt Cuban doctors with vastly increased earnings and an incomparably superior material quality of life in the U.S. as a strategy to foil Cuban medical diplomacy at the expense of those most in need .
 President Obama, we both know that enticing Cuban doctors to claim asylum and then claiming they are fleeing repression is not the American Way . President Obama and Cuban doctors should not have been allowed to stay in the U.S.
 The Bush administration tried to destroy Cuba's medical diplomacy program . U.S. foreign policy has been adrift without a moral compass, says Julian Zelizer .
 In Latin America, the U.S. is seen as having an ulterior motive and does not get the respect it deserves . The United States is seen in Latin America as having a motive for its actions .
 As you travel around the world, you sell America by selling yourself, and it's working . As you . sell yourself, sell yourself to the world by selling your country . It's working.
 Your speech to Iran and trip to Turkey will generate more good will and understanding than billions spent on advertising in the Muslim world. Your V.O.A.A.'s visit to Iran will generate good will, understanding, rather than billions of dollars spent in advertising .
 But gestures must be followed by deeds or the world public will label you a hypocrite within 12 months . The world public must be aware of what they are doing, says David Cameron .
 Walter Lippmann: "Even when they have been seduced and subverted, the right thing to do is to keep the way open for their return.""
 If there are scarcities of food or medicine, that there be no doubt about who is responsible . If there is scarcity of food and medicine, it will not be easy to find out who's responsible .
 Sen. Ruben Navarrette: "They will do as good a job as any trained diplomat in conveying American values to the Cuban people"
 Democratic countries that wish to help the Cuban people should recognize the existence of a new situation that calls for new thinking . Christopher Dodd, 1999: Democratic countries should recognize that situation . Dodd: "The Cuban people need help. They need help"
 "The goal would be to contribute to creating a less tense atmosphere," he says . "Hardliners would be difficult for the hardliners to obtain alibis to cultivate false nationalism," he adds .
 Cuban Americans should be allowed to visit the island and help their family and friends economically without restriction . Immediate steps could be taken such as permitting Cuban Americans to visit Cuba .
 This step would make people who receive assistance more independent of the totalitarian state . It would make those who receive help more independent from the state more independent .
 It would also be very valuable to promote exchanges between the U.S. and Cuban people in all spheres, including cultural, academic, scientific, and sports . Dr. Juan Carlos Vidal says it's important to promote exchange between the two countries .
 McDonnell Douglass DC-8 exploded at altitude as it approached Barbados in 1976 . People, including Cuba's teenaged Olympic fencing team, were killed .
 The incident remains the first and only mid-air bombing of a civilian airliner in the Western Hemisphere . association with the downing of flight 455 sullies the good name of the U.S. A
 Even now in 2008, U.S. jurisprudence, precedent, political expediency and tradition oblige our country to defend and protect those who would hijack airliners and ships, kidnap, take hostages or commit murder of their own countrymen as long as they're Cuban
 The embargo has extended Fidel and Raul Castro's lease on power indefinitely . Cuba's political evolution is frozen in time... just like the cars on the Malecon . As we shall see, the embargo has become much more than a prohibition on commercial intercourse .
 A had concrete advance intelligence on generalized plans by Cuban exile terrorist groups to bomb a Cuban airliner . The Cuban exile terror groups planned to bomb the Cuban airliner, authorities say .
 The national security archive posted documents showing that the F.B.I's attache in Caracas had multiple contacts with one of the Venezuelans who placed the bomb on the plane, and provided him with a visa to the U.S. five days before the bombing .
 The highly detailed intelligence was provided by a source known as ""a former Venezuelan government official"" who ""is usually a reliable reporter,"" according to the classified report .
 The case came to public attention in 2005 after Posada attempted to sneak into the U.S. under an assumed name . Posada was caught by United States Customs at the Mexican border at the border .
 President Bush correctly believed that the Bush clan would be sympathetic to him . The Bush clan was sympathetic to Obama's efforts to win the presidency .
 Venezuelan government considers him a terrorist fugitive . After living in Miami unmolested by law enforcement, he was detained after vocal diplomatic protests by the Venezuelan government .
 Venezuelan authorities requested his extradition back to Caracas where he escaped in 1985 after being incarcerated for the bombing of Flight 455 . Venezuelan authorities have asked him to be extradited to Venezuela .
 The reader is advised that Posada was a fugitive from Venezuelan justice decades before Hugo Chavez became president of that country . Posada is a fugitive of Venezuelan justice from decades before Chavez was president .
 Bush administration's refusal to extradite a convicted airplane bomber has damaged U.S. credibility in Latin America . Bush administration invoked 9-11 attacks as rationale for its foreign policy .
 The press agencies of Cuba, Venezuela and much of Latin America have informed hundreds of millions of people about this and will not let them forget about it . The press agency of Venezuela and Cuba, Cuba and many of the Latin American countries, will not forget it .
 The Archive also posted a declassified C.I.A. summary that provided new details of Agency ties to Posada and Bosch in the 1 960s and 70s . He called on the Agency to fully declassify its voluminous files on Posada .
 The C.I.A. continued to maintain relations with Posada after he became a high ranking official in the Venezuelan secret police, DISIP, between 1967 and 1974 . Posada's work for the Agency remains censored in the document .
 The C.I.A. also admitted that it had multiple contacts with Orlando Bosch in 1962 and 1963 . The agency also admitted to having contacts with Bosch .
 Bosch committed to para-military attacks on countries he believed supported Cuba, F.B.I. says . Bosch was committed to attacks on Colombia, Panama and Mexico, including Colombia and Panama, the agency says .
 The alliance discussed the kidnapping and execution of a diplomat, document says . According to the document, the document says. The document also says the alliance discussed a diplomat's kidnapping, execution .
 In July 1976, C.O.R.U. members did in fact attempt to kidnap the Cuban ambassador to Mexico; one of his aides was shot and killed . One of them was killed in the attempt .
 After Posada escaped from prison in Caracas, he flew aboard a private aircraft to Aruba, and was then taken to El Salvador where he assumed the alias ""Ramon Medina"" and became ""support director"" for the illicit contra resupply operation being run by the Reagan White
 Posada detailed his participation in these covert operations, including flying on resupply missions for contra soldiers in southern Nicaragua . In a deposition given to F.B.I, agents in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, as part of the Independent Counsel investigation .
 The operations were covert because they violated U.S. as well as international law . They were acts of war against a country at peace with the United States . Operation was covert because it violated United States and international law, the U.N. says .
 Reagan's obsession with tiny Nicaragua was such that he approved arms shipments to Islamic Iran . Iran is where blindfolded American hostages languished and served as the indignant centerpiece of Reagan's 1980 campaign only a few years earlier .
 Posada was happy to help stop Nicaragua from becoming "another Cuba" Posada helped Cuban doctors tend to the sick, penniless and malnourished . Cuban soldiers advised the Nicaraguan army as they fought the Contras and braced for an outright United States invasion .
 In 1988 he was accosted by a group of Nicaraguans convinced that he was a Cuban medic who could save the life of their loved one .
 Flight number 4SS in the Caribbean Sea on Oc confidential source of our Miami Office who reliable information in the past, reported o toe following significant information which 1 Mr L 0. 0. 1 .
 Morales Havarrete reportedly stated that this A broup had previously attempted to bomb Cuban* aircraft in ■» ■ ■»■> and in Jamaica . Morales said that this group had tried to bomb Cuba* aircraft .
 It is noted that Castro and Castillo rlcan citizens who have been active in anti-Castro activities in the past .
 Castro, a resident of the Dominican Republic, in a leader of an anti-Castro terrorist organization . Castro is a member of the Coordination of United Revolutionary Organizations . The organization claims responsibility for numerous terrorist acts throughout the Caribbean .
 Castillo la a subject in an attempted kidnapping plot against the Cuban Consul In Her l tin, Mexico, on July 23, 1976 . The plot was engineered by CORD which resulted in the death of the bodyguard of the Consul's bodyguard .
 Castillo's present wnereabonta Is unknown . Morales Navarre te told onr source that some peopla in the Venezuelan Government are Involved In tb* Cubana K>8 bombing and thfct If Posada talks, tbon Morale*
 Venezuelan Judicial Technical Police reportedly haw knowledge of the particlpante in this sot but havu been prohibited from investigating . DISIP officials irtio wish to cover up Venezuelan participation in the sot .
 Jposada and Fabri have been nrreetcd by Venezuelan authorities for providing false Identlfientlon and explosives to Boson Boson . They have been accused of providing false IDs and explosives .
 According to Mora lea Havarrete, arrsst«d auapect nernan Rioerdo Lozsno telephoned Bosch fro* Trinidad stating ""a bu» with 73 dogs went off a cliff and all got killed . The incident occurred in
 Bosch told him that Guillomo Movo traveled to Chile in early 1976 to viait Bosch . J inane s and Hulz Hernandez are la jail In Mexico in connection with the attempted kidnapping of the Cuban Morales Havarrete .
 When he ran out of money, he asked another exile figure, Rafael Quintero, for help . When he asked for help, he turned to the former president of Argentina . He has been in exile since 2002 .
 A source in Venezuela supplied the C.I.A. with detailed intelligence on a fundraiser held for Orlando Bosch and his organization C.O.R.U. after he arrived in Caracas in September 1976 .
 The dinner was held at the house of a Cuban exile doctor, Hildo Folgar . Venezuelan government officials also attended the event .
 Bosch was said to have essentially asked for a bribe in order to refrain from acts of violence during a U.N. meeting in 1976 . Bosch is believed to have asked for the bribe to avoid violence during the meeting .
 Orlando Bosch and Luis Posada were arrested in Caracas, Venezuela, in 1992 . They were the two exiles that had by then been arrested in Venezuela . The document records the summaries of traces of traces on the exiles .
 The C.I.A. also noted that he provided information to them on the activities of other exile groups . He was also known to have provided information on other exiled groups' activities .
 It censored a section of the document that described the services he performed for the C.I.A. while a high official in the Venezuelan secret police, DISIP, between 1967 and 1974 . The document was censored .
 Other C.I.A. records show that the Agency continued to have contact with Posada until June of 1976, more than eleven years after he was first recruited .
 The memo indicates that the bombing had caused some dissention in C.O.R.U. over its tactics . But that organization headed by Orlando Bosch is planning to sell bonds to finance future operations .
 F.B.I. report contains a range of information on a small terrorist organization headed by Orlando Bosch Avila . Report contains information on "a small terrorist group headed by Bosch" and other Cuban exile terrorists .
 The report details Bosch's efforts to raise funds from specific individuals in Miami, Caracas, and elsewhere . Based on sources close to the Bosch group, Accion Cubana, the report says .
 The F.B.I, also reports on the activities of Guillermo and Ignacio Novo, who are described as 'two Cuban exiles with long records of terrorist activities'
 C.O.R.U. was created in June 1976 to unify five different exile groups . The document describes a meeting in the Dominican Republic where the group met in 1976 . It also details the meeting in which C.R.'S. was formed to unite five different
 The memo says the groups agreed to jointly participate in the planning, financing and carrying out terrorist operations and attacks against Cuba and targets in other countries .
 Reagan likened the contras to the founding fathers of the U.S. even as they blew up civilian hospitals, murdered peasants and raped girls in front of their parents and forced fathers to have intercourse with their daughters for the Contra soldiers' entertainment . Reagan likened them to the founders of the
 The goal was to make Nicaragua ungovernable while the leftwing Sandinistas remained in power . The Sandinista was democratically elected in 1984 after a popular revolution toppled the Somoza dictatorship in July 1979 .
 Operations were termed ""Low Intensity Conflict" and were applied to other countries such as Afghanistan and Angola . The operations were termed "Low Intense Conflict"
 Americans were outraged at our association with the barbaric Contras and in 1984 the U.S. 9 Kornbluh, Peter. 9 .
 Reagan administration secretly established a mini air force of re-supply planes at Illopango airbase, known as "Cincinnati" in the BC records . Reagan administration established the air force at the base, which is now known as Cincinnati .
 Two F.B.I. agents interviewed Posada at the United States Embassy in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, in February 1992 . Posada was interviewed at the U.S. Embassy in Honduras in 1992 .
 He described in detail his work for the contra war, escape from a Venezuelan jail and sojourn in a private aircraft to Aruba, and El Salvador .
 The 31page interview transcript also provides extensive details of his activities in El Salvador and Guatemala after the Iran Contra scandal broke in November 1986 and after the contra supply operation was shut down .
 Posada accumulated $40,000 from the contra work he and others were paid from arms' sales to Iran . Posada eventually ran out of money from the money he accumulated .
 The National Security Archive sought the declassification of the Posada files through the Freedom of Information Act . The Archive has called on the U.S. to declassify all intelligence on Posada .
 Two Trinidad and Tobago police officers interrogated Hernan Ricardo Lozano and Freddy Lugo immediately after the plane went down . Two of the men were questioned by police officers .
 Their statements were turned over as evidence to a special investigative commission in Barbados after the crime . The victims' statements have been turned over to a Barbados special investigation commission .
 The first call the bombers placed after the 12 Kornbluh, Peter. Peter. Information derived from interrogations suggested that the first call was from Peter . Peter .
 He said that he had been paid $16,000 to sabotage the plane . Lugo was paid $8,000 . He said he was paid to sabotage a plane .
 Ricardo in his own handwriting recorded the steps to be taken before a bomb was placed in an aircraft and how a plastic bomb is detonated,"" The Archive also released three declassified F.B.I. intelligence reports that were sent to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger after the bombing .
 The updates focused on the relations between the F.B.I, legal attache in Caracas, Joseph Leo, Posada, and one of the Venezuelans who placed the bomb on the plane . The updates were classified ""secret"" and signed by director Clarence Kelly .
 Kelly: Posada attended meetings in Caracas where the plane bombing was planned . Kelly: One report from Kelly, based on the word of an informant in Venezuela, suggested that Posada had attended meetings .
 Bosch and Posada were arrested and imprisoned in Venezuela after the attack . Bosch was arrested and jailed in Venezuela . Posada and Bosch were later imprisoned .
 Posada escaped from prison in September 1985; Bosch was released in 1987 and returned to the U.S. illegally . Posada and Bosch escaped in 1985; Posada was released from prison and returned in 1987 . Bosch and Posada were both convicted of attempted murder in
 Like Posada, immigration authorities detained him; over the objections of the Justice Department, which determined he was a threat to public security . Bush's White House issued him an administrative pardon in 1990; Posada was granted a similar pardon .
 Leo suspected Posada and Hernan Ricardo Lozano of acts of terrorism, but still granted Ricardo's request for a visa to the United States . The report details Leo's contacts with Posada going back to the summer of 1975 .
 He fled to El Salvador using the alias ""Ramon Medina"" and worked on the illegal contra resupply program run by Lt. Lt. Carlos Cabarro . Cabarro worked for the illegal program . He fled El Salvador to join forces in El Salvador .
 Panama's president pardoned him and three co-conspirators in 2004 . President of Panama mysteriously pardoned them in September 2004 . He was found guilty of conspiracy .
 The Cuban tourism industry provided badly needed hard currency to the Castro regime and allowed it to remain in power and oppress its citizens in spite of the unilateral U.S. embargo . The ""justification"" for the Havana hotel bombings was that the Cuba tourism industry .
 By blowing up hotels and killing Cuba's European and Canadian sun worshipers, tourism would suffer, weakening the regime and hastening its demise . So by blowing up hotel rooms and killing tourists would weaken the regime, it would weaken its regime .
 This is the grotesque logic of the embargo as it has evolved and hardened over the years . From commercial boycott and diplomatic protest to sabotage and terrorism, the embargo has evolved . It has evolved from commercial boycotts and diplomatic protests to sabotage .
 Posada has been one of the world's most unremitting purveyors of terrorist violence . U.S. governments both Republican and Democrat have encouraged or tolerated terrorists who shared the United States government's agenda .
 President Bush has repeatedly stated that no nation should harbor terrorists . All nations should work to bring individuals who advocate and employ the use of terror tactics to justice, Bush says .
 Now is the time for President Obama and the Congress to reverse decades of de-facto sympathy and support for terrorists who cloak themselves in our flag, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Their tactics are incompatible with democratic principles and the human rights that the U.S. is so passionate about . The United States is passionate about human rights and democratic principles, the author says .
 Cuban dissidents' and reformers' attempts to change Cuba for the better all but impossible . By increasing the threat level to Cuban state security, they, along with the United States embargo, they insist, is the leverage needed to democratize Cuba . The U.S. and Cuba's
 Any domestic attempt to reduce the Castros' dictatorial powers is branded as treason against the liberating Cuban Revolution . Real reformers are prosecuted as Benedict Arnolds and sent to jail . Real reforms are not tolerated in Cuba .
 U.S. government strangulation of Cuba economically and tolerance of terrorism and human trafficking based in Miami have created a permanent state of emergency . Cuba's peaceful political and civic evolution is impossible, author says . Cuba has a long history of human trafficking, terrorism, human trafficking .
 As Sergei Khrushchev has said, it is not a coincidence that the embargo and Fidel' s rule will be entering their fifth decade together .
 The Cuban government refuses to issue Sergei Khrushchev a visa to speak in Cuba . The former Soviet Union leader was denied a visa by the government .
 President Obama, go to Havana, without preconditions that would allow the Cuban government to object and stop you . President Obama should go to Cuba without pre-conditions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Put on a guajiro's hat and greet the Cuban masses under a blazing sun in Revolution Square .
 Go to the base at the statue of Jose Marti, and deliver a live, uncensored, televised speech as only you know how . The speech will be delivered at the base of the statue .
 Invite Raul Castro to speak freely in the U.S. in reciprocity . Invite the Castro family to visit the United States. Invite Castro's family to attend the Castro-era visit .
 Tell the people of Cuba that the U.S. will abandon the embargo and normalize relations without preconditions . Tell the Cuban people that the United States will abandon its embargo . Tell them to tell them that the embargo will be lifted .
 The U.S. remains committed to civil right and civil liberties in Cuba, but will no longer use coercion . Explain that the United States remains committed . The United States will not take its Cuba policy marching orders .
 Tell the Cuban people that selfemployment and small business enterprise is the proven way out of poverty . The United States stands ready to encourage nascent Cuban entrepreneurs on the condition they remain in Cuba .
 U.S. businesses may conduct business with Cuban firms . Cuban government will feel victorious about overcoming the embargo and its backers .
 Fidel's typical speech was one fourth of his typical speech on the virtues of the Revolution and evils of the U.S. when he still had his health . Your speech need not last longer than ninety minutes, one of Fidel's speeches would have to last longer .
 "Follow my prescription and you will achieve what nine presidents before you could not," says President Obama . Follow my prescription, President Obama says .
 You will bring change to Cuba without firing a shot, or starving a child, or coddling a terrorist, says President Obama . You can bring change without firing shots or starving children, he says .
 "In one moment you will destroy the status quo and psychology of U.S. Cuba relations," he says . "You will set off a cascade of events the Cuban government will not control," he adds .
 The centralized Cuban economy will dissolve and morph in to a market economy with a large but increasingly irrelevant state sector . Private sector wages surpass government salaries . The state sector will become increasingly irrelevant as private sector wages rise .
 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 passes in the United States Congress . The act was passed by the U.S. Congress in 1961 .
 It prohibits aid to Cuba and authorizes the President to create a ""total embargo upon all trade"" with Cuba . The President also authorizes a total embargo on all trade .
 By the early 1960s, conditions in many industries had become critical due to the lack of replacement parts . The shortage of parts had led to the collapse of many industries .
 Virtually all of Cuba's all-industrial structures were dependent on supplies and parts now denied to Cuba . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the embargo . The embargo began in 1961 .
 One-half of the 1,400 passenger rail cars were out of service in 1962 . One-third of the train cars were taken off the rails .
 Louis A Perez, Jr., Jr. from his book Cuba, between Reform and Revolution, 2nd Edition Pg. Pg . Perez: "The Cuban Revolution was a revolution in Cuba, but it was not a revolution"
 In February 1961, he joined the C.IA.'s Brigade 2506 to invade Cuba . The ship to which he was assigned never landed at the Bay of Pigs . He was assigned to a ship that never landed in Cuba .
 A recruited him and trained him in demolitions . He subsequently became a trainer of other paramilitary exile forces in the mid 1960s .
 Documents reveal that he was terminated as an asset in July 1967, but then reinstated four months later . He apparently remained an asset until 1974, according to documents .
 Documents show that he remained in contact with the Agency until June 1976, only three months before the plane bombing .
 A payroll in the mid-1960s, he participated in a number of plots that involved sabotage and explosives . He was a member of a payroll in which he was involved in a series of plots .
 The Foreign Assistance Act is amended to prohibit aid to ""any country"" that provides assistance to Cuba . The act prohibits aid to any country providing assistance to the Cuban government .
 The United States government cables all Latin American governments and NATO countries new measures to tighten the economic embargo against Cuba . The U.S. government cables the measures .
 As of today, the transport of United States goods is banned on ships owned by companies that do business with Cuba . The transport of U.S. goods on ships is banned .
 The U.S. Department of Commerce announces the requirement of specific approval for exports of all food and medicine to Cuba . The requirement of approval for all food, medicine exports to Cuba requires specific approval .
 The Foreign Assistance Act is amended to prohibit U.S. aid to countries that continue to trade with Cuba . The measure would prohibit United States aid to nations that trade with the country .
 Robert F Kennedy seeks to end the travel ban to Cuba in a memo to Secretary of State Dean Rusk . Less than one month after President John F Kennedy's assassination, U.S. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy seeks end of travel ban .
 He refers to the ban as ""inconsistent with traditional American liberties,"" and difficult to enforce . The ban has been described as a violation of American liberties .
 Robert F Kennedy's memo of December 12 is discussed at a State Department meeting . Undersecretary of State George Ball rules out the possibility of ending the travel ban to Cuba .
 In Washington, Rep. John Breaux and Sen. J Bennett Johnston Jr. argue that it is in the national interest for Louisiana to be allowed to sell rice to Cuba .
 Henry Kissinger states that there is no possibility of U.S. relations with Cuba while Cuban troops are in Africa . Henry Kissinger: There is no possible of United States relations with Cuban troops in Africa while Cuban forces are there .
 There had to be some improvement in Cuba's human rights performance, he says . Cuba had to release political prisoners in order to improve, he adds .
 A reduction in Soviet-Cuban military ties is a result of a reduction in Cuban military ties . From the book: ""Cuba, Voices of Change,"" by Lynn Geldof May 25.
 Carter Administration relaxes laws to allow U.S. residents to send money to relatives in Cuba . The Carter Administration relaxed laws in Cuba to allow money to send to relatives .
 Ronald Reagan is inaugurated as U.S. President, and institutes the most hostile policy against Cuba since the invasion at Bay of Pigs . Reagan is the first President of the United States to begin a hostile relationship with Cuba .
 Despite conciliatory signals from Cuba, the new U.S. administration announces a tightening of the embargo . The embargo is expected to be tightened by the new US administration .
 The Reagan Administration reestablishes the travel ban, prohibits U.S. citizens from spending money in Cuba, and allows the 1977 fishing accord to lapse . The travel ban was re-instated by the Reagan Administration .
 U.S. citizens who travel to Cuba can only spend a maximum of $100 per day . According to new regulations by the United States Department of the Treasury, the limit is $100 a day .
 Mack Amendment prohibits all trade with Cuba by subsidiaries of U.S. companies located outside the U.K. It also proposes sanctions or cessation of aid to any country that buys sugar or other products from Cuba .
 United States Congress passes the Cuban Democracy Act . It prohibits foreign-based subsidiaries of U.S. companies from trading with Cuba . Travel to Cuba by United States citizens, and family remittances to Cuba are prohibited .
 The United Nations General Assembly votes heavily in favor of a measure introduced by Cuba asking for an end to the U.S. Embargo . The U.N. General Assembly voted heavily for a measure to end the embargo .
 Cuban government expropriated billions of dollars worth of private property belonging to U.S. individuals . State Department spokesman Joe Snyder: "The Cuban government, in violation of international law, has refused to make reasonable restitution"
 U.N. General Assembly votes overwhelmingly for a measure to end the United States Embargo of Cuba . Third year in a row, vote overwhelmingly to end U.S. embargo on Cuba . The United States has been the object of Cuba embargo for decades .
 Clinton Administration announces a new people-to-people-contact plan . The Clinton Administration announced the plan in 1996 .
 Since then, each time the vote comes up at the U.N., the number of nations voting against the embargo increases . Since then the vote has been on the rise in support of the embargo .
 President Clinton signs the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act . The act imposes penalties on foreign companies doing business in Cuba . It also permits U.S. citizens to sue foreign investors who make use of American-owned property seized by the Cuban government .
 President Clinton suspends enforcement of Title III provisions of the Helms-Burton Act . Title III is part of the Title III enforcement of the law .
 President Clinton again suspends enforcement of Title III provisions of the Helms-Burton Act . Title III is part of a Title III enforcement of the law . President Clinton suspends the act again .
 For the 6th straight year, the United Nations General Assembly passes a resolution to end the Cuban embargo . U.N. General Assembly passed a resolution ending the embargo last year .
 Americans for Humanitarian Trade with Cuba is formed to promote humanitarian trade with the island . The group is based in Washington, DC .
 Roman Catholic Cardinal Bernard Law urges U.S. President Bill Clinton to end the 36-year-old embargo . Cardinal Law urges end of the 36,000-year embargo .
 The U.S. Treasury Department denies PWN permission to participate in EXPOCUBA, an exhibition of pharmaceuticals in Cuba . PWN will not participate in the exhibition, which will include pharmaceuticals .
 The United Nations General Assembly adopts a resolution against the U.S. embargo on Cuba for the 7th consecutive year . The U.N. General Assembly votes against the embargo against the United States embargo . The resolution is the seventh consecutive year in the General Assembly .
 The United States Treasury Department investigates two U.S. organizations for traveling to Cuba without a license . Global Exchange and Pastors for Peace are investigated by the Treasury Department . The groups are accused of traveling without licenses in Cuba .
 U.S. Senator Christopher Dodd urges his government to establish a ""new conversation for the new millennium"" with Cuba . Dodd is a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . Dodd urges the government to set up a "new conversation" with Cuba.
 Six members of the U.S. Congressional Black Caucus visit Cuba to evaluate the United States -imposed embargo . The visit is part of a tour of Cuba .
 Maxine Waters, Barbara Lee and Barbara Lee of California, Sheila Jackson-Lee of Texas, Julia Carson of Indiana and others join in .
 Americans for Humanitarian Trade With Cuba join the United States Association of Former Members of Congress to call on the Clinton administration to end the embargo on food and medicines to Cuba .
 A resolution was passed in the United Nations General Assembly on the need to end the U.S. embargo against Cuba . The U.N. General Assembly passed the resolution on the issue .
 Cuban courts order the United States to pay $121 billion in damages for the 4-decade-long embargo . The U.S. has been under embargo for more than a decade .
 A similar lawsuit in November 1999 found the U.S. government liable for deaths and damage from ""aggressive policies towards Cuba" in the amount of $181 billion . In November 1999, a similar lawsuit found the United States liable for $181billion .
 A U.S. federal judge ordered Cuba to pay $187 million to families of pilots shot down by Cuban fighter planes in 1996 . Observers content that both lawsuits came about in response to a ruling by a federal judge in Miami .
 ICC Vice-President Richard D McCormick calls for an end to the U.S. trade embargo of Cuba . McCormick: "embargoes don't work"
 The United Nations General Assembly passes a Cuban-drafted resolution calling for an end to the U.S.-Cuba embargo . The U.N. General Assembly passed the resolution . The resolution was passed by the Cuban-Drafted resolution .
 Voting with the United States against the resolution are the Marshall Islands and Israel . Voting with U.S. against resolution are Marshall Islands, Israel and Marshall Islands . Voting against resolution is the U.K.
 A majority of Americans said to support the idea of doing business with Cuba and allowing travel to the island . In Washington, the Cuba Policy Foundation releases a poll in which a majority supports the idea . The poll is based on a survey conducted by the foundation .
 Most agree with the decision to reunite Elian Gonzalez with his father in Cuba . Elian will be reunited with his Cuban father in the United States .
 Organizers of the Latin Grammy Awards announce that they will change the location of this year's event from Miami to Los Angeles fearing violent protests from anti-communist exiles . The event will be held in Los Angeles .
 The U.S. turns down a Cuban offer to compensate Americans for properties confiscated by the Revolution 40 years ago . The United States government turns down the offer .
 In Philadelphia, Canadian businessman James Sabzali was found guilty of violating the United States embargo against Cuba . He was sentenced to life in prison for violating the U.S. embargo on Cuba .
 I do this because these allegations were made maybe not coincidentally just before our visit to Cuba. "I do this ... just before [the allegations] just before we visit Cuba," she says . "I think these allegations are not coincidental"
 State Department, intelligence agencies of my country, and high officials in the White House briefed us on the visit . "In preparation for this unprecedented visit, I requested, and we all received, intense briefings from the State Department," she said .
 President Obama received a briefing from the Cuban government about possible terrorist activities supported by Cuba . The briefing was for them to share with us any concerns that my government had about possible terror activities .
 Cuba has not been involved in sharing information to any other country on Earth that could be used for terrorist purposes . Cuba has been accused of sharing information with the U.S. government that could have been used in terrorism .
 Matt Welch writes in Foul Ball that the people are generally smart and jaded enough to tune out the government's propaganda . "They don't have much of anything to replace it with, except for the odd B.B. broadcast-and contact with foreign tourists"
 More and more Republicans are not willing to let the larger interests of the U.S. and their own constituents be sacrificed to the gods of electoral politics . The GOP has a history of letting electoral politics be sacrificed for electoral politics.
 House Majority Leader Dick Armey says the U.S. should open trade with Cuba . House majority leader says the United States should open Cuba trade with the island nation .
 U.S. General Assembly overwhelmingly approves a resolution asking the United States to end the 40-plus-years embargo against Cuba . The U.N. voted overwhelmingly in favor of ending the embargo .
 European nations expressed objection to the embargo, citing U.S. penalties on countries and companies doing business with Cuba as ""extraterritorial" The embargo is a bilateral issue between the United States and Cuba and should not be imposed on others .
 About 180,000 U.S. citizens visited Cuba in 2002, according to an article in the Christian Science Monitor . According to the article, 180,00 Americans visited Cuba .
 U.S. Senators Max Baucus and Chuck Hagel introduce a bill in Congress that seeks to lift the embargo . The bill would lift the ban on the sale of oil and gas from the Arab world . The United States is the world's largest oil and energy exporter .
 Stephan Vitvitsky writes in Tufts Daily; ""... the Cold War ended in 1991 when the Soviet Union ceased to exist"
 There is no more communist threat and the U.S. is the lone superpower of the world, President Obama says . Obama says the United States is now the only superpower in the world .
 Ten United States Senators from both political parties form the ""Cuba Working Group,"" to promote an end to the embargo against Cuba . Ten Senators form the group to promote the end of the Cuban embargo .
 Members include Max Baucus, Democrat from Montana, and Pat Roberts, Republican from Kansas . Members of the Senate are from Montana and Kansas .
 The United States House of Representatives approve a bill ending travel restrictions to Cuba for U.S. citizens . The bill would end travel restrictions for United States citizens to visit Cuba .
 The first U.S.-Cuba travel conference is held in Cancun, Mexico, where the first United States-Cuba tourism conference was held .
 The United States Treasury Department's Office for Foreign Assets Control bans publication of scientific articles from regimes subject to sanctions by the U.S. government . Cuba is one of the countries subject to such sanctions, as is Cuba .
 U.S. President George W Bush establishes the Committee for Assistance to a Free Cuba . Further enforces the ban on travel to the island .
 The United States Senate votes in favor of lifting the ban on travel to Cuba . The U.S. Senate votes to lift the travel ban on Cuba .
 The result was similar to a vote at the House of Representatives last month . The result is similar to that of a vote in the House last month.
 The United Nations General Assembly votes overwhelmingly against the U.S. economic embargo of Cuba for the 12th consecutive year . The U.N. General Assembly voted against the embargo for 12 consecutive years . The United States voted overwhelmingly in favor of Cuba in 2012 .
 President Bush signs Presidential Proclamation 7757, which bans vessels from traveling to Cuban ports from United States ports . U.S. President Bush signed the proclamation in 2003 .
 The Treasury Department has four full-time employees dedicated to investigating Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein . Over two dozen are assigned to investigating Cuban Embargo violations .
 The letter reveals that over $8 million were collected in embargo violation fines since 1994, and over 10,683 ""enforcement investigations"" opened since 1990 . The letter also reveals over $10,000 has been opened in investigations since 1990.
 OF AC opened 93 ""enforcement investigations"" between 1990 and 2003 . OFAC opened 93 "enforcement investigations" between 1990-2003 . Of the OFAC also opened 93 investigations into terrorism .
 U.N. General Assembly votes overwhelmingly against U.S. embargo on Cuba . 13th consecutive year, vote overwhelmingly against embargo against Cuba . United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly in favor of embargo .
 Voting with the United States for the embargo are Israel, Palau and the Marshall Islands . Voting with U.S. for embargo is Israel and Palau . The Marshall Islands voted for embargo .
 Cuba has agreed to purchase about $125 million in farm goods from U.S. companies . Cuba agreed to buy the goods by the end of the week . Cuba says it will buy the farm goods in exchange for $125million .
 The amendment rolls back a rule issued by the Treasury Department last February that requires that Cuba pay for food imports from the United States before they leave port . The U.S. House of Representatives Appropriations Committee approves the amendment .
 The full House and Senate must approve the amendment before it becomes law . The amendment must be approved by both chambers of Congress and the full House .
 The National Security Archive releases a memo written by Attorney General Robert F Kennedy on December 12 1963 (less than a month after President Kennedy's assassination) in which he seeks to lift the travel ban to Cuba .
 Also released is a memo about a December 13 1963 meeting at the State Department (to which Kennedy was not invited) in which Undersecretary of State George Ball rules out the possibility of ending the travel ban . Kennedy was invited to the meeting to which he was not .
 For the 14th straight year, the United Nations General Assembly votes to end the U.S. embargo against Cuba . The U.N. General Assembly voted in favor of ending the United States embargo against the Cuban government .
 Cuban government refers to this as an ""act of aggression,"" and Cuban dissident-journalist Oscar Espinosa Chepe considers the fund "counterproductive"
 "I believe Cubans have to be the ones who love our problems," he says . "Any interference serves to complicate the situation,"" he adds .
 The U.N. General Assembly votes overwhelmingly on a resolution to demand an end of the U.S. embargo against Cuba . The resolution is the 15th straight year in a row in the United Nations .
 The vote is 1 83 in favor of the resolution and 4 against, with the nation of Micronesia abstaining . The vote was overwhelmingly in favor .
 Israel, the Marshall Islands and Palau vote with the United States . Voting with the U.S. is Israel, Marshall Islands, Palau and the Marshall islands .
 Presidential candidate Obama says he is in favor of rolling back restrictions on Cuban American travel and remittances to Cuba . Obama spoke in Miami in front of the Cuban American National Foundation audience .
 This is a bold move with much political risk that has not been done by any serious presidential candidate in history . This is not the first time a presidential candidate has made such bold move in presidential history .
 This effectively sets a deadline for the President to formulate a comprehensive Latin America policy . The President will most likely have to include some action with regards to U.S. policy towards Cuba .
 Raul Castro announces a major reorganization of the Cuban government . Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque and Vice President of Council of State are fired .
 The character of the Cuban government after Raul leaves the scene becomes clearer, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the character of Raul's government after he leaves becomes clearer .
 The Senate passes the Ominbus spending bill that will continue to fund U.S. government operations . It contains controversial language that is a small step towards easing the restrictions of Cuba sanctions . After some political wrangling, the bill passes .
 Senator Menendez objects to having the Cuba language in the bill but eventually supports the bill . Treasury Secretary Geithner sends him a letter stating that the language will not substantially change U.S. Cuba trade laws . Menendez says the language is not substantially changing the laws .
 Sen. Menendez can see the writing on the wall that the momentum is building against the Embargo . Senator Menendez says he hopes the momentum will continue to build against the embargo .
 This meeting may have been scheduled in advance of the Summit of the Americas so the two Presidents could develop a working relationship and perhaps even discuss Cuba in order to formulate talking points before, during and after the Summit .
 Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez ""fires the first shot"" at Obama before they meet at the Summit of the Americas next month . Chavez and Obama will meet in Venezuela next month for the first time since 2009 .
 Chavez challenges President Obama to discuss Cuba before and during the Summit . Chavez challenges president to talk about Cuba with President Obama before and after the summit .
 New Cuban Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez says Cuba will work with the European Union to discuss human rights violations . Rodriguez: Cuba would work with E.U. to normalize relations with the EU . Cuba's new foreign minister says he will work to discuss rights violations in Cuba .
 Costa Rica and El Salvador announce that they will normalize relations with Cuba . El Salvador's leftist FMLN has just won a national election . Costa Rica, El Salvador and Costa Rica have announced normalization .
 Salvadoran President-elect Mauricio Funes reiterated his campaign pledge to re-establish relations with Havana . Funes made the comments hours before he was to meet with United States Assistant Secretary of State Thomas Shannon .
 Republican Congressman Jerry Moran from Kansas introduced Bill , Agricultural Export Facilitation Act of 2009 . Moran introduced Bill . Jerry Moran introduced bill in Kansas in 2009 .
 It is designed to facilitate the sale of U.S. agricultural products to Cuba . The act was authorized by the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 .
 United States Senators Byron Dorgan, Michael Enzi and Bob Stallman will hold a press conference Tuesday, March 31, at 12:00m. in room SVC-203 of the United States Capitol Visitors Center in support of S428, the Freedom to Travel to Cuba Act .
 There is a managerial/military Brahman bureaucratic caste, answerable to Raul Castro that exercises decision-making power over all matters of importance . The Brahman caste exercises decision making power over important matters, says Castro .
 Members of this elite did not achieve their status through business acumen or inherited wealth, but through loyalty and appointment . Members of the elite achieved status through loyalty, appointment and loyalty, not wealth .
 Fidel, the consummate micro-manager, slowly fades away and is replaced by Raul, who prefers to delegate authority . The caste's power will grow as Fidel fades away from power . Fidel is the most powerful person in Cuba .
 After Raul their power will expand again and the pressure to monetize their authority could lead to de-facto ownership and a nascent market economy from the top down .
 The Castros' top priority, from the grave, will be to prevent this from occurring, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Large state enterprise in the agricultural and other sectors will continue to dominate the brick and mortar economy . It is less lucrative than trade and banking, and tends to be outright un-profitable and in dire need of investment .
 Cuban state power serves as a bulwark against foreign power of every stripe . The military is the key to state power in Cuba post Raul Castro post-Castro .
 The productivity of Cuban enterprise will remain low, ensuring the low purchasing power of the majority and reliance on the discipline and coercion of military structures in the economy . Cuba's economy will continue to rely heavily on military structures, says the Cuban president .
 Large-multinational manufacturers will open shop in Cuba, attracted to low wages and proximity to the world's largest consumer market after the embargo is lifted . Cuba is a source of cheap labor and low wages .
 This scenario coupled with fear of the United States and exile domination, would be fertile ground for a populist to take charge . This scenario combined with the fear of U.S. domination, could be fertile grounds for an anti-American populist .
 A new Fidel could succeed by replacing ideology with religion and playing up egalitarianism, nativism and anti-Americanism . Fidel Castro could succeed if he succeeds by playing up nativism, playing up anti-U.S. nativism .
 Brahmin Brahmin caste members benefit from 'illicit opportunities for self-enrichment' on side . Illicit opportunities are the primary current material benefit of membership in the Brahmin .
 These opportunities are sought out due to the dearth of market incentives, morbidity of the peso economy and wide acceptance of filching and corruption . These opportunities were sought out because of the lack of market incentive and morbidity .
 Materialism is at the root of the crass materialism common in today's Cuba and post-Soviet Russia . It is common in Cuba and Russia, but it is also common in Russia and Cuba .
 This phenomenon is totally incompatible with the morality required to maintain Socialist ideals . It guarantees the end of the Cuban Revolution, says the author .
 The privilege achieved by the Brahman caste, and the fear of its loss, ensures resistance to Miami exile power . The fear of losing the privilege ensures resistance .
 The caste will wrap itself up in nativism, not just nationalism, which exiles have a claim to . Exiles will wrap themselves up with nativism not nationalism, it is claimed by exiles .
 Since the caste cannot match the compensatory power of Miami, the power of the state will be its defense against foreign domination . The state will not be able to match Miami's compensator power, but the state must be its own .
 How well he solves the inherent structural weaknesses of the command economy will determine how many options are available once he passes away .
 Years of token salaries and universal government subsidies keep many young people off the labor rolls because it's more lucrative to hustle . Young people in the U.S. are often kept off the job rolls because of their lack of government subsidies .
 Others live off money sent from Miami and elsewhere . Others live well off money from Miami .
 The destructive sociological effect bears similarities to what we saw in the U.S. under welfare. The destructive effect bears similar to that of welfare. It's similar to what happened in the United States under welfare .
 Iris, a young Cuban girl, turns down neighborhood janitor positions in hopes of higher-paying work at nearby resort hotels where she can earn tips in CUCs . Iris turns down janitor jobs in order to earn tips at nearby resorts .
 Cuba struggles to increase productivity while hundreds of thousands of people, if not millions, are not motivated to take work seriously . Cuba is struggling to find a way to improve productivity .
 Even highly educated people would rather remain idle or work in the tourist industry as waiters or taxi drivers than work as professionals requiring brainpower .
 This has lead to a profound disrespect for serious professions that make a country more competitive . This has led to a lack of respect for serious jobs that make the country competitive, it has said .
 Iris says she has blanketed all the state agencies that run tourist resorts near her home with resumes . But she lacks a high school diploma required for even menial work . Iris: "I have blanketed state agencies with resumes, but I have no diploma"
 The national flag was first raised on May 19, 1850, in Ciudad Bandera, Spain . The flag was raised in the city of Ciudads Banderas, where it was first established in 1850 .
 Cuban government figures show its unemployment rate is just 1. percent, the lowest in Latin America . Official figures show it is the lowest unemployment rate in Latin American history .
 Havana during normal business hours supports this assertion . Havana is a major city of Cuba . Havana has a reputation for being a tourist destination in Cuba .
 A 2007 survey conducted by Juventud Rebelde, a government newspaper, showed that in Guantanamo province alone there were 1 8 times more unemployed people than official figures reflected . The survey was carried out in Guantanamo Province .
 When Raul Castro took office in 2008, he announced an increase in state pensions and wages . The increase in wages and pensions was announced in 2008 .
 In April, economic commentator Ariel Terrero announced that the government would lift caps on wages . The government announced in April that the cap on wages would be lifted .
 I suspect very few Cubans understand that real wages can rise only if productivity rises . I suspect that very few Cuban workers understand that wages can only rise if productivity increases .
 Lenin added that he did not view this as a violation of egalitarianism, but rather of equality . Lenin said: "from each according to his ability" Lenin said that he was not concerned with egalitarianism but with equality .
 The Cuban Convertible Peso is a Cuban paper proxy for the Euro, United States Dollar, British Pound and Swiss Franc . The state pays salaries in nearly worthless pesos and sells most consumer goods in Cuban Convertibles Peso .
 Eduardo, 30, said most of his friends worked for the first time when they were in their late twenties — after emigrating to Florida . Eduardo got his first job in 2004, when he was in his late twenties .
 "The money they would pay me is not going to meet my basic needs,"" he said . "I would not be able to afford to live on the street," he added .
 Calls to be like Che and sacrifice for the greater good cannot substitute for concrete incentives, especially when there is dire want but no glory or immortality to be had for the heroic effort . Che died at the hands of Che Che, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 The lack of incentives in Cuba's economy explains the coercive nature of the government and ascension of the military . Cuba's lack of incentive explains the military's rise in power, the author says .
 At the height of the Cold War, Cuba's soldiers became a legend in Africa and on the island . They punched through enemy lines, defeating South Africa's army in Angola .
 Cuban generals are attempting to apply the profit motive to businesses that range from growing beans to running hotels and airlines . Today, Cuban generals have tried to apply a profit motive .
 Cuba's Revolutionary Armed Forces rent rooms to tourists through Gaviota SA, the island's fastest-growing hotel conglomerate . Cuba is home to the country's fastest growing hotel conglomerate.
 Havana's island-wide retail chain sells premium cigars, consumer goods through a chain . The chain also sells lobster dinners at the Divina Pastora restaurant in Havana's Morro Castle .
 The military also plays a role in allotting nickel mines and leasing offshore ocean lots for oil exploration .
 The FAR control more than 60 percent of the island's economy . The U of Miami's Institute for Cuban and CubanAmerican Studies estimates that the Cuban government controls more than half of the Cuban economy .
 Raul has traveled to China numerous times to study Beijing's economic policies . In 2003 he invited the leading economic adviser to then Chinese premier Zhu Rongji to give a series of lectures in Cuba . Zhu played a leading role in opening up China to foreign trade and investment to foreign investors
 Cuba sent its military officers to learn hotel management in Spain and accounting in Europe, Latin America, Asia, and Canada . In the 1990s, Cuban military officers had previously trained at prestigious Soviet military schools .
 Upwardly mobile officers burnt the midnight oil reading business books such as "In Search of Excellence" by Tom Peters and Robert H Waterman .
 As Defense Minister, Raul Castro adopted standard accounting and management incentives to run military-owned factories that made everything from uniforms to bullets . Raul used the system to run the factories .
 The government cautiously courted foreign capital and invited foreign entrepreneurs to jumpstart the economy . The government is courting foreign capital to boost its economy .
 In 1998, a Spanish businessman started a travel agency and hydroponics vegetable farm inside a vast helicopter hangar at a former submarine base in the port of Mariel . The farm is located in a vast hangar at the former submarine base .
 The farm proved short-lived because Aerogaviota, the transport company belonging to the Cuban army, was unreliable . The farm was located in Havana, Cuba, in 1959 .
 It shipped only a few loads of produce; the rest was left behind to rot . The rest of the food was left to rot, leaving it to rot on the ground .
 The Spaniard found it impossible to coordinate Cuban labor with unpredictable transport flights . He said it was difficult to coordinate flights with unpredictable flights .
 By 2000 approximately 1,400 state companies were being evaluated for or being run under perfeccionamiento management techniques . According to retired U.S. diplomat Philip Peters, by the year 2000 approximately 1,400 . state companies out of 3,000 were evaluated for
 Using such methods tripled profits in just two years for a tire plant, a manager says . Peters says such methods tripled profits in two years at the tire plant in 2001 . Peters: "Using such methods, you can make a lot of money in the process"
 As Cuban enterprise gains in productivity through perfeccionamiento, the groundwork is laid for market reform in the future .
 The military found foreign joint-venture partners for Cuba's moribund citrus industry . Cuba's citrus industry collapsed after losing its markets in the Soviet bloc .
 Israeli government is one of only four nations to vote in favor of the U.S. embargo . U.N. General Assembly roundly condemns embargo every year . Israeli government unable to say no to benefactor in Washington .
 Fidel's About Face: "I remember the hope that Cubans and foreign businessmen felt at that time" Fidel Castro was president of Cuba in 1980s and '90s . Fidel Castro is now president of the United States .
 There was an endless whirl of conferences, expos, trade shows, and trade agreements . There was a constant stream of conferences and expositions, but also a flurry of trade shows .
 Alamar Associates, trade consultants specializing in Cuba since 1974, organized the U.S. -Cuba Agricultural Conference . The conference was held in Cuba in 1974 .
 Fidel Castro unexpectedly drops by during a meeting at Havana's Palacio de Convenciones . Fidel Castro spoke for hours about agriculture and commodity prices . He then took live questions from the audience .
 I sat in the second row, three meters from Castro, and was called on to speak . I sat three meters away from Castro and was asked to speak. "I was called to speak," he said .
 I remember how the distinguished panel, including the senators, Kirby Jones, and top Cuban government ministers, held their breath as I spoke . I remember . I . remember how a distinguished panel of senators and Cuban security men held their . breath .
 No one knew what I, an unknown young man in suit and tie, might say to el Commandante . No one would know what I would say to the Commandante, but I did .
 Fidel's long-winded answer was that comparisons between the two countries could not be made . Cuba already had its agrarian reform in the 1960s and farmers' markets were currently open, he said .
 In 2003, he reversed the business opening, arguing that they were sullying the revolution . He reversed the opening in 2003, saying that they sullied the revolution.
 Fidel canceled business and management courses funded by the European Union, Sweden, and Canada . The courses together trained more than 1,300 Cuban officials in capitalist management techniques . By 2004, Cuba's economy had turned a corner .
 Free trade zones vanished, self-employment was curtailed and joint ventures were put on hold indefinitely . As a result, free trade zones were vanished and self-employed were curtailed . Joint ventures were also put off indefinitely .
 As of 2008, Cuba conducts $2 billion annually in oil barter for medical care with Venezuela . China invests heavily in Cuban nickel mines, and invests heavily with Cuba .
 Tourism receipts, remittances from abroad, and pharmaceutical and cigar exports comprise the economy's remaining components . Tourism receipts are also important to the economy . Remittances and remittance from abroad and pharmaceutical exports are key components of economy .
 Cuba effectively abstains from the world economy when the U.S. embargo does not accomplish this for it . Cuba's military is key to its political and ideological success .
 The inevitable result is autarky, a subsistence economy, no savings and public dependency on the state . It is the inevitable result of autarking, the government says . It will be a long struggle to find a solution to the problems of austerity .
 I am not suggesting that the Castros secretly want the U.S. embargo to continue or want to keep the Cuban people impoverished . The Castros are not interested in keeping the embargo in place, he says .
 An end to the U.S. embargo in their lifetime would be a huge political triumph for them . They don't have the right to end the embargo . They do, and an end to it would be an enormous political triumph .
 Once the initial euphoria wears off, it would also be the beginning of the end of the political system they built, says CNN.com .
 Castroite system needs monopolistic control as well as conflict and controversy to keep it from going soft . Castroites need conflict, controversy, conflict to keep the system from softening . The current Castroites system needs monopoly control and conflict to prevent softness .
 The Castroite system is incompatible with, fearful and mistrustful of the decentralized, impersonal, corporate power that could pose a challenge to it if given a toehold in Cuba . The Castroites are fearful of the decentralization of corporate power and are wary of the threat posed by corporations
 An analogy would be the uneasy feeling many American communities have towards WalMart . WalMart is an American company owned by WalMart. WalMart has a history of mistrust in American communities .
 The Castroite system is without merits and rationale, but it belongs to an earlier time, just like the embargo . I do not think the Castroite System is without its merits, but the embargo, like the Castroites, belongs to a previous time .
 The Cuban military has expanded its sphere of influence in recent years . The military is an obedient servant of state power and with the ability to command without ownership .
 The military's web of companies is run by the Grupo de Administracion Empresarial SA, or the Business Administration Group . The group is located on the fourth floor of Cuba's defense ministry building .
 Julio Casas Regueiro until he became defense minister on February 18, 2008, the day Raul succeeded Fidel Castro . He was defense minister until he was succeeded by Raul in 2008 .
 Gaviota, which means sea gull, has become GAESA' s most important business . By turning officers' clubs and naval bases into resorts, the tourism company has become its biggest business .
 Spain's Sol Melia and France's Club Med control the best hotels in the world . They control Spain's best hotels but leave management to Spain and France . Club Med has a history of poor management .
 Gaviota' s currently has approximately 8,500 hotel rooms . Of Cuba's roughly 40,000 hotel rooms, Cuba has approximately eight,500 .
 Hal Klepak, Canada's former military attache in Havana, has written a book on the Cuban military .
 Gaviota offers exclusive tours of the island's colonial forts and the barren land that surrounds the U.S. naval base in Guantanamo . The island is home to the Guantanamo naval base .
 Spanish Institute of International Trade study says it operates marinas, manages restaurants and manages gourmet restaurants . It also rents cars, runs marinas and manages an attraction that allows tourists to swim with dolphins .
 Generals hold the top management slots in the country's economic ministries . Generals are in charge of the ministries of state and finance departments .
 Rosales del Toro, other generals run the civil aviation, fishing, telecommunications, telecommunications and transportation ministries . The generals also run the fishing and telecommunications ministries .
 A colonel runs Habanos SA, a joint venture with the Spanish firm Altadis, which markets the country's famous cigars .
 Mark Entwistle, a former Canadian ambassador to Havana, has said the military has the power to cut bureaucratic red tape that bedevils other Cuban entities . The military has said it can cut red tape to cut the bureaucratic bureaucracy in Cuba .
 A Canadian business that wanted to grow soybeans was unable to get permission from the ministry of agriculture . For example, a Canadian business wanted to grown soybeans . The ministry says it is not required to obtain permission from agriculture .
 Castro brothers reward their supporters and give the military a stake in the status quo . Giving the armed forces a critical role in running the economy has helped the Castro brothers' supporters .
 A number of high-ranking ""entrepreneur soldiers"" have already been discharged and are often jailed for corruption . Many of the soldiers have been discharged from their service .
 Many officers envy fellow soldiers involved in joint ventures and covet their superior living standards . Many officers covet the living standards of fellow soldiers .
 Many Mexican businessmen complained to him that the ""juniors"" were demanding bribes and kickbacks as a condition of doing business with their fathers . During his time in Havana from 2001 to 2003, many businessmen complained .
 The most notable dismissals included Carlos Lage, widely credited with saving the country after the collapse of the Soviet Union . Felipe Perez Roque, a likely successor to Raul, was also dismissed by Raul .
 These moves leave little doubt that the military will take power on Raul's demise . Raul will be replaced by the military, which is expected to take control .
 The fact that Fidel was consulted before the firings is evidence of his continued power, even from a hospital bed . The fact he was consulted is evidence that he is still in power even from his bed .
 Raul has loosened controls on how state companies spend foreign currency . At the same time, Raul also loosens controls on foreign currency spending .
 He cancelled a decree requiring the Central Bank to approve all state company expenditures in excess of $10,000 . He cancelled the decree requiring approval of all company expenditures .
 Business leaders are relieved and said the change would benefit the entire economy by reducing bureaucratic delays and paperwork . Business leaders say the change will benefit the nation's economy .
 The 2003 decree was originally enforced at the behest of Fidel Castro to fight corruption . Fidel Castro's government has been fighting corruption since the Cuban leader died in 2008 .
 It was part of the re-imposition of rigid control after the loosening of the 1990s to cope with deep economic crisis . The loosened controls were part of a re-imposed regime of strict controls on the economy .
 Cuba's economy was battered by three hurricanes in 2008, drops in commodity export prices and the global financial crisis . The economy was hit hard by the 2008 financial crisis and three hurricanes .
 Cuba's current account went from a $500 million surplus to a deficit of more than $2 billion in one year . In one year, the Cuban government ran a surplus of $1.2 billion .
 Since taking office last year, Raul Castro has taken small but symbolic steps such as lifting restrictions on some consumer goods and rescinding tourist hotels' exclusion of Cubans . Cuba's president has taken a series of symbolic steps since taking office .
 He has also decentralized agriculture, granted producers more autonomy and lifted income caps . Workers and farmers should maximize their income, he says .
 Raul, assuming he is in good health, will accelerate economic reforms and liberalization . After Fidel's death, Raul will accelerate reforms, he says . Raul is expected to accelerate reforms in Cuba .
 The Cuban state will resist the formation of a moneyed elite outside its own ranks . But the Cuban state won't accept moneyed elites outside its ranks . The Cuban government will resist formation of an elite outside of its ranks.
 At some point in the future, Cuba will no longer be able to resist from exile money and personalities . Exclusion of exile money, personalities will be a more achievable priority for Cuba .
 After Raul, a disciplined group of senior army officers will likely rule Cuba in collective fashion . The Cuban army is likely to rule in collective style after Raul's death . The country's most senior military officers are likely to be disciplined .
 They will have command over the economy and political life, and the security services will clamp down very heavily . They will be in charge of the economy, political life and have control of the country's security services .
 Cuban leadership will decree further loosening of economic restrictions on small-scale Cuban enterprise and foreign investment . New leadership will seek rapprochement with the United States.
 The government will commute political prisoners' sentences but will not permit organized political opposition . Government will not allow organized opposition to the sentences of political prisoners .
 Cubans will not accept American-style elections and the Cuban government would be suicidal to accept them, Cuban president says . Cubans would not accept U.S. style elections .
 If the U.S. posture remains hostile, i.e. the embargo, and there is a credible threat that Cuba will be taken over by Miami exiles, then the Cuban government will maintain its character . iReport: If the United States continues to be hostile to Cuba,
 After Raul, U.S. policy must remain decoupled from Florida politics . United States policy must stay decoubled from politics, says Florida senator .
 This does not imply that the U.S. should wait for him to die before changing its posture, it says . This doesn't mean that the United States should wait until he dies .
 Raul will not leave his succession to chance either and his replacement will not make the changes Washington seeks . Raul's successor will not be the same thing Washington seeks. Raul is not likely to be the next president .
 This means not just sitting down to chat, as Obama said he would during the election campaign, but normalization of relations with a country with whom we are not at war . This is not just a chat, but a chance to normalize relations with the U.S. with a
 By engaging Raul now, his successors will have to continue the process from day one . Raul's successor will need to start the process starting at the age of 50 .
 U.S. policy makers must not be misled into thinking that somehow, after the Castro lineage is finished, the Cuban government will back down or be overthrown, as if Cuba were a monarchy or tin-pot dictatorship . American policy makers should not be fooled into believing that somehow after
 Nationalism predates Castros and will thrive after the Castros are dead, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "Nationalist predates nationalism. Nationalism will thrive in the future"
 American policymakers must not be seduced by the Miami-Cuban fantasy of turning back the clock to 1959 and taking over . U.S. policymakers should not turn back to the 1959 and take over, they say .
 Only this way can we influence what happens in Cuba instead of reacting to one fait accompli after another . Only this is how we can influence the situation in Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 George Jetson's version of the future accouterments were separated by a headboard that would bear tales of affairs and loss if it could only accept an offer that could not be refused and spill its cedar guts .
 A more vexed story of benign neglect and decay was the real headliner . But it was a more vexing story of . benign neglect or decay .
 It was enough to make you hold your breath while paring back the bed sheets to see what else might have been revealed .
 J Lo would not sleep on a hotel bed with sheets and blankets less than a certain regal thread count . Years ago I heard a rumor that J Lo had her trademark rear end insured for a billion dollars .
 It was a relief just to find that the bed linen was cum stain free . Here on the ""executive floor"" of Lansky's erstwhile Caribbean jewel .
 Cuba and Haiti are both nearly on the Tropic of Cancer, which means it is always warm or hot . The Hale Old Man and the Septic Tank are the most famous photos of the U.S.
 The Havana Malecon will have turned U.P.S. brown, but there is no mistaking the contents for anything Christmasy or kosher .
 Copenhagen Climate Summit under way as protesters head and T V. cameras roll . Copenhagen climate summit is under way in Denmark .
 The Left pretends that painting industry Red will make it green . Oblivious to history, the left pretends it will make green green .
 The United States is committed to helping Haiti "today, tomorrow and for the time ahead" Secretary of State Hillary Clinton declared on a January 16 visit to Port-au-Prince .
 It's not difficult to divine what the Castro brothers really think, says Rudy Calzado . The Castro brothers have a history of thinking, he says . The brothers have been together for more than a decade .
 Cubans already know their society does not work as advertised, but it sure looks good compared to Haiti, even before the earthquake . Cubans know that their society isn't working as advertised .
 In Cuba, all consequential matters are decided at the very top and everybody else, from broadcast personalities on down to the general public, automatically tows the line or falls silent . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption in recent years .
 Favorite news topics are those of global scope and issues far removed from Cuban influence . Favorite topics include issues far from Cuba's influence .
 The latest example is across the ninety mile Windward Passage to Haiti . It's the latest example of the passage to Haiti from the US .
 Fidel Castro's legal guardian as a child was Haiti's consul in Santiago so many years ago . Fidel correctly pointed out that the appalling death toll is the byproduct of Haiti's condition as Third World hell . Fidel, whose . legal guardian . as a . child, has correctly pointed
 The genial Castros are quite correct in their critiques but blind to the failure of their own solutions . Castros should not be blind to their own failure to solve the problem, they say .
 Cuban ""public opinion"" follows them like three blind mice into a black hole at the end of a dead end . When they are mistaken or wrong by omission, especially in business affairs and the economic and social realities confronting Cuba, Cuba's public opinion follows them .
 Of course, in a nation of knaves, fools and Forrest Gumps, ""public opinion"" has little meaning and no significance . In the U.S. of course, "public opinion ""has little meaning" of public opinion"
 Free higher education guaranteed notwithstanding and for all the sunshine in Cuba, you would be hardpressed to find a Cuban who doesn't have his head where the sun don't shine . Cuba is one of the world's most beautiful countries .
 Paul Lafargue and the Right to be Lazy are an example of the French right to be lazy . The Right to Be Lazy is a French law forbidding any man to work more than three hours a day . The law would have a new universe leaping within her, Laf
 Like Christ, the doleful personification of ancient slavery, the men, the women and the childeen of the proletariat have been climbing painfully for a century up the hard Calvary of pain . For a century compulsory toil has broken their bones, bruised their flesh, tortured
 His father once owned coffee plantations in Oriente, Cuba, and may have been part of the exodus of criollos from Haiti to Cuba after the establishment of the Negro Republic of Haiti .
 Paul Lafargue was born in Santiago de Cuba . He counted a French republican, a French Jew, a mulatto and a Caribbean Indian among his grandparents . He was also a French Jewish Jew and a Cuban Jew .
 Paul Lafargue's Utopian vision of an advanced industrial society of leisure has in a limited sense been achieved in a few developed countries today . The U.S. has achieved a limited version of the vision of a leisurely, leisurely society .
 The laws of market economics are astringent on society's progress even as they become less compelling, i.e. The reward side of the marketplace vanishes to a point while the downside remains a slippery slope . But in Third World, commodity-based economies with low human development and
 The wretchedly needy people of the world live in the midst of great natural resources but Capitalism is unable to provide for them no matter how high commodity prices go... hence illegal immigration all over the world .
 In the Age of e-commerce, merchandise and their payment flow seamlessly across borders at the speed of light . Boatloads of Haitians regularly perish at sea attempting to reach the Promised Land and eight year old American children languish on the Department of Homeland Security's no-fly list
 Socialism and public-sector economies make more sense for an impoverished nation when looked at from the miserable vantage point of survival and subsistence in a mean world . Socialism makes sense for the impoverished nation, says David Frum .
 This creates a grand opening for the left and makes comity with the U.S. difficult, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Like most of Latin America, Cuba and Haiti are birds of a feather, conceived as outposts of slave empires in the infamous Triangular Trade . Today they are destined to be societies maladroit, economic pantywaists at the mercy of world markets and their thirst for cheap labor
 The productivity, wages and living standards of these nations will never reach First World expectations . Big business interests and their governments have a long, sordid history of foiling weak nations' attempts to even the playing field .
 To paraphrase Bill Gates, Capitalism has forsaken the wretched of the Earth . The world's richest man and greatest philantropist Bill Gates said: Capitalism has betrayed the wretched .
 In Cuba, a great social experiment has been underway for half a century . Cuba's social experiment is underway for the first time since 1959 .
 The right to higher education, healthcare and employment are enshrined in the constitution . But, alas, the right to be lazy and its exercise is the upshot of the exercise . It is not the only thing to say: 'I'm lazy'
 Cuba recuses itself from World trade under the mantra ""socialism or death" The United States have a tailor-made embargo that unwittingly assists the Cuban government to maintain its monopoly over the economy .
 Maurice White: Leaders reared in failed states and societis are often backward, gimpy and corrupt . Maurice White says leaders are often reared to be backward and corrupt in a failed state . White: "Leaders rearried in failed state and society often are often
 If enough individuals develop a personality disorder, the national traits of an entire nation begin to change for the worse . The disorder is a disorder that can cause a nation to change its national traits .
 Cuba, like Haiti, suffers a permanent economic dislocation, but on a higher plane of poverty under the direction of a disciplined, well organized group less chaotic than its surroundings . Cuba's economy is like Haiti's, but under a well-organized group, says CNN's John Sutter
 The bonhomie of cheery islanders born in ""paradise"" is reduced to levity in both nations . Regardless, the bonhomies of the islanders are reduced to levity in both countries .
 The stellar CubanAmerican entrepreneur has his diametric opposite in the feckless nincompoop running Cuba's state enterprises at a loss . CubanAmerican entrepreneurs have their opposite opposite in Cuba .
 The successful Haitian businessman is outnmubered one hundred to one by Haitians living on less than two dollars a day . Haitians live in Haiti, many of them live in poverty and live on just a small amount of money .
 Fallow fields in Cuba at an opportunity cost and deforestation in Haiti at a profit . Deforestation in Haiti is a profit in Cuba .
 In the Third World, churlishness in thought and deed, at work and at play; stupidity and mediocrity, like a slow-motion earthquake, rumble underfoot for years until all their latent chaos is released in the avalanche of a ""natural"" disaster .