 The source below outlines the discussions that members of the Executive Committee from the United States of America held regarding the deployment of Soviet missiles to Cuba . SOURCE 1A The source says the U.S. held the discussions .
 The kind of people involved in the EXCOMM meetings were diverse and even conflicting in their opinions . ExCOMM meeting was diverse and conflicting in its participants' opinions .
 General Taylor as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Dean Acheson, or Adlai Stevenson, encompassed a broad spectrum of political opinions . From the most conservative, probably . probably General Taylor, to the most liberal, they encompassed . a broad . spectrum of opinions .
 The conservative extreme, represented by Acheson and Taylor favoured an out-of-out military showdown . The conservative far right favoured a military showdown.
 Acheson himself saw the entire affair as a test of wills and believed the only respectable course of action for the U.S. was a decisive air strike . He believed that the only acceptable course for the United States was to strike .
 General Taylor, along with the other Joint Chiefs, strongly supported Acheson's position . General Taylor's position was strongly supported by the Joint Chiefs of the Armed Forces .
 He proposed withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey and Italy in return for the Soviets doing the same in Cuba in Cuba . The proposal was rejected by the Soviets .
 The reaction to this from other EXCOMM members was a swift and overwhelming negative . The reaction was swift, overwhelming negative, according to EXCOMm .
 Robert Kennedy said strike would have brought death to thousands of Cuban civilians and US military personnel . Kennedy: Strike would have killed thousands of innocent Cuban civilians .
 Such attacks ran the risk of triggering the launch of nuclear weapons, such as nuclear weapons . Also, such attacks ran a risk of provoking the use of such weapons, experts say .
 Some favoured the blockade because it offered more flexibility and fewer liabilities than a military attack . Kennedy himself wrote that a 'surprise attack would erode if not destroy the moral positions of the United States throughout the world'
 The attack would create an all-ornothing situation for both the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The United States and Soviet Union could be at risk of being attacked .
 It didn't allow time for the Soviets to freely consider their position and comply with the U.S. wishes . The Soviets had to comply with American wishes .
 It provided for no diplomatic manoeuvring by which a peaceful solution could be found, it says . It provides for no diplomacy by which the conflict could be resolved .
 It explains the Soviet Union's position on the deployment of missiles to Cuba . The Soviet Union was behind the decision to deploy missiles there .
 It is well known to you, Mr President , the attitude of the Soviet government and personally, of Nikita Khrushchev toward the dangerous developments connected with the US administration’s position on the issue of Cuba .
 An unrestrained anti-Cuban campaign has been going on in the USA for a long time . There is a definite U.S. policy behind it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Behind the scenes, officials of both the U.S. and the USSR were negotiating a non-military resolution to the crisis . Officials of both countries were negotiating an end to the conflict .
 The Soviet Union would remove its missiles from Cuba and the U.S. would remove missiles from Turkey . The United States would remove the missiles from the Soviet Union and Turkey .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev announced that Soviet missiles would leave Cuba on 28 October . Kennedy announced that the missiles would be removed from Cuba . Kennedy also announced that missiles would also leave Cuba .
 The only public announcement of missiles being removed were those from the Soviet Union .
 The United States ‘quarantine’ continued, turning into a verification mission that the Soviet Union was keeping its promise to remove the missiles . The U.S. 'quarantine' continued .
 The dismantling of American missiles in Turkey began as well and the missiles were removed a few months later . U.S. missiles were also removed from Turkey in 2010 .
 Estimates at the time of the crisis, of casualties had the two nations traded nuclear missiles, were in the hundreds of millions of millions .
 The only leader to survive in power for more than two years was Castro Castro . Castro was Castro's only leader for over two years . Castro is the only leader in the world to survive a two-year rule .
 Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 and Khrushchev was ousted as Soviet leader the following year . Kennedy was ousted from the Soviet Union in 1963 .
 The following source outlines the reasons for the emergence of the Black Power Movement in the United States of America in the 1960s . SOURCE 2A The following page outlines the . reasons for . emergence of Black Power .
 The demand for Black Power in 1966 was an expression of the eagerness among young black activists for militant self-defence and rapid social change . In 1966, Black Power was a popular expression of an eagerness to militant self defence .
 The ‘Black Power’ slogan summarised their bitterness towards white society and their rejection of Martin Luther King Jnr’s philosophy which focussed on non-violence .
 The Black Power Movement celebrated black pride and stressed the importance of black selfdetermination as no mass movement had done before . Black Power was the first mass movement to celebrate black pride in a mass movement .
 As never before, the identity of African-Americans became the central focus of the story . The identity of black Americans was never before a central focus in the story of the civil rights movement .
 They were told to reject skin bleaches and hair straighteners, to give their children Islamic names and to glorify soul music . They were also told to avoid skin bleaching and straighteners .
 Black Power’s critique of American society, was accepted by other marginalised groups and helped shape their protests . This message and the critique of U.S. society, accepted by others, helped shape protests .
 On 5 June 1966, James Meredith was shot in ambush as he attempted to complete a peaceful march from Memphis, Tennessee to Jackson Mississippi . Meredith was killed in an ambush on 5 June 1965 .
 Civil Rights Leaders such as Martin Luther King Jr, Floyd McKissick of the Congress of Racial Equality and Stokely Carmichael of the Student Non – Violent Coordinating Committee rushed to Meredith's hospital bed .
 They were determined that the march James Meredith started must be completed . They are determined to complete the march they started .
 Local townspeople harassed the marchers while the police turned a blind eye or arrested the activists as troublemakers . The activists were arrested by the police or arrested by local police .
 Carmichael felt that African Americans needed to feel a sense of racial pride and self-respect before any meaningful gains could be achieved . Carmichael said African Americans need to feel racial pride before meaningful gains were achieved .
 He encouraged the strengthening of African American communities without the help of white Americans . He encouraged African Americans to strengthen their communities without white Americans' help .
 SNCC and CORE began to reject white membership as Carmichael abandoned peaceful resistance . SNCC rejected the white membership of CORE and SNCC .
 Colleges teamed up with young blacks wearing traditional African colours and clothes . Colleges teamed with young black students to wear traditional African clothes .
 At the bottom of the photograph Americans are seen protesting for ‘BLACK LIVES MATTER’ after George Floyd was killed by a white American police officer on 25 May 2020 .
 The film was released in 1973 . It was one of the most influential films in American cinema history . The film became a major part of American culture .
 For the first time, blacks in the U.S. were encouraged to acknowledge their African heritage . The first time in the United States, black Americans were encouraged .
 Colleges and universities established black studies programmes and black studies departments . Black studies departments were established in the 1930s .
 Blacks now found out that African culture was as rich and diverse as any other and they were encouraged to take pride in that heritage . Blacks now find out that . African culture is as rich .
 The Black Arts Movement, seen by some as connected to the Black Power Movement, flourished in the 1960s and 1970s . It was seen as a precursor to the movement's Black Power movement .
 Young black poets, authors and visual artists found their voices and shared those voices with others . Young black writers and artists share their experiences with each other .
 Unlike earlier black arts movements such as the Harlem Renaissance, the new movement primarily sought out a black audience . The new movement sought out the black audience of black people .
 The same spirit of racial unity and pride that made the Black Power Movement so dynamic also made it difficult and to some, dangerous . Black Power was a movement that made it hard and dangerous .
 Blacks were still victims of racism, whether they were charged a higher rate for a mortgage, getting paid less than a white co-worker for doing the same work, or facing violence at the hands of whites .
 Some suggested that blacks received paramilitary training and carried guns to protect themselves . Some, however, suggested that black men carried guns . Some said blacks were trained to carry guns .