 This omission can be attributed to the slow pace of declassification of relevant documents by both Washington and London . This is not the first time the UK has declassified relevant documents .
 The story is a case study in the emergence of an intelligence liaison during the Cold War . They tell a story that illuminates the blurry intersection of intelligence and foreign policymaking .
 Livingston Merchant telephoned British Ambassador to Washington Sir Harold Caccia to inform him and his government, 'before the news was carried on the radio', that the U.S. was breaking diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 This was a logical supposition given Berne's neutrality and tiny two-person embassy in Havana . United Kingdom's status as a Cold War ally with a sizable embassy in Cuba that enjoyed close working relations with the American diplomats stationed there .
 He urged the Embassy in Washington to 'exercise discretion, and not hand over reports, even those not marked ""Guard""", without scrutiny'
 A real survey of Castro's enemies, both internal and external, would require a serious intelligence collection and collation effort combining information from the U.S., Mexico, Caracas, and other Latin American sources .
 The British could not help but notice the mounting signs of a potential intervention in Cuba by anti-Castro forces, with or without overt U.S. aid or involvement . Nevertheless, like any close observer, the British could . help but noticed the mounting . signs of an intervention in
 London crossed swords with John Foster Dulles over CIA operation that overthrew Guatemala's leftist Arbenz government in 1954 . London thought the Eisenhower administration was exaggerating the Communist threat in Central America .
 British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd secretly cabled Ambassador Caccia to try to find out whether to expect Washington to attempt a repeat of the 1954 affair .
 Dulles hoped that a British refusal to transfer the Hunter jets would compel Castro to turn behind the Iron Curtain for arms, and in so doing help provoke opposition both inside Cuba and in the region . In fact, Dulles admitted candidly, he hoped that . that a refusal to
 Dulles was referring to a weapons shipment from Czechoslovakia that had been disclosed by Washington and used to help tarnish the Arbenz regime as Kremlin-aligned .
 Caccia reported that 'he hoped that any refusal by us to supply arms would directly lead to a Soviet bloc offer to supply' Dulles repeated, 'on a personal basis', that he hoped that 'any refusal by . us to . supply arms' would 'directly lead
 He was convinced that Castro was not only a bad man but had a streak of lunacy in his make-up which might have incalculable results . Then he might be able to do something, he said .
 Eisenhower secretly approved a CIA plan to sponsor an anti-Castro invasion in 1960 . A few months later, in March 1960, Eisenhower approved the plan to invade Cuba .
 It is not clear from the sanitized United States record of the conversation, nor does it seem likely, that the American revealed that this 'most encouraging development' was actually a by-product of the secret plan approved by Eisenhower in March to initiate a covert operation .
 Macmillan promised Eisenhower in early July to 'try to help you in any way we can' over what might develop into a 'really serious Russian threat' in Cuba . Senior U.S. officials remained disappointed by British reluctance to take firmer measures against the Castro regime .
 Eisenhower: 'Our allies equated every problem with every other problem' Eisenhower suggested that the problem was 'equating every problem' with other problems .
 On 22 July 1960, Macmillan responded with a 'personal, sympathetic, and rather ""hawkish""' telegram . Lamented that he could do nothing to block shipping in peacetime but otherwise commiserated over Washington's predicament .
 Eisenhower sent a long recitation of 'the Cuban problem' but dodged Macmillan's apparent efforts to learn more about covert operations . Eisenhower described plans for economic and 'counterpropaganda' efforts against the Castro government .
 A frustrated Macmillan gave up his attempts to prod the Americans into a franker exposition of their strategy for toppling Castro . The correspondence with Eisenhower petered out .
 Castro had taken measures in January 1961 against the United States Embassy in Cuba . Castro's actions had led to the cutting of diplomatic relations between the two countries .
 British observers in Havana unsure what to make of the January 1961 war scare . British observers unsure what was happening .
 The Cuban leadership 'may genuinely fear' that Eisenhower might 'at least do nothing to prevent counter revolutionary ventures inside and into Cuba' before his term ended on 20 January . Marchant conceded the possibility that they may fear that Eisenhower, evidently committed to overthrowing Castro, might .
 As the presidential transition passed in Washington without any major action by 22 February 1961 Marchant could report that 'the tension which rose hysterically during the phantom invasion is down to uneasy normal again again'
 Foreign Office officials seemed impressed by analysis of American options by Che Guevera in mid-February . Che had been credited with 'sound a note of sanity and caution' during the January war scare .
 British analysts took special note of Che's citing of continued aid from 'the Soviet bloc and China' in the face of the American trade embargo .
 If Castro's position was relatively secure, Foreign Office specialists seemed to agree, then pressure tactics such as an economic blockade were bound to prove counterproductive as well as futile . Britain and other American allies would be prodded to join in .
 Anti-Castro Cuban exile forces in the hopes of stimulating an island-wide revolt . They differed on the scale and strength of internal resistance within Cuba, and the practicality of any attempt to overthrow the Cuban revolutionary government .
 Rumors of a possible assault on Cuba by anti-Castro forces in the near future streamed into London from various diplomatic outposts . The British Embassy in Havana transmitted regular reports on what it could learn about the level of anti-government activity .
 Reports concluded that despite some grumbling and pockets of acute anti-government feeling, Castro and his government appeared firmly entrenched in power . These reports concluded in every instance that . despite some . grumbling, . some . pockets of . acute anti government feeling, . Castro and . his government
 A Latin American Department analyst observed that 'guerrilla activity can be endemic for long periods, without necessarily disrupting the national life or leading to the downfall of the government' More pessimistic appraisals of the chances for success of any invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro forces came from the
 Signs that an operation was imminent grew more concrete and alarming, alarming, widespread, and credible . Signs of an operation were consistent with U.S. claims that the Cuban Embassy had been routinely reporting for months .
 In late March, an 'increasingly disquieted' British Ambassador in Caracas expressed concern to the Foreign Office about reports that anti-Castro forces were planning to invade Cuba and expecting to receive 'massive' U.S. cooperation .
 Even if the invasion succeeded in installing a democratic regime, Busk warned, the impact of this blatant example of interference in a sovereign country would be 'disastrous'
 Prospect of badly organised landings planned on the assumption that internal opposition is strong enough to give decisive support continues to cause considerable concern to me and all my European colleagues .
 Marchant's analysis also appeared compatible with the conclusions of a 'paper being considered by the J.I.C.C.' which are, broadly, that the Castro regime will probably last' Edmonds noted that a landing of anti-Castro forces in the near future that counted
 Morale inside Cuba would be the 'decisive' factor in any clash of arms, since the 'well-armed' militia numbered about 200,000 . The militia is large enough to crush a landing force of the scale being bandied about in reports .
 He saw no sign that the population was ready to rise up in support of a returning exile army, especially one lacking a popular leader and possibly tainted by charges of including Batista supporters and others .
 It is unclear whether British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan passed on the gist of the FO's warnings when he met with President Kennedy .
 The two touched only briefly on Cuba during a series of formal and informal meetings .
 According to Macmillan's account, Kennedy (like Eisenhower before him) did not explicitly tell him about the CIA-backed invasion .
 President alluded cryptically to the 'disposal problem' of 1,200 Cuban exiles in Miami . Asked the Briton what he thought should be done with them, he replied .
 Kennedy noted that 'of course' Ambassador Adlai Stevenson would deny any United States role in the affair at the U.N. He thought it would be better to let them go to Cuba and become guerrillas'
 British diplomats apparently did transmit that viewpoint to counterparts in the State Department . State Department appears not to disagree seriously with them .
 An effective uprising in support of an invasion could not yet be expected, says the U.S. Embassy at Havana . The embassy at Havana showed that an effective uprising was not yet expected .
 14 landing craft were assembled in Puerto Cabezas on the Atlantic coast to transport 2,000 anti-Castro fighters to Cuba . French diplomat in Managua told 'in strictest confidence' by a source close to the government .
 They were expecting to receive United States air support as they came ashore . There they were expecting U.S. air support .
 In Washington, urgent inquiries to the State Department by the British Embassy failed to add to early press reports of the invasion . But a conversation with one mid-level official (the Deputy Director of Caribbean Affairs) on 17 April seemed to confirm the divergence in British and American analyses of the situation
 Marchant and his European diplomatic colleagues in Havana were critical of the U.S. State Department . But there was essential agreement between Marchant's assessments and those of mid-level State Department specialists .
 State also agreed that it was 'unlikely that internal uprisings alone would bring the Government down in view of the strength of Castro's police force' a prediction that succeeding days would bear out .
 It concluded despite the lack of official confirmation from Washington that the intervention had at the very least the Kennedy administration's full blessing and probably its active support . The precise role remained unclear, although it remained unclear .
 Hankey admitted that a serious miscommunication, misperception, or worse had caused London to misjudge its main ally's intentions . While insisting that the 'news was not entirely unexpected'
 The Foreign Office had received numerous reports indicating that an invasion was in the offing . But 'had supposed, however, from all that we have been told by the Americans that they did not consider the moment altogether ripe for such an operation'
 The British ambassador and his colleagues in London and Havana feared that the angered, humiliated Americans might compound the error by ordering a second, more massive armed invasion of Cuba . But the British ambassador said he was shaken by what they regarded as appallingly bad judgement by this inexperienced new U.
 This would have even worse consequences so they set out to do whatever they could to prevent that from happening . This would be even worse, they say . They say they want to prevent it from happening again . This is the first time they have been able to do so .
 Ambassador warned that it would be 'wrong' to conclude that U.S. tolerance of a Communist regime would last indefinitely . JFK refused to use force to save the invasion from collapsing .
 Caccia reported on 4 May after a session with national security adviser McGeorge Bundy that 'Cuba has been a hard blow'
 Caccia's concerns reflected doubts about the new US leadership, and the implications for the Anglo-American alliance and the Cold War as a whole .
 I 'feel in my bones' that President Kennedy is going to fail to produce any real leadership . President Kennedy will not be able to produce real leadership, Sen. Ted Kennedy says .
 Otherwise we may drift to disaster over Berlin over Berlin a terrible diplomatic defeat or a nuclear war . Otherwise, it may be a terrible loss of power or a terrible defeat or nuclear war.
 British loss of confidence in the competence, judgment, and direction of their principal ally across the Atlantic was also accompanied by, some degree, a loss of trust . The UK lost trust in the U.S. in the relationship with Russia, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Having been burned once, the British now doubted whether they could take at face value claims by Kennedy and his associates that they would not now invade Cuba absent some major provocation .
 Failure to recognize Cuban realities clearly understood and communicated by Her Majesty's representatives in Havana, deception of the inexperienced new U.S. president, and questionable merging of analytical and operational responsibilities in the same agency .
 A has further suffered and it is hard to see how it can continue to function as previously ...', declared Caccia . 'Hard to see' how the A has continued to function, declared the Italian politician .
 The British believed these had the best agent network among opposition groups within Cuba . They were believed to have the best network within the opposition groups .
 The Kennedy administration seemed to open the door to more intimate consultations with the British . British officials reacted enthusiastically when the Kennedy administration opened the door .
 The American reaffirmed his interest in keeping 'in close touch with us over the Cuban situation', the British envoy cabled London . The American closed the meeting, which he had initiated, by reaffirming his interest .
 Ambassador Marchant in Havana responded with alacrity to Achilles' invitation . He substituted the embassy's Head of Chancery, Iain Sutherland, for a 'casual courier' who was scheduled to visit Washington .
 Foreign policy-makers seek to gain leverage by providing intelligence information . It is a nice illustration of the presumably common (but rarely documented) phenomenon of foreign policy-making .
 Marchant dispatched post-mortems on the invasion, stressing the lack of coordination with anti-regime opponents within Cuba . Sutherland journeyed to Washington for a series of private meetings with United States officials .
 Hankey's urgent message from Hankey was waiting for him at the British Embassy in London . The FO's hopes and tactics regarding his forthcoming encounter are underlined by Hankey .
 Second, the invaders' failed to coordinate their actions with potential allies inside Cuba, especially Ray's group . Third, the invasion failed to communicate their actions to potential allies in the country .
 Castro's held 'at least the passive support' of a majority of Cubans until the end of 1960 . Castro's support had been ebbing prior to the Bay of Pigs, but his position was greatly strengthened as a result of recent events .
 Fourth, there was a lack of a 'really popular' figure among the anti-Castro activists . There was also a 'popular' figure in the Cuban community .
 There were no severe shortages of commodities or other economic problems that threatened Castro's rule or could not be alleviated with Soviet aid .
 A second US-backed intervention, direct or indirect, would be a grave mistake, the British warned . It would not only fail to stimulate an anti-Castro uprising, but would meet even Fiercer resistance than had the first one .
 The CIA director denied that the invasion plan had counted on a popular uprising in support of the landing . He said the attackers 'represented pro-Batista forces' or that Ray's supporters had been excluded .
 The US-British meetings offered an opportunity for some detailed exchanges and comparison of notes, and what appeared to be an amicable understanding to continue and deepen intelligence-sharing arrangements .
 The Americans probed in particular for any evidence Sutherland could pass along on the role of Soviet and Soviet-bloc (e.g., Czech) technicians and advisors in putting down the Bay of Pigs landing . The size of the Soviet Embassy in Havana and the extent of Castro's coordination
 Sutherland calls for the U.S. to help the British Embassy collate and analyze intelligence on key personalities in both the pro-Castro and anti-Castrovro camps . Sutherland, for his part, put in a plea for the understaffed British Embassy .
 But looming over all the discussions was uncertainty over what would and should follow in the confrontation between Washington and Havana .
 The National Security Council shelved any plans for an early military intervention or blockade in favor of a diplomatic offensive in Latin America to 'condemn and isolate' Castro regime .
 Achilles' comments comforted British officials somewhat, but considerable uneasiness remained . Achilles said Achilles' words comforted officials somewhat . Achilles' comment comforted the British .
 U.S. Govt will find itself face to face with the fact that the only way of getting rid of Castro in the reasonably near future is by military intervention . Sooner or later I am sure the United States Govt .
 Emotional undercurrents also unsettled AngloAmerican ties in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs . The Bay was a major source of tension between the two countries .
 The event helped expose the ambivalence at the heart of the British view of their ally across the Atlantic . A complex mixture of gratitude and admiration at American readiness to take on the burden of leading and defending the West in the Cold War struggle against Communism .
 At times, these sentiments contributed to a bit of schadenfreude at the Americans' plight as they struggled to escape the hole they had dug themselves .
 The British Embassy in Washington considered the 'general tone' of recent CIA and State Department assessments passed to London . NIE 8561 of 28 November was 'not markedly out of line' with those of Britain's embassy in Havana .
 As 1962 began, then, the situation in and regarding Cuba seemed, for the moment, relatively stable . The situation in 1962 began as a relatively stable state of Cuba .
 In his year-end review, Marchant reaffirmed his strong belief that the Bay of Pigs had been a godsend for Castro .
 April invasion 'made the Suez campaign look like a successful picnic', says Marchant . Neither Marchant nor his Canadian colleague in Havana discerned any opposition figures in or out of Cuba who seemed to enjoy significant popular support .
 Marchant later recalled the first months of 1962 as a comparatively placid time when most Cubans seemed to concentrate on going about their daily business and getting on with their lives . Political excitement confined to behind-thescenes strains within the leadership, he said .
 With Castro momentarily in the background as the year opened (having criticized his own cult of personality and launched a short-lived experiment in collective leadership), the 'government seemed determined as far as possible to get the country back to normal'
 The Militia was sent back to school and to work and there were fewer beards, guns and uniforms to be seen in the streets . The militia was sent home and sent to school .
 Kennedy said he intended to mobilise the Organisation of American States to bring pressure on Cuba because Castro's regime was 'really intolerable' The U.S. president evidently did not tell Macmillan that the diplomatic effort to increase hemispheric pressure was but one public face of an ambitious
 The renewed focus on crushing the revolutionary regime on the island would also include stepped-up pressure on the United Kingdom and other European allies to join in the economic sanctions against Havana .
 Beginning in late January 1962, these two storylines would run in parallel, and increasing in intensity as alarm mounted in the summer and early autumn at the Soviet military build-up in Cuba .
 The trade dispute story offers a fascinating glimpse into perennial Anglo-American disagreements during the Cold War over the efficacy and propriety of 'economic warfare' as well as in relation to the Castro regime ever since it took power .
 The latter resisted pressure to restrict British trade or shipping with Cuba as matters of 'principle' as well as UK economic self-interest . The UK resisted pressure on Cuba to restrict trade as 'principles'
 The Sturm and Drang over possible British and NATO economic sanctions against Havana is the backdrop for Anglo-American relations with Cuba .
 British officials in London were doing their utmost to resist NATO conscription into Washington's campaign against Cuba . Ironically, the British Embassy in Havana was seeking to expand intelligence cooperation among NATO allies .
 Iain Sutherland raised the subject when he cabled back to London an inquiry as to the advisability of comparing notes with other NATO missions in Havana . The JIC paper on that topic was reportedly under preparation .
 He assumed it would be shown to the Americans but wondered whether it would also be discussed in NATO channels as well . He asked whether the Americans would be able to discuss it with NATO channels .
 The French have an Air Attache resident in Mexico and accredited to Havana who had now paid two visits to Cuba . The French, for instance, have a resident in the Mexican capital of Mexico, accredited to Cuba, and a Cuban air attache .
 We quoted him on one or two points of identification in the report on the military parade . The report was published by CNN.com .
 The Dutch have some quite good contacts through KLM in the aviation field . KLM is a major carrier in the world and has a long history of flying .
 Sutherland's message sparked a series of inquiries in London and Washington regarding the scope of British and West European intelligence activities on Cuba and cooperation with the U.S.
 Parsons proposed regular but informal exchanges among interested NATO embassies, beginning with the British, Canadians, Dutch, Germans, 'and possibly Italians'
 K Elliott noted that an operation that looked 'too much like an organised NATO activity' would be 'very awkward indeed' if word escaped . 'The few NATO countries left out will be resentful and make a fuss' when they found out .
 He 'strongly' opposed including the Germans and Italians (let alone the Portuguese or Norwegians), and bringing in the others would depend on 'those Missions' security arrangements, and the degree of Cuban competence .
 We are rather concerned that the Americans do not seem to be telling us all they know in this field . We are worried that they don't seem to tell us what they know about it .
 J.I.B. do not consider that this particular point is sufficiently important for you to take any risks in finding about the points in their brief . J.B.'s brief does not concern you with any risk of taking risks .
 It would be a great pity to expend your limited resources in this direction on gathering intelligence that is already available in the Pentagon . They mention they have had difficulty in getting information of this sort from the Americans .
 Edmonds suspected that U.S. intelligence was conducting aerial reconnaissance of Cuba and refusing to divulge the results even to their closest ally . Edmonds did not mention it to Havana .
 British Embassy in Havana asked to investigate reports of increased shipping traffic from Soviet-bloc to Cuba . Concern was raised in the wake of high-level Soviet-Cuban exchanges .
 The Anglo-American consultations took the form of two lengthy meetings at the Pentagon . The meetings were attended by representatives of various service intelligence branches and the National Security Agency .
 Slater said the 'useful background' to the latest reports was provided by the 'excellent' NIE produced by the CIA shortly before they appeared . Slater noted that the Americans did not feel the need to modify their assessment of Cuban military strength . Slater said that the CIA did not
 NIEs incorporated intelligence 'obtained by all methods' and the Pentagon had assured him that this would be true for the Havana embassy as well . It seemed superfluous, since in any case .
 Asking the U.S. about aerial reconnaissance intelligence missions might be awkward and counterproductive as well as awkward as well .
 The Americans might consider aerial reconnaissance over Cuba to be 'a particularly sensitive subject at the present time' in light of increasing evidence that the Soviet bloc's latest model radar equipment and surface-to-air missiles might be arriving in Cuba .
 Washington had been periodically sending U-2s over Cuba throughout 1962 . The most recent flight was on 5 August .
 A U-2 plane for the first time photographed clear evidence that SAM missile sites were under construction in Cuba . The mission was a 'milestone' in the crisis .
 President Kennedy warned the Kremlin that 'the gravest issues would arise' if the Soviets install offensive weapons or establish military bases in Cuba .
 Rodgers made it clear that the Americans now possessed irrefutable evidence about the presence of ground-to-air and short-range sea-To-sea missiles .
 'considerable amount' of intelligence on Cuba had come from overhead reconnaissance, it was revealed . This left the Britons with the impression that a significant amount of intelligence had been obtained from overhead .
 Sutherland was interested in learning what the British thought the Soviets would do next . Sutherland's interest in learning about the Soviets' intentions was revealed in the book . Sutherland: "It's a good story. It's a great story"
 Khrushchev had responded to Kennedy's 4 September statement by issuing a TASS announcement reaffirming the Kremlin's commitment to defend revolutionary Cuba from U.S. aggression .
 The American also queried whether the British believed that the new evidence of a stronger Soviet military commitment to Cuba presaged some sort of bargain, or new crisis, over Berlin . Perhaps one of the countries bordering the Soviet Union with U.S. military bases such as Iran or Turkey .
 Rodgers' ominous concerns seemed to reflect those of senior Pentagon and State Department officials, Sutherland says . Sutherland did not share that interpretation .
 Recent U.S. intelligence on Soviet-bloc shipments superseded the information, inventory, and conclusions in the NIE which had formed the basis for the previous brief given the British .
 Sutherland received a list of preliminary 'priority targets' identified by U.S. intelligence, mostly in Havana, for the embassy staff to investigate . Now, although a formal new brief is not ready, Sutherland has received a preliminary list of targets .
 Washington resumed pressure on NATO allies, especially Britain, to curtail its trade and shipping ties with Cuba . Washington resumed its pressure on the NATO allies to curtail their trade .
 By late August, several factors were pushing Cuba to the forefront of the Kennedy administration's concerns, including the intelligence reports of the Soviet military build-up and the internal momentum of the covert Operation 'Mongoose' program .
 The preponderant U.S. attitude toward Britain and other European allies on the Cuban issue was exasperation, irritation, frustration, frustration and resentment . Washington's putative partners in the battle against Communism around the world could seem complacent and even mercenary when it came to doing business
 State Department officials complained that 'NATO continues generally to regard Cuba as a US problem' while Lansdale groused that 'Critical spare parts still arrive in Cuba'
 Kremlin's shipments of hardware constituted a serious new commitment to preserving Castro's regime . Despite recognition by September that the Kremlin's . shipments of . hardware constituted . a serious . commitment to preserve Castro's . regime (rather than a 'propaganda exercise')
 The Kennedy administration's impatience with British reluctance to join in their anti-Cuban efforts and secrecy regarding sharing information . The schism between Washington and London may therefore have inhibited and hampered intelligence cooperation regarding military developments in Cuba .
 On the eve of the missile crisis, nine months of disagreements over trade with Cuba had brought Anglo-American relations to a prickly juncture .
 A communique released after the meeting declared that the two had agreed on means to contain Communist 'expansion and subversion' But privately there was no meeting of the minds on the issue of Anglo-Cuban economic ties, it said .
 Foreign Secretary told Home he 'simply couldn't understand' why London refused to help the U.S. by joining in a trade embargo against Castro . Kennedy impatiently told Home that he couldn't 'understand' why he refused to join in the trade embargo .
 American officials were in fact trying to step up covert attacks in the Operation 'Mongoose' program . They responded . rather disingenuously that while opposing such attacks in principle the US was powerless to stop them .
 Alpha 66 conducted naval and coastal raids such as those that Alpha 66 had been conducting . Asked the Britons for their assessment of the impact on 'the Cuban populace' of the raids .
 There appear to have been no significant differences, however, between US and British intelligence estimates regarding the unlikelihood of Khrushchev's deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba .
 The British Embassy in Havana was stunned by the revelation that the Soviets had secretly sent nuclear-capable mediumand intermediate-range missiles in Cuba . Kennedy and his advisers in Washington .
 CIA analysts believed Khrushchev would be loathe to risk such an action . British experts in London and Havana shared the view of CIA analysts .
 They attributed proliferating reports of varying reliability regarding Soviet bloc military activities in Cuba to well-known erection of surface-to-air missile sites and other defensive preparations .
 The ongoing transmission to U.S. officials of reports from the British Embassy in Havana did not shake the prevailing assumptions in Washington .
 No evidence emerged to suggest that it affected the timing of the United States discovery or decision-making regarding the U-2 overflights that led to it . Nor has any evidence emerged that it .
 British skepticism at the Kennedy administration's initial claims that the Kremlin had deployed such missiles in Cuba ran so deep that Ormsby-Gore implored Kennedy to authorize the release of the U-2 photographs of missile sites .
 JIB director General Strong was initially 'quite skeptical', McCone later told the Excomm, but gradually 'became thoroughly convinced' and helped persuade Ormsby-Gore and his government that the missiles were for real .
 Graham Greene's Our Man in Havana is the fictional protagonist of Our Man In Havana . He was able to captivate his handlers with bogus agent reports and blueprints of a secret weapon under construction .
 This was actually modeled on the parts of an Atomic Pile vacuum cleaner . The sprayer detached from the hose-handle of the cleaner .
 Any record of the story of these first two weeks of the Cuban Crisis must necessarily read more like a wildly improbable sequel to 'Our Man in Havana' than a Foreign Office despatch. My Lord, My Lord .
 Soviet Russia was to be credited with shipping some four dozen giant missiles, each one longer than a cricket pitch, across the Atlantic to Cuba . Russian technicians disguised as agricultural advisers would set them up in secret on launching sites some of them just off the main road .
 No publisher could have accepted a Chapter II in which less than a week later the same missiles were being feverishly dismantled, packed up and reshipped back across the Atlantic .
 Marchant conceded, however, that the storm did not break 'out of a clear sky' as most Cubans had been waiting for at least two years for 'something to happen' that would end the uncertainty and suspense clouding the Castro regime .
 Intelligence agencies must be excused if they tend to discount the hundreds of recent rocket stories from their usually unreliable sources . Intelligence agencies are excused for discounting the stories .
 The arrival of much of the Russian equipment, the daily movements of technicians, of the sand and cement, all this was cheerfully accounted for by the fact that the Russians were known to be busy building ground to air rocket sites all over the country .
 Marchant believed installing 'offensive missiles' in Cuba was the one thing that could justify a U.S. invasion . It had seemed 'axiomatic' to Marchant and his diplomatic associates in Havana that 'with offensive rockets based in Cuba he could not survive as ""maximum leader
 The results of photographic reconnaissance of mid-October showed just how wrong we had been', the British envoy acknowledged . The British envoy said the results showed 'how wrong we'd been'
 Foreign Office prepared and circulated a confidential 'tentative assessment' of the motives for the missile deployment . The Foreign Office said Khrushchev's main aim was to shore up the Soviet position in the strategic nuclear balance .
 Roberts was willing to entertain the possibility that Khrushchev may have genuinely feared a U.S. attack to wipe out Castro's fledgling regime . Roberts: Unlike most United States analysts, however, Roberts was not willing to accept the possibility .
 "He is an intelligent man with a deep understanding of his immense responsibilities not just to the people of the United States alone but to the whole human race," he said .
 He kept in close touch with every aspect of the whole operation, one moment asking McNamara to check whether U.S. Air Force aircraft in Florida were properly dispersed in case of a surprise attack .
 He telephoned incessantly but this extraordinary attention to detail did not prevent him from keeping the main issues clearly in focus . He kept his attention to the fact that he was there for the interview .
 The period of most acute tension was during Tuesday night and Wednesday morning when the President assumed contact would be made between Soviet and American ships . The President assumed that contact would shortly be made .
 If the Soviet ships had orders to try and run the blockade a serious clash would ensue, he said . Events from then on might take on an intensely dangerous turn, he realized .
 Once it was known that the Communist bloc ships were turning back and the first surprisingly mild reactions from Moscow had been gauged the President was visibly relieved of a great burden .
 It is true that by Friday night he was becoming impatient and even angry but his reactions and his anger at this time were more nearly in the style he displayed when he thought he had been doublecrossed by the steel barons .
 Comparable arrangements presumably continued regarding reports from Canadian and West European diplomats resident in Havana, as well as the Chilean Embassy .
 Evaluating impact of the relationship on the events of 1961-62 must necessarily be an iffy business . Evaluating the impact on the relationship is a tough business, however .
 British skepticism about the efficacy of a US-backed emigre operation to topple Castro did little or nothing to deter or those CIA and Kennedy administration officials who approved the Bay of Pigs .
 It seems more likely that British advice was taken more seriously after the April 1961 debacle . It reinforced the position of those in the State Department, the CIA, and the administration who warned that Castro's position had if anything become stronger .
 Anglo-American friction over how best to deal with Cuba may have impaired intelligence cooperation . U.S. secrecy regarding aerial reconnaissance and covert operations could have impaired cooperation with Cuba .
 British intelligence seems to have zero effect on the CIA's location of the Soviet deployment, but London's analyses may have served to corroborate the U.S. post-hoc interpretation of Khrushchev's action .
 The story does not compel any dramatic alteration in our understanding of the crises in 1961-62, but does illuminate the uses of intelligence within alliances . It offers a slightly more skeptical, less Washington-centric view of this Cold War story .
 The story presented yields some unusually candid peeks into the Anglo-American 'special relationship' during one of its more difficult passages . And, finally, the story presents an unusually candid peek into the relationship .
 There have been scattered allusions to British intelligence assessments of the dim prospects for success of an anti-Castro invasion prior to the Bay of Pigs landing .
 Only Dino A Brugioni and Mark White refer even in passing to the secret information-sharing arrangement . London passed to Washington reports from the British Embassy in Havana .
 The author also thanks David Welch, Welsey Wark, Raymond Garthoff, Sam Halpern, Tim Naftali, Piero Gleijeses and Domingo Amuchastegui for helpful comments during the preparation of this essay .
 One official minuted that 'we might ... approach the State Department' on the matter . It is not clear if Britain formally requested that the Americans undertake a general assessment of the anti-Castro forces .
 Dulles noted that he had not cleared his statements with the State Dept., but his reasoning seems to have been shared there and the Anglo-American discussion on that point seemed to be shared there . Dulles: "It's a fundamental divergence about how to deal with Castro and the Cuban
 The Eisenhower Administration had also pressured the British to block the sale of six unarmed helicopters to the Cuban Navy . In the preceding months, the Eisenhower Administration also had also .
 In Aug.60 the Americans gave the British an aide-memoire noting the 'deteriorating' Cuban situation . The U.S. determined to restrict exports to Cuba of military equipment . The British agreed to go along with the policy .
 It was mostly the prospective highvisibility American role what Kennedy would call the noise level that Busk objected to . Busk was concerned about the potential high-profile American role in the Vietnam War .
 Material relevant to the Cuban crises remains closed and exempted from the 30-year rule . Unfortunately, although some JIC records have been released, some of them remain closed .
 Neither a State Dept. briefing paper prepared for the JFK-Macmillan talks specifically mentioned Cuba among the topics formally addressed at the summit .
 Macmillan's aide-memoire documented private exchange with JFK described below . British records of conversations with JFK are not found in British records .
 Declassified U.S. documents indicate that Ray Ray, a former minister of public works under Castro, was in fact included in pre-Bay of Pigs planning among anti-Castro exile leaders on the Cuban Revolutionary Council beginning in late Feb.61 .
 Ray offered a more plausible chance of rallying anti-Castro opinion within Cuba . Schlesinger complained about the CIA's negative attitude toward Ray because of his alleged lack of controllability . The CIA had a negative view of Ray because he offered a better chance to rally against Castro .
 Canada, along with Britain, provided political and military intelligence on Cuba from its embassy in Havana to U.S. officials after Washington severed relations with Cuba . As will be seen below, Canada and Britain provided intelligence to United States officials .
 The Pentagon's Maj. Braddock, Robert A Stevenson and Robert A. Hurwich, and P. Torrey, are among the Pentagon's top military brass .
 Such counter-revolutionary organisations as existed inside Cuba have been hamstrung, at least temporary . The Cuban government has been forced to step back from its anti-revolutionist roots .
 He reaffirmed that view in the following month in his annual review for 1961 .
 British reluctance to interfere in trade relations with Cuba extended to a refusal to go along with U.S. proposals to use such assets in anti-Castro operations or to undermine the Cuban economy .
 Parsons would be Britain's UN Ambassador during the 1982 Falklands War . Parsons was Britain's ambassador to the Falklands during the war . Parsons would have been Britain's Ambassador to the UN in 1982 .
 Draft had added the words 'and possibly the Germans and Italians if necessary' to the list of embassies, but this was deleted in the final letter . The draft had added 'possibly' Germans and Italy if necessary .
 Marchant allowed that the 4,000 total might hold if it included both military personnel and civilian technicians . Marchant said it might hold more if it includes both military and civilian personnel . The U.S. military says it has more than 3,000 troops in the country .
 U.S. intelligence estimated at the time that 3,000-5,000 Soviet-bloc personnel were in Cuba . CIA director John McCone presented the latest intelligence information to top officials, including Rusk, McNamara, Robert Kennedy .
 Cromartie: 'The U.2's are in the headlines again. See handwritten comments on 4 Sept.62, and a P.USD representative .
 Parsons, American Dept. of FO, FO, 17 Sept.62, top secret/guard, 11921/62G, enc.62G . Parsons was sent to the U.S. by the State Department of Defense in September . Parsons is a former member of the U
 By late Sept. and early Oct., the British Embassy in Havana was reporting a noticeable letup in the arrival of Soviet military personnel and equipment . The British Embassy reported that by late September and October, it had seen a noticeable decline in Soviet personnel .
 These reports were not shared with the British as part of the information-exchange organized earlier in the year, it appears .
 Ball recorded privately that the measures were intended 'more for American public opinion' than for any practical impact on the Cuban situation . Ball recorded that JFK had 'felt strongly that we had to do something along this line'
 The extent of the British stand was motivated by economic considerations rather than reflections on international law, principle, and Cold War efficacy obviously requires a more detailed study than is possible here .
 Macmillan's apparent allusion to a possible U.S. attack against Cuba 'some months' earlier remains cryptic . Kennedy and his aides later denied any intention to invade Cuba in the months leading up to the discovery of the Soviet missile sites in mid-Oct.62 .
 Quotations from Graham Greene's Our Man in Havana . Greene's book was published by William Heinemann Ltd and Viking Press in 1958 . Greene is best known for his work in Cuba .
 British Embassy, Havana, Havana , 'The Cuban Crisis Chapters I and II', 10 Nov. 1959 . British Embassy in Havana .
 Chilean agreement to pass reports from its embassy in Havana to U.S. officials was reached during President Jorge Alessandri's visit to Washington in Dec.62 .
 Cable: U.S. accepted that it was up to Chile to decide whether or not to break relations with Cuba . Cable: 'We did request that so long as they maintained mission in Cuba it would be most helpful to get more information about developments there'
 Antonio Undurraga Perez Cotapos was Counselor and Consul General at the Chilean Embassy in Havana . For the previous 2½ years, he had been Counselor, Consul general at the embassy .