 Atlantic Council’s experts have you covered—delivering their sharpest rapid insight and forward-looking analysis direct to your inbox . Fast Thinking Fast Thinking is the Atlantic Council's latest global news breaking .
 New Atlanticist is where top experts and policymakers at the Atlantic Council and beyond offer exclusive insight on the most pressing global challenges . The Atlantic Council offers exclusive insights on the United States’ role in addressing them .
 Inflection Points is a weekly column by Atlantic Council President and CEO Frederick Kempe . Inflection points focuses on the global challenges facing the U.S. and how to address them .
 UkraineAlert is a comprehensive online publication that provides regular news and analysis on developments in Ukraine’s politics, economy, civil society, and culture . UkraineAlertUkraineAlert is based in Ukraine and provides regular updates on developments .
 UkraineAlert sources analysis and commentary from a wide-array of thought-leaders, politicians, experts, and activists from Ukraine and the global community .
 MENASource offers the latest news from across the Middle East, combined with commentary by contributors and analysis .
 IranSource provides a holistic look at Iran’s internal dynamics, global and regional policies, and posture . IranSource offers unique analysis of current events and long-term, strategic issues related to Iran .
 1962 standoff remains the closest the world has come to nuclear Armageddon . 1962 standoff was the closest to a nuclear war on Earth .
 Plokhii provides relevant insights with new lessons for how to handle today’s tensions . As the world today sees the re-emergence of great power competition among nuclear states, Plokkii .
 With Russian troops once more massing on the Ukrainian border, the U.S. and Europe must make clear to the Kremlin that they stand with Ukraine and will impose serious costs in the event of an offensive .
 If new German government does not block Vladimir Putin’s Nord Stream 2 pipeline weapon, Ukraine will be irreversibly weakened . Germany and Europe as a whole will be sleepwalking into a perpetual gas crunch . Nord Stream2 will test new government's European solidarity .
 EU regulations may yet disarm Vladimir Putin’s pipeline weapon . Putin pushing hard to secure fast track certification for his Nord Stream 2 pipeline . EU anti-trust laws and regulatory system will likely prove no match for Putin's pipeline .
 Remembering the missiles of October by Harlan Ullman . Maintaining a strong, relevant military is vital .
 We should maintain an ‘off ramp’ to prevent the adversarial aspects of international competition from provoking a future military confrontation . However, we should maintain the “Off ramp” to prevent a future confrontation .
 U.S. and global security would be greatly enhanced by extending New START for another five years . The case for extended New START by Alexander Vershbow is the case for extending it .
 Extension would preserve the last effective and verifiable agreement that limits the strategic arms competition between the U.S. and Russia . It would make it easier to maintain deterrence and strategic stability by allowing both sides an assured second strike capability .
 Eurasia Center’s mission is to enhance transatlantic cooperation in promoting stability, democratic values and prosperity in Eurasia, from Eastern Europe and Turkey in the West to the Caucasus and Central Asia in the East .