 The Crisis was an incredibly important event for both the Cold War and the future of negotiations surrounding nuclear weaponry . It was the closest the world has ever come to mass nuclear warfare .
 The negotiations of the Crisis had a profound effect on the future relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Both sides learned valuable lessons which would shape their future strategies in diplomacy .
 The diplomacy of the Crisis was far from polished, as the US attempted to defuse a situation the Soviets had initiated and continually complicated . The U.S. was in the midst of a crisis the Soviets initiated .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev claimed to be instrumental in the peaceful resolution of the Crisis . But his actions only worsened it, increasing the tension in a situation already involving the fate of the world .
 Soviet leader lied about Soviet activity in Cuba, overestimated his negotiating power, sent conflicting messages to American President John F Kennedy, and in how Kennedy‚Äôs handling of the crisis shows the Soviet leader's role in the exacerbation of the Crisis .
 In 1959, Fulgencio Batista was ousted by a group of young Socialist revolutionaries, led by Fidel Castro . Batista had been the Cuban dictator for seven years, but was ousted in 1959 .
 This change in power was primarily a function of the Batista administration‚Äôs disintegration, as the revolutionaries were able to seize power without military confrontation .
 Castro started his Socialist movement to separate Cuba from the capitalist, imperialist, U.S. He saw it as the best way of separating Cuba from capitalism . Castro's Socialist movement was formed in Cuba .
 Soviet aid began in 1960, when they set up a ‘Äútrade-and-aid‚Äù agreement, effectively trading Cuban sugar for Soviet equipment . The agreement was substantial by the beginning of 1962 .
 In response, the United States cut off most of their Cuban sugar importation . The U.S. also cut off their sugar imports from Cuba .
 The U.S. was clearly uncomfortable with Cuba‚Äôs socialism, a feeling that would manifest itself in the Bay of Pigs invasion . A divide was formed, as the United States was unhappy with Cuba's socialism .
 In April 1961, John F Kennedy had just taken office, and Cuba had gone socialist two years before . In April of 1961, Cuba had just gone socialist 2 years before, and the Cuban government had gone from socialist to socialist .
 Dwight D Eisenhower initiated a plan for an attack on Cuba, with the goal of killing Castro . In the final years of his administration, Eisenhower initiated the attack . The attack would kill Castro .
 It was called the Bay of Pigs, the name of the inlet where the invasion was planned to begin . It was also called the bay of Pigs . The invasion began in an inlet known as the 'Bay of Pigs' inlet .
 1,500 Cuban exiles trained by the CIA set out to invade and instigate a revolution . The U.S. used them to instigate an overthrow of the Castro regime .
 The Cuban military had managed to acquire intelligence of the invasion in advance . The U.S. failed to gain popular support from the general Cuban population as they had hoped .
 After several hundred were killed, Kennedy considered sending in air support, but ultimately decided to cut his losses and leave the remaining 1,113 men to be taken prisoners . Kennedy: "After several hundred died, several hundred of them were killed"
 The failed attack at the Bay of Pigs caused the Soviet Union to reevaluate their role as allies of Cuba, to start considering assuming the role of a protector against the U.S. The Soviet Union was reevaluated their role in Cuba .
 Cuba grew towards a style of socialism closer to the Soviet Union‚Äôs. It also caused the divide between the United Stated and Cuba .
 Khrushchev believed the plan accomplished both of these goals efficiently and effectively . The plan was designed to achieve the goals of both the government and the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union was falling far behind the United States in the development of nuclear weapons . Long-range missiles were too weak to reach the U.S. from the Soviet Union . The United States‚Äô missiles could reach the Soviet Russia easily .
 The United States had missiles in Turkey as part of a NATO base, adding to their nuclear power over the Soviets . In addition, the U.S. also had a missile base in Turkey . The missiles were in addition to the nuclear power of the Soviets.
 Khrushchev had been worried that Castro would not comply because he wanted independence, but ultimately he agreed with him . He showed Castro the progress it would make with the defense of Cuba and the spread of communism .
 The United States noticed an increase in Cuban military activity . Reports of nuclear missiles in Cuba began to come in to the U.S. in September .
 U.S. U-2 reconnaissance plane captured images of long, thin, cylindrical objects covered in canvas at Cuban military base . They were confirmed on October 14, when a United States U.2 aircraft captured images .
 Analysts soon confirmed that they were MRBMs, easily within range of the United States . Analysts say they were easily within the U.S. range .
 Days later, the presence of IRBMs was also confirmed, but by then the U.S. had already formed an Executive Committee to deliberate on what action to take, and had begun to mobilize for a possible invasion .
 The U.S. set up a ‚Äúquarantine of Cuba, which prevented any more materials to be shipped into or out of the country, as it was the focus of Khrushchev's early negotiations . The blockade of Cuba was the result of the U.
 Faced with the Soviet missiles, Kennedy the ExComm were forced to make difficult decisions regarding how to respond to the Soviet missile threat . Kennedy the exComm made a difficult decision to respond .
 As the discussion progressed, the idea of a blockade was adopted by John Kennedy as choice . The idea was first suggested by Robert McNamara, who had advocated for an airstrike .
 He saw it as the only way to get what he wanted from the Soviets with the lowest risk of instigating a nuclear war, he said . He said it was the best way of getting what he got from the Soviet with the least risk of a war .
 He was able to gain enough support in the ExComm to go through with it, while continuing to prepare for any military action that hopefully would not be necessary .
 On the Soviet side, Khrushchev‚Äôs confidence was still high, and it would remain high going into his negotiations with Kennedy . Kennedy's negotiations with the Soviet Union would be the first time they had met .
 The roots of Khrushchev‚Äôs worsening of the Crisis are in his initial interaction with the U.S. surrounding Soviet activity in Cuba, which was filled with lies and deception, says historian .
 The Soviets then proceeded to lie outright to United Stated officials about his activity in Cuba . The Soviets lied outright to U.S. officials about the activities in Cuba.
 Kennedy had been told by Andrei Gromyko, Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, that there would be no offensive arms in Cuba . This was after he was told there would not be no ‚Äúoffensive arms‚âù in Cuba”
 Khrushchev ‚Äôs early diplomacy continued to exacerbate the Crisis, as his letters to Kennedy showed no willingness to compromise . With a foundation based in lies and presumptuousness, he continued to exaggerate the crisis .
 A strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated, he said . He made known his plans for a blockade .
 He also insinuated that the United States was prepared to engage the Soviets in combat if they did not comply . The U.S. was prepared for combat if the Soviets failed to comply .
 Any hope for a quick and easy resolution was erased by Khrushchev‚Äô’s response . Any hope of a quick resolution was wiped out by the response to the crisis .
 Khrushchev‚Äô’s letter of the following day was one of incredible defiance and confidence, as he attempted to use the new balance of power he perceived to his advantage .
 Kennedy responded in a brief letter to Khrushchev in which he pointed out that he had initiated the current events by furtively sending the missiles to Cuba . Kennedy responded later that day, in a letter asking for the quarantine to be respected .
 The Soviet leader responded the following day, in a long message explaining his views and feelings . He was still as confident in the negotiating power of the Cuban missiles as he was in his first letter .
 The next section will look at this offer, along with the conflicting one Khrushchev sent immediately after, in more detail . The next part of this article will discuss the offer in detail .
 A backpedaling Khrushchev tried to get out of the conflict without making the mistakes of his initial correspondence too obvious . In this next stage of diplomacy, he tried to avoid making the mistake of the initial correspondence obvious . The next step of diplomacy is to avoid further embarrassment .
 President Obama sent conflicting offers for a resolution of the conflict, which only led to confusion for the U.S. and further aggravated the crisis .
 Khrushchev‚Äô’s newfound desire for peace . The first, sent on October 26, was the conclusion of message focused on Khrushchevitch's desire to peace .
 Despite going on for a while on these points, Khrushchev does back down from them, recognizing Kennedy will never take them as the truth . Kennedy never takes them as truth .
 President Obama proposes a simple resolution to the crisis, offering a promise that no more missiles would be sent if the United States promised not to attack Cuba or assist in attacking her .
 Khrushchev said armaments would no longer be necessary for defending Cuba, and would be removed . The armaments were then removed from Cuba, he said .
 This is a remarkable change from where Khrushchev stood only one letter earlier, when he threatened the U.S. and refused to observe their blockade . The Soviet leader‚Äôs realization that the presence of the missiles in Cuba did not bolster his negotiating power .
 Khrushchev made a second offer, sent the next day, negated progress that had been made towards a solution . This proposal likely would have led to a quick and easy resolution, writes Robert Deitsch .
 Khrushchev sent another one on the 27th that made no reference to the first offer . Kennedy could not respond to the second offer, but he responded quickly .
 Kennedy was praised for his response to U.N. leader U Thant‚Äô’s proposal, which was essentially the same as the one Khrushchev had suggested . Kennedy's response to the proposal was praised as 'a good example'
 He then went on a long-winded complaint about the United States‚Äô military presence around the Soviet Union, especially the missiles they had in Turkey, all of which was not mentioned .
 Khrushchev was making a desperate attempt to save his image as a negotiator, to avoid the weakness portrayed in his first offer . So by bringing up Turkey in this second offer, it is clear he was trying to keep his image intact .
 Kennedy and the ExComm were forced to decide how to respond to Khrushchev‚Äôs enigmatic proposals . This selfish act only heightened the tension of the Crisis for no reason .
 We continue to see how the diplomacy of Khrushchev worsened the crisis by looking at how it affected the U.S. leaders . We will continue to look at how the crisis affected the American leaders .
 There was major controversy which proposal to respond to, adding to the stress that had been building throughout the Crisis . Within the ExComm, there were major controversy over which proposal was chosen .
 The main point of disagreement was whether Khrushchev would accept anything without the Turkey clause . Kennedy predicted that no, they would not, while much of the ExComm believed the Soviets would still accept a response to the first proposal .
 The transcripts of this deliberation also suggest that Robert had more support within the ExComm, as it got to the point where he jokingly suggested Kennedy leave so the rest of them could go forward with their response .
 Khrushchev did accept Kennedy‚Äô’s proposals, the effort Kennedy had to put forth and the uncertainty he had to deal with during his deliberations demonstrate the extent of the intensity of the Crisis .
 If Khrushchev had been consistent and stuck with the proposal his first letter, the tension created by the second letter would have been eliminated . A resolution would've been reached much sooner, historian says .
 With the conclusion of the negotiations, we must look at how the peaceful resolution was reached, and how the road reaching it was lengthened and twisted by Khrushchev . We must also look at the road to a peaceful resolution in the aftermath of the war .
 Khrushchev‚Äôs diplomatic action prevented the sides from easily reaching a peaceful resolution is that his role in the conflict was that of a fraud . The main reason for Khrushchev's diplomatic action is that he was a fraud, writes Peter Bergen .
 He considered the outcome to be a success for the Soviets, in that they accomplished their goals of protecting Cuba and avoiding a nuclear war . We see this in his recounting of the Crisis in a speech given to a Soviet audience .
 Khrushchev also does not mention the ways in which he prolonged the Crisis through his early correspondence and enigmatic proposals . Khrushchev did not mention how he prolonged the crisis through his correspondence and proposals .
 Khrushchev‚Äôs ally in the conflict advocated for an invasion of the United States . Castro was Castro's ally during the Cold War .
 Khrushchev‚Äôs willingness to prevent the Crisis from becoming any worse, but it does not come close to outweighing all the ways he did make it worse .
 Khrushchev had already been assured by Kennedy that the U.S. would not invade Cuba, removing the possibility of a need for soviet involvement, and from the thesis of Harold Macmillan, we know Khrushche had no desire to stand up to a United States
 The Crisis has served as a learning experience for all international conflicts that have arisen since it happened, and will continue to provide valuable lessons for the future . No similar conflicts have occurred since, evident in the fact that no similar wars have occurred .
 Khrushchev‚Äôs lack of intelligence in initiating and prolonging the Crisis. For the Soviets, the most important lesson has been that ‚Úúcrisis avoidance is better than crisis management.‚ Äù . For the U.S
 On the American side, the focus has been on conflict management, and the necessity of compromise in the resolution of any contentious situation . Not that Kennedy failed in this, but that he exemplified the favorable results of not pressing one‚Äôs power too far .
 The Crisis also demonstrated the importance of direct communication, as it was essential to a harmonious resolution to the Crisis . The crisis also demonstrated that direct communication was essential, as well as direct communication .
 Khrushchev came away as the villain, as he continually added stress to a conflict that did not need any more of it, and did nothing to help solve it . However, with this resolution and the way it played out, he was the villain .