 Thesetapes were still highly classified,exceptfor the tapes of October16, 1962, which had been transcribed, ""sanitized"" and published in 1985 . Thesetaped tapes were released in 1985, but were never publicly released .
 President Kennedy was allowed to listen to the still-classified tapes . The tapes were still classified, but Kennedy was in office at the time of the tapes .
 President Kennedy's "setapes" have "importanthistorical value," says author . President Kennedy would have opposed it if he had been asked, he says .
 I thereforeundertook the taskof transcribingthe tapesof the most important day, October 27, and presentlythe necessary Washingtonprocessof ""sanitization"" anddeclassification was completed . Noneof the still-classified materialexcisedaffects the substanceof the transcript
 The full transcript is available from the John F Kennedy Library in Dorchester, Mass. The Kennedy Library is located in the town of Dorchester .
 McGeorgeBundy was Special Assistant for National Security to Presidents Kennedyand Johnson, 19611966 . McGeorge Bundy served as Special Assistant to President Kennedy and Johnson .
 The author is currently working on a book about political decisions related to nuclear weapons .
 InternationalSecurity, Winter 1987/88 C 1987 by Harvard College and Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
 Discussionsinvolvinga numberof speakersare nevereasy to recordand transcribeclearly,and we aredealingwith equipmentof 1962 and a transcriber with no claim to experts .
 In closing, I want to report that in repeatedlisteningto the setapes of discussions in the CabinetRoomon the hardestday of the hardestnuclearcrisisso far, I heard no voiceraisedin angerand no rancorised exchange .
 The tapestell is a questionable decision by JFK, but none of his admirers need to be ashamed of it . JFK's admirers are not ashamed of what I think is the way to make a dangerous decision .
 Blight'ssummary of background and developments of the crisis, indicated by largertype . Blight: "The crisis has been the worst of the worst in the world"
 Italicswithinthe transcriptindicateemphasisnoted by transcriber McGeorgeBundy . Bracketed paragraphs withineachtranscriptsectionsummarizepartsof the full transcriptnot reprintedhere .
 The transcript begins with the ExComm in consternation and initial confusion after having received Khrushchev's second, public, and more demanding letter . The ExComm begins with a note of initial confusion .
 The letter demanded that American Jupiter missiles be removed from Turkey in exchange for removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The letter also demanded that the U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey were removed from the country .
 The members of the ExComm wonder which they should regard as the real Soviet offer . The ExComm. wonder which is which .
 It is clear that all would prefer to reach an accord that does not include the appearance of trading the Jupiter missiles .
 There ensues a wide-ranging discussion in which the President, believing that a trade of missiles will appear fair and reasonable to many observers, is confronted with arguments that such a trade might be very difficult and potentially damaging to intra-NATO relations .
 Reasons for believing in the efficacy of responding to the terms of the first letter while ignoring the second are sought . Reasons are sought to believe in the effectiveness of responding in the terms .
 The development of this response (nicknamed the ""Trollope Ploy") can be traced in this transcript . It was developed as a response to the question: "What do you think of the world?"
 The Trollope Ploy is endorsed by most ExComm members immediately, but the President initially resists it . The trollope ploy was endorsed immediately by the President, but he initially resists .
 He believes it overlooks the wide public appeal of the missile trade proposed in the second letter from Khrushchev .
 The ExComm discusses why two letters were received so quickly, one public and one private, with contradictory contents and conflicting messages . One public letter was received with conflicting contents, one private and one public, with conflicting messages.
 Llewellyn Thompson suggests that after Khrushchev sent the first letter, the Soviets may have become aware of a statement of Austrian Foreign Minister Bruno Kreisky, mentioning the possibility of a missile trade . Thompson suggests the Soviets became aware of Kreisky's statement, mentioning a possible trade
 Thompson suggests that either the Soviets interpreted the statement as a signal of American willingness to trade missiles, or the Soviets themselves put Kreisky up to it . The Soviets then responded affirmatively to a ""signal"" they sent themselves .
 McGeorge Bundy suggests that the private Khrushchev proposal of the day before has been overruled by his harder-line colleagues in the Kremlin . Bundy suggests the proposal was rejected by the hard-line Russian government .
 Thompson suggests they may have been unaware of Khrushchev's earlier letter at the time it was sent . Thompson suggests the letter was sent to the Soviet Union in 1960s .
 Encouraging signs had also emerged from an unofficial channel opened up by the Soviets the day before .
 Alexander S Fomin, ostensibly a Counselor at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, met with John Scali, State Department correspondent for ABC News, at a Washington restaurant . Fomin is thought to be a high ranking officer of the KGB .
 Fomin asked Scali whether he thought the U.S. would agree to a deal for ending the crisis . The deal involved a Soviet pledge to withdraw the missiles from Cuba and never to replace them, Fomin said . Fomin had asked whether the United States would agree .
 Scali took this proposal to Dean Rusk, who sent him back to tell Fomin that the U.S. government would be interested in such a proposal . Rusk also told Scali that time was getting short .
 The opening pages of the transcript also suggest that the members of the ExComm feel an acute shortage of time . The transcript also suggests that the committee members feel that they have time to work .
 Students of the crisis have assumed that this sense of urgency appeared only when the ExComm learned that an American U-2 had been shot down over Cuba, but the urgency is clear long before this news arrives, they say . The urgency of the situation in Cuba is clear, students say
 Adlai Stevenson's worry that Khrushchev's second letter, if not dealt with promptly, will cause the Americans to forfeit the peace initiative . The President's concern that the Turks may respond unilaterally to the Soviet proposal in a way that derails U.S. diplomatic efforts .
 United Nations hints that the U.S. might be amenable to a trade of missiles . United Nations hinting that the United States might be open to trade missiles . U.N. suggests that it might trade missiles for missiles .
 These factors are more related to diplomatic considerations than to strictly military ones such as the operational status of the Cuban missiles, the difficulty of maintaining the quarantine without incident, or the danger to American reconnaissance aircraft .
 President and SecretaryMcNamarabriefly discuss the intensity and frequency of Americansurveillance of the Soviet missile sites in Cuba . Will you check and be sure that the letter that's coming in on the tickeris the letterthat we were seeing last night?
 NITZE: Hare6says this is absolutely anathema, and as a matter of prestige and politics . Hare6: I ought to have-In case this is an accurate statement, where are we with our conversations with the Turks about the withdrawal of theseNITZE
 Report from Finletter and Rome on the Italians indicates that that would be relativelyeasy to do in Italy .
 "We would have to work it out with the Turkson the basis of putting a Polaris in the waters, and even that might not be enough," says the U.S. president .
 "We've got a-we've got one paper on it already,and we're having more work done right now," says President Obama . "We have a lot of work done already," he says .
 The NATO requirementinvolves the question as to whether we are going to denuclearize NATO, says Obama . Obama: "We're preparedonly to discuss Cubaat this time"
 I don't think we can-if this an accurate-and this is the whole deal-we just have to wait-I don't believe we can take the position . It's very odd, Mr President, if he's changed his terms from a long letter to you and an
 He-uh-I still think he's in a difficultposition to change it overnight having sent you a personal communication-JFK: Well now let's say he has changed it. He- uh, I still think . He still thinks it's a difficult thing to do overnight .
 I would answer back saying I would prefer to deal with your-with your interesting proposals of last night. I would rather be dealing with your ... interesting proposals . I would say yes, but I would be happy to answer back .
 We're going to be in an insupportable position on this matter if this becomes his proposal . We will be in a position in the U.S. if this is his proposal, he says .
 "We last year tried to get the missiles out of there because they're not militarilyuseful, number 1. Number 1. In the first place, we last year . Number 1, we tried to remove the missiles from there," says President Obama .
 It's going to-to any man at the United Nations or any other rationalman it will look like a very fair trade trade . Number 2, it will be going to be looked at by anyone at the U.N. or any rationalman . Number 3, it's going
 We did it on a basis where if we talked to the Turks,I mean this would be an extremely unsettling business. It would be a very unsettling business, he says . We did not talk to the Turkish, he adds .
 George W. Bush: 'Most people will regard this as not an unreasonable proposal, I'll just tell you that. Well thisis unsettling nowGeorge'
 'I don't see why we pick that track when he's offered us the other track, within the last twenty-four hours. I'm not seeing why we choose that track,' he says . 'I'm not going to go to that track, he says. I don't
 "I think you have to assume that this is their new and latest position and it's a public one," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's not the first time I've heard from the White House that they've been in this position"
 "We have to be now thinking about what our position's going to be on this one," says David Cameron . "This is the one that's before us, and before the world," he says .
 As between the twoI think it clearthat practicallyeveryone here would favor the private proposal . The proposal would be private, and the proposal would go public .
 There are disadvantages also in the private one, which is a guarantee of Cuba . But seriously, there are also advantages also in Cuba, says Cuban president .
 "This is the one that the Soviet government obviously is going on. But in any case this is now his official we can release his other one, and it's different, but this is different," he said .
 It's possible that they're going on a dual track, one a public track and the other a private track; the private track is related to (words unclear), and the public track is one that's in order to confuse the public scene additionalpressures .
 I think, yes, I think that the-uh-NATO-Warsaw Pact arms problem is a separate problem and ought to be discussed between NATO and Warsaw Pact. I think yes, yes . NATO should discuss the arms problem, he says, in a separate way .
 They've got hundreds of missiles looking down the throat of every NATO country, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com . NATO says it has 'hundreds of missiles' looking at every NATO member .
 The Cuba thing is a Western Hemisphere problem, an intrusion in the Western Hemisphere. And I think this is-we have to get it into that context. The Cuba issue is an intrusion into the Western hemisphere. We need to get to that context .
 I'd handle this thing so that we continue on the real track which is to try to get the missiles out of Cuba pursuant to the private negotiation . I would handle this issue so that the missiles were removed from Cuba, he said .
 The other way, it seems to me- if we accept the notion of a trade at this stage, our position will come apart very fast, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "If we acceptthe notion of . a trade, the other way- seems to be
 "If we had any understanding with the Turks that they ought to come out, it would be different," he says . "Or if we had ... a different understanding with them ... it would have been different," says Obama .
 I'd just like to know how much we've done about it and how much did we talk about it, Mr President . We decided not to. Mr President. I'd like to see how much of it had to be done, Mr. President .
 This thing would be all over Western Europe, and our position would have been undermined . This would have undermined our position in Western Europe . This is not the first time this has happened in Europe, it has been revealed .
 The Soviet Union would know that this thing was being discussed. Because immediately it would know, it would have been discussed. It would be the first time the U.S. would discuss such a thing .
 "In their own terms it would already be clear that we were trying to sell our allies for our interests," says Obama . "We were already clear that [the UK] was selling allies for its interests," he says .
 It seems to me we ought to get word to Stevenson that if this is put up there he should immediately say we will not discuss-discuss the Turkish bases . It seems that we should also get word from Stevenson to not discuss the bases .
 Khrushchev wrote a letter last night with an entirely different proposal, says President Nixon . Nixon: "I think it would be very desirable to tell that."
 We need to get clarification from the Soviet Union of what they're talking, says George Osborne . A lot of people think this is a rather reasonable condition, he says .
 Iran has declared that it would not accept foreign missiles in Iran . President Obama says it's relevant to say that we support Iran's declaration .
 The Turkishproblem is a NATO-WarsawPact problem, and it's an arms problem between these two groups . The Turkish problem is a problem of disarmament with respect to NATO and the WarsawPact .
 President Obama has been criticized for "trying to upset the status quo" in Iran . Iran has a history of unrest against the West, but the U.S. did not upset it in Iran, he says .
 It's not as if it was a private proposal, which would give us an opportunity to negotiate with the Turks . He's put it out in a way that the Turksare bound to say they don't agree to this. He's caused maximum tension and embarrassment, says David Cameron .
 There's nothing coming in yet on our tickers. Until we have gotten our position a little clearer, we ought to go with this-uh-last night business so that that gives us about an hour or two .
 Stevenson: "The United States does not have any territorial designs against Cuba, but of course we cannot tolerate SovietCuban aggression against us or our sister republics"
 GovernorStevenson recommendsthat such a statement be made in order to prevent the Soviets from capturing the peace offensive . Governor Stevenson recommendedsthat .
 GovernorStevenson also recommends that we not consider the Turkish offer as reported in the attached Reuters dispatch as an alternative or an addition to the Khrushchev proposal in his letter . Governor Stevenson: "GovernorStevenson recommends not considering Turkish offer"
 I think that we ought to go at-we ought to get a statement ready which will-uh-I'm not sure that-which would-which-would-be-to-back on that, number one . I think we should be ready to go back to last night
 "Number two something about the work on the bases stopping while we're going to have a chance to discuss these matters," he said . "Number three something about stopping while the work is done, and number four something about ... stopping," he added. "Something about the ... work on
 Khrushchev may have picked up the statement which Kreisky, the Austrian Foreign Minister, made day before yesterday . Of course, maybe the Russians got Kreisky to do it, too. Of course the Russians did it .
 Tommy asks: 'If we publish the letter of last night, Tommy, what other letters will get published. And if we publish it, Tommy's letters will also get published, Tommy says . Tommy says: 'I don't know what else will be published. What else will get
 I think probably this-uh-whole exchange, this refers to this crisis-this refers to the previous letters . This refers to a series of letters between President Obama and Hillary Clinton .
 I've got the feeling that if you have someone explaining the situation, you have to publish the exchange . I'm not sure how long it will be until someone explains what happened .
 "You perhaps don't have to put out the letter as much as you do the three proposals or so," the mayor says .
 This-uh-this question of Cuba and the must be resolved within the next few days; it can't wait . The first point is that this-uh,this question must be solved within a few days .
 "The negotiations and discussions must-uh-get on, and the work that is continuing despite our protests has been going on. The negotiations and . discussions must be going on,’s the government must get on, he says .
 U.S. joins Latin American nations in taking action against drug policy . President Obama says it's not an action just by the United States but is an action by all Latin American countries .
 We would-uh-obviously consider negotiating the giving up of bases in Turkey if we can assure the-uhTurks and the other European countries for whom these bases were emplaced that there can be some assurances given to them for their own security .
 I don't see how we can ask the Turks to give up their defense.... unless the Soviet Union also gives up their weapons . The Soviet Union must also give up its weapons to the Turks .
 Not only the weapons, but agree not to invade Turkey . ... and allow inspection to ensure that they haven't done so .
 We think that's a very good point made by the Russians, and we would be glad to-and we finally feel that this is a major breakthrough," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 It completely changes the character of the deal we're likely to be able to make, and also therefore our action in the interim . The deal is 'completely different' to what the club are likely to do in the future .
 Khrushchev's public statement should be knocked down publicly, says JFK . "Look-uh-your public statement is a very dangerous one becauseuh-it makes impossible immediate discussion of your private proposals"
 We are reluctant to release this letter which would display the inconsistency in your position, but we don't have very much time. I guess we say we are reluctant . We say we aren't reluctant to . release it which would . display the inconsistent in your . position, they say .
 "Before we even got the first letter translated, he added a completely new deal and he released it publicly," he said . "He added a new deal," he added, "before he added it publicly. He added it to the deal"
 CNN's John Sutter says the president's ploy is going to look satisfactory at present . Sutter: "He's going to have a ploy publicly that's going for him to look rather satisfactoryat present"
 I think that we're going to have to, in the next three or four hours, not just put the ball completely in-uh-in his hands and allow him to do whatever he wants . We're not just putting the ball in his hands, we're putting it in his
 We have an exchange with him and say he's double-crossed us, and we don't know which deal to accept, and then he writes back, and in the meantime he's got all the play throughout the world . We have to accept the deal and accept it, but
 CNN's John Sutter: "I don't think you can turn that down publicly without-uh-referring publicly to his letter"
 He's offered this deal ..... that he will withdraw the bases in Cuba for assurances that we don't intend to invade, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: President Obama has offered to withdraw bases from Cuba in exchange for assurances he won't invade .
 He said, "He said, in his letter to me, he said that we were to permit inspection. He said he said we were not allowed to be inspected."
 U.N. observers will inspect Cuba and U.S. to ensure that we're not getting ready to-uh-invade . The United States will be inspected by the United Nations to ensure it's not ready to invade Cuba .
 U.S. bases in Cuba are one of the things U. Thant-uh-involve the security of the Western Hemisphere, he says .
 Turkish bases should be disarmament, says President Obama . This must be brought to fruition, he says .
 Britain would be happy to make a similar arrangement with Turkey, says David Cameron . It does have to do with the security of Turkey, he says .
 We will withdraw the bases from Turkeyif-uh-and allow inspection of Turkeyto make sure we've done that, and you withdraw your invasion bases of the Soviet Union and permit inspection there .
 At least then we're in a defensible position. And work's got to stop today, before we talk about anything. We're in the right position. We need to be in a position that is defensible . And work must stop today .
 The other thing is to not have the Turksmaking statements, so that this thing-Khrushchev puts it out and the next thing the Turks say they won't accept it, he says . "The other thing ... is not having the Turks making statements," he adds .
 President Obama has set the groundwork to do something in Turkey, says Obama . "I think they've got to understand the peril that they're going to move in the next week," he says .
 When we take some action in Cuba, the chances are that he'll take action in Turkey, says Obama . "They ought to understand that," he says of Turkey .
 If we do any more about Cuba then he's going to do it to Turkey, he says . And in fact he may even come out and say that.... he's tried to be fair and that's not true .
 "We ought to try to get them not to respond to this till we've had a chance to consider what action we'll take. We ought to be careful not to react to this," he said .
 The Standstill Agreement and the Problemof the Two Different Audiences . The American government felt itself thrown by the second letter from Khrushchev . As the discussion progresses, we see the quandary into which the government felt .
 The President veers off in one direction, while many of his senior advisors take quite a different tack . The President's senior advisors have a very different approach to the President .
 The President has a mind of mind the U.N. audience or world opinion, President Obama says . President Obama has a history of speaking to the UN .
 Khrushchev proposed trade of NATO missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba . The proposal was rejected by the Soviets in the second, public, public letter . The U.S. State Department says the proposal was "reasonableness"
 The President seems to assume that there is no way the Soviets are going to remove their missiles without the benefit of some such trade . The President, in fact, seems throughout much of the early discussion to assume such a trade .
 The mere suggestion of appearing to trade away the security of our NATO ally, Turkey, in order to solve an American local problem in the Caribbean, is ""absolutely anathema"" to the Turks . As Paul Nitze has said, the mere suggestion that appearing to . appear to .
 Bundy, obviously speaking for several others, believes that any such trade might lead to a precipitous and general weakening of NATO, with long-term disastrous consequences . Bundy: "Any such trade may lead to precipitous" and "disastrous" consequences .
 The President wants a standstill agreement; he believes it represents an offer that will play well in the court of world opinion . The President believes it is a good idea for the United States to reach an agreement .
 The President's advisors, it appears, have nothing against a standstill agreement per se, only the implication given by the President that it is a precursor to a public trade of missiles . The President appears to be concerned about the possibility of a public exchange of missiles with Iran .
 The solution to the problem of how to respond to Khrushchev is still far from obvious . At this stage, the solution to this question is still not obvious .
 Work is going on 10.50 hours a day, says President Obama . "I would think the first thing we have to do is to get into the details," he says .
 One must be careful to make neither too much or too little of the differences at this stage between the President and his advisors, says President Obama .
 One may be tempted to revise the revisionist thesis and argue, on the basis of this transcript, that a dovish President is pulling his hawkish advisors along toward a trade .
 It's going to be tough in England, I'm sure-as well as other places on the continent-we're going to have to take action . That might seem, in my opinion, not a blank check but a pretty good check . It's not a 'blank check'
 Most think-people think that if you're allowed an even trade you ought to take advantage of it . Most of the time, people think that even trade is a free trade, and they should take advantage .
 This is all the things that-uh-why this is a pretty good play of his. These are all the . things that .-uh, why? "These are all of the things we need to know."
 The only thing we've got him on is the fact that now they've put forward varying proposals in short periods of time, all of which are complicated, and under that shield this work goes on . That-uh, being so-uh-I think that we-the only thing
 Mr. President, it's larger than the missiles, because he says ""the means which you consider aggressive""which-this could include planes, the presence of technicians, and everything else"
 President Obama could take missiles for missiles, which wouldn't be good enough from our point of view because it's to Cuba, says CNN's John Defterios . "He could take missile for missiles," he says .
 "It would be tough for three weeks because the problem is if the work on their bases stops, that's in my opinion our defensible position," he says . "That would be the case for the next three weeks," he adds .
 Stop the the operability of it-uh . Stop the operationabilityof it -uh. Stop it . Stop it being operable .
 All these proposals come; they're all complicated, and what they can do is hang us up in negotiations on different proposals while the work goes on . Well no, I'm trying to suggest that I'm suggesting that all these proposals are complicated .
 This is impossible,at this stage of the game, and that time is getting very short . I myself would send backword, by Fomin, that last night's stuff was pretty good . This is difficult, but it's impossible, to say that .
 The U.S. State Department says it has a "very important" message to Cuba . Cuba's government has been criticized for a lack of transparency in recent weeks .
 The President speaks with Stevenson and solicits his views on how to respond to the two Soviet proposals . After a brief discussion about the precise number of Jupiters in Turkey, the President speaks to Stevenson .
 JFK: Let's get it out of this problem, then we might as well just decide on sand in hisears for a few minutes . JFK: "If you start talking about Cuba and about Turkey, then you talk about Turkey" JFK: 'Let's not talk about Cuba,
 'I'm just trying to cope with what the public problem is about-because everybody's going to think that this is very reasonable. I'm just ... just trying ... to cope,' she says .
 There follows a lengthy discussion of the precise wording of the letter in preparation to Acting United Nations Secretary General U Thant .
 Various drafts are read aloud and criticized . George Ball is apparently working on a draft reply to the Soviets . Maxwell Taylor reports that U.S. reconnaissanceplanes have drawn fire over Cuba .
 The President then puts a hold on the night-flight draft previously approved . Rusk discusses possible public remarks regarding an American U-2 that has strayed off course over the Soviet Union . The President also holds on a night flight draft .
 The U.S. and Cuba have been at a standstill in Cuba since the crisis began . President Obama and Cuban President Castro Castro have not been able to reach out to the United States .
 "Best position now, with him and publicly, is to say we're glad to discuss this matter" "Once we get a positive indication that they've ceased their work in Cuba," she says .
 "We won't discuss Turkey till they settle Cuba," he says . "I don't think that's as good a position as saying we're glad to discuss his offer if we can get a standstill in Cuba"
 Most people will think his offer is ratherreasonable. That puts us in a much stronger world position, he says . He adds that most of the world will think it is a reasonable offer .
 "I think we ought to put our emphasis right now on the fact that we want an indication from him in the next twenty-four hours that he's going to stand still and disarm these weapons"
 "Under those conditions we'll be glad to discuss these matters. Then we'll say that under those conditions, we'll talk about these matters," he says .
 "If we don't say that he's going to say we rejected his offer, and therefore therefore therefore," he says . "I think that if we don’t say that, he’s going to have public opinion with him. But I think that . He's
 'Our only hope is to escape from that is to say that we insist that he stand still. So I think our only hope to escape is to ask him to stand still,' he says .
 "The United States would be glad to discuss this matter with you and others after consultation with the members of NATO," the U.S. says .
 The discussions required for any peaceful settlement of these other matters, however, will require time for consultation with the countries whose interests-uh-with these countries . This cannot be undertaken by this country until it is assured that work on these bases in Cuba has halted and the bases themselves are in
 The only question I'd like to raise is that while really it sets Turkeyas a quid pro quo . VOICE: That's my worry about it.
 The point is-the point is that we're not in a position today to make the trade . "The point is the point is ... that we are not in the position today ... to make a trade," he says .
 "We have to wait and see what the Turkssay. And we won't be-maybe-may in three or four days, I don't know,” he says . “We have a long way to go," he adds .
 "We don't want the Soviet Union or the United Nations to be able to say that the United States rejected it," says President Obama . The U.S. has been criticized by the Soviets and the U.N. since the Cold War began .
 President Obama says he is in real trouble if he says he wants to make trade deal with Russia . Putin: "If we sound as if we wanted to make this trade, to NATO people and to all the people who are tied to us by alliance"
 "We'll all join in doing this if it's the decision, but I think we should tell you that that's the universal assessment of everyone in the government," he says .
 The knockdown in this White House statement this morning was well received. That knockdown is well received by the White House .
 "If we don't for the next twenty-four or forty-eight hours, this trade has appeal," says MacKinnon . "Yes, but I should say that also, as the situation is moving, MacKannon says . Yes, but ... as a result, Mac
 If we rejectit out of hand and then have to take military action against Cuba, then we also face a decline . Now if we reject it out of . hand, then if we . have to . take military . action against . Cuba, he says, 'then we also have
 The only thing we've got for which I would think we'd be able to hold general support would be-well let's try to word it so that we don't harm NATO-but the thing that I think everybody would agree to-while these matters, which are complicated, are
 If they don't agree to that, the Soviet Union, then we retain the initiative, says Putin . "If they don’t agree, the former Soviet Union will not agree," he says . Putin says: “If they’re not agreeing, we’
 The result will probably be a Soviet counteroffensive-perhaps the seizure of West Berlin or a counter-attack on the Turkish missiles, or both . The result is likely to be a seizure of the West Berlin .
 The President does not believe the NATO allies understand that war is imminent and that if war comes in Cuba, they will stand vulnerable to a Soviet attack . NATO allies were reluctant to trade off a few obsolete missiles in Turkey, he says .
 The President seems to believe that he cannot get his trade without a NATO meeting, that such a meeting is unlikely to support a trade in any event, that the Soviets will therefore continue working on the missile sites . The United States must, bereft of any other diplomatic options, destroy the
 Two very different reactions provoked by the President's dark and blunt portrayal of the situation, both motivated quite clearly by the wish to 12 .
 McNamara proposes defusing the Jupiters in Turkey and increasing coverage by Polaris submarines near Turkish shores to protect the Turks in the event of an American attack .
 RFK suggests a step-wise approach, in which the standstill is agreed upon first . RFK: Standstill must be agreed upon before it can be agreed on first .
 After work on the missile sites is stopped, the U.S. can consult with NATO allies about a trade, perhaps involving a Polaris component . The United States will consult with the NATO allies on a trade .
 Martin and Bundy suggest that the U.S. in effect simply say ""thank you"" to the first Khrushchev letter after releasing it publicly via U. Thant .
 Without a public trade on the terms of the second Soviet letter, war is very likely . By now, he seems convinced that without a public deal, war will not be possible .
 Bundy suggests that, lacking an agreement, the U.S. should consider tightening the quarantine rather than going immediately to war . Bundy: "The United States ought seriously to consider tightening its quarantine"
 Neither he nor anyone in the room expresses enthusiasm for attacking Cuba . Despite the President's pessimistic mood at this stage, neither he or anyone else expresses enthusiasm .
 This is a far cry from the discussion as it has often been portrayed, sometimes by the participants themselves, as a fight between hawks and doves . The participants themselves are often portrayed as a clash between those seeking war and fearing retaliation and expecting retaliation .
 Each participant seems to be working mightily and, often quite creatively, to find a way to a diplomatic solution to the crisis .
 NATO 'strongly opposed' to any action in Cuba, says President Obama . "If you have a Council meeting you'll probably get a strong reaction from a great many of the members of NATO against our taking any action"
 Mr President, I wonder if we should not take certain actions with respect to the Jupitersin Turkeyand Italy before we act in Cuba . Mr President. Mr President . I wonder . If we should . not take . certain actions . before . acting in Cuba before acting in
 If we decided to take that action with respect to the Jupitersin Turkeyand Italy before we acted in Cuba, then we could tell NATO that at the time we talked to them about this proposal from Khrushchevand our response to it .
 I don't think we can make any limited attacks when they're shooting at our reconnaissance aircraft . We would not dare to go in with the kind of limited attack without taking out their SAM-sites, he says .
 "The moment we take out the SAM-sites and the MiG airfields we're up to the sortie program," says U.S. Air Force commander .
 If we send sorties in against Cuba, we must be prepared to follow up with an invasion in about days . We must also be prepared for a possible invasion in a few days, he says .
 If we start out on that kind of a program, it seems to me the Soviets are very likely to feel forced to reply with military action some place, particularly if these missiles are still in Turkey .
 "I think that kind of action is desirable prior to invasion of Cuba," he says . "Now if we were willing to undertake-first place, I think that . Now if . we were . willing to . undertake- first place, we would be willing to ... do that first
 We've already detected three submarines off the United States coast in the last forty-eight hours . Three submarines have already been detected off the coast of the U.S. coast .
 As far as we know they don't carry missiles, but that's just happenstance . Now they-as far . as far as . we know, they didn't carry . missiles, as well as we . know that they don’t carry .missiles, but
 President Obama says the U.S. will use Polaris missiles to cover the targets of the Turks . He says it will cover targets with Polaris missiles . Obama: "We have to say to the Turks we're going to cover them with Polaris"
 It's one thing to stand them down as a favor to the Turks while we hit Cuba, and it's quite another thing to trade them out. Yes, but I think, if we're going to take them out of Turkey they say they'll take them .
 We could defuse them and replacethem with Polaris. But what we could do is unilaterally, unilaterally-bilaterally with Turkey. We would agreed to defuse, defuse and re-activate them. We could also defuse the situation with Polaris, the U.S
 President Bush: "Now the threat is there-the threat is gone, you don't have to worry about that; we're going back to your letter of last night"
 If you made an offer-up there now-and you also ask U Thant to find an answer to this, now if U. Thant should come back and say, number 1, that they're going to continue to work , in which case I suppose we have to move
 Cuba can either accept our proposal, or reject it, says President Obama . The U.S. wants Turkey for Cuba, but Cuba is not interested .
 If they reject the proposal and say they want Turkey for Cuba but they're going to discontinue the work on the bases, then I would think would be the time to have-bring NATO in and say, ""This is the proposal. If . they rejectthe proposal and . say
 "We haven't lost anything, and they've discontinued the work on the bases," she says . "They've discontinuedthe work in the bases. They've discontinued," she said .
 I think if you have a meeting of NATO tomorrow morning-uh-I don't see that that's going to-I InternationalSecurity 12:3 j 54 . I think we're keeping the pressure on, we don't look like we're weakening on the whole Turkey complex .
 It's going to be-You see, they haven't had the alternativespresented to them. They've had to accept the alternatives, he says . It's not a good idea, he adds .
 "Now the question is whether it's tomorrow morning or Monday morning. So when the time-the crucialtime comes, obviously we want it," he says . "Obviously we want to be able to get our hands on the world's best."
 "If tomorrow we don't have a favorable answer from U Thant or Khrushchev to this message that's going out now, is it important to strike tomorrow? Or do we have some more time?" asks the Russian president .
 NATO meeting should be held before the strike, says David Cameron . It would seem to me the NATO meeting ought to be held .
 If it's necessary to strike tomorrow, there ought to be a NATO meeting tomorrow morning, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: NATO meeting should be held tomorrow morning .
 "What if he says, "We'regoing to discontinue the work on the bases and we going to-uh-we're going to make the missiles inoperative, and we'll work out with you United Nations supervision,"" that could take three weeks .
 If he said he's going to discontinue work on the bases and he's willing to make them inoperable, we carryon surveillance . And we continue the-uh-the-theMC .
 No, that's an excellent course of action which I don't believe he's going to accept . 'I don't think he's willing to accept. No, he's not,' he says .
 The probability is he won't say he'll stop work on the bases, and we're faced with a decision tomorrow . The probabilityis that he will not say he will stop work, and that's a good chance .
 "We're in-before the world we're in much better shape. Yeah, but of course we're better shape," she says .
 It would seem to me that we ought to surfaceall of this correpondence including this letter . The letter includes a letter to the author of the book, which was published in 1998 .
 The attention of the world is now focused back on Cuba and LatinAmerica, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This makes it much tougher for him to go to ahead"
 If NATO seems solid on this, this has a chance of shaking Khrushchevoff this point . On the other hand, Mr President. Mr President, Mr . President, if NATO . seems solid, this could be a good thing for Mr. Putin, says Putin .
 Khrushchev offered to release letters to U. Thant, who was in charge of releasing them . Thant released correspondence which consisted of an offer from Khrushievand we-we come back and write .
 There would be some reprisal against possibly Turkey and possibly against Berlin, he says . The escalation is going to go on, and we think this is very likely, he adds .
 What we don't want is to have a cheap turndown by them, without realizing that the turnddown puts us in the position of then having to do something . What we want is that they don't realize that they are putting us in a position of having to have to
 What we're going to be faced with is-because we wouldn't take the missiles out of Turkey, then maybe we'll have to invade or make a massive strikeon Cuba which may lose Berlin . That's what concerns me .
 The missiles in Cuba and the missiles in Turkey should be turned over to the United Nations for destruction, the president says . Mr. Foster14 has given some thought to the idea .
 The Soviets don't want to let anybody get at them, and see what their technology is . The Soviets want to see what they have to do with their technology, says CNN's John Sutter . The U.S. military says it's not interested in the Soviet Union .
 If we follow SecretaryMcNamara,what we're going to do is say to the Turks-which they're bound to think is-uh-under Soviet pressure, we want to get your missiles out of there . The Turks are bound for thinking they're under Soviet pressure .
 "Lookhere, we're going to have to invade Cuba. Well what I'd say to the Turks," he says . "Look here, we'll have to invasion Cuba," he adds .
 "We want to reduce your danger while at the same time maintaining your defense. We want to . reduce your . danger while . maintaining your . defense."
 I think we've got to decide how we'll respond to Soviet military pressure on NATO, and I'm not prepared to answer the question . Then I think, before we attack Cuba, I think . I think ... we've . got to . decide how to respond to . Soviet military
 "We haven't even thought about it for some hours, and it's been on my mind a good deal," he says .
 Bundy is suggesting that the ExComm may want to add these items to the list of items restricted by the quarantine . Bundy suggests that the exComm may also want these items added to the quarantine list . Bundy says the quarantine could be expanded to include items that are restricted by quarantine .
 At the conclusion of this sequence, the President approves the Trollope Ploy . At the end of the sequence, he approves the trollope ploy . The President then meets the President to approve it .
 Bundy and Sorensen argue that the President should consider a private response to the first acceptable Khrushchev letter . Bundy says the President's private response should come from a private letter .
 For the time being, this idea seems to lay fallow mainly because whether the response is private or public seems to be secondary to his belief that the terms of the second offer, requiring the missile trade, are necessary to any resolution .
 I don't agree, Mr President, I think there's still a chance that we can get this line going. I don’t agree. Mr President . Mr President. I think this line is still a possibility, he says . I think it's still possible, he adds
 In fact, the President appears never believed that a deal could be struck with Khrushchev on the basis of the non-invasion pledge .
 Thompson's forthright contradiction of one of President's fundamental assumptions prompts increased insistence by RFK, Bundy and Sorensen that Thompson might be right . RFK and Bundy say Thompson might not have been right .
 The Trollope Ploy is on its way to becoming policy . The President agrees and so far, it's on his way to become policy .
 There's nothing strange differentbargain, says Thomas Thomas . Thomas: 'If we go on the basis of a trade we end up with the Soviets still in Cuba with planes and technicians'
 It appears that the reluctance of the President to forego the trade and embrace the Trollope Ploy was also due to his keen awareness of the price of being wrong .
 The President Kennedy emerges from this transcript has a sense that if his advisors are wrong, if the Soviets do require a missile trade, the U.S. will have to go to war . The trade will retrospectively increase in attractiveness and in proportion to the destructiveness of the resulting war
 Turkey would still have technicians and planes and guarantees that would still exist for Turkey . But the country will still have its own technicians and plane guarantees .
 Today it sounds great to reject it, but it's not going to, after we do something . Let's not kid ourselves that we've got-that's the difficulty. Let's get-not-kidnich, the difficulty is the difficulty .
 Norstad just feels that no matter what we do, there's going to bewe've got to have NATO have a hand on this thing . Norstad: "If we take no action or if we take action- they're all going to say we should have done the reverse-
 The question really is-two or three-two questions-first, whether we go immediately to the Turks and see if we can work out some-see if they're receptive to the kind of deal which the Secretary of State Secretary talked about .
 If they're notreceptive then we ought to go to the general NATO meeting . NATO meeting may put enough pressure on them, he says .
 I just tell you I think we're better off to get those missiles out of Turkeyand out of Cuba, because I think the way of getting them out of . Turkey and Cuba is going to be very grave .... and very bloody, one place or another. I think .
 The Turks will not take them-will not agree to take them out except under NATO pressure . The Turks won't want them out of NATO except under pressure .
 Mr. President. Well, I'm not sure-because I think-let's speculate with this, Mr President. Mr President . Well, he said, "Let's speculate" with this .
 An immediate personal telegram was the best thing to do, he said . "If you have that conviction, and you are yourself sure thatuh-this is the way we want-the best way out-then I would say that an immediate personal . telegram"
 I think you'd have to do is get the Turksto agree-accepting it over their opposition and over NATO opposition I think wouldbe-I'd rathergo to the total blockade route, which is a lesser step than the military action .
 Turkish President Vladimir Putin says Turkey's decision to withdraw from Syria is a wise move . Putin hopes NATO and Turkey will join forces together in Syria . Putin: "I'd like to see the Turks and NATO equally feel that this is the wise move"
 I wonder, Mr President, inasmuch as your statement this morning does give some answer to the public statement of the Soviets, whether we can't defer this for twenty-four or forty-eight hours while we try to try to the private letter route . Mr President .
 Stevenson argues that the standstill in Cuba is a prerequisite to a discussion of issues such as NATO and the WarsawPact . Stevenson: The standstill is necessary for discussion of NATO and WarsawPacts .
 "We're going to have to take our weapons out of Turkey. But I mean-by negotiation-we're . I mean, by negotiation, we're . going to take out our weapons from Turkey," President Obama says .
 The important thing for Khrushchev, it seems to me, is to be able to say ""I saved Cuba, I stopped an invasion,"" and he can get awaywith this, if he wants to . This is, maybe, just pressure on us, I mean to accept
 All right, what about at the end of this, we use this letter and say, ""will be a grave risk to peace. All right . The letter was sent to the U.S. House of Representatives .
 President's position is that once he meets this condition of the-uh-halting of the work and the inoperability,you're then prepared to go ahead on either the specific Cuban trackor what we call the general detente track .
 "It really depends on whether we believe that we can get a deal on just the Cuban-or whether we have to agree to his position of tying . Yeah, now it all comes down-I think it's a substantive question, because it really depends . Whether we believe we can
 I think that having made it public how can he take these missiles out of Cuba .... if we just do nothing about Turkey. How can he . take these missile out of . Cuba? If we just . do nothing . about Turkey, he says . I think .
 The position, even in the public statement, is that this is all started by our threat to Cuba, the president says . The position is that the Cuban government is starting to blame for this, he says .
 He must be shaken up or he wouldn't have sent the message to you in the first place, he says .
 "Please don't into discussion of NATO, or Turkey, because we want to talk about Cuba," Obama says . "It's just in general terms, rather defensive, and it just says we don't want to get in"
 The other one says, ""You made an offer to us, and we accept it,"" and you've also made a second offer which has to do with NATO, she says . "We'll be glad to discuss that at a later time," she says. "You've also
 I don't think we're any further along, except we don't like you-what you said . The other first letter-of Adlai-Idon't think says anything, I'm sure .
 "I think it sounds rather defensive about this has really thrown us off by the fact that you've brought this thing up," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We're not going to be able to talk about it. I think it's rather defensive"
 Adlai-I think if we could take our letter, introduce some of the elements of his letter in the last part of it, that might do it. Well we can't-I'll tell you, Mr President, I tell you .
 JFK: Why don't we try to work it out without you being able to pick? JFK: The one you're going to have to worry about is Adlai, so you might as well work out with him . JFK: "The one I'm going to be worried about
 I'm certain, but the only thing is I don't want him-that's why we've got to end-end with saying, whatever we're going to do, that's got to get a cessation of work . As I say, we're not going to-he's
 JFK: "I think that Bobby's notion of a concrete acceptance on our part of how we read last night's telegramis very important" JFK: In other words you want to-you have to get them to say we accept your proposal .
 The Shoot-down of the U-2 was one of the most dramatic hours of the Cuban missile crisis . The shoot-down took place on October 27, 1962 .
 Low-flying American reconnaissance aircraft have encountered anti-aircraft fire, probably from Cubancontrolled batteries . The discussions take on an unmistakable urgency .
 There is general agreement with Taylor's assessment that 24-hour surveillance is absolutely necessary at this stage . There is also general agreement that 24 hours surveillance is necessary .
 McNamara: "We have to put a cover on.""-that is, provide protection for the reconnaissance aircraft . But in the face of anti-aircraft fire from the Cubans, McNamara argues .
 The President postpones the decision a day to determine whether a general pattern is developing or whether the fire just encountered was an aberration . The President thinks the latter course will be necessary .
 Major Anderson's U-2 was shot down over Cuba . The ExComm next receives news that Major Anderson had been shot down .
 This has been generally believed to be the single most significant event of the missile crisis . American leadership sought and found a way to resolve the crisis peacefully less than 24 hours later .
 Khrushchev's second letter to the U.S. was only part of a plan to rush the Americans to the brink, or over it . Did this mean that the tougher, second letter was part of the plan? Did this plan 17?
 Mr President, the Chiefs have been in session during the afternoon on-really the same basis as we have over here. Mr President . Mr President said the Chiefs were in session in the afternoon .
 Either we decide not to send in at all or we decide to send them in with proper cover . We decide on whether to use proper cover or not to use them .
 The standard account of the U-2 shoot-down in RFK'sThirteenDays gives the very distinct but, on the evidence of this transcript,quite misleading impression . The standardaccount of the shooting down in the standard account gives the impression that the shooting-down precedesthe
 "We must attack back, either the SAMs and/or MiG aircraft that come against them, or the ground fire that comes up," says Russian commander .
 "It seems to me we're too weak. When you put the two of these together-the question of-you know stopping surveillanceand not stopping the ship-it seems to be too weak," says President Obama .
 I'd say we must continue surveillance. That's far more important than the ship, says President Obama . "We need to continue surveillance," he says .
 "I don't think at this particularpoint we should-uh-show a weakness to Khrushchev," he says . "I think we would show a weakness if we-if we failed on both of these actions"
 If we go in with surveillance, we have to put a cover on, and if we start shooting back, we've escalated substantially . Therefore I would recommend that tomorrow we carry on surveillance, but that we defer the decision as late as possible in the day to give a little more time
 "If you're going to take a reprisal-the cover isn't much good because you've got anti-aircraft guns," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 JFK: I would think we ought to take a chance on reconnaissancetomorrow, without the cover, because I don't think cover's really going to do you much good . The main thing is to assure effective reconnaissance. Whether thatwhat that implies, we won't
 "My personal view is that we .... ready to invade but make no advance decision on that," he says . "I'm ready to prepare for invasion, but I'm not sure if I'm going to invade"
 Now that's a big one-then we know then we know, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Then I think we ought to either do one of two things.
 We ought to decide at that moment we're either going to return fire, tomorrow, but in a limited fashion against the things that fired against us, or against their air defenses . Or, alternatively, if we don't return the fire tomorrow,we ought to go in the next day
 However, why don't we wait. I'm ratherinclined to think that the more general response- however, is to wait.
 Let's be prepared for either one tomorrow-let's wait and see whether they fire on us tomorrow . Meanwhile we've got this message to U Thant-and we're-so let's be well prepared. Let's wait to see if they fire .
 We've got to be very clearthen that-uh-if we're doing this tomorrow, and they do shoot weapons, and then we do need to have the general response, there's no time to do what you're talkingabout with Turkey . JFK: That's why I
 I think what we ought to do is not worry so much about the cover, do the reconnaissance tomorrow. I think we should be doing reconnaissance tomorrow, not worrying so much . I think it's important to do so much for the U.S. to get back in touch with the
 If we get fired on, then we meet here, and we decide whether we do a much more general .... announce that the work is going International Security 12:3 | 66 ahead .
 Various approaches have been suggested that may make Turks more amenable to missile trade . These include emphasizing how obsolete the Jupitersare and how much more secure the Turks will be if they replace them with Polaris .
 RFKand Bundy point out that any decision on the Turks is difficult at this stage because no one knows whether the Soviets will yet agree to the U.S. proposal .
 What is the rush about this other than the fact that we have to make? What do we do? I think the rush is what do we want to do?
 It was shot down near Banes which is right near a U-2 site in EasternCuba . The plane was shot by Cuban forces in the early hours .
 I think we can defer an air attack on Cuba until Wednesday or Thursday, but only if we continue our surveillance and-and-uh-fire against anything that fires against the surveillance aircraft . Only if we maintain a tight blockade in this interim period, he says .
 We think we-we have various other reasons to believe that we know the SAM-sites. We think it's a good thing to believe we know them. We have various reasons to think they know them, including the fact that they know the sites .
 I wonder if this shouldn't cause a most violent protest .... a letter right to Khrushchev. I wonder ... if this should be a protest. A letter of support for Khruschev is a letter that should be sent to the world's leader .
 A new order in defiance of-of public statements he made, he says. Here's, here's an action they've taken against us, a new order .
 If there's any continuation of this, we just take those SAM-sitesout of there . If there is any continuation, we would just take them out of there. We don't want to see any more of this .
 "If we're going to reconnaissance,carryout surveillance, each day, we must be prepared to fire each day," says President Obama .
 We certainly shouldn't do it until we retaliateand say that if they fire again on one of our planes, that we'll come back with great force . We should not retaliate, he says .
 I think you've just got to take out that SAM-site, you can't (word unclear)with them . You can't use SAM-sites with them . I think it's just a matter of time to get rid of them .
 I think we can forget the U-2 for the moment, says U.S. President Obama .
 "There are so goddam many-we could take it all day if-well let's say if we're sure the U-2's been shot down it seems to me we've got to announce it-it's going to dribbleout. There are so many U-
 "Then we ought to not say anything, don't you think, and just take the reprisal without making any announcement," he said . "We ought to just take it without making an announcement. Then we should be careful not to say anything."
 I think we ought to announce that-uh-that-uh,uh-action is being taken-action will be taken to protect our fliers, he says . I think it's a good idea, he adds .
 JFK: We ought to go in at dawn and take out that SAM-site . Then we ought to send the surveillance aircraftin tomorrow with the regular flights early in the morning, and we should be prepared to take out more SAM-sites .
 We're going to say it was shot down and we'll continue our surveillance by U.S. fighter aircraft-DILLON: Suitable protection. We're . going to continue our . surveillance by United States .
 Ros-and you, General-get a statement which would cover in any case. Well why doesn't Ros- and you, general- get a statement? Well, it would cover any case, says Rosie .
 "The only thing that troubles us is the other plane was shot at. The only point is, the only thing is the . only thing to . troubles us are the other planes being shot at," he said .
 I'd like to find out whether Havana says they did shoot it down. They say-uh-that's why I'd want to know if Havana says it shot it down, they say . They say they did .
 This is a change of pattern, now why it's a new pattem we don't know, we do not know, says David Cameron . "It's a change in pattern. Now why it is a new pattern?" asks Cameron .
 The importantthing to find out if we possibly can is whether this was a SAM-site . The important thing is to know if we can find out, is whether it was SAM-sites .
 SAM was the one that had the radar which was required for control of the missiles . What we know is that that particular SAM was . That particular SAM had a radar that was required to control the missiles. We know that SAM was one of the ones .
 The U.2 was in operation, we believe, at the same time that the U-2 was over . And it was in service, it was also in operation at the time of the operation .
 To have a SAM-site and a Russian crew fire is not any accident, he says . You could have an undisciplined anti-aircraft-Cuban fire, but it's not an accident .
 President Obama says he's "just afraid of what's going to happen in NATO, to Europe" Obama: "I think they ought to feel that they've a . part of it"
 A consensus appears to form, led by McNamara, that the Turks are to be told forthrightly that their Jupitermissiles ought to be defused in order to help prevent Soviet retaliation .
 Bundy expresses concern that any such arrangement will be viewed by NATO as a trade of missiles . Bundy points out that such a perception is unavoidable . Bundy: "Such an arrangement is unavoidable. The President expresses concern"
 President Kennedy is absent from all but the very end of the discussion that follows . President Kennedy was absent from the discussion of Cuba .
 "One can see by his absence how controlling and decisive he has heretofore been," says David Cameron . "One must see by . seeing how controlling he is heretoto been," he adds .
 A letter should be sent immediately to the Turks and to all NATO governments explaining that the Turkish missiles are being defused, he argues . This would reduce the likelihood of a Soviet counter-attack on Turkey, he says .
 The point is that if the U.S. attacks Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, and the Soviets respond against our NATO ally in Turkey, we very likely will find ourselves in a catastrophic nuclear war . If the United States attacks Cuba, the Soviet response will likely be catastrophic .
 The focus of McNamara's attention is out on the horizon, if all diplomatic initiatives have failed, and an attack on Cuba is imminent . McNamara will be the focus of his attention in the coming weeks .
 McNamara's blunt appraisal brings the prospect of nuclear war for the first time into the center of the discussion . McNamara: The prospect of a nuclear war is now the focus of the debate .
 Strategic Air Command is on full nuclear alert and this state of extreme readiness for all-out war is 19 . The Strategic Air Force Command is currently on full alert . This is the highest level of readiness for war in the world .
 His argument is a proposal for a contingency plan, to be undertaken if all else fails, to deal with the possibility of escalation to nuclear war .
 Many ExComm members appear to believe that McNamara is saying that war, nuclear war, is becoming increasingly probable .
 McNamara has struck the fear of uncontrollable nuclear war into the ExComm . Ball and McCone express their disregard for NATO sensibilities regarding the missile trade . A telling index of the degree of the importance of the President's absence, is that Ball expresses very directly .
 McNamara suggests that the prospects are dim for the letter currently on its way to Khrushchev . McNamara never says he believes it is too late to trade, but he suggests it is not too late for a deal .
 Nowhere in it does Khrushchev say that he will remove Cuban missiles in exchange for a non-invasion pledge from the United States . However, the message received simultaneously through the Scali-Fomin connection erased the ambiguity perceived by McNamara .
 Llewellyn Thompson makes another critical contribution to the discussion of Khrushchev . Thompson's pessimism about the prospects for the diplomatic response to the crisis in the 1960s is discussed .
 Thompson expresses his belief that the growing pessimism over the prospects for the Trollope Ploy is unwarranted, premature, and possibly harmful . Thompson believes that pessimism is premature and premature .
 Thompson is concerned that the Soviets may get wind of American-generated discussions within NATO about trading missiles . Thompson: The Soviets may have gotten wind of U.S.-generated discussions .
 Bundy notes that wide differences of opinion exist in the ExComm . Bundy calls on Thompson to lay out the situation . Bundy says Thompson should explain the situation in a letter to Thompson .
 Give it a chance to work, he argues, before sending out any more letters to anyone . Give the letter to anyone before sending it to anyone, he says .
 Thompson appears to have buoyed up the President's confidence sufficiently to give the Trollope Ploy a chance to work, at a time when several of the others were ready to assume InternationalSecurity .
 Thompson refocused the President on a solution to the Cuban missile crisis, while others were out of the room trying to head off a Turkish missile crisis . Thompson focused on the Cuban crisis .
 "We're going to lose airplanes, and we'll be shooting up Cuba quite a bit," says President Obama . "But we will lose airplanesevery day," he says . "We will be shooting Cuba up quite a lot, but we will be losing air, he says
 Unless you get a cease-fire around the world, you won't be able to go to the U.S. unless you get it .
 The third proposition is that if we do this, and leave those missiles in Turkey the Soviet Union may, and I think probably will, attack the Turkish missiles . The Soviet Union could attack Turkey if it does not leave them in Turkey .
 If the Soviet Union attacksthe Turkishmissiles, we mustrespond . Now the fourth proposition is, if the . Soviet Union attacks, we would respond . We must respond if the Soviet . Union attacks Turkish missiles .
 "Frankly,I don't think I'm going to be able to get through this," she says . "I've got a-why don't I get through-then let's go back and attack each one of my propositions," she adds .
 NATO response to a Soviet attack on the Turkish Jupiter missiles would be a response with conventional weapons by NATO forces in Turkey . The minimum response would be to Turkish aircraft, aircraft, against Soviet warships and/or naval bases in the BlackSea area .
 A Soviet attack on Turkey and NATO response on the Soviet Union is the absolute minimum, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It is damneddangerousto-to have had a Soviet attack"
 Defuse Turkishmissiles before attacking Cuba would be a way to avoid attack, says President Obama .
 If you defuse the Turkish missiles that saves you from a reprisal, it may-may mean a retaliisal elsewhere . I would say that in the assumption that if you . defuse . the Turkish missile that saves . you from being hit by a . reprisal may mean a
 I think you're in a position where you've gotten rid of your missiles for nothing. I think it's a good thing for the U.S. to get rid of its missiles for free. I don't think you've got rid of them for nothing, he says .
 I didn't say it saved you from a reprisal. I simply said it reduced the chances of militaryaction against Turkey. I didn’t say it . I simply . said it . reduced the chance of military action against Turkey, I said .
 You have to go back in my proposition and say if there aren't Jupiter missiles in Turkey to attack, they're going to employ military force elsewhere . Well, but what good does that do that do you action against Berlin, or somewhere else?
 The State Department said they'd be delighted to trade missiles in Turkey for Cuban missiles in Cuba . The State Dept. of Cuba said it would be "delighted" to trade the missiles for the Cuban missiles .
 I'm not opposed to it, now, all I'm suggesting is, don't push us into a position where we haven'ttraded it and we are forced to attack Cuba, and the missiles remain in Turkey, says President Obama .
 IBUNDY: We were going to let him have his strike in Turkey,as I understood it last week .... at one point, that was the way we talked about it . Well, but he said it was going to be OK for him to strike .
 We thought that if we could tradeit out for Turkey this would be an easy trade and a very advantageous deal . We thought it would be easy trade to Turkey and an advantageous deal.
 "We're talking about a course of action which involves military action with enormous casualtiesand a great-a great risk of escalation," he says . And then we don't want it, he adds .
 Let's see what consequence George draws. Well, why don't we look at two courses of action? VOICE VOICE. Let's go to see what consequences George draws . VOICE: George draws his own consequences .
 I would far rather-if we're going to get the damned missiles out of Turkeyanyway,say, we'll trade you the missiles . We'll put Jupiters in Turkey-in, in Cuba. You're not going to benefit by this-but we will,
 If this is a matter of grave concern to you, and you equate these things, which we don't, we can work it out. If you do, ok, we'll work it . We don't equate things like this with other things, but if you do it, we
 "I don't think NATO is going to be wrecked, and if NATO isn't any better than that, it isn't that good to us," he says .
 Well, I mean, if you do this, you do it on the basis of an immediate trade and they immediately, they immediately have surveillance .
 What you do, with the Turks and NATO, you go through the propositions that Bob has outlined here. What you want to do is go to Turkey and NATO," he says .
 "Let's get the message ready on the assumption that either the Soviet don't want a trade or we don't . We're going to attack Cuba. Let me suggest this," he says .
 Before we attack Cuba we're going to reduce the danger to Turkey to a minimum, says President Obama . Obama: "Before we attacked Cuba, we're not going to attack Cuba"
 Mac, Mac, this other course will in a sense be that, so-let's get first the message written on the assumption that: write that. But Mac, it will be that - so- let's get it written first, write that .
 You want to write one, or do you want me to draft it, or what do I want to do I'll get a draft . You want a draft, or if you want to draft one, you'll get it, it's OK .
 The message will go to the Turks, heads of government of NATO countries, and the North Atlantic Council-same message in effect. It's going to go to Turks, to the heads of . governments of . NATO countries and North Atlantic .
 Max is going back to work out the surveillance problem for tomorrow with the Chiefs and see how much cover we need and so on. Max will go back and work out a plan for tomorrow's surveillance problem . Max is also going back and working out a new plan for the Chiefs .
 We can carry this on for a couple of days, maybe three days, possibly even four days, perhaps even four . We have to carry it on for longer than a few days, I would think .
 I think that we ought to take this case to-send directly to Khrushchev by fast wire wire, and demand that he-that he stop this business and stop it right away, or we're gong to take those SAM-sites out immediately .
 I'd tell him this is a-I'd just use one of the .... messages he sends us, and I'd send it right off, and if he won't-and I'd trade these Turkish things out right now. I'd just tell him it's a message he sends
 We sat for a week, and evenybodywas in favor of doing it, and I'd make that part of the message . Evenybody was in favor, and that's what I'd like to do, he says .
 I'd tell him we're going to conduct surveillance, as announced by the President, and one shot and in we come, and he can expect it, he said . I'd say: "One shot, one shot, in we here come and there will be surveillance"
 I think that we can assume that that kind of an approachwill be made ex the-I think we can . assume an approach to tradethe missiles will be made one way or another, he says .
 Let's assume that that's made and time goes by and nothing happens and we're losing airplanes . But now let's assume it's made, and time will go by and we'll lose airplanes .
 Well, I mean this is a job for the White House, she says . Let's assume that the approach is made, and he doesn't do it .
 When I read that message of last night this morning, I thought, My God, I'd never sell-I'd never base a transaction on that contract . "I would never sell," he says of his contract .
 "Not once-there isn't a single word in it that proposes to take the missiles out. Not once," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "There isn't once-in-a-word in it"
 Last night's last-night message wasn't the same thing . Well his message this morning wasn't. Well, no, it wasn't .
 "Beforewe got the damned thing read the whole deal changed-completely changed. And beforewe got it read the entire thing changed," he said .
 The probabilities are that nothing's going to be signed quickly, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The probability is that nothing will happen quickly"
 I think we ought to be prepared for attack, all-out attack, but we should know how far we can postpone that, he says . We should be prepared to be ready to attack, he adds .
 "We ought to think of some other answers here. But I don't think that's the only answer," he says . "I'm not sure what the other answers are," he adds .
 John's suggestion, I think, is obviously one-to try to negotiate a deal . Now John's . suggestion, he thinks, is to try to . negotiate a . deal, he says .
 "You shot down a plane today before we even had a chance to send you a letter," he says . "Despite the fact that you knew that we were sending unarmed planes on a publicly announced surveillance, you shot down the plane today," he adds .
 Khrushchev: "We're sending unarmed planes over Cuba. Now we're telling you, Mr Khrushvic, this just one thing, that we're sending ... unarmed planes" The U.S. government says it was sending unarmed aircraft over Cuba .
 InternationalSecurity 12:3 | 80 installations out, and you can expect it . If one of them is shot at, we're going to take it out, we'll take the International security team .
 I've been afraid of these damned flyers ever since they mentioned them. "I'm afraid of them," he says of the flyers .
 Looks like we're playing Fourth of July over there or something . He might just pull a trigger .
 "I'm scared of that, and I don't see what you get for that photograph," she says . "You know they're working at night; you see them working in night," she adds . "That's so much more important than what you see," she writes .
 If you're going to try to psychologicallyscare them with a flare, you're liable to get your bottom shot at . If you try to psychological scare them, you'll get a bottom shot .
 He says if you're going to-you ought to accept the trade, you'll give up the Turkish bases, that you ought to say, ok, we'll give them up for Cuba . Cuba .
 McNamara says if we're going to hit Cuba, we've got to say to the Turks that we want you to give up your Jupiters, and we'll give you Polaris instead . McNamara: "We want to give you the Turks a Polaris instead. We want
 McNamara's drafting one, Ball drafting the other, both of them came back with the two . McNamara and Ball drafted the two. McNamara drafted one of the two, Ball drafted one .
 Any suggestion that we're willing to accept this unless there is an irrevocable decision to take these out by bombing is very dangerous . That's why I think any suggestion that . we're . willing to . accept this is very . dangerous, he says .
 Is somebody forcing him to up his ante, or is he trying to just see-maybe we'll give more-let's try it, and I can always come back to my original position? "He's trying to see more, maybe we'll try it," he said .
 Khrushchev and/or his colleagues were deceived by the Lippmann piece21 and the fact that Kreisky put this out which made them think that we were putting this out, that . we were willing to-to make a trade. EitherKhrushchevwas overruled
 It's our position to say unless you agree not to shoot at our unarmedplanes until these things of yours are inoperable in Cuba, then we're going to have to hit you . Well, Lippmanncan work this thing differently .
 SAM: I'm inclined to take one because I don't think giving an ultimatum is recommended . SAM: Would you rather send them a thing like this which says if they shoot at all you're going to take them all out, or would you rather go in and take one
 The only thing that bothers me is the-uh-you can see that we have two conflicting things here. I'm very happy to see that, but I'm not very happy with that . I think it's a good idea, but it's not a good thing to see two
 One is to prepare for action in Cuba, and the other is to get a peaceful solution along the lines which he has proposed . The Cuban government has been accused of using violence in the country's capital .
 If we want to get him to accept the thing that he put in his letter last night, then we shouldn't give any indication that we're ready to talk 21. And the purposes are conflicting because of that, he says .
 Columnist Walter Lippmann had published a piece in the Washington Post on Thursday, October 25, 1962, advocating a trade of Turkish for Cuban missiles as a way to end the crisis .
 You just ask yourself what made the greatest impression on you today, whether it was his letter last night or this morning, or whether it is his letter this morning .
 "That'swhat everybody and that'swhat's going to make an impression on him," she says . That'swhat everyone and everybody will have to say to him, she adds .
 I think we ought to go-essentially go back to this problem and then when we get these messages to the Turks, the British, and the NATO messages. We need to go back and go back, and then send them back to Turkey, the Turks and the British .
 McNamara: We have to go back to-we have to instruct Finletter,we have really to agree on the track,you see, Mr President and I think there's a very substantial difference of opinion .
 President Obama asked Mr Thompson to speak, but I'll ask him to speak. Well I haven't been in as much of the discussion as some others, Mr President said .
 It seems to me there are many indications thatuh-they suddenly thought they could get-uh-up the price . The price of the U.S. dollar has not yet been determined .
 "We have to bring them back by upping our action and by getting them back to this other thing without any mention of Turkey. And I think that we have to . upped our action," he says .
 "We have to cover that later, but we're going to surface his first proposal which helps the public position. We have a lot of things to do with that later," he says .
 It seems to me the public will be pretty solid on that, and that we ought to keep the heat on him and get him back on the line which he obviously was on the night before . And that-that-that . somewhat diminishes the need for any talk about . any
 Well, I think we ought to try to-just a second-I'll just say, of course . Well-I think we should try to go the first route which you suggest, I say . But I'll just let you know, he says .
 "We're going to do by one means or another. Get him back," the letter says . "That's what our letter's doing-that's what we're doing"
 "We oughtto have this discussion with NATO about these Turkish missiles, but more generally about sort of an up-to-date briefing about where we're going"
 We can't very well invade Cuba with all its toil, and long as it's going to be, when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles in Turkey . We could have made a deal with Turkey, President Obama says .
 Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin at approximately 7:45m. Kennedy has gone to his office at the Justice Department where he has met with the Soviet ambassador . The President and Rusk were Instructed by the President of Cuba .
 The letter agreeing to what the International Security 12:3 | 84 Americans take to be the terms of Khrushchev's first letter is on its way to the Kremlin . The letter agreed to what is known as the terms .
 President has also seen fit to convey a less formal, more personal statement to Khrushchev, through his brother and through Dobrynin .
 RFK told Dobrynin that while there could be no public deal regardingTurkishmissiles for Cuban missiles, the Soviets should understand that those missiles in Turkey would probably be removed in due course anyway . The mission was meant to keep the focus on Cuba, to emphasize that the Turkish missiles
 The Turkish missile issue proved to be a distinctly subsidiary accomplishment of the RFKmission to Dobrynin . But clarification of the Turkish missile is not all but a major accomplishment .
 Its real value may have been to strike the same fear of uncontrollable war into the Soviets . The previous ExCommdiscussion, initiated by McNamara, had struck into many ExCommmembers themselves .
 Only a few are aware of the RFKmission to Dobrynin, and of course none yet knows the outcome . The final ExComm meeting of October 27 is scheduled for October 27 .
 Ironically, it is Taylor who quickly emerges as a moderating influence on a discussion . Taylor is evidently concerned to continue to apply pressure to force the Soviets to remove their missiles from Cuba .
 Taylor expresses the view that they can do without low-level reconnaissance the following day . Disagreeing with McNamara, Taylor says they can't do without reconnaissance the next day .
 President believes any further reconnaissance will probably require a massive attack on all the anti-aircraftbatteries and SAM sites protecting the Soviet missiles . The President agrees, but believes that any further . reconnaissance would probably require . a massive . attack on . all anti-missile sites protecting
 Thompson's point of view has clearly by this time become the central assumption of the ExComm: Give the TrollopePloy a chance to work before talking about Turkishmissiles or shooting up Cuba . Thompson's view has now become the . central assumption that the . ExComm .
 RFK argues that the U.S. should not mention Turkey at NATO allies meeting . RFK: NATO allies should not discuss Turkey at the meeting of the following morning .
 He has just given the diplomatic effort a boost via Dobrynin . He doesn't want it sabotaged by loose talk about Turkish missiles at NATO .
 As the meeting breaks up after almost twelve continuous hours (on this, the twelfth day of the crisis), we may feel that we are voyeurs on a conversation that is private and not a little moving .
 The moment is powerfully poignant, but it soon passes, as an unidentified committee member cracks a joke about making RFKthe mayor of Havana . RFK was assassinated in June 1968 .
 McNamara, unaware of the decisive impact on the RFK mission and utterly pessimistic, it seems, about the prospects for the Trollope Ploy, the joke is a grisly one .
 The price of making anyone the ""mayorof Havana"" might be a horrendous nuclear war . Knowing only what he knew then, he must have guessed that the price of . making anyone . the . mayor of Havana might be the price .
 Many members of the ExCommhave recorded in memoirs and interviews that when they left the Cabinet Room after the meeting just concluded, they were not optimistic, either about the prospects for a diplomatic resolution or about controlling a war in Cuba .
 Only the President has expressed strong and repeated enthusiasm for the merits of the trade . Perhaps this is because it was only the President who expressed strong . enthusiasm .
 On the evidence of this document, one guesses that if President Kennedy had lived to write his own memoir of the missile crisis, it would have differed considerably .
 It is hard to avoid the impression that here was a man who went to sleep on the evening of October 27 knowing well what he would not do if Trollope Ploy failed .
 We have enforced surveillance;we shoot anybody who gets in our 23.5-vehicle . I would think that tomorrow we take certain steps to build up the pressure . We have the enforced surveillance, we have the enforce surveillance; we shoot anyone who gets into our 23rd .
 In firing that goes on in Cuba, we keep the-keep the focus on the Cubans. In Cuba, the focus should be on the Cuban people, says CNN's John Sutter .
 John McCone's draft suggested that Khrushchev should have enforced surveys . The message would keep the monkey on Cuba's back in this regard .
 It's not something that we make a very public issue out of, we're enforcing this with respect to Cuba, not the Soviet Union- the surveillance business . It's something that is regrettable but it's not a very publicly made public issue of it .
 The Chiefs have been-I went back this and talked this over with the Chiefs. The Chiefs are a good example of the Chiefs, I said . I went back and talked to the Chiefs over with them, he said .
 The planes returned the first to the missile sites and then the second turned back and cut out . The planes cut out and returned to the sites, returning to the base .
 We think, however, the Chiefs would recommend, that we still go back with about six planes tomorrow, picking out targets which we don't know have this kind of flak around, to verify that the work is still going ahead, and also to prove we're still on the job
 Low-level reconnaissance will be entirely impossible, says President Obama . But we're approaching the point, he says, Mr President, where it's impossible .
 When we reach that point, we're faced with taking out a number of SAM-sites that [threaten] 24 . When we're going to continue reconnaissancewithout actually taking out the whole works, we'll face taking out some of the SAM- sites .
 Rusk is apparently referring to Washington, the U.S. government, and its ability to apply various forms of pressure on Cuba . Rusk was apparently referring here to Washington .
 I would add to that I don't believe we should carry out tomorrow's U-2 mission... but I do believe that we should . We should carry on the mission with the necessary fighter escorts and . preparations for following our reconnaissance, if it's attacked, with attack on the
 "If our planes are fired on tomorrow, we ought to fire back," he says . "We ought to shoot back. Well, I think the point is that if our planes ... are fired back"
 If U Thant goes down there-we're rapidly approaching a real-I don't think that firing back at a twentymillimeter coming off the ground is good . Let me say, I think we ought to wait till tomorrow afternoon to see whether we get any answer .
 If Cuba fires at U.S. in Cuba, President Obama could make a statement Monday, he says . He says if Russia doesn't respond, he'll consider making a statement about the fire .
 I'd rather take-I don't think that it does any good to take out-to try to fire at a twenty millimeter on the ground. "I'd rather than take out," he says. "It does no good to try to shoot at a . twenty millimeters
 "You just hazard our planes, and the people on the ground have the advantage," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "I don't think we do any good to begin to sort of half do it. On the other hand, I don't want to-I don’t want to ... sort of . half . do it," he says .
 I think we ought to keep tomorrow clean, do the best we can with the surveillance. I think it's a good start to the day, I say . I think tomorrow will be clean .
 If they still fire, and we haven't got a satisfactory answer back from the Russians then I think we should put a statement out tomorrow that we were fired upon . We are therefore considering the island of Cuba as an open territory, and then take out all these SAM-sites .
 The U.S. needs to keep SAM-sites low and high, says President Obama . "We'll find ourselves without-our requirement will be so limited, that we'll find themselves with all the disadvantages," he says .
 I think we ought to, tomorrow-let's get U Thant our messages-take-if they fire on us, tell them we'll take them all out . Figure that Monday we're going to do something about the SAM-sites. We'll take some satisfaction .
 Taylor reiterates the Chiefs' view that reconnaissanceis unnecessary the following day . The Chiefs' decision to take the lead in the first place in the game was made following a bye bye week .
 Discussion turns to what to do about a Soviet ship approaching the quarantineline . Discussion turned to what should be done to stop the ship from entering .
 Decision on intercepting it can be postponed until noon the following day . It is agreed that a decision on whether or not to intercept it will be postponed .
 Mr President, just to remind us of seven things that have happened today. Mr President . Mr President. Just . remind us, just remind us that seven things . have happened .
 Tomorrow, we'll need to be sure that the pressures continue to build up. Tomorrow,we'll need . to be . sure that they continue to . build up . tomorrow, we will need to . be sure . that the pressure continues to build .
 Rusk responds by proposing that the U.S. say its preference is to settle on a Cuban basis alone . Rusk says NATO allies should understand that this may not be possible .
 We want them- if they hit Turkey and they hit Berlin, we want them to get off, now's the time to speak up . Well now, will the introduction of Turkey, we think .
 If I were they I'd push on that, and then push on Italy, figuring that well if they're going on that they can carry it one step further . And then figuring, I mean if we lose the gamble with-and I think that-if once they find, playing
 Russia has made an offer to the West, but it's not clear if it's been eased . Russia's offer was first made to the UK in 2008, but has since been softened .
 "The whole thing looks like it's collapsing, and we're going to have to go in there. We find out if U Thant is successful, then we find that he's not successful," says the show's creator .
 "State the facts, and say we think that this should be based-based completely in the Western Hemisphere," the government says . State the facts .
 We'll meet with you again raising this irrelevance, at ten o'clock tomorrow morning. We have an obligation to talk with you, and more of an obligation. We'll be talking again tomorrow morning .
 JFK: "I think you've got to figure- that's another twenty-four hours. Then if the thing blowstomorrow, then we go at ten o'clock the next morning and say that"
 "I can't believe it's going to make that much difference. Well-uh-uh, one day, I can't," she said . "Well-uh"
 U.S. military says it will meet with Russia on Tuesday morning to try to get bases out of Turkey . Russia says it is only going to do it if you can get bases from Turkey, if it can get them out of the country .
 It seems to be that on Hare if we don't want to-we try to get the Russians off the Turkishtrade-then we probablydon't want anything with Hare for twenty-four hours till we get some sort of an answer . Let's just say, it seems to me
 "Let's see-uh-let's give him an explanation of what we're trying to do. Well, let's see," he says .
 We're trying to get it back on the original proposition of last night, and-because we don't want to get into this trade trade, we're not going to get involved in this trade . We're going to try to get back to our original proposition, and we're trying
 If we're unsuccessful, then we-it's possible that we may have to get back on the Jupiter thing . If we are unsuccessful, we might have to go back to Jupiter .
 U.S. President Barack Obama has been criticized for not sending troops to Turkey . Obama says the U.K. has a right to speak to the Turks, not the Turks .
 "We need to have two things ready, a government for Cuba, because we're going to need one," says Bobby Kennedy . "And we need to also have plans for how to respond to the Soviet Union in Europe," he says .