 Air Force pilot Richard Heyser flies spyplane over Cuba and takes photos of Russian medium-range missiles . Air Force pilots take photos of the Russian missiles .
 Nikita Khrushchev asked Cuba President Fidel Castro if he could put them there in May . Soviet leader asked Cuba's President to put them in place in Cuba in May.
 Ex-Comm, a group of U.S. political leaders, meets for the first time to discuss the Soviet missiles . The group of American political leaders meets for first time in a decade .
 Ex-Comm would meet several times throughout the crisis and rarely agreed on what to do . The members rarely agreed to do what they would do .
 More photos of missile sites show that Cuba also has long-range Soviet missiles . More photos show the missile sites are analyzed .
 October 18, 1962 Robert Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko . Kennedy met with Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko in Moscow . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko . Kennedy keeps a previously scheduled meeting with Soviet foreign minister . Kennedy does not mention missiles .
 Gromyko tells Kennedy that the only help the Soviet Union is giving to Cuba is assistance growing crops and missiles that are only for defense . The only help given to Cuba was to grow crops and missile missiles that were only defense .
 Ex-Comm meets and discusses sending U.S. ships to Cuba to prevent Soviet ships from reaching the island . Ex-comm meets to discuss sending ships to Cuban ports .
 They are careful to call it a quarantine because a blockade is an act of war . The blockade is a 'quarantine' because a quarantine is an 'act of war', they say . It is not a quarantine, it is a quarantine .
 October 20, 1962 Robert Kennedy gives Ex-Comm's recommendation to the president . Robert Kennedy: "Ex-Comm" recommendation to President Kennedy . Kennedy: 'ExComm' recommendation to president was "a good idea"
 Robert Kennedy tells the president that Ex-Comm recommends a quarantine . Robert Kennedy: "Ex-Comm recommend a quarantine" Robert Kennedy calls for quarantine after meeting all day the previous day .
 President Kennedy lies about having a cold so that he can return to Washington to deal with the crisis . Kennedy was in Chicago when he lied about a cold to avoid a trip to Chicago .
 October 21, 1962 Ted Sorenson writes one of the most important speeches President Kennedy will ever give . Ted writes about Kennedy's speech in a book written by Ted and others .
 Attorney and advisor to the president, Ted Sorenson, writes the speech that Kennedy will give to the nation . Kennedy's speech will be broadcast at 9 p.m. ET .
 Informing Americans that the Soviets have missiles in Cuba that are pointed at the United States will be an important moment in American history and one of the most frightening speech as president ever gives .
 October 22, 1962, President Kennedy gives a televised speech to the nation . President Kennedy gave a televised address in 1962 . Kennedy was the first president to address the nation on television .
 President Kennedy gives a speech that is carried live on television stations across the country to inform Americans that missiles have been discovered in Cuba . The speech is carried out live on TV .
 He tells Americans that he has ordered a Navy quarantine around Cuba and orders the Soviets to remove the missiles . The president orders the Soviet Union to remove missiles and quarantines Cuba .
 This prevents a confrontation with United States ships that are around Cuba . Soviet submarines trailed behind the U.S. ships in place .
 He also accuses Kennedy of putting the world at risk of a nuclear war by ordering the quarantine . Kennedy ordered the quarantine, which was ordered by President Kennedy .
 President Kennedy orders flights over Cuba to be increased from once to twice per day . Kennedy ordered the increase in Cuban flights to increase from once a day to twice a day .
 October 26, 1962, The United States begins discussions about invading Cuba . The U.S. begins discussing invading Cuba in 1962 .
 October 27, 1962, American pilot flies off course into Soviet airspace . American pilot flew off course in Soviet airspace.
 Charles Maultsby, an American pilot, gets lost flying a mission to Alaska and ends up in Soviet airspace . Charles Maultby was flying over Alaska when he got lost .
 Khrushchev says that he will remove missiles from Cuba if Kennedy promises not to invade Cuba . Kennedy agrees to the proposal . Khruschev says he'll remove the missiles if Kennedy agrees not to invasion Cuba .
 The world goes to bed that night waiting to see if Khrushchev will accept the arrangement and bring an end to the crisis . The world went to bed waiting for the end of the crisis to be decided .
 Khrushchev gives a speech on Radio Moscow and says that he has agreed to Kennedy's arrangement . Kennedy's deal was the first time the Soviet Union had agreed to an arrangement with Kennedy .