 Chic and I were in separate classes in the 31-week, 560G surface sonar course . The pair would not enter the inner sanctum ‘behind the green doors’ for another six months .
 Director Emeritus Ed Dalrymple was under orders to attend the SOSUS officer course . He arrived a few weeks later, in mid-November, while tensions were still very high .
 Kennedy would make a televised address that evening, on an urgent matter of national importance . Kennedy would address the nation on the night of the day .
 Many of the waterfront piers normally occupied by several submarines, destroyers, and other Navy ships mysteriously had become completely vacant .
 In his address, “JFK” revealed that Soviet medium-range, surface-to-surface ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads were being installed on Cuban soil . The missiles were capable of striking Washington, DC .
 President Obama ordered a ‘quarantine’ imposed on the island of Cuba, to prevent the introduction of additional missiles that were known to be en route aboard cargo ships . He demanded those missiles be removed and said a Naval “quarantine was being imposed”
 All off-duty personnel on the Naval Station were rounded up, mustered, given brief instructions, and posted around the base perimeter in a chain of security watches .
 M-1 rifles and clips loaded with eight, .30 caliber cartridges were augmented with M-30 caliber clips . As they became available, these items were augmented by M1 rifles .
 My watch assignment on that first night was to ‘guard’ the marine railway against swimmers and to blow my whistle if I saw any . My watch assignments on that night were to “guard” the . marine railway .
 During a night watch on the long concrete mole pier that juts out into the Gulf of Mexico, I was startled by a loud splash . I was relieved to discover it was caused by a large Manta ray .
 Fleet Sonar School modified its normal schedule, so that we students were attending classes every other day, alternating with days on which we stood security watches, four hours on, eight off . Students were required to stand security watches for four hours each day .
 Instructors, all senior petty officers and Chiefs, were also on that daily schedule . Instructors and Chiefs were on the watch bill as security section supervisors .
 The U.S. had become aware of the missiles in Cuba a week earlier and was ramping up preparations for war . Unknown to us at the time, the United States had become . The United States was ramped up preparations to war .
 Nike anti-aircraft missile batteries were set up by the United States Army in at least a couple of locations on the island as well as at other sites in southern Florida .
 The sounds of powerful Navy F4 Phantom jet fighters and RF-8 Crusaders, probably flying out of the adjacent Naval Air Station at Boca Chica, were a common occurrence .
 These flights rattled the Jalousie windows of the BEQs . These flights were especially unnerving in the middle of the night .
 Phantoms were probably escorts for the Crusaders, which flew frequent, low-level photo-reconnaissance missions over Cuba . The Phantoms probably were escorts . The Crusaders were probably flying frequent low level photos of Cuba over the island .
 He then displayed large aerial reconnaissance photos of missile sites to the UN Security Council . He then explained what they revealed, exposing the Soviet lies . The photos were then displayed to the Security Council of the UN .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev struck an eleventh-hour deal . Tense negotiations ended about a week later when President Kennedy struck an end to negotiations . Kennedy and his Soviet counterpart struck an 11-minute deal .
 In exchange for the withdrawal of their nuclear missiles from Cuba, the Soviets were promised that the U.S. would not invade that Communist-controlled island nation . The Soviets were also promised not to invade Cuba, but the United States would not .
 "We did not relax our guard until late November or early December. While this agreement allowed both sides to step back and take a deep breath, it did not allow us to relax . The agreement was reached in late November and early December .
 The resolution of the crisis and subsequent relaxation allowed a personal happy ending . "The resolution of this crisis allowed me to relax," she says .
 "To my knowledge we have never before, nor since, been so close to the edge," says President Obama . "We've never before before," says Obama .