 It was among the most important studies in American political science in the 1970s . It was an ambitiously intelligent and sophisticated book .
 Allison’s volume helped shape interpretations in disciplines interested in decisionmaking, and provoked many methodological and conceptual critiques, as well as some on issues of evidence, sources, and missile crisis history .
 He writes on Cold War history, and has been publishing on the Cuban missile crisis since 1963 . He has been writing on the Cold War .
 The author is indebted to Elizabeth Kopelman Borgwardt, Lynn Eden, Alexander George, Stephen Krasner, and Scott Sagan for critical comments . Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow for privately addressing questions about their research sources .
 "Their generosity has been a model of collegiality in assisting an author who is somewhat critical of their work," author says . "They have been generous and gracious," he adds .
 The volume had wide use in programs that sought to understand and explain the behavior of organizations, and the tugs and rivalries within bureaucracies . Even involving enterprises far removed from foreign policy and the United States government .
 This essay does not hope to be exhaustive in examining and comparing the two editions’ models of explanation and the interpretations of the missile crisis . This essay is not exhaustive .
 Fair-minded critics may plausibly argue about some of this essay’s choices in examining theory and evidence . But the expectation is that most readers will consider the choices generally reasonable while tolerantly acknowledging that an author's taste and interest sometimes inºuence the choice of problems .
 This review essay, beyond this introduction and a later conclusion, is divided into two major sections . It includes an introduction, a conclusion, and a review essay .
 The ªrst provides a comparatively short consideration of the 1971 Essence . The 1971 Essence was released in 1971 .
 Second section offers a longer consideration of the revised Essence, with occasional reference to the ªrst edition .
 Second section does not discuss other scholarly critiques of the 1999 edition because none of any depth has yet been published . None of these critiques have been published.
 Allison’s original volume was intentionally conceived not to address such basic questions of values and of purposes . Allison: ‘I’m not going to address those basic questions, but I’ll address them here. Allison: The original volume of this volume was intended to
 The understanding of process became the way to understand the substance of policy, according to the 1971 volume .
 The book, while seemingly nonideological, was implicitly quite ideological in result and presumably in intention . The book was published in 1996, and the book was released in 1998 .
 Allison narrowed the deªnition of the important questions in studying foreign policy, and probably wanted to improve the decisionmaking processes of the U.S. government . Allison narrowed down the questions to study foreign policy .
 Allison provided frameworks that usually treated the U.S. as what might be called an ordinary state, one in which he believed bureaucracies and organizations substantially deªne policy . Allison avoided the major questions of United States purpose and ideology .
 The particular inºuence of U.S. history, of the alleged values of the “Open Door,” and of conceptions of national mission and of American exceptionalism, were implicitly dismissed, or ignored, in Essence .
 "The proper study was substantially of organizations and bureaucracy, and their signiªcant interactions," says the author .
 The book brieºy applied similar frameworks of emphasizing bureaucracy and organizations in the Soviet Union .
 Allison often often minimized the role of communist ideology and of centralized party control as authoritarian . Allison also usually treated the Soviet Union as an ordinary state .
 The volume generally disregarded the often-ªerce scholarly dialogue between ‘revisionists” and ‘orthodox” interpreters in analyzing Cold War history and questions of Soviet versus American blame .
 Essence ignored the often-related disputes about the nature of the Soviet system and its effect on Soviet foreign policy . Essence also ignored the disputes over the nature and the effect of the system .
 Allison’s book brieºy but explicitly challenged foreign policy realism, with its deªning assumption that states seek to maximize power and security . Allison also challenged realism's assumption that divisions over policy within the government are not analytically interesting in explaining state behavior .
 Essence offered a markedly different way of studying U.S. foreign policy . Essence offered an alternative view of the world's foreign policy.
 Essence stressed the domestic making of foreign policy and seemed to reject the realist conception of a neo-Hobbesian world in which states operated .
 The book challenges realism, which was already the dominant analytical trend in American political science studies of foreign policy . The book emphasized the need to look within the state, and in particular ways and places inside the state .
 The 1971 Essence often narrowed, disregarded, or distorted, the book’s work in the process of implying ‘newness’
 Allison seemed not to know, or was unwilling to acknowledge, that historians for some time had been using a form of bureaucratic politics to structure parts of their studies in both domestic and foreign policy . Allison seemed to be unaware that historians have been using bureaucratic politics in their studies .
 Allison probably was not really interested in what historians had been writing, and he was primarily addressing a social science audience . Allison was addressing social science, but he was not interested in history .
 Allison would have been correct to contend that many historical works lacked explicit models . Allison would be correct to say that historical works had no explicit models for their work . Allison was correct to argue that the models were not explicit .
 Many historical works emphasized differences in values and personality among competing government members . They did not seek to offer a general theory to explain behavior within the government .
 Historians seldom, if ever, delved into organizational culture or ways of processing information . Historians often did not appreciate how organizations could inºuence policy by narrowing options, privileging particular responses .
 Allison’s work was less new than he contended . Viewed from the critical perspective of what American historians had actually been writing about foreign policy and recent American history .
 The 1971 Essence’s promise of rigor, explicit models, thoughtful laying out of assumptions, and attention to conceptualization and the role of “lenses” in interpreting evidence made the volume potentially very valuable .
 Essence’s formal division between a theory chapter for each of the three models and then an applied-missile-crisis-history-history chapter . The book also included many 1940s and 1950s' historical illustrations .
 Political science had moved more toward models and discussions of methodology and efforts to generate theory reaching beyond particular events . History seemed more substantially empirical and also wanted sometimes to discuss the nature of the United States .
 Concerns about the nature of the U.S. or its core values reserved most often for older practitioners, who frequently were treated as dated scholars . Political science is the subject of much of the nation's history of American exceptionalism .
 These concerns were relegated also to those political scientists, whether young or old, who did political philosophy, not foreign policy analysis or international relations .
 These three models, or lenses, or paradigms, were conceived, in part as alternative ways of analyzing events and of seeing and emphasizing different facts . Allison often shifted terms and also employed others—and Allison often employed others .
 Unlike epistemological relativists in history, Allison did not challenge scholarly ‘objectivity” as either a goal or a result . Allison is not a relativist, but a historian .
 "Lenses" had a peculiar quality of fragmenting reality and making observation, and knowledge, dependent upon the chosen theory . Yet there were explicit rules and standards for putting together the varying perceptions of events, had to be put together .
 He designed his explicit models to make analysts very aware of their assumptions, and allow them to conduct rigorous inquiry .
 Essence: How to put together the varied ªndings of different theory-driven models could be, and was, unclear in Essence . Essence.com: How does it work?
 Allison believed Allison believed Models II and III were usually superior . As a result, important portions of the conclusions would have to be supplanted, he said . Allison believed that the conclusions of the book should be replaced with those of the models III and II .
 Allison treated Models II and III in explicit theory and in his application in his history chapters as competitive and sometimes complementary . Allison also treated Models I and III as competitive, sometimes complementary, in his theory and history chapters . Allison's theory and application of his theory was both explicit and complementary .
 In the book’s tone and organization, there was some implication that Model III was superior, but there was no sustained argument to that effect . The book was published in March 2013 .
 Essence was sometimes unclear on why a part of the book’s narrative on the missile crisis or its ªndings on certain events fell into Model II and not Model II .
 Model III as a concept, and in its application in examining the Cuban missile crisis, had a suppleness that approached dangerous promiscuity . Even more serious, Model III had to be considered as a potential solution to the Cuban crisis .
 Allison stressed that policy resulted from “pulling and hauling,” from negotiating and sparring, among the main actors . In much of Allison’s explicit formulation, Allison said, ‘pulling, hauling’ meant ‘separating’
 Essence is a grab bag of inºuences, with inadequate guidance to the reader for sorting them out or weighing the major factors . The seeming near-parsimony of an actor’s “stand depends on where you sit,” or even more tempered formulations in
 Did the particular salient causal inºuence—whether personality, or background, or bureaucratic membership—on an individual vary from person to person? 5. 5.5.5 . 5.6.5 questions: Did personality, background, and bureaucratic membership vary?
 Essence did this despite its lexicon of near-science and alleged precision . In practice, the result often was a set of descriptions and even some “theory” that seemed to indicate a kind of eclectic palace politics .
 The lexicon might brieºy conceal the mushiness of the model, but perhaps also perhaps of the historical interpretation that the model’s application offered for the missile crisis .
 Essence discussed Carl Hempel’s ‘covering law’ model of historical explanation . Hempel's conception was that explanation was logically the converse of prediction . Essence discussed, in a substantial endnote, a philosopher of science described Hempel .
 The book provided models, or lenses, or paradigms with substantial mushiness . Nevertheless, after mentioning Hempel, Ernest Nagel, and Wittgenstein, the book provides models for models or lenses of the world .
 Allison’s citations to analytical philosophy helped promise rigor, but the book did not deliver on that promise . Allison: “Rigorous” is a book that promises rigor . Allison says the book will be used as a guide to the world of science .
 The book seemed not to value the likely beneªts in the formulation of policy of “multiple advocacy,” to use Alexander George’s phrase . The book also seemed to not value the . likely bene’t in the . formulation of . the policy of
 Allison’s conceptualization and presentation of Model III were sometimes uncertain about how to treat the hierarchy among the pullers and haulers . In addition, Allison's conceptualization was sometimes unclear about how the hierarchy was treated in Model III .
 These central matters—of power—merited the closer attention of theory, of considerable emphasis on analytical distinctions, and of careful historical explanation in studying particular cases . The central matters, of power, merit closer attention .
 This 1972 essay was not explicitly presented as sometimes modifying Essence . But that essay can be interpreted that way . The 1972 essay can also be interpreted as sometimes modified .
 Sometimes, the book suggested, more often in its applied-history segments, that he was above the “game,” and at another level . But occasionally, it suggested he was higher than the ‘game’ Sometimes, he suggests he is above the game, and
 Essence provided no conceptual guidelines, or even implicit rules, for combining these presidential roles . It provided no guidelines for combining presidential roles and determining when one role or the other is crucial .
 A basic problem with Essence was whether the Cuban missile crisis was a good subject for a test case-study . Essence: "A basic problem is that it's not a good case for a study"
 President Obama and many of his advisers focused sharply and often exclusively on missile crisis issues . That crisis was probably the most dangerous two weeks in modern history .
 Allison’s defense of choosing the missile crisis because it was a tough case study,9 there is serious reason to doubt whether generalizations from that crisis period would .t more normal times and situations in the scholars’ efforts to construct conceptual frameworks to understand decisionmaking .
 Some of this privileging resulted necessarily from the problem of dealing with then-recent events, when the available archives were skimpy at best . But practice rooted in temporary necessity took on the form of virtually an operating principle about deªning what constituted valuable evidence .
 The book’s belief, and the operating practice in the book, was that skillful interviews would reveal the subtleties of bargaining and the differences in individuals’ priorities and perceptions, while documents were judged unlikely to yield such understanding .
 Historians' emphasis on archives and their faith in their capacity to wring evidence and interpretation from dusty papers . Implicitly, but not explicitly, it was an oblique assault upon historians’ practices .
 The faith in interviews could carry over, as it often did in Essence, to a heavy but sometimes uncritical reliance on memoirs and on the books by others who had conducted interviews .
 1971 Essence allowed later analysts to test, at least in part, the book’s guiding principles on the use of evidence .
 Allison’s trusting faith in interview and memoir evidence helped him, unintentionally, to misunderstand these and other matters . Allison: “I’m not sure what happened to me, but I’ve got a lot of respect for the author,” Allison wrote .
 Allison’s uncritical acceptance of the wrong “history” may have occurred in part because his “theory” told him that events like this (especially organizations thwarting higher-level orders) happened, and then he implicitly relaxed 10.10. Allison�
 Interviews often determine what is chosen from the public record, and how it was interpreted . Interviews were often determined what was chosen .
 On the air force, see Merritt Olsen to Allison, January 11, 1978, courtesy of Zelikow, Allison and Olsen .
 Allison seemed not to doubt the probity of former Kennedy administration stalwarts, or to wonder whether their desire for prominence in future administrations might lead to selective memory and self-serving recollections about missile crisis events .
 Allison often used conªdential sources, and his footnotes were sometimes inadequate . Independent checking by other scholars was sometimes difªcult in assessing his evidence .
 Allison’s American interview sources never mentioned ‘Mongoose,” or suggested that there had been such Kennedy administration efforts after the Bay of Pigs to eliminate Fidel Castro .
 Allison’s book did not reºect caution, or critical self-awareness, in the determination of the reliability of some key evidence . Allison: Despite discussion of models and lenses of viewing, Allison's book didn’t re-ect caution . Allison says, “
 Model II’s emphasis on organizational culture, and on the way it can ill-serve ofªcials at higher levels like the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, may actually impair the analyst's understanding of organizations and culture .
 Problems with organizations ill-serving superiors on major issues do not occur all the time, and perhaps not very frequently . Problems like this don't occur often, but perhaps not often, often .
 Allison's task was to retain the theory as a guide, but to be critical of evidence, not to allow the theory to serve to validate soft, or dubious, evidence . Allison: The difªcult task for Allison, or any analyst using such a theory about organizations,
 In a circular process, the theory or lens validated that soft evidence, thereby also helping to establish the value of the theory . In the process, soft evidence is validated by the theory and lens, it also helps establish its value .
 Essence’s use of Model II could still have considerable analytic value . Despite such criticism, the model could still be useful for analytic purposes .
 Scholars might not be looking at high-level decisionmaker's purposes, but rather at organization's mode of operation . It reminded scholars, in looking at particular policies, that they might be actually looking at specific policies .
 A scholar should look for evidence that the policy was formed by an organization, not by a top decisionmaker, he says . Such understanding could push a scholar to look at evidence that an organization formed its own policy .
 Organizational Theory had become more complicated and nuanced, the author says . Organizational theory has become more complex, nuanced, he says .
 In turn, in dealing with Model III, scholars had usually found it difªcult to operationalize, in 12.1.2.3 .
 The division of labor among the two co-authors is undiscussed in the new Essence . Graham Allison is a political scientist and Philip Zelikow is a historian .
 Zelikow was on George Bush’s National Security Council . Allison Allison served brieºy as an assistant secretary of defense in the early Clinton administration . Zelikowski was on Bush's national security council .
 Compared to the 1971 book, the new edition is about one-quarter longer and considerably richer in evidence and interpretation of the missile crisis . The book also contains many seemingly unnecessary additions on the Bush administration’s policies, though .
 Only three explicit models appear in the book, though Models II and III are somewhat reformulated . Models I and III have been reformulated for the book .
 Model II is renamed as “organizational behavior,” and the theory chapters for all three models are expanded . Model II, Model II and Model II are renamed “Organizational behavior”
 Model I’s theory chapter now includes a brief discussion of rational choice theory, psychology, and game theory . Model I's theory chapter also includes discussion of the psychology and game theories .
 Model II’s theory chapter is supple and richer than in the 1971 volume, reºecting the quarter-century of organization theory . Model II's theory chapter includes a chapter on organization theories .
 Model III, in a partial revision, is even more of a grab bag of various explanations than it was in the 1971 edition . Model III is now more of an explanation book than in 1971 edition.
 The 1999 book still has three sets of two chapters (a theory chapter followed by an applied-history chapter on the missile crisis for each model), plus a preface, introduction, and conclusion . Organized essentially like the ªrst edition, the 1999 book is organized essentially like
 Allison and Zelikow agree on the Neustadt dictum and why it is still in the book . One wonders whether Allison and Zelikow agreed .
 The revised book almost never states what major interpretations have been changed, or why . It almost never reveals what major changes have been made in the revised book . The revised version of the book has no explanation of major interpretations .
 The new edition avoids an explicit dialogue with the earlier edition, or its critics, and an explicit acknowledgment of mistakes in the 1971 edition . New editions usually avoid a dialogue with earlier editions, or critics .
 Unlike the ªrst edition, the new one makes a somewhat expanded, but still-incomplete, effort to present an integrated interpretation at the end . Unlike the . first edition, this one makes an expanded but still incomplete attempt to present the . end .
 In the revised Essence, Model I is regarded with more respect than in 13.5 years ago .
 The 1999 book also seems unduly to narrow, and partly to misunderstand, Kennan’s thought and thus why he really does not properly ‪t into the rational actor framework. But in newly added paragraphs, the 1999 book . It also seems to seem unduly narrow,
 Kennan, in his famous American Diplomacy, did not claim that U.S. policy had conformed, historically, to rational actor behavior . His memoirs are full of the stuff of internecine bureaucratic/personal rivalries .
 There has been greater effort in the past quarter-century to operationalize, and test, theory . It may be testimony to the inºuence of the 1971 Essence, and to the somewhat related changes in the international relations and United States foreign policy .
 Collingwood and, in line with his 1933 urgings, calls for “empathetic recon14.14. “Empathetic recon’s,” he said in a speech to the U.S. House of Representatives . Colling
 Essence never discusses how such “empathetic reconstruction” could be rigorously operationalized for agreed-upon testing . Essence does not discuss how such an agreement could be tested .
 The 1999 Essence is concerned, brieºy, with the logic and nature of explanation . It's concerned with the "logic" and "nature of explanation"
 The book revises, with an important addition, its earlier substantial endnote on Hempel and the “covering law” conception of historical explanation .
 Zelikow, unlike Allison, rejects Hempel’s conception that the model of the “covering law” carries over from science into history . Allison: “Allison rejects the idea that the covering law carries over into history.” The expanded note
 An expanded endnote also has references to William James and John Dewey . Hilary Putnam: James rejected the dualism of fact and interpretation .
 Allison and Zelikow never explicitly acknowledge that their substantial difference on the nature of historical explanation has no apparent implication, or effect, on the actual content of their collaborative book . But Allison never explicitly acknowledges that .
 The revised Essence would reveal, explicitly or implicitly, such differences elsewhere . If it did, it would reveal the differences elsewhere in the world .
 Essence systematically applied each of its three models to each issue, thus producing nine sets of explanations . Essence produced nine explanations for each issue in 1971 .
 Model III does not apply Model III to the question of why the Soviets put the missiles in Cuba . Yet, without discussing the departure from that strategy, the 1999 book does not discuss that .
 The new book seems to give great weight to the Model I explanation of the 16 .
 Essence, 288, 95, for a reference to Collingwood but without any endorsement of his thought . Essence , 288, . 95, . for reference to collingwood . Collingwick .
 Allison’s Model I single answer to the question, of Soviet purpose, was that the Soviets had sought signiªcantly to supplement their missile power by placing missiles in Cuba . In 1971, Allison's Model I said the Soviets wanted to supplement its missile power with Cuba
 1971 Essence had dismissed other possible Soviet motives, including the Soviet effort to buttress Cuban defense from possible U.S. aggression .
 There was nothing inherent in Model I, or in the logic and normal form of historical explanation, that limited a nation-state to just one motive, or that should have restricted an analyst to only one cause in explaining an event . Yet, there was nothing in the Logic and logic and
 In Nikita Khrushchev’s 1970s’ memoirs, the Soviet premier had emphasized Cuban defense as his primary motive, and he brieºy suggested the desire for enhanced Soviet missile power as an additional purpose . Khrushchchev's memoirs suggest the desire
 In the 1980s and early 1990s, different Soviet representatives usually accepted both motives . Different Soviet representatives sometimes split on which of the two was more important .
 Ex-Commons members seemed to split on whether missile power was preeminent and “defense of Cuba” secondary, or vice versa . A few former Ex Comm members also seem to split .
 In using Model I, Allison changed the implicit rules for the answer in Essence on the number of Soviet motives for the deployment . Allison used Model I to answer questions about the Soviet motives .
 Essence on earlier pages seemed to reject “Cuban defense” as even one of the Soviet motives . That ambiguous phrasing might leave wiggle room for Cuban defense as an additional motive in the book's analysis .
 The reason for revising the ‘rule’ on the number of motives is unstated . It is not clear why the change is being made .
 The book argues that the deployment’s size (so many missiles) and its components (MRBMs and IRBMs, rather than shortrange nuclear weapons) were not essential to defending Cuba .
 A more reasonable explanation would have acknowledged that these weapons were viewed generally, in a rational actor framework by Soviet ofªcials, as desirable because they would both defend Cuba and enhance the Soviet missile arsenal . The more reasonable and appropriately supple explanation would be from a more rational actor
 Essence’s 1999 general dismissal of the Cuban defense motive is especially surprising given that Khrushchev repeatedly claimed Cuban defense privately and publicly . Many of his associates believed him in 1962 and also later .
 The revised Essence does not systematically argue with interpreters who maintain the importance of Cuban defense,22 though, in a strange twist at the end of the book’s section on Model I .
 There may well be still-unexamined Soviet archives on Khrushchev’s 1962 thinking that may help resolve this factual/interpretive dispute . There may also be still unexamineed Soviet archives .
 Fursenko has recently been in the Soviet archives on the Berlin crisis, 1958–63, and reports that he found no evidence connecting it to the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba . He has been in Soviet archives since 1958-63 .
 Khrushchev’s desire to place missiles in Cuba ran into some early opposition among his advisers . In a set of events unmentioned in the revised Essence but discussed in “One Hell of a Gamble,” discussed in the original version of the book .
 At a mid-May 1962 meeting of the Soviet Defense Council, Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan objected to placing Soviet missiles and troops in Cuba, but a majority endorsed the proposal . At the same meeting, a majority of Soviet defense council members endorsed the plan .
 The Presidium, presumably including Mikoyan, approved Khrushchev’s venture . Three days later, the Presidium reportedly approved the venture . The venture was the first of its kind .
 There are puzzling questions why the revised Essence did not try explicitly to place these events, even brieºy, within its unused Model III framework on the issue of Soviet deployment .
 Allison and Zelikow’s argument that Berlin was one of two important Soviet motives for the deployment is clever but not compelling, they say . The authors' argument is not compelling .
 Khrushchev neither expressed this “purpose” to his associates, nor claimed it later in his memoirs and other post-1962 forums . The two authors took some skimpy evidence, and ignore the fact that Khruschev expressed it to associates .
 For Kennedy in October 1962, the fear of Soviet counteraction in Berlin, as Essence argues, in using Model I, does help explain the choice .
 JFK was afraid of a Soviet military backlash against Berlin in retaliation for U.S. action against Cuba . Kennedy opted for a quarantine, and not a more bellicose response, Allison and Zelikow stress .
 JFK’s fear of Soviet nuclear retaliation from Cuba against the United States if the U.S. selected a stronger response than a quarantine . That is probably a large part of the explanation, mixed with JFK's fear of nuclear retaliation against Cuba .
 JFK’s worries about keeping the alliance system together . Like most interpretations, the book also stresses JFK's worries about the future of the system .
 According to the revised Essence’s application of Model I, President Kennedy could not tolerate Soviet missiles . He had to act to get them out or face political reprisals at home .
 1999 Model I history, as history, seems useful and eminently reasonable—as far as it goes . Other analysts might slightly quarrel with the mix, and many may want a clear statement of priorities .
 In applying Model III to the quarantine, the 1999 Essence runs into some peculiar problems . The 1999 Essence Essence is the world's first version of the Model III .
 Most of the lengthy segment on the quarantine is not about the choice of the quarantine, but about other matters, including the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The U.S. discovered the Soviet missile in Cuba, the author says .
 The nine-page segment on selecting the quarantine mostly describes various advisers’ thinking, and could mostly have been written by someone who rejected Model III as a useful lens .
 Kennedy’s nine-page segment does include a thoughtful, one-and-a-halfpage analysis of his concerns about domestic politics and international affairs . Kennedy also discusses his thoughts on domestic politics .
 Domestic-politics analysis is not dissimilar in its central arguments from the much briefer material in the book’s Model I, applied-history chapter .
 JFK’s domestic political fears and concerns ªrst ªt Model I and then Model III, not explained . JFK's domestic political concerns and concerns are not explained. JFK”s domestic concerns and fears were not explained by JFK .
 It is as if the co-authors are unsure about what Model I includes in practice, and how to apply their theory, part of the time, when doing applied history involving that model . Not according to the book's discussion of the theory of Model I .
 To some critics in the 1970s, that contention, absent any proof, seemed counterintuitive . But some critics say that contention is counterintuitive, and it's not always true .
 1999 book’s analysis, while similar to the 1971 version, is broader and also somewhat different . 1999 book's analysis is similar to 1971 book, but it's not the same .
 It constitutes both an enrichment and a slight retreat by no longer relying exclusively upon the 1971 version’s analysis of standard operating procedure . The new version of this article is published by The Washington Post .
 This explanation, then, ªts under Model II, but really emphasizes the ‘blunder” of that team and not a conception of SOP behavior . This explanation is under Model I .
 According to the new Essence, the Soviet forces, upon reaching Cuba, discovered that the palm/forest belief was wrong-headed, but they did not adequately adjust to the situation . The new Essence says that Soviet forces discovered the belief, but did not adjust to it .
 No camouºage, a procedure developed for deployments in the Soviet Union, is standard operating procedure used by the U.S. troops . Instead of camouades, the soldiers followed a procedure of no camouade .
 Essence . 102, 102, for possibly more hedges about being suggestive in explaining Soviet action . Essence , 102, . . . For more information, visit Essence .
 This organization, in facing a tug between two competing goals of a tight schedule and secrecy, focused on the schedule, not secrecy . Thus, this organization, the organization, is focused on its schedule, rather than secrecy .
 The requirements of camouºage would have made installation more difªcult, and impeded the schedule, which the organization presumably deemed more important .
 The 1999 Essence’s interpretation seems plausible, and may even be correct . The writer's interpretation of the book is plausible .
 A critic might well comment upon how easily the book’s interpretation slides from providing some evidence to offering a speculative possibility (the organization was following SOP and facing a tug between secrecy and speed) to presenting a strongly asserted conclusion (the schedule was emphasized, and thus camouº
 In this interpretive process in Essence, the theory of Model II almost unobtrusively ªlls in the gaps, paving over the problem of the shortage of evidence .
 Khrushchev had wanted the SAMs to protect the missiles from U-2 surveillance . According to the 1999 Essence, based upon Fursenko and Naftali’s book, Khrushche had wanted them to go in to protect them .
 SAMs did not shoot down U-2s. It does not rely on Model II, and may dissolve the puzzle of why the SAMs didn't shoot them down .
 Possibly, Khrushchev changed his mind during the summer about the role of the SAMs . Therefore the absence of a shoot-down order was not the product of various kinds of Model II behavior by others but, rather, of his own intended decision .
 Perhaps wary of provoking a United States attack by the Soviets downing a U-2 near the United States, he may well have decided against issuing an order directing the Soviet commander to shoot down a U.2 .
 A Model I interpretation, especially in the absence of compelling alternative evidence, may sometimes be “the answer” to the puzzle . Thus, a Model I interpretation, especially with appropriate hedges about the problems of evidence, can sometimes be the answer to a puzzle .
 The impossibility on the basis of available evidence of adequately explaining the absence of a shoot-down order should remind readers of Essence of how easily that book, by drawing upon Model II or Model III, sometimes uses a model as a substitute for evidence .
 In Essence, the models do far more than organize evidence and suggest particular ‘lenses’ for seeing particular patterns . The models are more than just organize evidence, they suggest particular "lenses" for seeing patterns .
 The models, despite the authors’ hedges, serve virtually as substitutes for adequate evidence in some important situations, they say .
 The president’s choice of advisers and his efforts to set the agenda are signiªcant considerations . In places, they more fully acknowledge the importance of hierarchy and differential power among advisers .
 No other sentence from 1971 volume had attracted so much attention, and so much criticism . Probably no other word from that 1971 volume has attracted such attention .
 The new edition explains that “depends” did not mean “always determined by,” but instead “substantially affected by” where you sit . Signiªcantly, the new edition of this week's edition of the book explains that
 On military budgets and procurements, very probably much of the time, or more often, not, the U.S. military budget is likely to be a problem .
 The standing/sitting explanation’s difªculties are pronounced . Consider the ªrst day of the missile crisis .
 This simply was RFK, sometimes a “shoot-from-the-hip” guy, at his reckless worst . RFK was sometimes a "shoot-in-the hip" guy, sometimes sometimes a . "shoot from the hip" RFK's reckless worst was
 Probably most of the positions uttered the ªrst day do not in a useful way the standing/sitting dictum was uttered .
 Random selection gives better or equal results in matching statements than does bureaucratic position . Random selection probably gives better . equal results than bureaucratic position. Random selection is more likely to be the best .
 Maybe the standing/sitting dictum, in its softened formulation, should be systematically tested for the missile crisis . It should be tested for a missile crisis, perhaps in the wake of the Korean crisis .
 It would be an interesting but admittedly narrow test to have some students go through the Ex Comm minutes, with the speakers’ names removed and some anonymous identiªcation substituted, to test the standing/sitting dictum .
 McNamara’s emphasis on the domestic-politics threat of the Soviet missiles did not what analysts would expect . That speaker was—JFK.
 Analysts would expect concern from the secretary of defense, because of his bureaucratic position, or not from the attorney general . It is unlikely that analysts would expect that concern from defense secretary, not secretary of state .
 Analyst's sense of knowing adviser’s concerns about war, his belief in toughness, and his fears about personal credibility may be better guides to interpreting the adviser's behavior in the missile crisis . Analysts should also know adviser's fears about war and personal credibility .
 An adviser's personality and general experience, far more than bureaucratic afªliation, often heavily inºuence that individual’s perceptions and advice, especially in potentially deadly crises . Maybe the dictum should be that an adviser’�s personality and . general experience
 Of course, the complexity of coming up with any comparatively simple formulation is that important shifts occurred during the missile crisis days . The complexity of the complex problem is that it's not easy to come up with .
 The next week McNamara spoke brieºy of possibly attacking the missile sites in Cuba . McNamara said the next week he spoke of possible attacks on Cuba .
 Interpreting shifts as just part of bargaining is too simple and unfair . Interpreprecribing shifts as part of the bargaining process is unfair, too simple .
 The missile crisis was unusual—the wrong decision could mean massive death, even nuclear annihilation . The wrong decision was unusual, and the wrong move could mean mass death or even nuclear war .
 In the missile crisis, high-level advisers were seeking to deªne a course that would protect the United States, their president, the alliance system, and nuclear credibility . The U.S. was seeking to protect the U.K. and its allies from the crisis,
 National Security Adviser Bundy sometimes chose the role of “devil’s advocate”42 to focus the dialogue in meetings . Bundy's activity is hard to interpret in particular situations, he says .
 Only probing, systematic analysis, reaching well beyond Essence’s efforts, is likely to provide rich answers in explaining the behavior of the 39.5 million people .
 Historians stress importance of full-length biography to understand ‘actors’ Some historians argue that only through studying the “actor” in depth, and over time, can that person be well understood in a particular situation .
 For such historians, brief rules of interpretation, involving emphasis on bureaucracy or other general formulations, are simplistic and often offer dubious insights . For many historians, such as myself, the rules of interpreting are simplistic .
 Such theories, when reaching beyond the Joint Chiefs, who were not truly among the president’s men, do not take analysts very far in understanding behavior .
 "Not to recognize this important problem is to succumb to the false promise of questionable theory," says author . "The theory cannot adequately illuminate or explain," he says .
 Despite some buttressing, much of the book’s discussion swirls around the president without focusing on him . And in the applied-history chapter on governmental politics in 1971 and even in 1999, the book focuses on the president . The book's discussion of the president is largely focused
 Much of the time in Essence, his role seems to be that of a resultant of forces, not the major actor . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in October .
 The revised Essence seems deeply divided, and perhaps both unsure and unaware of its uncertainty, about how in the missile crisis history . Ultimately, the revised Essence appears to be deeply divided .
 If the narrative in Essence can reasonably be read that way, maybe at least a fourth model is essential . It's not clear whether it's a good idea for a new book .
 The Ex Comm minutes reveal vigorous opposition by key advisers to a trade deal . Bundy feared damage to NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) system . McNamara seemed at one point to suggest a U.S. attack on Cuba . RFK forcefully opposing a Jupiter deal and worrying about injury in
 President kept plumping for serious support for a trade deal . Virtually alone, the most ‘dove-like’ person in the . ªrst two Ex Comm sessions on Saturday was the president .
 He warned the others that the trade would look reasonable to many people . He warned that many people would not agree with the deal .
 Kennedy regretted that Khrushchev had made the demand publicly and not privately . Kennedy said war would be an awful mistake, that war would shatter NATO alliance .
 Most of his generally closest advisers, and especially McNamara and Bundy, seemed strongly opposed to a public Jupiter deal . Rusk, though not a close adviser, is 45 .
 President Kennedy’s only explicit support in the Ex Comm came from three comparatively minor advisers . Ball, Ball, Johnson, McCone and McCone were not close to the president and were marginalized men .
 JFK’s opponents on the Jupiter trade were his normal allies and his highly valued counselors on most matters . But JFK's near-enemies on many matters within the administration had become his strong supporters on the issue .
 Theories of bureaucratic allegiance are remarkably unhelpful in explaining this lineup of proand antitraders, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Close proximity to the president, even on that perilous Saturday, does not explain this lineup . But perhaps inversely, it does, perhaps .
 Ex Comm minutes are not a good source for telling us what of signiªcance actually occurred on that fateful Saturday on the subject of the Jupiter trade . But the Ex Comm. minutes, we now know, are not good source of telling us .
 LBJ, McCone, Ball, and Ball had supported the president, while the president’s key advisers had disagreed with JFK . JFK's key advisers disagreed with the president .
 Bundy, McNamara, Rusk, Theodore Sorensen, RFK, Ball and Ball met privately in the Oval Ofªce with the president .
 At that meeting, the decision was made to accept Khrushchev’s deal privately to trade the Jupiters . The deal was made at the end of the 1960s .
 RFK was sent to meet, shortly after 7:30 P.M. with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to make this offer and also to warn him that the crisis was becoming very perilous . The Soviets’ Saturday shoot-down of a U-2 over Cuba was
 Secret meeting in the Oval Ofªce is important for various reasons, including security .
 "The best available evidence indicates that the president was the dominant person at that small session," the president said .
 He called the meeting, selected the participants, and excluded about another eight men . The meeting took place in New York City, New Jersey .
 At this meeting, the president pushed for making the Jupiter deal, and everyone there loyally accepted it, though some had earlier expressed serious opposition to it .
 The fact of a private deal undoubtedly met the objections of some of the serious opponents of a public deal . The private deal is a private matter, but it is not a public one .
 The president made clear that he cared deeply about this issue, he chose the policy, and nobody would resist him . But the central fact was that the president cared deeply, and the policy would not have to be changed .
 The work of Allison in the 1971 Essence in helping to popularize the uses of organizational theory in studying decisions . Scott Sagan49 and others in pursuing and reªning the theory of organizational culture are important to analysts .
 Allison, Zelikow, Sagan and Allison all agree that near-disasters have important lessons for policy makers . Sagan, Allison and Zelickow, and Sagan, among others, have a useful reminder of near disasters, Allison says .
 Sagan,50 for example, in his public dialogue with ardent realist Kenneth Waltz, made a powerful argument against nuclear proliferation on the grounds that organizational culture and difªculties of communication make deterrence unstable .
 JFK's recollections are fully consistent with the October 27 Ex Comm minutes, which strongly indicate JFK’s interests and preferences that day . But those recollections were fully consistent .
 What they don't know, or misunderstand, or are misinformed about, or cannot control, can kill them, too . Put simply, but bluntly, what they do or misunderstand can kill many others, too.
 President Kennedy and of Premier Khrushchev were more important than was normally the case in each government’s handling, in the early 1960s, of what might be called ordinary business . In the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, precisely because it was a crisis, the activities and decisions of
 Crises ªx attention and make the government leader the central decisionmaker . Crises are Crises. Crises . make government leaders the central . decisionmaker.
 The Cuban missile crisis and most U.S. foreign policy crises were deªned at the time as crises . Analysts should regard “bureaucratic politics” as an arena that is worth investigating in depth .
 Organizational actions may take control from the president’s hands in dangerous ways, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Organizational action may take over from the White House in dangerous places .
 The gap between advisers “inºuencing” and “shaping” presidential decisions is profoundly important . Allison and Zelikow seem only sometimes sometimes to recognize the gap .
 Some analysts including many historians have long known from deep study in the details and documents of U.S. foreign policy . They focus on the president's personality, values, aspirations, hopes and anxieties to explain important foreign policy decisions .
 To focus unduly on others, to make too much of advisers, is a mistake in theory and foreign policy theory . To see bureaucratic politics as the essential key to understanding presidential decisionmaking on central matters, especially in crises is a fundamental mistake .
 Those who enter the presidency are neither unformed nor fully formed, but they are usually largely formed . The president is not always unformed or fully formed but usually formed .
 The experience of the presidency, with its burdens and loneliness, further shapes them, says President Obama . "The experience of being president further shapes the presidency," he says .
 An analysis of U.S. foreign policy decisionmaking in crisis that concentrates on process, and not on the key person, the president, is a study that risks distorting understanding .
 A president’s past does not dictate his actions in crisis or at other times, says Obama . But his personal development in that past has a strong bearing on how he judges issues, deªnes crises, interprets dangers, perceives challenges, and chooses policy .
 No analysis of decisionmaking should simply be applied biography, but skimpy awareness of biographical matters may impoverish, and unduly constrict, that study .
 Essence unwisely disregarded when mischaracterizing the history of foreign policy . Many books on foreign policy by historians by historians understood this important point in their usually ad hoc interpretation of decisionmaking .
 The effort at “empathetic reconstruction” of a president’s decisionmaking requires, among other matters, a deep understanding of that chief executive, of how he viewed the world, and perhaps even why he viewed it that way .
 The task for model makers in studying foreign policy and decisionmaking is to link the quest for generalization and theory to the aspects of the key decisionmaker that seem to be both idiosyncratic and important .
 This task may be most difªcult when studying foreign policy crises, and the centrality of the president . The task is most important when considering foreign policy .
 President Kennedy, Bundy, McNamara, Sorensen, and others among the president’s advisers understood in 1962 that many lesser decisions by the government were made without substantial, or any, presidential attention .
 Many decisions on middle-sized and smaller matters in foreign and domestic policy are far removed from the president’s focus .
 He usually pays little or no attention to those problems and to their resolution . He often pays little attention to that problem .
 Essence of Decision, in its 1971 version and in its revised edition, is most valuable for concentrating analysts’ attention on the importance of bureaucracy . It is in such arenas, well beyond crises and major problems in foreign policy, and often beyond major issues in domestic policy, that Essence of
 "It required greater awareness by the analyst of the questions asked, and the assumptions made, about process," said the analyst . The analyst said: "The process was necessary to be transparent and transparent"
 The volume reminded scholars that process in many ways may help deªne policy . The volume was published in 2010 .
 The frequent admonitions and useful emphases, since the 1971 book about Models I, II, and III, have helped clarify thinking in discussing policy creation .
 The 1999 revised edition, even with its numerous conceptual and evidential problems, may help scholars think somewhat usefully about some of the processes of decisionmaking .
 The book's conceptual narrowness, with its deªnition of policy heavily in terms of process, will not bar them from also reaching well beyond Essence's restrictive formulation . Ideally, however, the book’s conceptual narrowess will not stop them from reaching well
 Scholars should think deeply about the underlying values framework of major policy, and perhaps even about the class background or social origins of major policymakers . Resisting the narrowness of Essence, scholars must think deeply and critically about the values framework .
 In U.S. foreign policy, those dimensions require thoughtful attention, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "In United States foreign policy ... those dimensions need thoughtful attention"
 The implicit ideology of focusing on process, as Essence seems to urge, can trammel critical scrutiny, narrow dialogue about United States purposes, fail to note the comparatively similar social backgrounds of many policymakers, and block probing analysis of the American past .