 Imagine, Mr President, what if we were to present to you such an ultimatum as you have presented to us by your actions. Imagine, said Mr President . Imagine, he said .
 "You have thrown down the gauntlet. Having presented these conditions to us, Mr President, you have thrown it down," he said . Mr President.
 "Our ties with the Republic of Cuba, as well as relations with other nations, regardless of their political system, concern only the two countries between which these relations exist," says President Obama .
 "You yourself understand this. However, in this case we are not talking about quarantines, but rather about much more serious matters," says the BBC .
 You, Mr President, is not declaring a quarantine, but rather issuing an ultimatum, he says . You are threatening that if we do not obey your orders, you will then use force, he adds .
 "It would mean for us to conduct our relations with other countries not by reason, but by yielding to tyranny," he said . It would mean that we conduct relations by reason but by yield to tyranny, he added .
 I think that deep inside, you will admit that I am right. No, Mr President, I cannot agree to this, he says . I think you will agree with me. No. Mr President. He says he cannot agree with this, and I think he will .
 This Organization has no authority or grounds whatsoever to pass resolutions like those of which you speak in your letter . This Organization does not have any authority to pass such resolutions .
 International law exists, generally accepted standards of conduct exist . International law exist, and international law exists . The U.S. should not be allowed to engage in sexual violence .
 "We firmly adhere to the principles of international law and strictly observe the standards regulating navigation on the open sea, in international waters," says the ship .
 "We observe these standards and enjoy the rights recognized by all nations," says President Obama . "We are proud of our human rights," says Obama .
 You want to force us to renounce the rights enjoyed by every sovereign state . You are attempting to legislate questions of international law. You are violating the generally accepted standards of this law. We are not breaking the law, we are breaking the rules of the law.
 The actions of the U.S. in relation to Cuba are outright piracy . Such morals and laws are not to be found, because of the actions of Cuba, says the Cuban government .
 With the appearance of modern types of weapons, the USA has completely lost its former inaccessibility . Unfortunately, people of all nations, and not least the American people themselves, could suffer heavily from madness such as this .
 'When you lay conditions such as these before us, try to put yourself in our situation and consider how the USA would react to such conditions,' says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 I have no doubt that if anyone attempted to dictate similar conditions to you - the USA - you would reject such an attempt . I'm not sure if anyone would try to dictate such a thing to you, the USA .
 The Soviet government considers the violation of the freedom of navigation in international waters and air space to constitute an act of aggression propelling humankind into the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war . The violation of international waters, air space and international waters is considered a form of aggression .