 Long-held understandings about the Cuban missile crisis are undergoing dramatic revision . Newly declassified documents expand and reshape our knowledge and interpretation of events .
 The National Security Archive has played a key role in enabling scholars, policymakers and journalists to reevaluate the events of 1962 . The Archive is a key repository of documents that shed light on events in 1962 .
 United States conference participants include Kennedy Administration officials McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, Theodore Sorenson, Pierre Salinger and Raymond Garthoff, as well as Senator Edward M Kennedy, John F Kennedy, Jr., and senior American scholars .
 The Soviet delegation comprises eleven Khrushchev Administration officials . Andrei Gromyko, Anatoli Dobrynin, Aleksander Alekseev, Georgi Kornienko and Fyodor Burlatsky are among the delegation .
 Secretary Gorbachev is expected to close the final day of the conference (and only portion open to the press) with a major address . Gorbavachev is also expected to speak at the end of the day .
 15,000 pages of declassified and unclassified U.S. government material collected and indexed by the National Security Archive . The United States delegation will bring significant documents to the conference, including declassified documents .
 Soviet officials have indicated that significant official documents from their own archives may also be made publicly available for the first time . Soviet officials also have indicated they may also make public access to their archives .
 The Soviets may use this occasion to make available for the first time both oral accounts and previously scaled records of this extraordinary period . Finally, the Soviets may . use this . occasion to . make available . oral accounts of the . first time . Both oral and scaled records will be made available
 The first was the March 1987 Hawk’s Cay conference which brought together academics and senior Kennedy Administration officials . The conference was held in March 1987 .
 Project ""The Cuba Project,"" February 20, 1962 (Top Secret Sensitive; declassified as a result of a FOIA request, January 5, 1989) Outlines goals and a schedule of action for ""Operation Mongoose,"" the United States program of covert action against the Castro
 Director of Operations Edward Lansdale’s plan aims for the overthrow of the Cuban government through internal revolt by October, 1962 . Lansdale's plan was later scaled back and later scaled down .
 President Kennedy would give tacit approval to the guidelines on March 16, 1962 . Kennedy would be briefed and given tacit approval .
 Minutes confirm the magnitude of the air attack against Cuba considered by the Kennedy Administration . The minutes confirm the size of the attack on Cuba was considered .
 The U.S. Jupiter nuclear IRBMs were turned over to Turkey on October 22, 1962 the same day President Kennedy announced the naval quarantine of Cuba to in response to the introduction of Soviet nuclear missiles into Cuba .