 The Cold War was a struggle between the United States and its allies and the Soviet Union . U.S. and allies were involved in the Cold War .
 Although direct military conflict never took place, diplomatic and economic struggles occurred during the Second World War . Diplomatic, economic struggles also took place during the war .
 The United States as well as Western European countries were greatly concerned . The U.S. and Western European nations were also concerned .
 Truman Doctrine was issued in response to Stalin’s military movements in 1947 . President Harry Truman issued the Truman Doctrine in 1947 after Stalin's movements .
 Truman asked that the U.S. would aid any country that asked for help in resisting communism . Truman said the United States would help any country who asked for assistance . Truman: "The United States will help any nation that asks for help"
 Truman Doctrine was the basis for containment, the policy to keep communism from spreading to other countries . Truman Doctrine became known as the basis of containment . The Truman Doctrine is now known as containment .
 After the Truman Doctrine, George Catlett Marshall proposed the Marshall Plan, the European Recovery Program . Marshall Plan was through which the United States provided aid to Western Europe after World War 2, in June 1947 .
 The Marshall Plan was offered to all European countries, but Stalin would not let the countries his military was occupying take part . Stalin refused to allow the countries he was occupying took part in .
 The countries involved in this pact were the United States, Britain, France, Canada, Belgium, Denmark, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway and Portugal .
 To ward off aggressors, American forces and nuclear weapons were to be kept in Western Europe . U.S. forces were to keep nuclear weapons in Europe .
 In response to NATO, the Soviet Union formed a similar pact between seven Eastern European countries called the Warsaw Treaty Organization, or Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was formed in response to the NATO alliance . The Soviet Union also formed the Warsaw Pact in response .
 The countries involved along with the Soviet Union were Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Romania . East Germany and East Germany were also involved .
 While these pacts were forming, the U.S. and the Soviet Union were in an arms race . The United States and the USSR were in a arms race.
 "They were building lots of nuclear weapons, trying to outproduce each other so that neither dare attack," he says . The U.S. and Russia are now the world's most powerful nations .
 By 1952, the United States tested a hydrogen bomb, a bomb more powerful than an atomic bomb . The U.S. tested the first hydrogen bomb in 1952 .
 While arms were building up, the Soviet Union went through a major change in power . The Soviet Union was in full control of the world's most powerful state .
 The Soviet Union would follow a policy of ‘peaceful coexistence” with the West, he said . He said that the Soviet Union will follow a . policy of peaceful coexistence with the Western .
 This ‘peace’ was to continue until the early sixties, when new conflicts surfaced . New conflicts surfaced in the early 1960s . This "peace" continued until the sixties .
 In the early 1960s, Fidel Castro openly embraced communism and allied with the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban government in the 1960s .
 Anastas Mikoyan, the Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister of the Soviet Union, negotiated this alliance . The alliance was created by the Soviet government .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower severed diplomatic ties with Cuba in 1953 . President Eisenhower ordered the U.S. to sever diplomatic relations with Cuba . Cuba was the last nation to have diplomatic ties between the United States and the Soviet Union .
 The Central Intelligence Agency had been training Cuban exiles for a possible invasion of Cuba .
 Newly inaugurated President John F Kennedy approved this invasion on April 12, 1961 . President Kennedy approved the invasion of Vietnam in 1961 .
 On April 14, 1961, a group of B-26 bombers attacked air bases in Cuba . The planes were piloted by Cuban exiles . The attack was the first of its kind .
 This raid was designed to destroy most of Castro’s air power before the land invasion was to take place . The raid was meant to destroy the most of the Castro's air power .
 On April 17, 1961, the land invasion of Cuba took place at the Bay of Pigs . The land invasion took place in Cuba .
 After the invasion in Cuba took place, more tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union surfaced . The Soviet Union invaded Cuba in 1953 .
 In August 1961, the East German government, which was occupied by the Soviet Union, built the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was built in August 1961 in the city of Berlin .
 Guards were on watch constantly and mines were placed around the wall to discourage escaping . Mine mines were also placed around walls to discourage escapees .
 On October 14, 1962, U.S. spy planes spotted the first ballistic missile on Cuba . The Cuban missile was the first to be spotted in Cuba by the United States in 1962 .
 He had several options, invasion, air strikes, or a blockade, or diplomacy . He had a number of options, including air strikes and a blockade .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the arrival of more missiles . The blockade was ordered by President Kennedy to prevent more missiles from Cuba .
 President Kennedy announced that he would turn back ships with the intent of delivering missiles to Cuba . President Kennedy turned back ships that were carrying missiles .
 President Obama pledged full retaliation against the Soviet Union if even one missile is fired from Cuba toward any country in the Western Hemisphere . He also pledged to strike back at any Western Hemisphere missile strike .
 President Kennedy demanded that Khrushchev dismantle and remove the missiles that were placed in Cuba . President Kennedy also demanded that the missiles be removed from Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles and offered an on-site inspection of the site . The missiles were removed from the site, but the missiles were never removed . The site was the site of a missile factory in the Soviet Union .
 U.S. aerial reconnaissance planes revealed that the missile bases were being dismantled . The missile bases are being dismantled by the United States . The bases are believed to be the first to be dismantled .