 The Bay of Pigs was a CIA-backed attempt by Cuban nationalists to invade their homeland and retake control of the island from the Communist government under Fidel Castro . President John F Kennedy is still smarting from the disastrous attempt .
 A U-2 spy plane flying over Cuba photographs new military installations being built across the island . The U.2 plane was flying over the island to photograph new military facilities .
 U.S. intelligence concludes that medium-range, nuclear-armed missiles are being installed on Cuba to give the Soviet Union a devastating first strike capability . With the missiles still days from becoming operational, the United States have the advantage of surprise .
 The United States military urges a surprise attack using overwhelming air power to destroy the missiles . The U.S. military urges an attack on the missiles in the region .
 The only way to deny the Soviet Union the use of Cuba as a forward base off the American coast is to invade Cuba and remove its government by military force . However, the U.S. cannot permanently deny the . use of . Cuba as an . forward base of Cuba .
 So begins a high-stakes exchange of diplomacy, the failure of which could very well result in nuclear war . It is interesting that relatively little has been paid in recent years to the one time when the fate of our world really did hang in the balance .
 The diplomatic resolution over the crisis was complicated by the lack of direct communication between the White House and the Kremlin . The messages had to be sent by back channels and feelers extended through the media and the United Nations .
 Roger Donaldson's film chronicles the crisis exclusively from the point-of-view of the U.S. government . The crisis resulted in the installation of the Washington-Moscow hotline to avoid such problems in the future .
 There are no scenes set in Havana or Moscow, and the only scenes in Cuba are transition-based ones showing the progress of the missiles being set up and fuelled .
 The film makes the interesting choice to have the action seen from the perspective of Kennedy's appointments secretary . Kenneth O'Donnell had no formal policy or advisory role but was a close and old friend of JFK and his brother Robert .
 This is an interesting and wise choice, as many of the other characters involved in the crisis are politicians or generals of fairly grand stature themselves . Using them as the main POV would make the film more about them than the crisis . This is a wise choice .
 The relatively unknown O'Donnell, played very well by the surprisingly good Kevin Costner, carries less baggage . Bruce Greenwood plays JFK and Steven Culp his brother Robert, and both are excellent, really inhabiting their characters .
 Greenwood delivers real gravitas as the President, but also lets slip a few moments of annoyance and contempt for some of his advisors . Greenwood in particular delivers . The show reflects some of the tensions that dogged the Kennedy presidency .
 The lack of faith that Kennedy can deal with the crisis is almost palpable among the senior military figures . The stress this inflects on the President is well-depicted by Greenwood .
 The idea that Kennedy considered the fates of Cuba and Berlin to be entwined is strongly pushed in the film . A U.S. attack on Cuba would trigger a Soviet attack on Berlin is strongly promoted .
 The movie starts off by presenting a pretty credible case for military action . The movie is about the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 A swift and massive U.S. aerial assault on Cuba is portrayed as not leading automatically to war . But it could destroy the USA's moral authority in a future conflict . A swift US aerial assault would not lead to war automatically .
 "The strong advantages of the aerial assault are initially fairly presented. Nevertheless, the strong advantages were initially fairly present," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 From then on the military option is consistently presented as the 'wrong' one . Some of the senior admirals and generals, such as Le May, are presented almost as villains .
 This simplification of the military's actions during the crisis is the movie's key weak point and muddles the issues involved somewhat as well as coming across as a needless attempt to introduce more drama to the script . The rest of the movie is very good .
 The dramatic tension of the military build-up and the politicians' confusion during the fog of diplomacy are handled superbly .
 The performances in the movie has pretty much first-rate across the board . The few special effects sequences showing spy planes overflying Cuba and so far are effective, if inexplicably expensive . The movie had a budget of $80 million, higher than Independence Day .
 It effectively depicts a period in the history of the world that should never be forgotten . It shows the stresses of government and effectively depicts the stresses .
 Donations to the Wertzone help cover costs and support the site . Donations are made to support our community .
 Adam Whitehead is a British science fiction and fantasy fan of film, books and computer games . He is also a fan of computer games and computer gaming .
 Martin Paul J, McAuley, Cormac McCarthy, Ian McDonald, Sophia McDougall and Seanan McGuire were all named . Cormac, Ian, Seanan, Ian and Ian McGuire are all being represented .
 Agents of SHIELD: Seasons 1-2 Altered Carbon: Season 1 . American Gods: Season 2 of American Vandal: Season 3 of American Gods . American Vandals: Seasons 2-3 of the American Gods series .