 P1 NOVEMBER 2020 ADDENDUM consists of 14 pages . SENIOR CERTIFICATE/ NATIONAL SENior CERTIFIEDATE GRADE 12 HISTORY . This addendum consists of . 14 pages.
 The source below focuses on why Cuba and the Soviet Union became allies in the early 1960s . SOURCE 1A The source focuses on the reasons for the two countries to become allies .
 When Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba, his relations with the United States of America got worse . Fidel Castro's relationship with the U.S. got worse when he became president .
 Castro was not a communist but became close to Nikita Khrushchev because of his support and friendship . Castro's friendship with Nikita became strong enough to become a leader in Russia .
 Later diplomatic and commercial relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union were established . Diplomatic relations between the two countries were later established . Cuba and Soviet Union had diplomatic relations established .
 Castro nationalised all banks and US-owned companies . Castro refused to pay compensation . Castro had nationalised banks and U.S. owned companies . He refused to accept compensation from the banks .
 The USA responded by cutting off all diplomatic and commercial ties with Cuba in 1961 . The U.S. cut off diplomatic and economic ties with the island nation . Cuba was the last nation to have diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 Castro responded by announcing that Cuba was now implementing communism as a political ideology . Castro responded to the criticism by saying that Cuba had implemented communism .
 The United States imposed a trade embargo on all Cuban goods . The embargo was imposed by the U.S. government in 1953 . Cuba was the first country to have imposed an embargo on Cuba .
 Cuba did not have a market for its sugar and tobacco produce . This meant that Cuba had to rely heavily on its sugar, tobacco and other products . Cuba was forced to rely on the government to sell its tobacco and sugar .
 It was well known that the United States had nuclear missiles in Turkey which were pointed at the Soviet Union . The USA had a huge number of military forces in Europe near Soviet borders .
 By the time John F Kennedy became president, the Americans were already working on ways to get rid of Castro . This plan ended in disaster with the failed battle at the Bay of Pigs .
 Castro and his army quickly defeated the United States sponsored rebels and the failure was a huge embarrassment for Kennedy's administration . This helped to solidify Castro's alliance with the Soviet Union .
 It outlines how the Soviet Union assisted Cuba economically and militarily . The Soviet Union was heavily involved in Cuba's economic and military efforts .
 A certain amount of armaments is also being shipped from the Soviet Union to Cuba at the request of the Cuban government because of aggressive threats by imperialists . We do not hide from the world public that we really are supplying Cuba with resources such as industrial equipment and goods which are helping to
 Castro requested the Soviet government to send military specialists and technicians to Cuba who would train the Cubans in handling up-to-date weapons which require high skills and in-depth knowledge .
 The number of Soviet military specialists sent to Cuba can't be compared to the number of workers in agriculture and industry sent there . It must, however, be said, that it must be said that the military specialists are not military specialists .
 The armaments and military equipment sent to Cuba are designed exclusively for defensive purposes . The weapons and equipment are designed to be used to defend Cuba .
 The President of the United States and the American military know what means of defence are, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The Soviet Union has the possibility from its own territory to render assistance to any peace-loving state, not only Cuba . We do not say this to frighten someone. We have said, and we do repeat, that if war is unleashed, if the aggressor makes an attack on
 All Americans, as well as all of our friends in this Hemisphere, have been concerned over the Soviet Union's role to bolster the Castro regime in Cuba .
 Along with these missiles, the Soviets are apparently providing the extensive radar and other electronic equipment which is required for their operation . The missiles are apparently being provided by the Soviets along with extensive radar equipment .
 Several Soviet-made motor torpedo boats carrying ship-to-ship guided missiles having a range of fifteen miles . We can also confirm the presence of several Soviet made motor torpedo boat carrying ship to ship guided missiles .
 The Cuban question must be considered as a part of the worldwide challenge posed by the communist threat to democracy, peace, stability and prosperity, writes David Frum . Cuba is a key part of a worldwide challenge to democracy .
 It must be dealt with as a part of the larger issue as well as in the context of the special relationships which have long characterised the inter-American system .
 It continues to be the policy of the United States that the Castro regime will not be allowed to export its aggressive purposes by force or the threat of force, the U.S. says .
 It will be prevented by whatever means may be necessary from taking action against any part of the Western Hemisphere . The U.S. will not be allowed to take action against parts of the world .
 The source below discusses the defeat of the South African Defence Force by the Cuban military forces at the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale . SOURCE 2A The South African Defense Force was defeated in the battle .
 In 1987 to 1988, the myth of the invincibility of the South African military machine was laid to rest, with important consequences for social change . In 1988, South African soldiers were killed by the fall of apartheid in the country .
 In July 1987, the South African Defence Force launched a major attack into south-eastern Angola .
 This was an attempt to prevent the Angolan government forces from capturing the town of Mavinga from UNITA and to extend the area under UNITa control . This was a failed attempt to stop the government forces capturing the area from capturing it .
 The South African and UNITA forces met unexpectedly strong resistance from Angolan and Cuban forces around the town of Cuito Cuanavale . Angolan, Cuban forces also met unexpected resistance in the town .
 Despite the arrival of fresh SADF reinforcements in December 1987 and the use of their most destructive and sophisticated weapons, such as aircraft, artillery, tanks and armoured cars, they still suffered heavy casualties .
 The South African Air Force found itself unable to match the modern Soviet equipment brought into battle by the defenders . The S.A.S. Air Force was unable to compete with the Soviet equipment .
 South African aircraft were unable to penetrate the radar/missile defences at Cuito Cuanavale . Cuban forces launched an air strike on the Calueque Dam in June 1988, the SADF air defence proved inadequate .
 The commitment of Cuban troops has radically altered the balance of power in southern Africa . Nonetheless, the commitment of Cuba troops has changed the balance .
 The prospect of more white conscripts being killed by a well-armed Cuban adversary prompted South Africa to leave Cuito Cuanavale . The cost of the war and the impact it had on South Africa's economy prompted the move .
 In April 1988, PW Botha's cabinet agreed to begin direct negotiations with Angola and Cuba . Chester Crocker's mediation led to direct negotiations between the two countries .
 A flurry of negotiations now gradually brought Crocker's linkage plan closer to reality .
 On 22 December 1988 two treaties were signed at the United Nations Organisation . One between Angola and Cuba arranged the withdrawal of Cuban troops . The other among Angola, Cuba and South Africa agreed to Namibian independence .
 Crocker's long fight was over, his goal of brokering a regional peace deal was realised at last . Crocker had been battling for decades to secure peace in the region . He was killed in a helicopter crash in the early hours of the day .
 It includes the terms of the tripartite peace agreement that Cuba, South Africa and Angola signed . The agreement was signed by Cuba, Angola and South Africa .
 Cuba and Angola agree that the question of the independence of Namibia and the safeguarding of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Angola are closely linked to peace and security in the south-western region of Africa . A tripartite agreement containing the essential elements for the achievement of peace
 The Cuban military contingent now present in Angolan territory, which has successfully fulfilled its internationalist mission . We now therefore hold it to be established that the conditions have been created which . permit the return to its homeland of the Cuban military .
 Both parties request the Security Council to carry out verification of the redeployment and the phased and total withdrawal of the Cuban troops from the territory of Angola .
 The Panthers organised community programmes such as free breakfast for children, health clinics and shoes for children . The programmes were of key importance in the Panthers' strategy .
 African-American charity gives out food, clothing and medical care to poverty-stricken African Americans . First they fed the hungry, then gave out food and clothing .
 'A lot of people misunderstand the politics of these programmes,' he says . 'It showed what could be achieved if you were organised,' he adds . 'I think it was a good example of how you can be organised'
 They are not reform programmes, they're actually revolutionary community programmes . They're not reform programme, they are community programmes. They are revolutionary programmes. We need to change our attitudes to the world's most powerful institutions .
 A revolutionary programme is started by revolutionaries, by those who want to change the existing system for a better system . A revolution is a revolution, and a revolution is not a revolution .
 The first programme the Panthers organised was the Free Breakfast for Children . A reform programme is set up by the existing exploitative system as an appeasing hand-out, to fool the people and to keep them quiet .
 Lesley Johnson explains how this led her to get involved in the Panthers . Johnson: "It's not just a game, it's a life changing experience"
 "There were times when I was growing up, the week's oatmeal or whatever would run out and I went to school hungry. And there were times ... I went hungry. I went school hungry," he says .
 It focuses on how the Oakland Community School contributed to the upliftment of African American children in the United States of America . The Oakland community school is located in Oakland, California .
 This city needs to organise to get things done in education, housing and the courts . It needs to also uplift the lives of the African Americans, says Nairobi . "This city must organise," she says .
 I wanted to say that before I went on to talk about education, I talked yesterday about the Oakland Community School, about alternative education and community schools . I talked about alternative schools, community schools, and alternative education .
 Oakland Community School has been in the news for more than 20 years . The school is located in Oakland, California, near the city of San Francisco . It is the first school in the state to open in the fall of 2010 .
 We're working with children who would be in public schools; who have not been to private schools or other alternatives . Parents have no political affiliation and just want their children to have the best, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He called the programme 'potentially the greatest threat to efforts to destroy and render the BPP ineffective and what it stands for' and gave carte blanche to law enforcement agencies .
 FBI agents went door-todoor in cities like Richmond in Virginia, telling parents that members of the BPP would teach their children about black nationalism . FBI agents told parents that they would teach them black nationalism in their homes .
 In San Francisco, parents were told the food was infected with contagious disease . Free food sites in Oakland and Baltimore were raided by officers who harassed BPP members in front of children . In Chicago, participating children were photographed by Chicago police .
 Ultimately, these and other efforts to destroy the Black Panthers broke up the programme . Ultimately, the programme was broken up .
 Public visibility of the Panthers' breakfast programmes put pressure on political leaders to feed children before school . The School Breakfast Programme was permanently authorised in 1975 .
 Today, it helps feed over 14,57 million children before school . Without the radical actions of the Black Panthers, it may never have happened . Today, the Black Panther's efforts to feed the world's poorest children have been successful .