 In the beginning of the Cold War Cuba was allies with the United States until the USSR became close to Cuba . The USSR and Cuba were allies in the beginning and the USSR was close allies .
 From the threat of the U.S. having nuclear weapons in other countries new Russia . New Russia . Russia. Russia .
 In October of 1962 an American U-2 Spy plane noticed that the Soviet Union was building nuclear weapons . The U.S. U.2 spy plane was flying over Russia in October of that month .
 The other reason why Cuba became close to the USSR was from the Bay of Pigs Invasion to over throw Fedel Castro . The other part of Cuba's relationship with the Soviet Union was from its invasion of Cuba in the 1960s .
 President Kennedy wanted to keep it a secret from the USSR for fearing that the missiles could reach the White House . President Kennedy got a hold of these images and kept it secret .
 Kennedy decided to make a blockade around Cuba . After talking to his advisors many of which wanted to start an nuclear war, Kennedy made the blockade .
 The Blockade was the U.S. responds of the USSR secretly sending nuclear weapons to Cuba . It was the United States responds to the Soviet Union's secret nuclear weapons .
 The aim of the blockade was to quarantine Soviet ships from bringing in more supplies to Cuba . The blockade was aimed at quarantined Soviet ships bringing in supplies .
 On October 22 President Kennedy address the country about the threat of the missiles . President Kennedy spoke to the nation on October 22 .
 Kennedy demanded the removal of the missiles and the sites the missiles were located at . Kennedy demanded that the missile sites be removed from the site .
 USSR leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to meet with Kennedy, were they agreed on the devastating possibility of nuclear war . Nikita and Kennedy discussed the possibility of war .
 The United States also agreed to remove the nuclear weapons in Turkey . During this meeting, the United States and Turkey agreed to end nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy said that peace is the important aspect to keep the world safe . Later in 1963, Kennedy addressed the country saying that peace was important to the world .
 He also wanted to end the stereotypes and myths that were used in the Cold War . He said he wanted to also end the myths that had been used in Cold War.
 A hot-line between the USSR and U.S. was created to better deal with future nuclear problems or problems that both countries have with one another . The USSR and the United States were created to deal with nuclear problems .
 There was also the singing of Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty on July 25th 1963 . Limited nuclear test ban treaty was signed in 1963 .
 Kennedy said: "For, in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet" Kennedy said to the American people, ""For . the final . analysis of our most common common link, our basic common . link is to our planet," he
 If Weebly.footer.addEventListener { document.get()() . AddEvent()() is an event that listeners listen to . Use this article to help you understand our history .