 Nikita Khrushchev and the Cuban missile crisis were the focus of the crisis in the 1960s .
 For forty years it has captured the imagination of the media, scholars, and the public alike . It has produced a veritable mountain of articles, scholarly essays, and books .
 Some aspects of the Cuban missile crisis continue to defy any logical explanation . Still, after so much effort by so many privileged minds, some aspects remain puzzling today as they were .
 In this chapter, I will study the alleged evidence of the presence of strategic missiles and their associated nuclear warheads in Cuba in 1962 from the point of view of semiotics . This chapter will focus on the alleged presence of the missiles in Cuba as well as their nuclear warheads .
 Rumors about the presence of strategic missiles in Cuba were widespread among Cuban exiles in Florida since mid-1962 . The U.S. intelligence community was never fooled by them, the Kennedy administration says .
 This meeting is considered by most scholars to be the beginning of the Cuban missile crisis . Most scholars believe this meeting was the start of the missile crisis in Cuba .
 U.S. Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson had shown ‘hard’ photographic evidence of Cuban planes, allegedly piloted by Castro’s defectors, which had attacked positions on the island prior to the Bay of Pigs landing .
 The photographic “evidence” was received abroad with mixed feelings .
 Senior CIA officer Sherman Kent recorded in detail the story of how the U-2 photographs were brought to some U.S. allies . Kent recorded the story in detail in detail .
 British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan just spent a few seconds examining the photographs, and accepted the proof on belief .
 General de Gaulle accepted President Kennedy’s word initially on faith, though later he inspected the photographs in great detail, and was impressed with the quality of them . President Kennedy's photograph was taken in 1961 in Paris .
 André Fontaine, an important senior writer for Le Monde, strongly expressed his doubts . However, when the photographs were shown to French journalists, one of them, expressed doubts .
 Only circumstantial evidence he received later, not the photographs themselves, made him change his opinion .
 Canada’s Prime Minister Diefenbaker questioned the credibility of the evidence of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba . Canada's Prime Minister questioned the evidence .
 CIA director John McCone reaffirmed the same line of total belief in a Top Secret post-mortem memorandum of 28 February 1963 to the President to President . CIA director McCone said the memorandum was Top Secret .
 As Magritte’s picture The Treachery of Images masterly exemplifies, a picture of a missile is not a missile . The picture of the missile is a missile, not a photograph .
 A picture, by itself alone, can hardly be accepted as ‘hard evidence of anything,’ says CNN.com.com . A picture is hardly the proof of anything .
 It seems, however, that the very fact that it is so obvious —somebody said that the best way to hide something is by placing it in plain view— has precluded scholars from studying it in detail .
 A photograph is nothing more than a thin film of gelatine spread on top of a paper support . A photograph of a photo taken by a camera can be taken from a paper frame .
 Gelatine has embedded in it very small grains of a light-sensitive substance . The gelatine is embedded in a light sensitive substance that can detect light .
 During the developing process with the right chemicals, some of the grains, in the form of very small dots, turn black, others remain white . Others take different gradations of gray .
 When observed by a trained individual, the dots, due to the integrating, holistic ability of the human mind, turn into a meaningful image . The dots are the result of the integration of the mind and the ability of a trained person to observe them .
 This, both the material support and the mental image it creates, is what we call a photograph . This is both a photograph and a mental image, and we call it a photo .
 We are so used to dealing with photographs that most of the time we refer to them as if they were the real thing . We often refer to photographs as 'photographs' rather than 'real things'
 Of course, what you see in the photograph are not the real things, just an image of the things . The photograph was taken in a series of photographs taken in New York City .
 As nobody can smoke Magritte’s pipe, no army can fire photographs of missiles against the enemy . Nobody can smoke the pipe, nobody can fire photos of missiles .
 The inability to distinguish between a sign and the thing it signifies is one of the characteristics of primitive, magic thinking, says the author .
 Until relatively recent times the word semiotics appeared only in the field of medicine, in connection with the study of the symptoms of a particular disease . Semiotics is a form of language that can be translated into science and art .
 Ferdinand de Saussure and Charles Sanders Peirce created the scientific foundations of the discipline we now know as semiotics . It was not until the beginning of the 20th century, however, that they created scientific foundations .
 In some circumstances, a person can see something and have similar impressions as if he were experiencing something different . In some particular circumstances, however, the person has similar impressions .
 Photointerpreters carefully compare apparently meaningless forms and shadows against their previous experiences, looking for meaningful relationships . They become signs —that is, pointers to other real-life things— in the minds of skilled photointerpreter .
 The science of semiotics is concerned with the different procedures used to transform nature into culture . As Claude Lévi-Strauss put it, it's concerned with different procedures . Semiotics is a form of science that transforms nature into art .
 This is roughly equivalent to the process of transforming raw data into intelligence . This is the same process of turning data into an intelligence database .
 Beginning with the concept of sign, Pierce created trichotomies of concepts, which sometimes extended almost ad-infinitum . Missiles and Signs of Missiles .
 Index is a type of sign showing some relationship, usually of cause and effect, or antecedent to consequent, between a sign and a thing . Index is an index of some relationship between signs and things, such as a thing or a person .
 Dark clouds are a sign indicating an approaching storm . High fever is an indexical sign of disease; smog is a sign of air pollution . A high fever is a symptom of disease and a high fever .
 To Robinson Crusoe, footprints in the sand were the first indication that somebody else beyond him inhabited the island . The footprints are the first sign that someone beyond him is on the island, Crusoe .
 An icon is a type of sign which shows a relationship of formal or topological similarity or likeness between the sign and an object . Icon is a sign that shows a resemblance or likeness to an object, such as an icon . Iconography is a form of icon which shows the relationship of
 A symbol, however, is a type of sign which shows no physical, or visual, or any type of relationship between the sign and the thing it signifies . A symbol is a symbol, but a symbol is not a sign that shows any physical or visual relationship with the sign it signifies
 The relationship established in the mind of the interpreter is totally conventional and arbitrary, as the result of an explicit or implicit agreement among those who use the sign . "The relationship established by an interpreter is ... totally conventional," the interpreter says .
 Language is the most extended system of symbols used by men to communicate ideas . Other important systems of symbols, like the ones used in mathematics, music, chemistry, etc. are also used in science and math .
 Semiosis is just a mental process, and there are no physical ties whatsoever between something and its sign . Semiosis has no physical links whatsoever between things and their sign, the author says .
 Signs can be decoded differently by different people or by the same people under different circumstances . Therefore, signs can be interpreted differently by people in different situations .
 Something can act as an icon while, at the same time, acting as an index and symbol . Moreover, something can also act as a symbol and index . Something can be an icon and index, but also a symbol .
 The American flag on top of my town’s city hall is an object made out of red, white and blue pieces of cloth sewn together . The object is a sewn piece of cloth that was sewn into the American flag .
 An American flag on an American embassy abroad is an index that the building is owned by the U.S. government . The flag on the American embassy is a index of the building's ownership index .
 A photograph of that particular American flag is an iconic sign of the particular flag it depicts . A photograph is a symbol of the American flag's identity .
 Famous photograph showing the footprints of an American astronaut on the moon’s soil is an iconic sign depicting an indexical sign . The famous photograph was taken by an astronaut in 1969 .
 The photograph became a symbol of the advances of American space technology . With the passage of time, it has become a symbol .
 Most studies repeat the extended opinion that the U-2 photographs were the hard, irrefutable evidence provided by the photointerpreters at the NPIC . The photos were the ultimate proof that the Soviets had secretly deployed strategic missile bases in Cuba .
 Photographs need to be decoded by an interpreter to become meaningful information . But, as we have seen above, in order to be meaningful information, photos need to become decoded .
 There is always the risk of erroneous interpretation, by which a sign is interpreted as something totally different from what the creator of the sign originally intended to communicate . The risk of error is that a sign can be misinterpreted and misinterpreted .
 In the case of the U-2 photographs, the NPIC photointerpreters incorrectly decoded the objects appearing in them as strategic missiles, instead of images of strategic missiles . In the photos, the objects appeared to be strategic missiles instead of missiles .
 Images of missiles as proof of the presence of strategic missiles in Cuba were a big jump of imagination, as well as a semantic mistake . But accepting the images of missiles was a big leap of the imagination, it was a mistake .
 Photointerpreters at the NPIC confused the images of the objects they saw in the photographs with the actual missiles . But the photointerpreter said the images were of the missiles .
 The media and the scholarly community have blindly followed the 10 S E R VA N D O G O N Z A L E Z pied piper of photographic evidence . Afterwards, like mesmerized children, the media and scholarly community has blindly followed .
 Magritte’s picture of a missile in not a missile . But, as in the painting, it was not a shot of the missile . The picture was taken in Paris in 1968 .
 There has been a growing trend in the U.S. intelligence community to rely more and more on imaging intelligence and less on agents in the field . Photography alone, though a very useful surveillance component, should never be accepted as hard evidence . But, as any intelligence specialist can testify,
 Photographs, at best, are just indicators pointing to a possibility which has to be physically confirmed by other means, preferably by trained, qualified agents working in the field . Photographs can only be used to point out a potential danger .
 Nothing is so misleading as a photograph, even disregarding the fact that photographs can be faked and doctored,28 .
 The photographic evidence of Soviet strategic missiles on Cuban soil was never confirmed by American agents working in the field . According to the information available to this day, the photographic evidence was not confirmed by the American .
 The highly quoted report of a qualified agent who saw something “bigger, much bigger” that anything the Americans had in Germany, omitted the important fact that what he actually saw was a canvas-covered object resembling a strategic missile .
 Their metal, electronic components, and fuel were never tested . Radiation from their nuclear warheads was never recorded; their heat signature was never verified . The radiation from their nukes was also never recorded .
 Access to it can be repeated by the same sense at different times and repeated by different senses of the same observers . It can also be repeated in different ways by different observers .
 Recently declassified Soviet documents and questionable oral reports from Soviet officials who allegedly participated directly in the event have been accepted as sufficient evidence of the presence of strategic missiles and their nuclear warheads in Cuba in 1962 .
 Former adversary has yet to prove he has turned into a friend . But one can hardly accept as hard evidence non-corroborated, non-evaluated information coming from a former adversary .
 Even if some day this becomes accepted practice in the historian’s profession, I can assure my readers that it will never be adopted in the intelligence field . The historian says he will never accept it in intelligence fields .
 Photographs are just information, and information is not true intelligence until it has been thoroughly validated . Information should be thoroughly validated, says CNN iReporter .
 As a rule, most counterintelligence analysts believe only information that has been secretly taken from an opponent and turned over is bona fide intelligence . Counterintelligence analysts THE NUCLEAR DECEPTION 11 believe that only information taken from a rival is genuine intelligence .
 If the opponent had intended it to be turned over, it would be automatically considered disinformation . But, if the opponent intended it, it is automatically considered untrue .
 One of the principles of espionage work is that what is really important is not that you know, but that your opponent doesn’t know what you know . "One of the principle of espionage is that it is important that your opponents don't know that you’ve been compromised
 As Sherman Kent pointed out, once the U-2 brought photographs of strategic missiles in Cuba, the main thing was to keep it secret . The main thing is to keep the secret, he says .
 As it happens most of the time, U.S. scholars found plausible explanations a posteriori for the Soviets’ behavior . The Soviets' behavior was not the only explanation .
 These explanations range from flawed bureaucratic standard operating procedures to political-military disagreements, and pure carelessness .
 The fact constitutes one of the most unexplainable Soviet “mistakes” during the crisis . Nevertheless, still today the fact . still today, still . today, the fact constitutes . one of . the fact that the fact. still today constitutes one . of the . most
 Before the crisis, missile sites had never been camouflaged in the Soviet Union . The construction crews at the sites in Cuba did what they were used to do; building missile sites according to the installation manuals .
 Allison’s explanation seems a bit too simplistic to be credible . But, given the strict operational procedures of the Soviet Army, it seems too simplistic . Allison's explanation seems to be plausible .
 The personnel assigned to do the job of building the missile sites were not common soldiers, but specially trained personnel . The sites were built by special forces personnel, not soldiers .
 It is naive to suppose that the Soviets could have made this type of gross mistake, especially if they were trying to deploy the missiles in Cuba using deception and stealth, as the U.S. official version of the event claimed . Even without disregarding the bureaucratic procedures common to all armies
 Of course, this is only a variation of the ‘the Russians are stupid” argument . The Russians are not stupid, they are stupid, of course, according to CNN.
 Soviet soldiers involved in Operation Anadyr were supplied with skis and cold weather gear and clothing before traveling to Cuba . This may also explain why they were supplied by the Soviets with cold weather equipment .
 This was not because of an error, but part of the maskirovka procedures designed to disguise the operation . Now we know that this was not due to an error .
 According to U.S. intelligence sources, missile sites had never been camouflaged in the Soviet Union . The missile sites were never camouflaged, according to the United States .
 After Gary Power’s U-2 was shot down, the flow of information about Soviet missiles almost stopped completely . However, after Gary Power's shooting down of the U.2, it almost stopped .
 We don't know if the U-2 photos never detected camouflaged sites because the camouflage was so effective it avoided the missiles from being detected . Aside from the fact that, being in the so-called “denied areas,” where no in situ verification by agents in
 Most of the missile sites photographed by the U2s on Soviet territory had actually been decoys . Also, there is the possibility that most of the sites photographed were decoyed .
 After the U-2 incident and the discovery of the high quality of its surveillance cameras, the Soviet Missile Forces would have changed their procedures and would have camouflaged their missile sites . One can safely surmise that after the incident, after the . U.2 incident, the .
 Soviet military literature strongly emphasizes the importance of surprise and deception in modern warfare . Furthermore, Soviet military . literature strongly emphasize the importance . of surprise . and deception .
 The Russian tradition of using camouflage to mislead goes back to the times of Grigori Aleksandrovich Potemkin .
 It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that, if the Soviet personnel in charge of installing the missiles failed to camouflage them, it was not because they were stupid, but because they had been ordered to do so .
 The lack of adequate camouflage to hide missiles from American observation is such a gross mistake that author Anatol Rappoport concluded that it was part of a Soviet plan by which the missile sites were meant to be discovered by American spy planes .
 In 1961, Life magazine published a report about the anti-Castro guerrillas fighting in the Escambray mountains . Life magazine reported on the conflict in 1961 .
 Some of the photographs illustrating the article had been taken by the U-2s . The U.2s were involved in the U.S. mission .
 On several occasions Castro asked the Soviets to give him SAMs, and let his people operate them, but the Russians were reluctant . Castro asked several times for SAMs but the Soviets were reluctant to do so .
 To the evidence offered above of the Soviets’ willingness to let the missiles be discovered, I can add some of my own . The Soviets were willing to let their missiles be found .
 As a Cuban Army officer during the crisis I was assigned to headquarters and sent on inspection visits to several military units to assess their combat morale and battle readiness . I was sent to headquarters to assess the combat morale of the Cuban Army .
 The Isle of Pines unit was deployed in an area close to the Siguanea peninsula . It was not far from a Soviet missile base located on the top of a nearby hill .
 Cuban soldiers nicknamed the base “el circo soviético,” because of the canvas tarpaulins surrounding it . The Cuban soldiers had aptly nicknamed it ‘el circos soviéico’
 The base itself remained uncovered on top and in plain view of American spy planes . The most interesting detail is that, though the tarpaulins precluded observers from seeing the base from the ground .
 The Soviets apparently were eager to allow long-distance detection, but they didn't want any shortrange observation of the missiles by the Cubans . So, it seems that, though, though the Soviets apparently was eager to .
 In another inspection, I visited a Cuban Air Force base at San Antonio de los Baños, south of Havana .
 The visit occurred after president Kennedy had alerted the American public about the presence of missile bases in Cuba . The visit was made after Kennedy had warned the public of the bases .
 Castro ordered antiaircraft batteries under his command to fire at American planes . Low-level American reconnaissance flights had begun, and Castro ordered them to fire .
 In the distance, several MiG fighter planes were lying like sitting ducks on the apron of the base .
 On close inspection, we discovered that the planes were clumsy dummies made out of wood, cardboard and cardboard .
 An officer at the base told us that the real planes were well protected and camouflaged . The real planes are protected from the public view .
 The antiaircraft batteries received a phone call alerting them that American planes had entered Cuban airspace, and one of them was flying in our direction . As we were talking to other officers at the end of the runway, the .
 A few minutes later, what seemed to me like a RF-101 Voodoo reconnaissance aircraft overflew us at treetop level, too fast for the inexperienced boys to open fire . The boys3939 were manning the four-barreled antiaircraft guns to open
 Dummies on the runway were perhaps good enough to fool the high-flying U-2s . But they were too clumsily made to fool low-flying reconnaissance planes .
 The fact that the Soviets had used decoy planes (and probably other types of decoys) in Cuba during the Crisis has never been mentioned in any of the United States declassified documents pertaining to the Crisis .
 There is a strong possibility that the missiles deployed in Cuba, like the ones Khrushchev was displaying in Moscow’s Red Square parades, were a ruse de guerre; nothing but empty dummies . Therefore, there is a good possibility that there was a strong
 After Gary Powers’ U-2 was shot down in May, 1960, the Soviets hurriedly began building dummy SAM silos .
 Dummy tanks, guns, and other types of war matériel were regularly deployed to confuse the sky spies . The sky spies were often confused by fake tanks and guns .
 Some units of the newly created Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces were not getting real missiles, but dummies . According to some sources, as late as 1960, even some units in the Soviet SRL were getting dummies instead of real missiles .
 Khrushchev sent the Sandal SS-4 to Cuba in 1960s . The Sandal was a Soviet MRBM like the ones sent to Cuba .
 This may not even be a photograph of a missile, but a symbol of Grigori Potemkin’s motherland . Given the fact, however, that the Soviets would not run the risk of parading a real missile with its nuclear warhead and its highly unstable liquid
 From the point of view of semiotics, camouflage is intentional false encoding with the purpose of deceiving the decoder . "Cambodian" is a form of false encoding that deceives a decoder, according to semiotics .
 In semiotic terms, camouflage can be defined as the art of confusing the enemy to make him believe that a sign of a thing is the thing itself, that is to induce the enemy into magical thinking .
 The successful launching in 1957 of the first man-made earth satellite, the Sputnik soon became a symbol of Soviet technological success . Strategic Missiles as Symbols are Symbols .
 After that, the U.S.R. passed through a brief period of national pride and faith in a better future . After that .
 Khrushchev’s poorly chosen phrase “We will bury you,” was most likely not intended as a threat to the West, but as an assertion of his confidence that socialism, under the guidance of the Soviet Union, would replace decadent capitalism .
 The Soviet Union had expressed support for the new revolutionary phenomenon developing 90 miles from American shores . It had been mostly rhetorical, but it was mostly rhetorical .
 Khrushchev made the symbolic offer of rocket support to Cuba . Three days later, he backpedalled and said, “We don’t need bases in Cuba.” Just three days later he backed down .
 In the event of an armed intervention against Cuba, the only thing the Soviet Union was going to offer was its strong support . But, a careful reading between the lines, it was clear that in the case of an attack, the U.S. was not going to support an attack
 The symbolic missiles suddenly disappeared from the picture as if they never existed . No mention was made of the symbolic missiles, which had suddenly vanished from the scene .
 Khruschev ignored Castro's efforts to force him further into a strong commitment . Castro made several attempts to force Khrushchev into a stronger commitment to the missile program .
 Khrushchev pounding his shoe on his desk at the General Assembly was perhaps a symbolic, but ambiguous statement of support for Fidel . Khrushche pounded his shoe in an attempt to keep his feet on the floor of the room .
 The Cuban leader wanted more than symbols. He wanted to use the U.S. nuclear arsenal as a weapon of power . The U.N. nuclear weapons program was launched in 1998 .
 Castro sent Carlos Franqui, editor of Revolución, to Moscow on the pretext of interviewing Khrushchev . He wanted to find out how the Soviet leader could pass from figurative, symbolic language to direct statements . That same month Castro sent the editor to Moscow to interview
 Franqui spent several hours in the Kremlin going over the subject with Khrushchev . The most he obtained from the shrewd Soviet leader was a Solomonic statement, which was interpreted in contradictory fashion by the press services .
 Apparently Khrushchev had second thoughts about the responsibilities he had assumed with regard to Cuba . Apparently he decided to leave Cuba .
 There are indications that he finally got tired of Castro’s schemes and diplomatically told the Cuban leader to quit rattling the Soviet missiles against the U.S. The United States.
 Castro told the Cubans to forget the idea that they were protected by Soviet nuclear missiles . It seems that, finally, Castro got it, because during a long speech on November 8, he said .
 Hoy, the newspaper of the old pro-Soviet Cuban communist party, denied Khrushchev had told Castro to stop mentioning the Soviet missiles . Hoy denied that the former Cuban Communist Party newspaper did this .
 Khrushchev used to complain about the U.S. nuclear missiles deployed by some NATO countries around the Soviet borders . The missiles were deployed by NATO countries in the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The missiles the U.S. had deployed in Europe were no less symbolic than the ones Khrushchev had promised Castro Castro . The missiles were seen as symbolic as the ones given Castro had promised to him .
 The phasing out of the American missiles in Turkey had been under consideration long before the crisis . The decision to phase out the U.S. missiles had been made long before .
 The Kennedy administration had decided to remove them because they were obsolete, clumsy liquid-fuel rockets . In any case, Kennedy administration decided the previous year to remove the rockets .
 The American plan was to replace them with missile-bearing Polaris submarines stationed in the Mediterranean . The U.S. wanted to replace the submarines with missiles-laden submarines .
 Kennedy reportedly ordered the removal of the fuses and warheads from the Jupiter missiles in Turkey, probably with the intention of making them fully symbolic . Kennedy took precautions to avoid costly mistake by subordinates ignoring orders .
 In his life as a Russian leader, Khrushchev was to show that he was deeply addicted to the calculated risk, especially if it implied no real risk at all . In the life of Russian leader he was addicted to calculated risk .
 Khrushchev knew the cardinal difference between a symbolic missile and a real one . He knew that the manipulation of symbols was a lot less riskier than the actual manipulation of things, especially when things were tipped with nuclear warheads .
 symbolic missiles have the same deterrent power as the real ones, but without all of their inherent risks . As a matter of fact, symbolic missiles can be used as a deterrent to deter Soviet Union .
 Semiotics is concerned with everything that can be taken as a sign . Umberto Eco: Semiotics concerned with all that can't be seen as signs . The Treachery of Intelligence Images .
 A sign is everything which can be taken as significantly substituting for something else . Sign is everything that is taken as significant substituting something else. Sign is a sign of something being replaced with a sign .
 This something else does not necessarily have to exist or to actually be somewhere at the moment in which a sign stands in for it . It can be used to stand in for something else, but it can be a sign of something else .
 Semiotics is in principle the discipline studying everything which can be used in order to lie . Semiotics in principle is the study of everything that can be done to lie. Semiotics studies everything in the context of lying .
 Intelligence, espionage, and particularly counterintelligence are semiotic activities par excellence . They deal mostly with all types of deception, and deception has always been an important component of the intelligence profession since its early days .
 During World War II, the British intelligence services carried out an enormous disinformation exercise code-named Fortitude . Fortitude was a part of a major deception operation called Bodyguard . Bodyguard was part of an enormous deception operation code-name Bodyguard.
 The main goal of operation Fortitude was to fool the Germans about the place selected by the Allied armies for their coming invasion . Operation Fortitude is based in Fortitude, Germany, in the area chosen by Allied forces .
 Fortitude was extremely successful in creating a notional56 American invasion force, the First United States Army Group, under the command of Lt. Lt. Fortitude . Fortitude created the First U.S. Army Group under Lt. Gen. George Washington .
 Gen George Patton was ready to land at Pas de Calais, according to German intelligence reports . Patton's plane was believed to have been ready for landing in Calais . Patton died in the Battle of the Bastion, France, in 1944 .
 More than 19 German divisions, including several armored ones, waited patiently for an attack that never materialized . The invading forces secured their positions at Normandy, Normandy, the true place of the invasion .
 The main mistake of the German Abwer and other intelligence services was that they apparently believed that aerial photographs were hard evidence . The Abwer's mistake was to think aerial photos were hard proof .
 German reconnaissance planes brought back load after load of photos showing two large Allied armies getting ready to invade Norway and Pas de Calais . One of the Allied armies was in Scotland, and another in Scotland getting ready for the assault on Calais . Another was in France preparing for the invasion of Pas de
 The aerial photographs depicted large concentrations of men, tanks, trucks, cannons, cannons and all types of matériel associated with an invasion force . The aerial photos depicted large quantities of men and tanks, tanks and trucks .
 Some of the tanks and trucks were inflatable rubber replicas, and the rest of the matériel was made out of plywood, cardboard and canvas .
 Some of the “cannons’s” hiding under camouflage nets consisted of an oil drum turned on its side with a telegraph pole resting on its top . Others consisted of a tank with a top-mounted oil drum .
 The British intelligence was careful not to allow low flying planes to photograph the “armies” while high altitude planes were allowed to do their jobs unmolested . German reconnaissance flights were allowed .
 The Germans ignored that the British intelligence services had managed to capture most of the German agents, ‘turning’ some of them to feed controlled disinformation to the German intelligence .
 Most German intelligence officers still believed that the invasion by the two large Allied armies never materialized only because of a late change of plans . At the end of the war, most German intelligence officials still believed the invasion was only due to a change of plan .
 McGeorge Bundy,59 General Maxwell Taylor and Deputy Secretary of State George Ball attended the ceremony . The ceremony was held at the White House in Washington, D.C. for the first time .
 None of them were directly linked to the U.S. intelligence services . But, significantly, none were directly tied to the American intelligence .
 No mention is made in the available literature of the Cuban missile crisis about any concern expressed by members of the U.S. intelligence community about the possibility of Soviet deception . On the other hand, there is no mention of concern about what tradecraft tests were to evaluate the authenticity of the
 The fact that the U.S. intelligence community apparently accepted the U-2 photos as hard evidence of the presence of missiles in Cuba could be interpreted as a gross violation of elementary intelligence practices . It could also indicate a high degree of incompetence .
 The problem I have with reaching the conclusion expressed above is that, in the field of intelligence and espionage, things are never what they seem to be . I have a high opinion of the professionalism of American intelligence officers, and, secondly, that one of the axioms in the profession
 The U-2 photographs were taken by the U.S. Air Force in the early 1980s . The U.2 photos were used as evidence of the existence of the Soviet Union . The photos were taken during the Cold War .
 Sherman Kent says he didn't know about any Ex Comm members who had doubts about the credibility of the U-2 photographs . But he knew about a few very important officers at the Agency who did, he says .
 There is more than meets the eye in the unproved, but blindly accepted belief that the Soviets deployed strategic missiles and their nuclear warheads in Cuba in 1962 . Therefore, I have come to believe that, in the particular case of the . case, I believe that . there is more
 The U.S. didn't force an in situ inspection of the Soviet ships leaving Cuba . The only way to verify beyond any reasonable doubt that the missiles had actually been in Cuba and were now on their way back to the Soviet Union .
 A high number of American documents relating to the missile crisis have been declassified and made available to scholars . A great part of them dealing with anecdotal information about the opinions of the participants . Almost all signals intelligence, including communications, electronic and nuclear radiation intelligence is still kept classified .
 Maxwell Taylor in the White House at the time, has reported a very interesting detail . Maxwell Taylor was in charge of the National Security Council during the Bush administration .
 Gen. Gen. George S. Eisenhower reviewed message traffic from U.S. intelligence sources on Soviet military activity . Gen. Eisenhower was briefed on Soviet activity in the early 1980s .
 A U.S. Navy ship picked up suspicious levels of radioactivity from a Soviet freighter . The Poltava freighter was the source of the radioactivity detected .
 Taylor was asked to ask Admiral Anderson if the emanations meant the ship was carrying nuclear warheads . Taylor told Anderson that he should ask him if he knew if he was carrying nuke warheads .
 At the next Joint Chief’s meeting, Taylor posed the question to Anderson, who replied, somewhat embarrassed, that he had not seen the message . Anderson replied that he did not see the message, and that he was embarrassed .
 Later that morning, Anderson’s office informed Smith that the report had little significance, that Smith had misread it . Anderson's office later told Smith that he'd misread the report .
 The U.S. had the means to detect radiation from nuclear warheads leaving Cuba, without having to board the Soviet ships . It makes sense to believe that at the time the United States had the ability to detect the radiation .
 No mention has been made of this important fact in any of the declassified documents on the Cuban missile crisis . But, again, no mention of this fact is made of it .
 Admiral Anderson’s claims, contrary to his claims, that report was extremely significant . Smith, is strange, to say the least, because of the importance of the report .
 The CIA, like the gang that couldn’t shoot straight, is inept and incompetent . The CIA is inept, incompetent and incompetent, says Julian Zelizer . It's time for the CIA to get back on the track .
 You cannot take at face value everything you read or hear about how inept and stupid the CIA is . But you can't take everything you hear or hear from the CIA as a matter of fact .
 Everything one ever hears about the CIA are its failures, but the very nature of intelligence work precludes them from announcing their successes . The problem is that everything one always hears about is its failure, but it's a good thing .
 The CIA was not incompetent, but just deceitful, in the handling of the Cuban missile crisis . This is not a criticism of an intelligence service, but a compliment, he says .
 If this sounds too close to a conspiracy theory, I don’t have a problem with that, I’m not sure if it’s too close . The NUCLEAR DECEPTION 19 is the latest in a long-running series of sci-fi
 Intelligence, espionage, and counterintelligence, ultimately are just key elements of a conspiracy to fool, confuse and eventually defeat the enemy . At any rate, intelligence, espionage and counter-intelligence are just elements of an attempt to fool .
 My assertion that the presence of Soviet strategic missiles and their nuclear warheads in Cuba in 1962 is yet to be proved, is not a speculative, unsubstantiated hypothesis, but an uncontrovertible fact .
 There is evidence showing that the photointerpreters at the NPIC used flawed methodological analyses in an effort to prove the existence of strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962 .
 The alleged evidence provided to substantiate the claims that the Soviets deployed strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962 is so flimsy that it makes it irrelevant . Until now, however, the alleged evidence .
 Up to this day, these claims seem to be more the product of theoretical, or perhaps ideological, considerations than direct observation . The claims were made in the early 1900s, but they were more likely to be theoretical, perhaps ideological .
 History has been manipulated through suppression of data that challenges the prevailing interpretations, says author . Historians have manipulated history in the past, including the sinking of the Lusitania, Pearl Harbor and the Cuban missile crisis .
 Most scholars have ignored facts that disagree with their theories, such as the fact that they are wrong, they say . This is the case for most scholars, it seems to be .
 Most of the American academic community dismisses as nonsense UFOs, ESP, and astrology . Early studies of the Cuban missile crisis based on highly questionable information provided by an administration that felt pride in its "management" of the news .
 The Cuban and Russian governments are known for going way beyond mere news management in their total control of information . The second generation of scholars is making a similar mistake, the author says .
 In the late 1960s, Neal D Houghton said that recent American foreign policy had been so poorly conceived and dangerous that it was unworthy of the support it had received .
 Most recent American scholarly studies about the Cuban missile crisis are evident proof that Houghton’s observation is still valid . Most of the recent American . scholarly studies show that . most recent American studies on the Cuban . missile crisis .
 In a field that prides itself for detached analysis and intellectualism, dogma and extra-academic interests run rampant . In this case, the academic community has been accused of being too close to academic dogma .
 Many things we see every day are misleading, or not real, or outright false . But, actually, seeing should never be used as a basis for believing, because many things you see are misleading . Seeing is not the only thing to believe, but it's the most important thing to
 From magicians we know how easily one can be misled by visual images . From watching magicians one can't be fooled with visual images, magician says . Magicians use visual images to trick trick tricks .
 It was not until October 9, 1962, that the interagency Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance gave authorization to fly over the Western part of Cuba . The U.S. was granted permission to fly in October 1962 .
 Evidence indicates that Zorin, like most Soviet diplomats, was left out of the loop by his own government about the events developing in Cuba . Evidence indicates he was not in the loop with the Cuban government .
 His doubts about the credibility of the photographs most likely were not faked, he says . Therefore, his doubts about his doubts were most likely not faked . He says the photos were likely genuine .
 James Jesus Angleton had doubts about the strange things in the U-2 photos . Angleton later admitted to having doubts about his role in the crisis .
 He asked to see all documents prepared by the NPIC during the crisis . Perhaps suspecting Russian foul play, he asked for the documents .
 The results of his study —if he ever did one — were never published . Unfortunately, the results of the study were never released .
 Brugioni mentions that most people at CIA regarded Angleton as eccentric and paranoid . Angleton was known for his eccentric nature and paranoia .
 Angleton came to be hated by some of his CIA colleagues . It is easy to understand why Angleton was so hated by his colleagues .
 Rubenstein’s article appeared in 1972, ten years after the Cuban missile crisis, and it is safe to assume that during these years the quality of aerial surveillance advanced considerably . Rubenstein's article was published in 1972 .
 Still, the inability of photographs, by themselves alone alone, to serve as a source of true intelligence, persists . Still, photos can be used to provide valuable clues to intelligence .
 The following story is further proof of the validity of Korzybski’s extensively quoted dictum . The following article was published in the New York Times .
 In that capacity he had carefully studied the Soviet Union at a level of detail matched by only a few others in the West . The former KGB chief had studied the country at a high level .
 He had studied the footage of the military parades at the Red Square, pored over thousands of satellite surveillance photos, and scrutinized the deployments of Soviet missiles and other armaments .
 His mental image of the Soviet Union was a fearsome superpower with a highly developed military machine capable of using the most advanced sophisticated military technology . The Soviet Union is a powerful superpower with an advanced military machine .
 President Obama visited the Soviet Union for the first time in the 1980s . The Soviet Union was the country's biggest economic success in the world .
 From the air, Sheremetievo airport resembles an open field from the air . The uneven, pockmarked runway resembles a field of fields .
 The taxiways were still covered with snow from a storm two days earlier . Dozens of runway lights were broken, and dozens of the runway lights broken .
 As he rode into downtown Moscow he noticed that the streets were ragged and most of the big buildings lacked paint and were crumbling . The streets are ragged, the streets are crumbling and the buildings are crumbling .
 Butler had expected to find a modern, advanced country . After poring over thousands of satellite photos and thirty years worth of classified reports, Butler had found it . Butler had spent 30 years poring through satellite photos .
 "What he found let him realize that what he had been watching all these years was actually a caricature," he says . "What I found was a caricature. What I found let me realize what I was watching was actually being watched"
 Anthropologists have recorded impressions of primitive tribes after they have been shown a photograph for the first time in their lives .
 Usually they have taken the puzzling object from the hands of the person conducting the experiment, smelled it, looked for something on its back, and returned the photograph without being able to decode the meaning of the photograph .
 In the early 1960s, the Cuban Institute of Cinema produced a documentary film, Por primera vez . It records the impressions of farmers in the Sierra Maestra mountains after they saw a film for the very first time in their lives .
 The farmer’s comments about their impressions are quite revealing, not too different from the anthropologists’ experiments described above . The farmer's comments about his impressions are not too revealing, as are those of anthropologists .
 President Obama presented some of the U-2 photographs at the White House on Thursday, October 18 . He kept referring to the pictures as if they were the real objects they represent .
 Magic operates on the principle that similar objects share the same properties . Magic is based on the fact that similar things share the properties of each other .
 According to this, there is no difference between an object and its photograph . According to the photographer, there are no differences between objects and their photographs .
 Science operates on the opposite principle, which is best expressed in Einstein’s Principle of Locality . Science, on the contrary, operates in the opposite way, says Einstein .
 Though Peirce’s original trichotomy of signs has been improved, modified, and contested, it is still a good introduction for the beginning semiotician .
 Most of the small pictures appearing on the Macintosh interface are actually symbols, not icons . The Macintosh interface uses symbols, rather than icons, to show how icons appear .
 For many centuries, the swastika has been a symbol of peace, love, and good luck for many people around the world, including some American indians . The swastika symbolizes peace and love for many of the world .
 This is when we found uh, the missiles in Cuba, and if you look close you can see it’s annotated that we not only have the missiles, and uh, but we also have the erectors in place, says CNN.com .
 Brugioni and the photointerpreters at the NPIC actually never found any missiles in Cuba . But, as I will show below, they never found missiles in the country .
 Nothing of what he wrote in his book was applied by him during the missile crisis . Unfortunately, however, he learned about maskirovka too late in his career .
 The product of these activities sometimes is called “raw intelligence,” but this is also a misnomer . “Raw intelligence’s” is often called ‘raw intelligence” by some .
 Intelligence is the sum of the conclusions based on raw data after it has been processed and evaluated by qualified intelligence analysts . Intelligence is based on the conclusions of the raw data .
 Intelligence is an elaborate product 24 S E R VA N D O G O N Z A L E Z of the human intellect . Intelligence is a very elaborate product of intelligence, says the author .
 The photo of a missile parading through the Red Square I used in the cover of this book has been doctored . By the way, the photo used in this book was doctored.
 I purposely did it in a clumsy way to avoid disguising the fact that the photo has been doctored . The photo was doctored to show that it had been altered by Photoshop .
 Brugioni never mentioned the possibility that the canvas-covered object appearing in the U-2 photos may have been decoys . Unfortunately, it seems that he learned the use of decoys too late in his career .
 NPIC photointerpreters were so confident about their belief that the Soviets had deployed strategic missiles in Cuba because they had three different types of information which have confirmed their judgement .
 In order to be considered objective, a fact has to be confirmed by different people, using different senses, at different times . But, as professor Nosick rightly affirms, in order to consider an objective, the fact must be verified by different senses .
 In the first place, U-2 photos of Cuba and the Soviet Union, and Corona satellite photos, are just variations of the same sense, photography . In the second place, the U.2 photos are just a variation on the Corona satellite photo of Cuba .
 Vladimir Penkovsky is accused of violating rules of tradecraft in his handling of the case . But the strong doubts about his bona fides indicate that the information he provided is not reliable, he says .
 The triangulation theory is not even a biangulation, and it has no value at all . Consequently, the triangulated theory has no effect on the biangulations theory .
 Central Intelligence Agency, A Compendium of Tradecraft Notes, Volume I, Washington D.C.C., February 1997, Note 10, Tradecraft and Counterintelligence .
 It seems, however, that, contrary to some people’s claims, the intelligence provided by the NPIC analysts was based on unreliable, single-source information —namely, only the photographs taken by the U-2 .
 Jonathan Pollard is in an American prison convicted of espionage in Israel . Pollard was one of Israel's agents, but is in prison for espionage in the U.S.
 Presenting the Photographic Evidence Abroad,” Studies in Intelligence, Spring 1972. Presenting Photographic evidence Abroad. “
 A Ralph Epperson interviewed Abraham Shifrin, ex-chief advisor for the Soviet Ministry of Defense, at the time a Russian emigré living in Israel . In Russia Has Wooden Missiles!, a provoking video of a conference given by A Ralph . in 1988, Epp
 Shifrin told him that he had heard from other Russian Jews that most ICMB silos in the forests of Krasnoyarski Kai and other places were faked . He said he heard from others that most silos are faked .
 Such silos had been deliberately camouflaged less carefully, so that they would not be missed by the American surveillance planes and satellites . The silos were camouflaged to avoid being seen by the U.S.
 Georgi Arbatov, of the U.S.-Canada Institute in Moscow, mentioned having heard having heard that the Soviets had “phony missile launch sites” and inflatable dummies of submarines .
 During WWII the Soviets built a huge factory hidden in the Ural mountains, solely dedicated to the production of all types of military dummies and decoys . The Soviets built the factory during WWII . The factory was located in the mountains of Ural Russia .
 For unknown reasons, the U.S. intelligence services have apparently ignored the important place deception plays in warfare, particularly strategic deception . The American intelligence services ignore the important role of deception in warfare .
 In the mid-1980s, Kenneth de Graffenreid turned his attention to CCD, a new-fad hypothesis which focused in the Soviets’ efforts to deceive .
 De Graffenreid wanted to study possibility that some of the data collected by U.S. technical means could have been part of a vast Soviet hoax . He said satellite imagery and communications intercepts may have been a hoax .
 He argued that it was logical that the Soviets had conducted deception operations, but the U.S. had never uncovered one . He said the United States had never found a deception operation .
 It is important to examine the possibility that some larger, successful deception may have been under way and had been missed . Therefore, he concluded, it was important to look at the possibility .
 Not surprisingly, de Graffenreid made a lot of enemies in the intelligence community, among them Bobby Ray Inman, the National Security Agency director .
 A notional mole, for example, is sometimes more useful than a real one . A mole is a mole that can be used to help people find useful things, experts say .
 The main advantage over the real one is that the notional mole is impossible to discover for the very reason that it does not exist . The mole's main advantage is that it's impossible to find because it is not real .
 Some people have speculated that Angleton’s search for a Soviet mole inside the KGB was actually a wild goose chase after a notional one . Angleton's search cost him his career and almost destroyed the CIA, almost destroying the CIA .
 Ex Comm. Ex Comm Meetings, October 1962,” International Security, 10/1 , note 13, 178. “International Security” is a reference to the 1962 World War II .
 Taylor and Ball wondered if the missiles might be a Soviet deception to provoke the U.S. into some sort of action . Ball and Ball expressed some doubts about the missiles .
 Their speculation was quickly rejected by the majority of the Ex Comm. members .
 The Cuban missile crisis is a mystery surrounding the missile crisis . Another mystery to add to the long list of mysteries surrounding the crisis . The crisis was the height of the Cold War .
 American search team boarded Soviet ship only to find out that missiles and warheads were actually decoys . On the other hand, one can only imagine the scenario of an American . search team boarding Soviet ship .
 "The United States would have instantly become a laughing stock of the whole world," says President Obama . The U.S. would have been a 'laughing stock' of the world, he says .
 The Agency's own operation is criticized for its lack of freedom of opinion and criticism of the Agency’s own operation .
 Other declassified articles are available on-line at the Center for the Study of Intelligence . The Center is based in Washington, D.C.
 Even if a mountain of declassified Soviet documents were provided as proof , one has to be very gullible not to laugh in the face of anybody making such a far-fetched claim .
 Dawkins defines a meme as a replicating information pattern that uses minds to get itself copies into other minds, in a viruslike fashion . Dawkins says a meme is a replicator of information that replicates information patterns .
 The meme is the basic unit of replication and selection in the ideosphere . Memes are the "basic unit of replicating and selection" in the Ideosphere .
 According to Dawkins, memes, like viruses of the mind, float about in the soup of human culture where they grow, replicate, mutate, compete, or become extinct . Dawkins: Memes are like viruses that float about, replicate and mutate in culture .
 As Nazism and Marxism have shown, however, a meme doesn’t need to be true to be powerful . A meme can be powerful, but a meme can't be true, it can be true .