 President Kennedy decided on quarantine to prevent Russian ships bringing additional missiles to Cuba . President Kennedy demanded that Russia remove the weapons from Cuba .
 The television, which gradually had become publicly accessible in the U.S. and Europe in the early 60s, added a new dimension in the news coverage . The television had gradually become public access to in the USA and Europe .
 The crisis was solved after two nerve-wracking weeks when Kennedy struck a deal with the Soviet Prime Minister, Nikita Khrusjtsjov . Kennedy struck the deal with Khrushjov after two weeks .
 Kennedy and his staff discussed different options to dealing with the conflict . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with the situation"
 John F Kennedy’s brother Robert Kennedy played an important role during the crisis . Robert Kennedy's brother played a key role in the Kennedy family .
 Nikita Khrushchev, Fidel Castro, Robert Kennedy, Theodore Sorensen, C Douglas Dillon, Dean Acheson, Llewllyn Thompson, Robert McNamara, Lyndon B Johnson, Anatoly Dobrynin . Choose at least 3 of the people below and
 Choose two opposing characters and make a few lines that characterize their rhetorical contributions in the Crisis and act out their conversation . Choose two characters from the Crisis .
 Listen to the first 8 minutes of the speech before you discuss the questions below . The questions will be answered in the comments section below .
 The U.S. has played an important role in the world for a long time, says President Obama . TV as a means of media was in its early start, says Obama .
 There are still countries that may pose a danger to world peace . Even though the nuclear threat is less imminent today, there are still some countries that pose a threat .
 Bruce Greenwood as President John F Kennedy and Kevin Costner stars as Kennedy's aide, Kenneth O'Donnell . The film is set to be released in May 2015 .
 Steven Culp portrays President Kennedy's younger brother, Robert, who was appointed as U.S. Attorney General . Robert Kennedy was appointed by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Choose two opposing characters . Make a few lines that characterize their rhetorical contributions in the Crisis and act out their conversation . Choose two characters .
 The U.S. has played an important role in the world for a long time . TV as a means of media was in its early start .