 The United States intelligence on the transport of warheads to Cuba, Soviet leaders would never have taken the risk of putting underway at the time the crisis began on October 22, was the missiles into Cuba without an important expected beneitin fact remarkably good .
 The nuclear warheads for the misfit in the strategic balance of power, which then heavily siles in Cuba, were loaded on the cargo ship Poltava in favored the U.S. The warheads were loaded onto the ship .
 The Poltava, a large-hatch cargo freighter, made two trips to Cuba with missiles in September and Ocand with no military strategic gain . The ship was the only type of ship able to deployment would have provoked all the risks of U.S. reactransport
 There was, however, a real question in the minds and a false manifest of cargo . "There was, but there was a real concern," says CNN's John Sutter .
 A review of dezvous in the Atlantic Ocean with three or four submarines also helps to answer the quesfrom the Soviet Northern Fleet, which escorted it toward Europe .
 The Poltava and 15 other Soviet ships at sea carrying arms stopped and soon returned . In October 1962 the United States imposed to the Soviet Union a naval quarantine cutting off any further shipment of So-called missiles .
 Cuba in 1962 tended to confirm that none had been brought that there were any nuclear weapons in Cuba . There was no direct evidence Cuba had nuclear weapons .
 Jesse Helms of North Carolina expected that nuclear warheads would be and former television evangelist Pat Robertson have recently provided for the missiles .
 A check with more sensitive instruments there probably were no nuclear warheads yet in Cuba . The Cuban government has no nuclear weapons in the country .
 Nonetwo days later found no radioactive emanations from the theless, in the words of a now declassified ""top secret"" speship .
 On its arrival in the Soviet Union on November 23, cial national intelligence estimate on October 20, "In any the Aleksandrovsk, which departed from Cuba on Novemcase, it is prudent to assume that when the missiles are ber 5, unloaded six vans probably
 The pres. pres. Raymond Garthoff is a senior fellow at the Brookings Instituence of the vans, detected earlier in Cuba, did not, however, mean that the nose cones with warheads had been there .
 In 1962 he was special assistant for Soviet bloc politico-military affairs in the State Department . The Soviets assured the United States in November that the warheads (in one discussion, qualified with ""if involved in missile crisis deliberations") were no longer in Cuba .
 They did not want to risk creating a new issue by informing us that they had never been there . Quoting from the yet unpublished edited transcript of been there.
 'He took risks, but not there had been any warheads our doubt might tempt the more than he had to take,' says the author .
 I had conversations at Soviet leaders would have wanted to run the risks involved at the time, and I was told that warheads were not there . I had some conversations at the Soviet leaders, but they would not want to risk the risks .
 This in leaving any warheads in Cuba if they had been there was to be the second step . This was the first step in the process of removing any warheads from Cuba . The second step was to remove any warheads left in Cuba .
 Lebow introduces this quoted statement by saying ""Burlatmay never have intended to send nuclear warheads to Cuba, sky said . Lebow said he had explored the question in 1962 and had and the evidence he believes supports those arguments. Lebow's arguments that Khrushchev .
 The Soviets exercised strict control over all their nuclear weapons, in stages so as to minimize the risks:' If readers and have been conservative about deployment beyond their were to understand those sentences to mean that Burlatsky own territory .
 Khrushsaying that the Soviet purposes-deterrence, improving the chev that there was a two-stage plan, would be in error . Logically and theoretically he is correct in had said that he ""discovered"" from sources dose to Khrush .
 Khrushchev's own hypothetical construction of missiles would also apply to missiles in the Soviet Union . It is less convincing, however, to argue that in practice tended to be more accurate .
 Soviet source reports Khrushchev's proposal future publication, saying very much the same thing he said to Castro to place the missiles in Cuba referred to the weapon Cambridge . Burlatsky has since written on this subject for formed Soviet source .
 He had bluffed in a more general way in the missile gap a few years earlier . But that bluff had been called and contributed to the predicament that now inspired a new risk, he says .
 He does not advance any such evidence, and the available evidence earlier summarized is, if not conclusive, at least strongly against his hypothesis . But he does not, in fact, advance any evidence .
 Both Lebow and I participated in the first formal meeting of Soviet and United States scholars and quondam missile crisis participants, held in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in October 1987 .
 Lebow notes a divergence in the views taken by two Soviet participants . Sergo Mikoyan, son of the late Soviet Politburo member Anastas Mikoyans, and Burlatsky, a prominent member of the Soviet political establishment in 1962 and now .
 Mikoyan was sure that nuclear warheads for the missiles were in Cuba in 1962, he says . He says he was also sure that they were going to be deployed in Cuba .
 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: 41 count of that meeting states, and not at all what Lebow whether the ship actually carried nuclear warheads . Paul Valerry, West Germany, was a member of the West German government .
 Assistant Secretary of Public Affairs Robinformation that they were on the island . Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs confirmed that they are on island .
 This history pulls together a great deal of inthe reaction, and then make a decision regarding warheads . The history of the U.S. involvement in the nuclear weapons program is a key part of the story .
 Had nuclear warheads been decomplete, and to put it in final and authoritative form at ployed on the island, the American side certainly would this time would require the time and attention of a lot of have known about it, for they had at their disposal .
 Of course, they would have used this fact in their public priate files:' 3' That was its fate until it was declassified for announcements and secret negotiations with us . So my suggestion is that this history be put in the public record .
 The ""serious closed a ""plan"" he had ""discovered"" after having ""spoken division"" is entirely Lebow's inference from the word ""susto sources close to Khrushchev:'
 Burlatsky was prepared at the ""top secret" level of intelligence materials . The level was a restrictive, low classificaguish what any source can report as information from what it can report from what was then called ""codeword"
 It was to guard such evidence that the ship was described as merely ""suspected"" of transporting nuclear . In addition 10, he advanced his hypothesis, Lebow weapons .
 Most of the best intelligence on such matters remains to deploy nuclear warheads on the island . Not even the name of the ship was given. suggests that Khrushchev intended .
 Lebow cites ""former officials"" who heads were en route can be explained away . Lebow cited "former officials" who were headed to the White House .
 The warhead have ""confirmed"" a division of views or have been ""skepstorage sites and nose-cone transport vans could have been tical"" about ""the report"" of the weapons loading in Odessa .
 The technical intelligence on fact that most officials, even most intelligence officers, were the loading and transport of the warheads could have been not cleared for and privy to the critical information on these generated to convey a clever deception .
 Lebow refers to 'a detachment of the Ministry sider this to be extremely unlikely' Lebow says .
 I believe the of Defense whose sole responsibility was said to be handling intelligence is far more credible as a series of bits of connuclear weapons"" as having loaded the warheads . Moreover, I believe . the of defense whose sole . responsibility is said to have handled intelligence is more credible .
 The Cuba History, prepared nuclear warheads in the 1960s. Yet he sistent evidence than as part of an elaborate deception. correctly notes later that the KGB controlled handling of Lebow refers to the fact that . ""the Cuba History" refers to . the fact . that the Cuba History
 A ship suspected of transporting such warheads was heads for land-based strategic missile systems, including en route to Cuba at the time of the ;'' and while medium-range as well as intercontinental systems .
 Sub-nuclear weapons could have been flown to the island . There is no indication this was ever attempted . This sub nuclear weapons were never found .
 Lebow also states that this study reveals a serious division of opinion within the intelligence community as to THE WHOLE STORY of the nuclear warheads for the July/August 1988 .
 Historians must now disentangle and inment that they would be. Nor was there any intelligence assesslicy makingthat historians must later disentendangle . Nor was any intelligence assessment making that historians must now decide .
 Lebow is raising the question about whether Khrushchev was bluffing about nuclear capability . Lebow raises the question planning assumptions that automatically credited the sysof as having a possible nuclear capability.
 In a Joint Chiefs of Staff reversal the 1962 intelligence and the 1987 Soviet comments that of earlier orders, supplied with Honest Johns, without the he cites . I differ with his interpretation .
 Nuclear warheads but able to receive them quickly if later if later should be asked, author says . All of this, however, concerns only one issue that nuclear warheads but can be sent quickly should be posed .
 This was not known to the president or his Ex . Another issue from which some interesting inferences can be made from this .
 One variant of the invasion plan was and Soviet leadership perceptions stemming from the quespication on United States use of tactical nuclear weapons . Nor was known that even before be drawn was the potentially significant divergence in United States the FROGs were seen .
 The Soviet leaders almost certainly would . have believed that the United States leaders knew that they were succeeding the delivery of the nuclear warheads . Another ramification of military planning was to Cuba, as disclosed in a declassified report .
 U.S. intelligence estimators and crisis, that "because the FROG could carry a nuclear . weapon, that ""because the . FROG . could . carry a . nuclear weapon," said U.N. intelligence officials .
 No one would have raised a risk of prompting a U.S. resort to arms . No one knows how these differing presumptions affected crisis deci. knows how .
 The assumptions in military planning can have unanticipated crisis, military planners say . But perceptions and equation not recognized at the time, or in analyses since, can lead to unanticipated crises .
 These presumptions might have importantly affected far-reaching effects . The presumption of presumptions may have important implications for future generations .
 During the crisis, U.S. aerial reconnaissance discovered that 2.2 million people were killed in the crisis .
 These notes, as well as The Cuba Crisis, 1962, have been declassified and are at the John F Kennedy Library, Dorchester, Massachusetts . ground) short-range missiles .