 Learn about the 1962 standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union that nearly resulted in nuclear war . Read about the tense 1962 standoff that nearly ended nuclear war.
 In October 1962, the Soviet provision of ballistic missiles to Cuba led to the most dangerous Cold War confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The world was brought to the brink of nuclear war .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev negotiated a peaceful outcome to the crisis . The two leaders negotiated an end to the two weeks-long crisis .
 Crisis evoked fears of nuclear destruction, revealed the dangers of brinksmanship, and invigorated attempts to halt the arms race . Crisis evokes fears of nukes' destruction, invigorating attempts to end arms race, says author .
 Fidel Castro came to power on January 1, 1959 . Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader of the Cuban Revolution . Castro was born in 1959 .
 Castro was not yet a communist, and U.S. policymakers initially took a cautious wait-and-see approach to his regime . Castro's regime was a state of Soviet Union-sanctioned dictatorship .
 Over the course of 1959 and 1960, US-Cuban relations worsened due to Castro’s anti-US rhetoric and radical policies, especially his refusal to hold elections . Over the years, Castro's radical policies led to a worsening of US relations with Cuba .
 Eisenhower cut off diplomatic ties to Cuba after it became clear Castro intended to pursue an alliance with the Soviet Union . Eisenhower began preparing contingency plans for overthrowing Castro and replacing him with someone more amenable to the U.S.
 Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro shakes hands with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in 1961 . Castro was Cuban prime minister of the Soviet Union from 1961 to 1961 .
 As US-Cuban relations deteriorated, Castro turned to the Soviet Union for support . Castro was Cuban president of Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The Soviets signed trade and aid agreements with Cuba, provided Castro with arms and weaponry . The Soviets also gave political support to the Cuban Revolution in the United Nations .
 After the invasion, Castro turned to the Soviets for protection against future U.S. aggression . Castro's government turned to them after the invasion .
 The Soviets provided Cuba with nuclear weapons on the condition that the deal would remain secret until the missiles were fully operational . In October 1962, U-2 spy plane flights over Cuban territory revealed the missile installation sites . Khrushchev claimed that his motivation was to safeguard the Cuban Revolution against United
 Kennedy administration established a naval blockade to prevent any more missiles from reaching Cuba . The Kennedy administration demanded the immediate removal of missiles that had already been delivered .
 The danger of this approach was that if the Soviets refused to remove the missiles, the U.S. would be forced to escalate the crisis by authorizing air strikes over Cuba to bomb the missile sites .
 Contingency plans were drawn up for a full-scale invasion of Cuba and a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union . Khrushchev initially refused to acknowledge the presence of the missiles in Cuba and declared the U.S. naval blockade to be an act of war .
 Over the course of approximately two weeks, Kennedy and Khrushchev negotiated a peaceful outcome to the missile crisis . The crisis ended with a peaceful end to the crisis .
 The Soviets compared their provision of nuclear weapons to Cuba with the stationing of Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Jupiter missiles were in range of Soviet territory, which was in Soviet territory .
 Kennedy agreed to remove missiles from Turkey, and also pledged that the U.S. government would not undertake another invasion of Cuba . Kennedy also pledged the United States would not conduct another invasion .
 Castro: For Castro, this was humiliating and seemed to prove that the Soviets prioritized relations with the United States over relations with their own allies . Castro: This was humiliating for Castro, who was humiliated by the U.S. for his actions .
 Castro hoped to negotiate the closing of the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo and the cessation of U-2 flights over Cuban territory . Castro also hoped to close the U.-2 flight over Cuba's borders . The Cuban leader wanted to negotiate a deal with the United States .
 He was forced into retirement by other Soviet officials who claimed that the missile crisis was proof of Khrushchev’s reckless decision-making and his inability to lead the Soviet Union . Other Soviet officials said that the crisis had been proof of his reckless decisions .
 Khrushchev’s successor, Leonid Brezhnev, came to power and sought to reduce tensions with the U.S. He was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 His calm but firm stance in the negotiations was heralded as great statesmanship . But it is often forgotten that his bungling of the Bay of Pigs invasion had helped lead to the crisis .
 He and Khrushchev had peered into the abyss of nuclear destruction but had managed to pull back from it . The two men pulled back from the brink .
 A Moscow-Washington hotline was set up in the White House to facilitate direct communication between the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States . In order to prevent future crises, a hotline was established in the U.S. to facilitate communication .
 In August 1963, the United States, the Soviet Union, and Great Britain signed a treaty banning atmospheric and underwater nuclear testing . The treaty was signed by the three countries .
 The test-ban treaty failed to halt the arms race . Kennedy simultaneously authorized a massive arms buildup that vastly expanded the U.S. nuclear arsenal . It amplified United States strategic superiority in the Cold War .