 President Kennedy made the announcement in a TV address on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy made it clear the United States was prepared to use military force if necessary to neutralize this perceived threat .
 The two superpowers plunged into one of their biggest Cold War confrontations after the U.S. spy plane photographed a Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile being assembled for installation . President Kennedy was briefed about the situation on October 16, 1962 .
 Nikita Khrushchev gambled on sending missiles to Cuba with the specific goal of increasing his nation’s nuclear strike capability . The missiles were sent with the intention of increasing the nation's nuclear capability .
 Kennedy and ExComm determined that presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was unacceptable . Castro and Khrushchev saw the missiles as a means of deterring further U.S. aggression .
 The president delivered an ultimatum that the existing missiles be removed . The U.S. was prepared to use military force if necessary to neutralize this perceived threat .
 Soviet ships bound for Cuba neared the line of U.S. vessels enforcing the blockade . A crucial moment in the unfolding crisis arrived on October 24, when Soviet ships were approaching .
 Soviet ships stopped short of the blockade . But they did not address the problem of the missiles already in Cuba . The Cuban missiles were already in the country .
 A similar sense of doom was felt by other key players on both sides . Despite the enormous tension, Soviet and American leaders found a way out of the impasse .
 Khrushchev sent a letter proposing that the USSR would dismantle its missiles in Cuba if the Americans removed their missile installations in Turkey . The Kennedy administration decided to accept the terms of the first message and ignore the second letter entirely .
 American officials also agreed to withdraw their nation’s missiles from Turkey . Privately, however, U.S. officials also agree to withdraw missiles .
 The crisis convinced the Soviets to increase their investment in an arsenal of intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching the U.S. from Soviet territory . In fact, another legacy of the crisis was that the Soviets increased their investment .
 The U-2 aerial photos were analyzed inside a secret office above a used car dealership . The U.2 aerial photographs were analyzed in an office above the dealership .
 During World War II, the U.S. and the Soviet Union fought together as allies against the Axis powers . The treaty, which President John F Kennedy signed, was signed by President Kennedy . President Kennedy signed the treaty .
 An arms race occurs when two or more countries increase the size and quality of military resources to gain military and political superiority over one another . Americans had long been wary of Soviet communism and concerned about Russian leader Joseph Stalin’s .
 The Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union is perhaps the largest and most expensive arms race in history . The Suez Crisis began on October 29, 1956, when Israeli forces pushed into Egypt toward the Suez Canal . The canal was a valuable waterway that controlled
 Khrushchev led the Soviet Union during the height of the Cold War, serving as premier from 1958 to 1964 . The Israelis were also prime minister of Israel in the 1960s .
 The Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 was a failed attack launched by the CIA during the Kennedy administration to push Cuban leader Fidel Castro from power . Confronted with the evidence of his nation’s espionage, the Cuban leader was confronted with evidence of espionage .