 The American Perspective Karolina Sekerášová Bachelor's Thesis 2018 ABSTRAKT Tato práce pojednává o Krabiské krizi . Karolina se odehrála v říjnu roku
 Spojenþmi státy Americkými vyhlášena blokáda Kuby, která měla zabránit dopravení dalších zařizení .
 V prvnnní části práce je popsáno historcké pozadí a příčiny krize, následuje pr�ůb�ęh . V.S. V
 The 13-day crisis set the world on the threshold of nuclear war . The main causes of the crisis were building of a military bases and deploying Soviet mid-range missiles .
 The naval blockade was announced by the United States of America, to prevent the transport of other equipment to Cuba . As a reaction, the U.S. of America announced a naval blockade .
 The first part of the thesis describes the historical background and causes of the crisis . The last part discusses the factors of the decision-making process and the consequences of that crisis .
 I would also like to thank my father, for giving me the opportunity to study and for his endless support . I would like to say thank you for your support and your support .
 I hereby declare that the print version of my Bachelor’s thesis and the electronic version of that thesis deposited in the IS/STAG system are identical . The print and electronic versions of my thesis are identical, he declares .
 Those were the main characters and symbols of the greatest danger of a nuclear world so far . The main characters of the nuclear world are those of the characters .
 This crisis had been preceded by many causes and events that had taken place over the last four years before the crisis itself . The crisis had to be preceded by a series of causes, such as many causes, events that took place over four years ago .
 After the Second World War, spheres of influence in Germany were divided among the victorious powers . After World War II, spheres were divided in Germany .
 The signing of peace treaties and the negotiations in Geneva and Paris were unsuccessful . Although the Soviet Union tried to reduce the sphere of influence of the United States, the negotiations failed .
 After Castro's putsch, the U.S. attempted another effort to overthrow Castro's regime . Castro's government was overthrown by the United States in 1953 .
 In 1962, the United States intelligence service found out the presence of Soviet nuclear warheads in Cuba . The U.S. intelligence service discovered the existence of the nuclear weapons in Cuba in 1962 .
 The United States responded to the Soviet presence of missiles by announcing a naval blockade of Cuba . The U.S. responded by announcing the naval blockade . The blockade was the response to a Soviet presence in Cuba .
 Both countries had to make great concessions, but eventually agreed on a compromise which calmed down the crisis and the threat of a potential war . Both countries made great concessions to the compromise .
 Americans have already suspected some ongoing situation on Cuba due to increasing number of Soviet soldiers on the island . Americans already suspected there was an ongoing situation .
 In that time, photographic evidence and reports of missiles and nuclear weapons deployed in Cuba taken 2 days earlier were already in the President's hands . The photographic evidence was already in that time .
 The President immediately summoned his counsellor's meeting to look for a way out of the situation . The President said he was looking to find a way of avoiding further embarrassment .
 Kennedy eventually opted for a naval blockade . Several solutions were offered but Kennedy opted for the blockade . The blockade was the first time the blockade was offered .
 All ships carrying a bulk of offensive weapons and heading to Cuba were returned to the port they were sailing from . All ships with a large majority of weapons were returning to their ports .
 Kennedy gave a speech on television and radio introducing the situation to the American people . Kennedy gave the speech on October 22 in the evening, October 22 .
 Two days later at 10 o'clock in the morning, a quarantine was imposed on Cuba . Cuba imposed a quarantine on Cuba at 10 a.m. Tuesday .
 Khrushchev's letter to Kennedy on October 26, the First Secretary confessed for the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The letter suggested a possible compromise which should secure a guarantee for the Castro's regime in Cuba by the United States . In exchange for withdrawing Soviet missiles from the island,
 The removal of missiles and nuclear material would be carried out under the supervision of UN inspectors . On the contrary, the United States president insisted that the removal of missile and nuclear materials would be under UN inspectors.
 The secret addition of this agreement was the dismantling of United States missiles in Turkey . The secret agreement was also a secret addition to the agreement .
 Khrushchev announced Kennedy's withdrawal of missiles from Cuba on October 28, 1962 . Kennedy withdrew missiles from the island in Cuba .
 President Kennedy officially announced the end of the crisis at a press conference on November 20, 1963 . President Kennedy made the announcement at the press conference .
 The crisis which had brought the world to the threshold of a nuclear war was averted . The crisis had been brought to the brink of nuclear war . It was the first time nuclear war had been averted.
 In the 1950s and 1960s, several serious crises emerged in the relations between the Eastern Bloc and the West . In the 1960s and '60s, crises emerged between the two sides of the world .
 The most significant events in connection to the later event in Cuba in 1962 were the Berlin Crisis and the political developments in Cuba, which at that time began to indicate the direction of Fidel Castro . The Berlin Crisis was the most significant event in Cuban politics in 1962 .
 Khrushchev and Eisenhower met in Germany before the Vienna summit . The meetings were held in Germany between the two leaders .
 The German situation has not been resolved due to the U.S. presidential election . The situation is not due to be resolved .
 U.S. administration with elected President Kennedy officially negotiated only once with the USSR and Khrushchev . The United States negotiated only one deal between the two countries .
 The meeting of two leaders took place in Vienna at the beginning of June 1961 .
 Negotiations were, however, marked by unsuccessful invasion in the Bay of Pigs . The negotiations were marked by an unsuccessful invasion of the Bay .
 Kennedy was for Khrushchev only a beginner, who just started his career on the political scene . Kennedy was only a novice when he joined the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 The Soviet leader believed that he could be able to dictate conditions through intimidation and ultimate. ultimate. power . He believed he could dictate conditions .
 He gave a speech proposing the transformation of West Berlin into a free and demilitarized city . He proposed the transformation into West Berlin .
 He demanded the abolition of Berlin's four-member statute and warned that the USSR was willing to hand over control over entry into the city . He also demanded that Berlin be given control of its borders .
 He submitted a new proposal with drafts of peace agreements with both German states in January 1959 . Even though his propose was refused by NATO, he submitted new proposals in 1959 .
 West Germany was asked to resign from NATO and East Germany from the Warsaw Pact . Those agreements contained a request for West Germany to resign . East Germany wanted to quit NATO and West Germany from Warsaw Pact, but West Germany refused .
 French President Charles de Gaulle was against any concessions of Moscow . The U.S. and UK have been considering a compromise .
 Problematic of the Germany question was supposed to be resolved at the Geneva Summit attended by the Foreign Ministers of the US, the USSR, France and Great Britain .
 The negotiation lasted for three months but ended without any success . Vladimír Nálevka, Karibská Krize, 12.02, is a member of the Czech Republic .
 Inviting Khrushchev to visit the U.S.A. which should take place in September 1959 . Inviting him to visit was a dream come true for Khrushchevitch . Invitation to visit should be September 1959.
 Both leaders agreed on the next summit to be held in May 1960 in Paris in Paris .
 The expected conference in Paris, which was due to begin on May 15, 1960, ended even before it started . However, the expected conference ended in a disaster .
 The U-2 spy plane was shot down by the Soviet Union two weeks before the conference . It was the first time the plane had been shot down during the Cold War .
 When Khrushchev arrived in Paris he asked for an apology for espionage . He asked for a French apology for his involvement in the war .
 Eisenhower's apology only meant a worsening of the tense situation . Refusing the apology by Eisenhower only meant the situation was worsening .
 Khrushchev announced he would no longer deal with the president Eisenhower but the newly elected U.S. president of the United States. He announced that he would not deal with Eisenhower but with the newly-elected president .
 The first evidence of the construction of the Cuban missile base in Cuba was acquired in August . The base is believed to be under construction .
 Four memoranda were sent to the White House by the CIA Director, John McCone . John McCain sent the memoranda to the Obama administration .
 None of these clearly records an effort to transform Cuba into a Soviet base . However, none of these records clearly records a Soviet effort .
 The Soviet intent to designate Cuba as a hub for the spread of communism throughout Latin America, the Soviets wanted to spread communism throughout the region . The Soviet Union wanted Cuba to be a hub in Latin America .
 CIA: Soviets ambitions were decidedly underestimated by the CIA . CIA stressed the fact that the Soviet Union would not consider the risk of retaliation by the United States . CIA: The Soviet Union's ambitions were definitely underestimated .
 National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy provided key information to the report . National Security Adviser Bundy provided additional details of the report to the National Security Council .
 It covered increased shipping between Cuban and Soviet ports and twenty ships carrying military material . The report was published in 1959 . It was the first time the Soviet Union had sent ships to Cuba .
 U.S. concluded that an air defence system was under construction in Cuba .
 During the routine U-2 surveillance over Cuba on August 29, 1962, the first construction of SAM missile ramps in the province of Pinar del Rio in western Cuba was 5 Nálevka, Karibská Krize, 13 .
 SAM missiles were often sent to Soviet's allied countries . However, such information did not call attention, as the missiles were sent to allied nations .
 The White House ordered avoiding Cuban 11 airspace during observing flight .
 Director of Central Intelligence Agency John McCone introduced the presumption that the aim of SAM missiles in Cuba is to deter Americans from further exploration of the area .
 The main pretence was import of medium-range missiles capable of reaching U.S. targets to the island, he said . He said .
 This detection could mean decreasing of United States superiority in amount of missiles, John McCone therefore requested more reconnaissance flights over Cuba territory .
 On September 4, Kennedy warned Moscow that he and the US government disagree with deploying missiles in Cuba . The warning was sent to Moscow by President Kennedy on September 4 . President Kennedy also warned that the U.S. and the Russian government disagreed on deploying missiles .
 Khrushchev responded on September 11, with denial of allegation of supplying Cuba with missiles and assault weapons . The allegation was denied by the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev insisted that Cuba which is threatened from being invaded, has every right to be supplied with military material .
 He included a denial of any intentions to deploy strategic missiles outside the USSR territory .
 This statement contains another warning to protect security and safety of its allies . This statement contained another warning that the U.S. will protect its allies from harm .
 Resolution would authorize the President to launch an armed action against Cuba if necessary to prevent the consolidation of a military power that would corrupt U.S. security, was adopted . Resolution was adopted by the House of Representatives .
 The President has agreed with Congress's request to call 150,000 midfielders and launching a military exercise in the Caribbean territory .
 Colonel John R Wright Jr. submitted a comprehensive report on the Soviet air defence intention in Cuba to Minister of Defence .
 Wright was persuaded of existence of 15 bases for S-75 missiles located in the middle of the province of Pinar del Rio fully controlled by Soviet soldiers . Wright was convinced that 15 bases in the province were fully controlled .
 The US Government reacted to this statement by increasing the United States Armed Forces . The US government has increased the number of troops in the country .
 During reconnaissance flight of U-2 plane on October 14, photographic evidence was taken . U.2 plane was captured by U.S. Air Force in the U.N. mission .
 Analysis of these pictures revealed a ballistic missile near San Cristobal . Analysis of the missile was carried out by a missile team in the region .
 A missile base and 21 transport containers with military material and bombers in San Julian were identified . Subsequently, the missile base in Guan Jay was identified . The missile base was also identified .
 If not, the Soviets could take similar actions elsewhere in the world . tolerating the Soviet base near the United States territory and its sphere of influence could be understood as a concession . If not .
 Executive Committee of the National Security Council, called ExComm, was formed by members from several departments . ExComm is a response to newly discovered fact .
 The main task for the ExComm was to develop the best variants of possible solutions to the crisis . The ExComm's main task was to find the best possible solutions .
 On June 7, 1959, the United States government supported opposition forces in an attempt to overthrow Castro's regime . The U.S. government attempted to establish a US loyal government in Cuba . The Cuban government was overthrown .
 Unofficial support proposed sabotage in Cuban sugar factories and attacks by small aircraft with CIA-funded Cuban exiles . This unofficial support proposed attacks on sugar factories .
 Cuban government sends protest to Washington claiming aircraft took off in Florida . Havana was attacked by unmarked aircraft in Havana, Cuba, last week .
 According to Nálevka, the Americans have never admitted the participation in this incident . The Americans never admitted to the involvement in the incident, according to the Czech Republic .
 As a response to reducing the quota for imports of Cuban sugar into the US, Castro had nationalized all 15 Nálevka, Sv�ętová Politika ve 20 .
 Castro had a speech known as the First Haven Declaration in September . Later that year, in September, he gave a speech in which he called for the end of the war . Castro's speech was known as The First Haven .
 The United States was blamed for interfering with internal politics of the Latin America states . The U.S. has been accused of interfering in internal politics .
 Cuba has declared receiving missile aid from the Soviet Union in case of attack by the U.S. military forces . Cuba has also declared it will receive missile aid if it is attacked by the United States .
 The US ambassador has been recalled from Havana in October . The export embargo has been imposed by the U.S. government .
 A solution has been found in the Soviet Union along with other Eastern Bloc countries . A solution to the problem was found in Russia and the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 The U.S. government did not succeed in overthrowing Castro's regime in Bay of Pigs at first . It had not prevented them from planning other similar events . The United States failed to overthrow Castro's government at first, but planned other events .
 Cubans have been involved in Cuba's naval manoeuvres in the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean for decades . The Cuban Navy is known for its role in supporting exile Cubans .
 The U.S. steps have been evaluated by the Soviets as interfering with Cuba's internal affairs . The Soviets have been trying to disrupt the communist regime in Cuba .
 In 1961, the deployment of U.S. mid-range missiles in Great Britain, Turkey and Italy could provoke the Soviets to an operation Anadyr . The deployment of United States . in 1961 could provoke an attack by the Soviets .
 Soviets claimed that Jupiter rockets would hit the Moscow in sixteen minutes . Jupiter rockets hit the city in 16 minutes, according to Soviets .
 Ideje, Doktríny, Strategie: Strategie (Praha: Proffessional Publishing, 2009), 177. Ideje: Ideje was a member of the Czech Republic’s political party .
 Invasion in the Bay of Pigs was an unsuccessful operation of Cuban exiles led by the CIA . The CIA attacked Cuba in April 1961 .
 The operation was funded and supported by the US government and was supposed to overthrow Fidel Castro . Operation was funded by the U.S. government and intended to overthrow Castro .
 Due to underestimation of preparations, it ended up with a complete defeat . It was due to underestimating of preparations for the match .
 Invading warriors were defeated by trained Cuban armed forces within three days . Cuban forces equipped from the Eastern Bloc countries were defeated in three days by Cuban forces .
 As a result of these actions, Fidel Castro had fallen under the influence of Soviet Union even more . Fidel Castro fell under influence of the Soviet Union more than ever . Castro had become more susceptible to Soviet influence .
 According to Robert Dallek, the USSR was converging with Cuba because of the offer to deploy Soviet missiles as a response to the deployment of American rockets in Turkey and Italy . The USSR and Cuba were converging because the offer was made in response to U.S. rockets in
 The Soviets could use Cuba as the centre of communist expansion in Latin America . Cuba could become the centre for communist expansion .
 President Kennedy evaluated USSR-orientated Cuba as a security threat to the Western Hemisphere . Therefore, President Kennedy considered the military invasion of Cuba .
 President was terrified of invasion as it could result in retaliatory action by the USSR and possibly China . However, the President was afraid invasion would result in retaliation against the US .
 This action could be understood as a violation of the principles of selfdetermination and freedom . This action is seen as an act of violation of freedom and selfdetermination . This is not the first time this has happened in the U.S. history .
 Kennedy doubted the success of just 1,500 Cuban exiles . Despite this fact, the invasion seemed to be necessary .
 On the other hand, he was confronted with an undemocratic regime which subverted the order in Latin America, he says . On the contrary, he said: "On the other side, he faced a undemocratically-controlled regime."
 Moving away from Eisenhower and his policy could mean an accusation of appeasing Castro Castro . Moving from Eisenhower to Castro could mean accusing Castro of being appeased .
 The project of an invasion was submitted to the new President Kennedy by CIA assistant, Allan Dulles, on January 20, 1961 . The project was submitted by Dulles to Kennedy by the new president .
 Despite his sceptical approach and negative view of seven members of the government, the action was marked as approved by the government .
 The date was set on April 17, 1961, in conjunction with the location selected in the south of the Cuba island in the Bay of Pigs . The date of the attack on Cuba was set to coincide with a location chosen in the .
 Fidel Castro expected the invasion since the bombing of the air base in Havana and Santiago as well as high rise activity of Castro's regime opponents a week before . Fidel Castro is expected to expect the invasion . The invasion was expected to take place in Havana, Santiago and Santiago .
 A high alert was immediately announced for air forces to bomb the exile troop's ships . Air forces were immediately on high alert for air strikes .
 The arrest of people suspected of counter-revolutionary activity was ordered to prevent a rebellion against the regime . Simultaneously, the arrest of those suspected of anti-regime activities was ordered .
 1,200 men captured out of the total number of 1,500 men . Nevertheless, exile troops were defeated within two days . Men were killed and captured .
 Bradley: Main reasons for failure were the absence of air support during the invasion and the fact that the invasion did not initiate the rebellion among people of Cuba .
 Other factors of the failure were caused by underestimation of Castro regime from the CIA side, choice of the swampy bay to proceed with the invasion together with the second air attack .
 As a result of the debacle in the Bay of Pigs relations between the USSR and the United States were deteriorating . Consequences as a result, relations between U.S. and USSR was deteriorating .
 The prestige of Moscow increased on the contrary to decreased prestige of Kennedy and his administration . Furthermore, the prestige of the Moscow government increased .
 Operation Anadyr was a secret designation for the Soviet bases building project for Cuba's medium-range missiles, named after a river in north-eastern Siberia . TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 18 4, is dedicated to the Czech Republic's Institute of Human
 President Kennedy was assured that the Soviet Union did not and would never have its base in Cuba . The decision to build it was declared by Khrushchev on May 21, 1962 . The base was declared in 1962 .
 Khrushchev considered the U.S. President too inexperienced and intellectually based politician who would not dare to intervene against the Soviet plan . The United States President was considered too inexperienced .
 After debates with Khrushchev's closest advisors, a final decision had been made . After debates, a decision was made to remove the Soviet Union flag from Russia .
 The main ambition of Anadyr was to balance the strategic stability of military forces and to respond to the deployment of rockets in Turkey and Italy . The main aim of the new government is to balance stability of the military and security .
 Their plan was to acquaint Cuban government with Soviet's intention to build a military base . Plan was to warn Cuban government that Soviet's plans to build military base were to be carried out .
 The delegation travelled undercover with devisable names and was presented as agricultural experts . They were presented as a group of agricultural experts in disguise .
 A meeting had been assembled, where Rashidov met Fidel Castro and presented him the first draft of the potential military facility . The meeting also included a meeting with Fidel Castro, who visited the country's capital .
 Castro requested a day to think out the plan and discuss it with other members of his government . Castro requested the day to discuss the plan . Castro: "I don't think it would be a good idea"
 Castro strongly wanted the Soviet strategic base to be built . In particular, Castro wanted to build the base . Castro wanted the base built .
 Issa Plijev, the Second World War veteran was named the military commander 39 of the operation . Issa Plijev was the military leader of the mission .
 He recruited over 44,000 soldiers and sailors and the missile division . He recruited 44,500 troops and sailors, including 44,200 soldiers and . The missile division is the largest in the country .
 In the course of next months, the form of the new Soviet-Cuban treaty was discussed . In the past few months, it has been discussed by the Soviet Union .
 TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 19 40 be subject only to the Soviet leadership . TBU was subject to only Soviet leadership.
 The agreement should be concluded for five years with the possibility of further extension . The agreement is expected to be concluded in five years .
 Castro has highlighted the political significance of the treaty and suggested its title . Castro has also suggested that the treaty should be renamed . The treaty was signed in 1961 .
 First ships loaded with military technology and cargo sailed from the harbour on Anadyr River on July 12, 1962 . First ships were loaded with the military technology, cargo .
 It should have taken less than four months to get the cargo to Cuba under complete secrecy . But units responsible for the transfer of material did not know where they were going .
 Mariel, a city situated approximately 40 kilometres west of Havana, was appointed a landing place . Mariel is located about 40km west of the city .
 Nuclear warhead missiles were never completed during the installation of devices . The devices were intended to be used for nuclear warheads .
 From the beginning, they were stored and strictly guarded in Mariel port during the crisis . From the start of the crisis they were strictly guarded . They were stored from the beginning of this year .
 Nikita Khrushchev could only be triggered by direct command or permission from Nikita himself . The first time they could be triggered was in the 1960s and '60s . Nikita was the only person to trigger them .
 At the end of September, it was obvious that the predefined schedule of the operation Anadyr could not meet its end . Not all of the ships were transported by October, 20 and rocket complexes could not be in full operation sooner than a week later .
 Soviets were also not satisfied with the plan of hiding rockets and technology which had been previously developed by Rashidov's military experts . Soviets were not satisfied that the plan was to hide rockets .
 The United States was acknowledged about increased traffic in the Atlantic by secret service of the Federal Republic of Germany . The U.S. government acknowledged increased traffic .
 A large number of shipping boat between Soviet and Cuban ports must have been transcribed . The Americans were not alarmed. Even though a number of ships were transcribed, the Americans weren't alarmed .
 The course of the crisis until the declaration of the blockade . It was October 16 when the president was informed about aerial photographs from his National Security Adviser McGregor Bundy .
 From the first day of the crisis, this committee has almost continuously met in virtually same composition . The committee has been meeting in virtually the same composition since the crisis began .
 President's brother and Minister of Justice Robert Kennedy and Vice-President Lyndon Johnson attended . Ted Sorensen, Llewelyn Thompson, George Ball and Alexis Johnson were also attended .
 Pictures taken by U-2 spy planes no one was convinced of Soviet's creating a military missile base in Cuba . After examining the pictures taken by the spy planes, no one believes Soviet's base was created .
 CIA experts identified captured missiles close to San Cristobal as SS-3 and R-12 assault rifles . CIA experts identify captured missiles as weapons close to the city .
 Everyone in the Oval Hall, including Kennedy, was surprised even though there had been presumptions and indirect evidence from several Cuban refugees, that the Soviet Union was operating with military equipment .
 At the moment of revealing Soviet plans in Cuba, ExComm realized that any assurances given by Khrushchev or Ambassador Dobrynin were lies . ExComm. realized that . any assurances . given by . Khrushchevitch or . Ambassador Dobynin were . lies .
 Kennedy asked his counsellors for an explanation of how it was possible for Soviets to do so . Kennedy asked for a . explanation of why it was . possible for the Soviets to . do so. Kennedy .
 There was a predominant view that the Soviet Union did not have confidence in its intercontinental ballistic missiles . The Soviet Union wanted to achieve 47 launch ramps for its mid-range missiles, it said .
 46 Nálevka, Karibská Krize, 80. Most consultants have come to the conclusion that 46 Nálevká, Krize is the best place in the world to be buried .
 TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 21 that the situation calls for urgent solution . Proposals for an immediate air strike against 48 missile base .
 The idea of quarantine and naval blockade of the island was brought to light . The idea was raised in a bid to quell the spread of disease .
 One of the two sides of the debate is supporting military intervention in Syria . The other is supporting a blockade of Syria and the blockade of Turkey .
 Up to 32 rockets with a range of up to 1,600 kilometres were found in the images . They showed the presence of 32 rockets . The rockets are believed to be capable of launching up to 30 rockets .
 Military experts say they would be operational by the end of the week . They say they could hit important military and civilian targets in the Southeast of the United States within minutes .
 There were not one functional tee holes available on October 16, five days later, there were 20 of 49 . Even though there was not one of 49 holes available, 20 were available .
 Even the most accurate air strike would not have destroyed all of the assault missiles in Cuba, new reports show . The whole action would require bombing of a military base and subsequent invasion of a base .
 The president was sceptical about the military action, he knew that if his government would not react, the Soviets would get the impression that the U.S. was completely incompetent .
 Kennedy held a meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko on Thursday 18 . Kennedy met with Soviet foreign minister Andrey Gromyko in Moscow, Russia .
 This meeting was scheduled for a long time period and its cancellation could cause unnecessary speculations . It was scheduled to be scheduled for long periods of time and could cause speculation about it .
 Kennedy's intention was not to confront Gromyko with photographic evidence of the Soviet base, but only to listen . Kennedy wanted to listen, not confront, but to listen to the Soviet leader .
 The Soviet minister introduced the issue of threatening Cuba by the U.S. by the United States . The only aid provided to Cuba is agricultural .
 The president Kennedy felt astonished of how did Gromyko lie to his face even after reading the presidential statement pointing to the serious consequences of the deployment of the Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba . The president felt astonished .
 Gromyko assured Kennedy that there was no military base being built in Cuba and left the meeting . Despite this he did not change his mind and said there were no military bases being built there .
 The ExComm adopted the blockade by the end of Thursday . TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 22, is a university in the Czech Republic .
 The idea of quarantine triumphed among the members of the committee . As the final decision was only under president's competence, he should have clearly decided whether to run a blockade or a military action .
 The U.S. Armed Forces were supposed to prepare for the smooth process of both above-mentioned options . In the meantime, the United States Armed Forces are preparing for both options .
 President Barack Obama announced the decision to blockade Syria in a speech scheduled for Monday, October 22 . Obama said he wanted to familiarize the world with his decision in a public speech .
 U.S. needed to carry legal support from Organization of American States, which would gain the entire Western Hemisphere against Cuba and the Soviet Union on its side . "From the point of view of the United States, it was necessary to carry . support from the Organization of . American States
 Kennedy received support from his closest allies France, Great Britain, Canada and Germany . In the meantime, Kennedy received the support of France, Britain and Canada .
 President Kennedy delivered his evening speech and presented plans for the naval blockade . The crisis became a serious worldwide public matter . Events after the declaration of the blockade occurred .
 Events 55 from the previous week did not bring any attention to the world . Until then, events 55 from previous week had been quiet .
 The President announced the blockade coming into force on October 24 at 10 o'clock in the morning . The blockade is only the first step in the prepared plan, stressing out that if any ships trying to break the blockade, the United States Navy will respond .
 Khrushchev summoned to a meeting with his closest advisors in the Kremlin . The meeting took place in Moscow in the early hours of the day .
 Khrushchev became aware of the seriousness of the situation because he arrived in the session upset and irritated . He arrived at the time of the incident and became irritated .
 He obviously did not want to launch a nuclear war but only intended to push the U.S. to the corner . "He obviously didn't want to . launch a . nuclear war," he said .
 TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 23 supported by the fact that missiles in Cuba were obsolete and unsatisfactory for both the first strike and the retaliatory attack on the United States .
 The second day of the meeting of the Organization of American States was held Tuesday, October 23 . The meeting was held in Washington, D.C.
 As a surprise to the White House, all Latin American countries unanimously supported and legitimized the blockade . The White House was surprised by the support of Latin American nations .
 The ExComm has reunited in Washington and decided to interpret the issue of the crisis in the UN meeting . Meanwhile, the ExComm is in Washington to discuss the situation with the UN .
 The blockade was due to enter into force the next morning . It was discussed as for example, what would happen if any of the ships did not stop on their way to Cuba .
 The U.S. ships should avoid any military confrontation and only in the extreme case would have to shoot the enemy's bolt and rudder . The United States ships should not engage in military confrontation .
 Shattered boats should be taken to the ports of Jacksonville or Charleston . Broken boats should have been taken to ports of Charleston or Jacksonville .
 The Guantanamo base was surrounded by Cuban troops and the Warsaw Pact troops . The base was placed in combat alert . In the same day, the Guantanamo base in Cuba was placed on combat alert.
 57 measures were cancelled almost a month after the end of the crisis . Almost a month later, 57 measures are cancelled .
 The United States demanded the end of the Soviet intervention in the Caribbean Sea . The U.S. demanded an end to Soviet intervention .
 The Soviets accused the United States of aggressive politics towards Cuba . On the other hand, the Soviets demanded the immediate abolition of the blockade . The U.S. was accused of being aggressive politics by the Soviets .
 This led to an inevitable confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet members of the Soviet Union . This led for the United States and the Soviets to be involved in the conflict .
 U.S. representative Adlai Stevenson was equipped with photographs of military missiles bases awaiting the right opportunity to unveil them .
 After exposing these photographs, Cuba and the Soviet Union have lost the support from the Third World states . Cuba and Russia have lost their support from third World states, says CNN.com .
 Stevenson suggested the whole situation be investigated by the United Nations Inspection Panel . Stevenson suggested that these photographs and 59 photos should be investigated .
 At ten o'clock in the morning of October 24, the blockade came into force . The blockade came in force at 10 a.m. on October 24 .
 US military Forces moved to standby 2, followed by readiness for warfare . The US military forces moved to stand ready for war .
 Robert McNamara was responsible for the implementation of the blockade and the naval forces were to be subject to his direct command . He often had to argue with his military commanders, even with respect to his competences .
 McNamara 60 never had complete control over the Navy operations during the crisis . McNamara never had a complete control of the Navy .
 One of the Soviet submarines took the position between the ships and approached along the border with them . The tense situation was complemented by the report .
 The Essex aircraft carrier was supposed to contact the submarine an identify it . The Essex plane was meant to send a signal to identify the submarine .
 According to his brother Robert, President Kennedy was experiencing the worst fears during the crisis at this time . According to Robert's brother, the president was in the midst of the crisis .
 At 10 o'clock and 25 minutes, it was reported that the ships had stopped it's moving towards the sea . At 10:30pm, the ships were reported to have stopped moving towards sea .
 On the Soviet side, during these events, Khrushchev was lost in his indecision . The Soviet leader was also lost in indecision during the events in the 1960s .
 First, he ordered the Soviet submarines to return fire immediately . But on the day the blockade came into force, he suggested shutting down most of the ships .
 He then announced that all the necessary weapons and materials were already in Cuba and hence decided not to overcome the situation . The Cuban president announced that the situation had already been resolved .
 After finding that the Soviet ships did not brake maritime blockade and that Khrushchev has not yet taken any retaliatory action in Berlin, the Americans gained confidence . According to them, the isolation of Cuba gained international credibility .
 Other aerial photographs pointing to the fact that the construction of rocket bases continues at an extraordinary speed, were sent to the White House on Thursday .
 Khrushchev declared that the situation over the Caribbean territory should be resolved peacefully . On that day, Khrushchev declared that . The situation was resolved peacefully in the Caribbean .
 He proposed that the Soviet would withdraw missiles in exchange for the U.S. not invading Cuba . He made a proposal to dismantle missile facilities in Cuba and withdraw missiles .
 First inspection of the passing ship was carried out at the border of the blockade . The day after that, the first inspection of a passing ship had been carried out . The first inspection took place on the day after .
 TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 25 63 Lebanon and leased by the Soviets . TBU is located in Lebanon and was leased by Soviets .
 Kennedy decided to demonstrate to Khrushchev the seriousness of the blockade and let it search trough . The blockade was meant to be a show of seriousness .
 The ship did not transport any weapons or military material so it was allowed to continue the journey . The ship was given permission to continue its journey after the incident .
 The President was more serious about the invasion of Cuba but was told by McNamara that this action would not be uncomplicated and easy to implement and would require the lives of many U.S. soldiers .
 This information, however, turned out to be counterfeit and was based on an interview by two Americans journalists . This information was actually based on a fake interview with two Americans .
 First Secretary decided to end the crisis by offering Kennedy a peaceful solution . This report, however, shocked the First Secretary .
 In this mood, he sent an emotional letter to the White House describing the war as a world-wide disaster for all people . He assured the United States that missiles in Cuba would never be used for the attack and suggested the possibility of withdrawing the missiles in exchange for Cuba's 65 safety
 In this letter, the Soviets admitted the existence of missiles for the first time . The Soviets admitted that they had missiles in the Soviet Union in the letter .
 Khrushchev's office sent a second letter to the ExComm, carrying a more formal spirit than the previous one . The letter was carried in a much more formal tone than the first one .
 The Soviet Union demanded the withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey and Italy . At the same time, the Soviet Union promised not to take any action on Turkey .
 President Kennedy was aware of this exchange trade and its disadvantages for both the U.S. and NATO allies . President Kennedy knew about the disadvantages of this trade trade .
 President Obama did not want to step into a warfare because of the presence of outdated Jupiter missiles in Turkey . After all, he did not seek to withdraw missiles under the Soviet threat but wanted to step in .
 Everyone was surprised by the contents of the above-mentioned letter in the White House . The letter was sent by President Barack Obama .
 Llewellyn Thompson suggested that the President should only answer the letter from October 26 and completely ignore the latest one . Thompson suggests that the letter should only be sent October 26 . Thompson also suggested that Obama should only respond to the October 26 letter .
 TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 26 Robert Kennedy and Ted Sorensen produced a response which was signed by the President on Saturday and delivered to the Moscow in the evening that day . The President signed the letter and delivered it to Moscow .
 The high-speed construction of jet 68 bombers IL-28 continued in San Cristobal . The construction of the aircraft continued on Saturday . The aircraft are currently being built in the area of the country .
 The most serious situation, which nearly threw both superpowers into the war on Saturday, October 27, was the downing of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft . Rudolf Anderson was killed in the U.2 downing .
 Spies have been conducting a series of spy aerial missions over Cuba in recent days .
 Even the President's advisor Kenny O'Donnell commented the situation as the most unpredictable and most depressing during the time of Kennedy's agency at the White House . Everything was about to escalate the crisis .
 President stopped military action planned for Sunday morning against Cuba and the Soviet Union . President himself stopped the military action .
 He decided to negotiate despite the action supported by 71 his military chiefs . President Barack Obama's decision to negotiate was backed by 71 military officers .
 Robert clarified that the U.S. did not want to launch a conflict . Robert introduced a letter addressed to Khrushchev .
 No agreement between the U.S. and the USSR could contain a commitment to withdraw missiles from Turkey but he indicated that 72 the President is willing to withdraw them within the next few months .
 The U.S. is demanding an immediate response, which unless it involves the withdrawal of missiles, will take military operations against Cuba on Monday, October 29 .
 The President warned through the Pentagon, the U.S. headquarters in Germany and the West Berlin against the Soviet attack . The President of the United States warned the Soviet Union against the attack .
 The Soviet Union reply arrived in the White House saying that the Soviets are interrupting the work on missile devices and are 68 Nálevka, Karibská Krize, 117 . The Soviets replied that they were working on a missile device .
 The Soviet Union has agreed to remote the military material, and later, the United States has pledged to withdraw its missiles from Turkey . TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 27 dismantling them before the return to the USSR, 75 .
 Khrushchev and his advisors were fully aware of huge predominance in both nuclear warheads and the number of long-distance bombers in the U.S. side .
 The crisis ended and President Kennedy, ExComm and the rest of the American public could calm down . President Kennedy and ExComm were in the midst of the crisis .
 Kennedy has received great recognition for his treatment of patients and resolving the crisis by diplomatic means . Kennedy's treatment of the crisis has been described as a 'miracle'
 Kennedy announced the official end of the crisis at a press conference on November 20, 1962 . Kennedy announced that the crisis had officially ended in 1962 .
 The main variable of the solution of the crisis was certainly time factor. Time factor was certainly the time factor, says German politician .
 President Kennedy appreciated an extraordinary report of CIA after the discovery of missile bases . CIA report: CIA found missile bases in the United States . President Kennedy was impressed with CIA report .
 If the incriminating photographs were taken about three weeks before, there would have been more time for consideration of all alternatives by the US administration . However, if the photos were taken three weeks earlier, the administration would consider all alternatives .
 The decision would not be affected by the possible completion of Soviet nuclear missiles in few days and its preparedness . Decision would be not affected by possibility of Soviet missile completion in days .
 Kennedy's top priority was to determine whether the missiles are already operational and if not when they will be completed . Kennedy: "It's not clear if the missiles will be operational or if they will not be completed"
 The uncertainty about the time which played the significant role was a problem . While considering possible alternatives, the uncertainty over the time was a major problem .
 It is assumed that president would insist on the detailed and more sophisticated action after experience in Bay of Pigs .
 The alternative of air attack depended on the exact location of all nuclear missiles on the island and those had to be precisely targeted and destroyed . The alternative was to attack the island's nuclear missiles in an air attack .
 The rain season is during October a frequent phenomenon in Cuba supported by numerous occurrence of hurricanes . These alternatives, however, were time-consuming .
 McNamara argued that for air attack it would be necessary to know whether the missiles are working or not with certainty with certainty . McNamara though argued that .
 Previous considerations and estimates were still based on photographs taken during espionage flight . Previous considerations were still . based on photos taken during the flight .
 Kremlin still suspected that Anadyr's operation was secret . U.S. administration had to use the moment of surprise to surprise the Kremlin .
 If the completion of missiles were announced to the public, the U.S. would suddenly be in a subordinate position . The United States would suddenly lose control of North Korea .
 The political approach against Cuba has become an oppositional instrument to possible criticism of the current administration since the Cuban Revolution . Cuba has been an opposition tool to possible criticisms of the government since the revolution .
 In his presidential campaign, Kennedy has blamed Republicans for allowing Cuba to become a communist area . Kennedy has said Republicans have allowed Cuba to be a communist .
 After he took the office, he became a target of criticism of the Republicans . On the contrary, 83 after he took office, 83 Republicans criticized him .
 The preelection campaign for November elections was graduating in summer 1962 . It was the first time November elections had been held .
 The Cuban question became a dominant theme in Republican's pre-election campaign . Cuban question was a dominant issue in the Republican presidential campaign .
 As a result, people would call for action which should have been promised by Republicans . Republicans should have promised action, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 On the one hand, it was the Republican demand to intervene Cuba and influencing U.S. public opinion . On the other hand, the Cuban government is influencing American public opinion, it is influencing the U.N.
 There is no evidence proving the presence of offensive weapons in Cuba . On the other hand, there was no evidence that there was any evidence of an offensive weapons .
 President was assured by Khrushchev and other Soviet officials that imported military arsenal serves only to defend Cuba and can be no threat to the U.S. President was also assured that imported weapons only serve only to protect Cuba .
 TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 30 president during the pre-crisis and crisis weeks . TBU is a university in the city of Zlíni .
 He could not allow the voters to start seeing him as a weak and indecisive leader because of the criticism of the Republicans and thus to reduce the electoral preferences of the Democrats .
 Despite the lack of evidence of the presence of offensive weapons and persistent persuasion of the Soviets could aggravate not only Soviet-American relations but also alliance relations between Western allies . On the contrary impulsive responses to the Soviet military presence in Cuba could seriously aggravate relations between the two countries .
 Diplomacy factor influencing Kennedy administration's decision-making process is a diplomatic factor that includes the issue of the legality of the possible military action of the United States towards Cuba . Concerns about the legalities of the U.S. military action and concerns about the allies' reaction to the
 The first aspect of diplomacy factor was closely linked to the minister of foreign affairs Dean Rusk . During the first talks, there was a predominant view that military intervention against Soviet missiles in Cuba would be inevitable .
 Rusk argued that it is necessary for the U.S. administration not to underestimate the legality of any military action in the context of international law . Rusk argues that the United States should not underestimate the legal implications of any action in relation to the law .
 His was convinced that in order to provide support to the public and the allies the legality of the action is a necessity . He said he was convinced .
 Kennedy's administration considered several options to justify a possible military intervention against Cuba . Since the beginning of the crisis, Kennedy's . administration has been considering several options .
 Ministry of Justice has submitted a proposal to appeal to the doctrine of self-defence . Ministry has submitted proposal for appeal to self defence doctrine .
 Foreign Ministry's legal department says doctrines of self-defence cannot be invoked when no attack was thrown . This possibility was however disproved by the Foreign Ministry .
 Legal issue would also have to be addressed in the case of a naval blockade . A naval blockade would also be a legal issue, according to the UN .
 Kennedy decided to use term 'quarantine', which better represented the American counter-attack . With regard to the possible problems associated with defining the blockade in the context of international law .
 TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 31 one knew what quarantine signify and as a result, the likelihood of a violation of international law would have been reduced .
 The second aspect of this factor is the fear of allies' reaction in the event of a surprise U.S. military attack on Cuba . The fear is that allies will react to a US military strike on Cuba if it happens .
 Kennedy could not be sure of the reaction of Western allies in the event of a surprise air attack . Leaving aside the query of what would Khrushchev's reaction be or the moral dilemma of the U.S. The U.K. could not know if the West would react to
 This alternative entailed a high risk of Soviet retaliation which was primarily aimed at West Berlin or bases in Italy and Turkey . This option entailed the risk of a Soviet retaliation aimed at the West Berlin .
 The question was whether the western allies of the US would be willing to risk launching a nuclear war because of the deployment of offensive weapons on the western hemisphere and the U.S. feels threatened .
 Kennedy's administration was concerned that possible supporting or rejecting the United States could cause a confusion and conjecture in the NATO .
 A psychological factor had to be included in the decision-making process by Kennedy and his administration . Kennedy: "Psychology is a big part of the decision to make this decision"
 Khrushchev himself and the inability of US administration to understand his intentions and the distrust of U.S. administration against him . This determinant implied two approaches to Soviet administration and Khrushche himself .
 Kennedy's advisors often considered the reason why Khrushchev's team had organized such a risky action because they hoped that understanding the motives would lead them to better determination of an appropriate alternative .
 There is no consensual output defining the reason for the Anadyr operation . Even nowadays after the end of the bipolar conflict, when all declassified records of negotiations made during this period and testimonies of top leaders are available, there is no consensus .
 Kennedy administration faced the more complicated decision-making process . Kennedy's administration had faced a more complicated process than the previous administration .
 The Soviet Union was indeed sealed and Khrushchev's actions were known only from his public statements or appearances . The Soviets were sealed by the end of the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 The United States did not know whether Khrushchev had faced internal pressures . The U.S. had no detailed knowledge of the tensions in the Eastern Bloc . The White House had no details of the internal pressures in the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. administration has even wondered if Khrushchev was still holding a leading position and is the one who decided fully . The United States administration has wondered if the former Soviet leader was still leading in the country .
 The resolution of the German situation in West Berlin was one Khrushchev's main interests . The resolution was one of the main interests of the Soviet-Russian leader .
 The United States administration believed that Soviets could propose a 92 possible way to resolve the exchange of Cuba for Berlin . The U.S. administration believed the Soviets could have proposed a possible way of resolving the Cuba-Bergen exchange .
 If the U.S. did not face the Soviet challenge, it would shake the Western Bloc's confidence in the possible protection from the United States . The U.K. would have to face the challenge, the author says .
 The argument about the defence of Cuba against possible US intervention was corrupted by the verity that the Soviet Union equipped Cuba with offensive nuclear missiles of medium and long range . The argument was corrupted into the idea that Cuba had nuclear missiles .
 Kennedy's advisors were not convinced that the Soviet operation had been triggered in order to start a war . As it is obvious from above from above, Kennedy's advisor was not convinced .
 Diplomatic pressure on the Kremlin was one of the possible alternatives which could significantly influence the United States response to Soviet military activity . This caused a relatively rapid rejection of diplomatic pressure on Russia .
 Khrushchev lied to Kennedy and his advisors from the very beginning, says Krushchev . TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 33 arsenal began on July 12 . The arsenal began to be used against the wishes of the Soviet Union .
 In this case, the United States administration could not start negotiations as they did not know precisely whether Khrushchev would be able to meet the agreed conditions .
 U-2 reconnaissance flight proved that Soviet missiles had been built in Cuba . Photographs were presented to the President by the President .
 Reports did not contain any information on the possible installation of offensive weapons on the island . Even though the United States administration has been informed by the CIA about increased Soviet activity in the Caribbean .
 After the burst of Cuban relations Khrushchev declared that Soviet Union did not need to build missile base outside the USSR and that the missiles were being deployed purely as a support to the Cuban 98 people . After the bursting of Cuban Soviet relations Khruschev declared .
 During September and first two weeks in October, Soviet Union delimited the possible installation of offensive weapons in Cuba several . Soviet Union: During September, first . two weeks of October, possible . installation of . offensive weapons .
 October 18, two days after Kennedy had clear evidence of the existence of offensive weapons in Cuba, Khrushchev was still refusing any activity . October 18: Two days after . Kennedy had evidence of . evidence of offensive . weapons in . Cuba; Khrush . refused any activity. October
 The fact that the United States and the Soviet Union were able to solve such a serious situation by diplomatic means had a positive impact on the development of the Cold War . TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 34 7 Consequences .
 The American Soviet rapprochement increased America's popularity together with presidential prestige . The American-Russian relationship increased the country's popularity with the USSR .
 The confidence of the United States defence guarantee has rapidly decreased in Europe . Europe's confidence in the U.S. defence guarantee is rapidly decreasing .
 The Soviet Union lost its ability to have a strategic base near the U.S. Therefore, the Soviet Union was unable to have such a base .
 There was growing doubt about America's commitment to defending Europe in the event of a conflict with the Soviet Union . At the same time, the security guarantee for Cuba was secured as well as removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey .
 Kennedy denied Soviet requests to remove missiles from Italy and Turkey . Kennedy was afraid of the loss of prestige within NATO . He was afraid to lose prestige in NATO .
 NATO Council meeting in December 1962 approved U.S. government's procedure during the crisis . It is unlikely allies were aware of the strict secrecy of the pledge .
 The removal of Jupiter missiles was presented as a refinement and renewal of NATO armaments within the wider nuclear power regrouping . The removal is seen as a reflection of NATO's wider nuclear capability .
 The United States has consistently denied any connection between the withdrawal of Jupiter missiles and the crisis . The U.S. government has said it has no connection between Jupiter missiles withdrawal and crisis .
 Kennedy and his administration were criticized by right-wing opponents for not taking advantage of the opportunity and not resolving Cuban problem forever . The United States had a clear predominance in both the number of strategic nuclear and conventional weapons .
 Others have reproached his willingness to risk a nuclear war just to delay that one day the U.S. would be equally threatened by Soviet nuclear weapons .
 They were blamed also for the factual support of Castro's regime . Cuban exiles could not forgive them for the promise of non-aggression in Cuba .
 Castro did not allow the Americans or the UN inspectors to review the complete withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba and did not terminate supporting of the guerrilla movement in other Latin American countries . Kennedy refused to officially confirm the non-aggression commitment .
 In 1963, Kennedy and his advisors discussed possible ways to weaken the alliance between Cuba and the USSR . Kennedy considered negotiations with Castro who seemed to be interested in improving relations between the U.S. and Cuba .
 Kennedy talked about peace and warned of the dangers that nuclear weapons could bring . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 He called for cooperation and negotiations especially on the issue of an arm race stressing out that it was a common American and Soviet interest to avoid the war .
 He relayed that consulting with the US security experts is not always always the best choice . Therefore, he relayed that consultation with the U.S. security experts may not always be the best .
 This approach is evident from the Oval Office meetings during the 13 days . This approach was evident from President Barack Obama's visit to the U.S.
 During the Crisis, Kennedy was influenced by his experience and knowledge . Kennedy was inspired by his experiences during the crisis .
 He thought of the next generation and what would squeeze of the nuclear knob mean to them . He said he thought of his own generation and the future of nuclear power .
 The U.S. president has faced threats and ultimate from the USSR since his oath as the 35th president . TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 37: The United States president faced threats from the Soviet Union .
 At the end of World War II it turned out that the United States and the USSR would not be able to cooperate together due to different ideological opinions . However, even those countries will compete thanks to the great potential.
 The Soviet Union did not admire the considerable influence of the U.S. in Europe, it says . The United States was not admired by the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets maintained with the United States peaceful coexistence in Germany . This measures should be only temporary .
 The Soviet Union did not have any military base near the U.S. Therefore they focused on Cuba and Fidel Castro . The Soviets had no military bases near the United States .
 First state emerged with the Western Hemisphere located in the socalled Eastern Bloc . This inclination signified the first state emerged in the society's first state .
 This was of course, not accepted by the United States who felt threatened . This was the case, and was not accepted .
 The U.S. interrupted all diplomatic relations with Cuba and began to plan a putsch in Castro's Cuba . Therefore, they interrupted diplomatic relations and began a plan to oust Castro's regime . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Cuban government in 2009 .
 This plan took place shortly after Kennedy's election to the White House but ended up with a massive international scandal for Kennedy's government . This plan was shortly after he was elected to the presidency in 1968 .
 The Soviet Union took advantage of the situation and with the direct support of Fidel Castro deployed nuclear weapons to Cuba . Fidel Castro was the prime minister of Cuba in the 1950s .
 The United States discovered the military equipment in Cuba later, they did not provoke a military attack . Even though the U.S. discovered the equipment, it was not a military strike .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba did not serve only as a tool for the intimidation of the U.S. but also for a possible trade . The missiles were used to intimidate the United States, but also to trade .
 Soviets and U.S. did not want to launch a war on this level . Both countries have agreed to withdraw their missiles from their bases simultaneously . The countries have also agreed to negotiate a compromise .
 Thanks to ExComm advisors was the whole crisis resolved diplomatically . Thanks to the ExComm, the crisis was finally solved diplomatically.
 Khrushchev accepted the withdrawal of 38 nuclear missiles from Cuba in exchange for the withdrawn of nuclear weapons from Turkey and Italy . The deal was a compromise, which concerned withdrawal of TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 38 nukes from Cuba .
 Third, it was the international pressure from the United Nations which forced both sides to act and come up with a peaceful solution . The United Nations was forced to act after the incident .