 Shadow of U.S. reconnaissance plane is seen on the foreground . Shadow of the United States reconnaissance plane was visible in the background .
 These portions of the text were omitted from this article . Editor Mary S McAuliffe was editor of CIA History .
 A number of documents in this collection have been excerpted, some to re­duce their length, and others to speed declassification of missile crisis information by omitting irrelevant material .
 Most of the material omitted for reasons of length or relevance in our published excerpts will be declassified and made available to the public . When the Historical Review Group systematically reviews these and other missile crisis records for declassification and release to the National Archives, we expect that most of these material will
 Collection includes many of CIA's most important documents on the Cuban missile crisis . Collection in this volume includes many important documents . J Kenneth McDonald Chief, History Staff .
 The discovery of missiles in Cuba brought him back to Washington on the evening of 16 October . He remained in Washington for the rest of the crisis .
 It should be noted that these documents, many of them written hastily during a time of national emergency, contain occasional errors .
 Dean Acheson, Dean and Stewart Alsop were Dean of State . Adm. George W. Anderson, George W., Jr., was the Secretary of State of the USSR . Mary S McAuliffe Deputy Chief, History Staff .
 Charles Bohlen, Charles E Newly appointed Ambassador to France, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union . Charles Bowles, Chester Bowles and McGeorge are President's Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian and Latin American Affairs . Clarence Cannon, Clarence Representative Chairman, House Appropriations Committee .
 CIA Director Gen. Stanley Grogan, Col. Stanley G. Col. Roswell Graybeal, Gen. Sidney N. Chief, Offensive Missiles Division, Office of Scientific Intelligence, CIA . CIA Secretary of Defense John Kerry, Secretary of State George W. Bush and Secretary of
 Operation MONGOOSE was a CIA operation to carry out Operation MONGOSE . Operation MONOOSE was the brainchild of the Soviet Union . CIA Director William Harvey was the CIA chief of the operation .
 Helms, Richard M Deputy Director for Plans, CIA . Hickenlooper, Bourke B Senator Chairman, Senate Republican Policy Committee . Hilsman, Roger, Jr. Senator President Pro Temp. of the Senate .
 U.S. Supreme Allied Commander, Europe and Commander in Chief, United States European Command . David Stewart, Col. David Stewart and Lt. David O'Neill were the two commanders of Europe .
 Senator Chairman of Senate Armed Services Committee Saltonstall, Leverett, is a Democrat . He is a member of the House of Representatives from Washington .
 Scoville, Herbert , Jr. is the Republican Party Chairman of the Senate Republican Conference . Scott, Paul Scott is the chairman of the Republican Conference in the United States .
 U.S. Representative to the UN and Representative in the Security Council . Rep. Adlai E. Stevenson was the United States representative in the UN . Gen. Walter C, Jr., Gen. George A Senator Secretary, Senate Democratic Conference .
 USA President's Military Representative until 1 October 1962; thereafter Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff . Thompson, Llewellyn E. E. Jr., Jr. was President's military representative until 31 October 1962 .
 Former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, William Tidwell, William A. Assistant to Deputy Director for Intelligence, CIAU Thant Secretary-General of the United Nations . Carl Vinson, Carl. Vinson was Secretary of the U.N. Thant .
 The CIA, CIA, USIA, CIA and Cuban exile groups were involved in the Cuban exile group . AlPHA-66 was the group that led to the death of Fidel Castro .
 Construction begins on on SAM sites at Sagua laGrande, Caibarien, & Sancti Spiritus . SAM sites will be built in the next decade .
 Construction of the remaining SAM sites began in late September or early October . The remaining sites were considered less vital to the protection of offensive missile bases in Cuba .
 To analyze the situation in Cuba and to estimate the pros­pects over the next year or so, with particular reference to Castro's relations with the Communists and to the potential for resistance to his regime . The best way to analyze Cuba's situation is to analyze Castro's relationship with Communists .
 By force of circumstances, the USSR is becoming more deeply committed to preserving and strengthening the Castro regime . The USSR is increasingly committed to preserve and strengthen Castro regime, writes Julian Zelizer .
 Cuba's armed forces are loyal to the personal leadership of the Castro brothers . The Cuban armed forces have been loyal to their personal leadership .
 We believe it unlikely that Cuba will provide Cuba with the capability to undertake major independent military operations overseas . We also believe it is unlikely that the Bloc will station in Cuba Bloc combat units of any description .
 The Cuban armed forces are well able to intimidate the general population and to suppress any popular insurrection likely to develop in present circumstances . The armed forces will be able to frighten the general public, says the Cuban president .
 The Cuban economy is in deep trouble, in part because of the U.S. embargo and a shortage of convertible foreign exchange . Agricultural and industrial mismanagement is blamed for the country's economic woes .
 The Castro regime retains the positive support of about 20 percent of the population, but disaffection is increasing . Disaffection has increased in Cuba since the Castro regime began in 1961 .
 This trend is manifested in growing passive resistance and in occasional open demonstrations of resentment . This trend has been manifested in the past few years in the United States .
 Few dare to accept the risks of organized active resistance in present circumstances, for fear of the regime's massive apparatus for surveillance and repression . Few, however, dare to . accept the risk of . organized active . resistance .
 If arms and supplies became availahle and if confidence was created in the likelihood of outside support for a major Cuban uprising, resistance activity and potential would increase .
 On August 10th at a nutting In Secretary Rusk's Conference Room attended by Rusk, Johnson, McNamara, Gilpatric, Bundy, Bundy and Bundy .
 McCone reported on the sudden importation of materiel — at that time the characteristic of which was unidentified -and Soviet personnel . McCone speculated that this could be electronic equipment for use against Canaveral and/or military equipment including medium range ballistic missiles .
 On August 21st at a meeting in Secretary Rusk's office attended by the same group . The same group held a meeting at the same time in the same office .
 McCone again reviewed the situation as it developed since August 10th . McCone reported definite information on surface to air missiles . He again speculated on the probability of medium range ballistic missiles .
 On August 22nd McCone gave the same information to the President, adding certain details concerning the number of Soviet and Chineese personnel who had recently entered Cuba as reported .
 On August 23rd in a meeting with the President, Rusk, McNamara, Gilpatric, General Taylor, Bandy and others, McCone again reviewed the situation . He questioned the need for the extensive SAM installations .
 The same reasoning was applied in discussions with Senator Russell's Subcommittees, Chairman Vinson's Subcommittee and in private talk with Chairman Cannon prior to McCone's departure on August 23rd .
 U.S. might face prospect of Soviet ahort-range surface-to-surface missiles of portable type in Cuba . Could command important targets of southeast United States .
 On September 13th McCone received communication from Carter stating that the BNE continued to feel that the installation of SA 2s is most reasonably explained by other than a desire to hide MRBM build-up .
 I would lika to talk with you from Norstad's headquarters to the White House or Pentagon situation room, tonight between 1700 and 1800 your time, tonight . We'll be talking to Norstad from 1700-1800 your time .
 Z can envisage a Soviet plan to package missile, control and operating equipment in a way that a unit could b* mad* operational a few hours after a site cleared and a modest concrete pad poured .
 Do not wish to be overly alarming this matter but believe CIA and community must keep government informed of danger of surprise and also that detection of preparatory steps possibly beyond oar capability may be beyond oars capability .
 Press reports say there exists a clear demarcation between defensive and offensive preparations . I question if we can be sur­surrounded of this, he says . We need to be able to make sure we are ready to defend ourselves, he adds .
 I recognise Cuban policy decisions most delicate and beyond Agency or my competence . Cuban policy is most delicate, beyond Agency's competence, he says .
 Acting DCI proposed an overflight which would cover the entire north and south perimeter of Cuba east of Havana and out to the eastern tip of Oriente Province except for an area in the immediate vicinity of Santa Clara where four SAM sites were known to exist .
 It is reported that because of Husk's concern for the safety of the U-2 in view of the Sakhaolin violation on 7 September and the ChiNat loss on 10 September, the sense of the meeting that CIA be permitted to make 4 flights against Cuba, two peripheral and
 On October 4th McCone noted to the Special Croup that there had been no coverage of the center of Cuba and more particularly the entire western end of the Island .
 DCI objected strenuously to the limitations which had been, placed on overflights . There arose a considerable discussion (with some heat) as to whether limitations had or not placed on CIA by the Special Group . CIA requested to prepare a comprehensive plan for aerial survey of Cuba .
 Reviewed JC3 proposals and it was agreed that a U-2 flight flying frorn south to north across the western part of Cuba where at least two SAM sites were known to exist should be undertaken promptly .
 On October 15th at a Special Meeting (and prior to receipt of the results of the October Hth flight), two additional U-2 missions to cover all of Cuba were approved . This was concurred in by higher authority .
 Information available to the Agency since August 10th indicated that the extent of the Soviet supply operations was much greater than had been reported . There were indications that construction work was undertaken by Soviet personnel, technicians with newly delivered Soviet equipment . While the nature of the construction was not known, it was
 DCI then stated that on August 10th in discussing the arguments for and against the so-called stepped up Plan. DCI said that on that day, DCI had discussed the arguments against the stepped-up Plan.
 The DCI had stated that continuing Soviet aid and technical assistance -will present the United States with a more formidable problem in the future than it now confronts or has confronted in the past .
 McCone then stated that con­clusive evidence indicated such a stepped-up Soviet effort . McCone said the evidence indicated that such a step-up effort was possible .
 DCI then read 21 August paper entitled, ""Recent Soviet Military Aid to Cuba"" as prepared by DD/L . He then referred to paper of office of the office of National Estimates, subject, ""Soviet View of the Cuban Economy"" emphasizing the conclusion that under energetic Soviet direction,
 CIA concluded that Soviet economists in analyzing Cuba would conclude that in supporting Cuba the Soviets were not involving themselves with a permanent liability . Therefore, the CIA's conclusion was that there was an opportunity of creating a viable and reasonably prosperous economy which, while not a showcase, would always be an annoyance
 DCI referred to the 15th August paper of the Board of National Estimates, subject, ""The Soviet Stake in Cuba"" and read the summary of this paper which is in numbered paragraph 7, page 3 . DCI then referred to a paper which was published by the British government
 DCI reviewed a chronology of unevaluated reports on recent Soviet military aid to Cuba, 21 August, and noted my reference to maps; location of the reported activities . In support of the above DCI .
 A blockade of Cuba would automatically bring about a blockade of Berlin, it was felt . It was felt that drastic action on a missile site or other military installation of the Soviets in Cuba would bring about similar action by the Soviets with . respect to our bases and numerous missile sites, particularly Turkey
 There is a reluctance, as previously, to the commitment of military forces' because of the task involved and also because of retaliatory actions of the Soviets elsewhere throughout the world . Also, there is also a reluctance to commit forces to the task because of Russia's actions elsewhere .
 McNamara expressed strong feelings that we should take every possible aggressive action against Castro regime . McNamara said intelligence, sabotage and guerrilla warfare should be used to divide the regime .
 "To date we had exper­ienced a very tight internal security situation, and probably this would become more so in the future," he said . "Probably [will] become more secure," he added .
 Attorney General questioned the feasibility of provoking an action against Guantanamo which would permit us to retaliate, or involving a third country in some way .
 The meeting was inconclusive with respect to any particular course of action . The meeting ended up inconclusive .
 It was felt that the President should be informed on the evolving situation and the DCI agreed to brief him at the Meeting on Wednesday, August 22nd at 6 o'clock . The meeting will take place at 6 p.m. on August 22 .
 McCone reviewed all of the substance of the August 21st briefing of the Secretary of State, Defense and others . McCone also explained in considerable detail the personal report concerning his personal observauonsans and the observations of his confidantes during a recent trip to Cuba .
 President expressed concern, but agreed with General Taylor and DCI that any policy matters would be discussed at the forthcoming meeting of the Principals to be held at the White House on August 23rd .
 McCone advised that President had been briefed on the Cuban situation but added the information given usk advocated Lnforming Canadians and all NATO allies of growing seriousness oi situation .
 The president requested a continuing analysis of the number and type of Soviet and Oriental personnel imported into Cuba . The president also asked to know whether construction involved SAM sites might differ from the ground sites .
 DDCI should have Board of National Estimates working continuously on this analysis . Board of national estimates should be working continuously, DDC says . Board should also be working on the impact of this analysis.
 I £elt Cuba was our most serious problem, I stated in a private conversation with Robert Kennedy, I said . I also added, in my opinion, Cuba was the key to all of Latin America; if Cuba succeeds, we can expect most of Latin American to fall . If Cuba
 The arrival of four to five thousand Soviet/Bloc technicians and possibly military personnel during July-August . Proposed plan of action for Cuba in the light of the arrival of 4 to 5,000 Soviet-bloc technicians .
 Arrival of many ship loads of equipment and materiel during July and August . Many shiploads of equipment, materiel and equipment arrived during the summer .
 Modified plan will contribute to intelligence gathering and will impede Castro regime's economic progress, but will not be sufficient to frustrate the regime's progress in view of the evidences of substantial Soviet technical assistance . Modified plan would contribute importantly .
 Such a Cuba would also serve as a possible location for MRBMs, for COMINT and ELINT facilities targetted against U.S. activities, most particularly Canaveral, and finally as an ECM station which might adversely affect our space and missile work . Being dominated by Moscow,
 An immediate continuing aggressive political action is designed to awaken and alarm all of Latin America and all of the free world as to the extreme dangers inherent in the present Cuban situation . The U.S. should take action to wake up to the dangers of the Cuban situation, President Obama says .
 U.S. should take steps to alarm the people, through the United Nations and through the Organization of American States and its subcommittees, by contact with each free world country .
 General Carter called Mr Cline to say that he had just completed a telephone conversation with the President . According to the President's instructions, the clamps were to remain on the release of certain information concerning Cuba except for the barest minimum access .
 This instruction was interpreted to permit the release of a single copy of the report concerning Cuba to OCI for them to use in preparing a briefing with a deadline of 7-30m . OCI was instructed to allow the release to use the report to prepare the briefing .
 All recipients of these copies to be advised that there is to be no further dissemination except on a minimum need-to-know basis to those people who might need to beccme involved in the preparation of the President .
 Diey were also to be advised that no actions were to be taken on the basis of the information . No action should be taken based on the information, says Diey .
 August ccmfiras extensive Soviet nllitary deliveries to Cuba were made to Cuba . August was the month of Soviet military supplies to the island nation .
 Surface-to-air missile sites, guided missile boats, and additional land armaments were observed . Surface to air missile sites were observed in the U.S.
 The smaII amount of permanent construction at these sites and the speed of the work indicate the program is proceeding on a crash basis . The program is continuing on a 'crash basis'
 The pattern now emerging suggests as many as 24 sites may eventually ""be aet up" — enough to ""blanket the entire island" B. B .
 At least 8 Komar-class missile boats have been delivered to Cuba in recent weeks . The Komar class boats are the latest in a long line of missile boats .
 PT-like boats carry two missile launchers each, with the radar guided missile effective against surface targets to ranges of between 15 and 17 miles .
 Some Cuban naval personnel have received training in the USSR, but it is not known if this included Komar training .
 These boats are in addition to 13 or more torpedo boats and 6 submarine chasers delivered by the USSR earlier this year . These boats were added to the USSR's fleet of submarine boats .
 The photography shows that current deliveries to Cuba also contain land armaments, including tanks and possibly self-propelled guns .
 Reports indicate other shipments have contained artillery, tanks, and possibly combat aircraft, but these are not confirmed .
 The photography of 29 August turned up the highest number of MIG aircraft yet noted, some 37 . The photography was taken on 29 August in a bid to find out what happened .
 At least 1,700 Soviet military technicians arrived in Cuba in late July acd early August in coonection wlth these military activities . At least 2,000 Soviet military personnel arrived in the country in July and August .
 At least 1,300 more Soviets are arriving unannounced this veek; no reports an their activities so far . No reports of their activities yet .
 Additional bloc personnel probably have arrived on some of the cargo ships . Still additional bloc personnel are expected to arrive .
 USSR-Cuba Comminique of 2 September 12. Annex A Surface-to-Air Missile Deployment in Cuba . Annex A: Cuba's Air Defense Capabilities . Annex B: Description of Komar-dass Missile Boat . Annex D: Cuba has air defense capabilities .
 Action Generated by DCI Cables . Conceming Cuban Low-Level Photography and Offensive Weapons . Cables are designed to conceal Cuban weapons .
 General Lernnitzer said use of RF -101 or F8U aircraft flown by U.S. pilots would be feasible from the military point of view . At the Special Group Meeting the following day, . said that . use of . RF-101 or . F8
 General Carter informed Secretary Gilpatric on 1 September that the General and Karl Kaysen agreed a full readout was necessary and that some low-altitude flights were needed to pinpoint the sites .
 General Carter asked DD/R on 5 September to initiate steps for fixing to cover Cuba . General Carter asks DD/Rs to start working on fixing Cuba .
 The President and Secretaries of State and Defense were briefed by General Carter late 6 September of a more detailed readout of the 29 August mission . This led analysts to suspect the presence of another kind of missile site—possibly surface-to-surface--at Banes .
 The White House put a complete freeze on this information . Bundy gave an OK to put analysts to work on providing information on need-to-know basis .
 USIB was brought up to date in executive session at its 7 September meeting on information concerning the SA-2 sites, the new unknown site at Banes, and the freezing atmosphere of the White House .
 There is no evidence that the information was passed outside of the Agency, presumably because it was a reaffirmation of a position you had already taken before .
 On 10 September you cabled following ""Difficult for me to rationalize extensive costly defenses being established in Cuba as such extreme costly measures to accomplish, security and secrecy not consistent with other policies such as refugees, legal travel, etc. etc. On 9 September you said it was difficult
 General Carter sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense calling further need to conduct tactical reconnaissance of Cuba, particularly the facility near Banes . The site would require in the near future photography of a larger scale than acquired by a U-2 .
 On 13 September, you cabled your views of the importance of going ahead with securing release of Cuban prisoners . On Thursday, you sent a cable to the White House urging the release of prisoners .
 At the USIB meeting of 19 September, General Carter, in discussing terms of what would be necessary if a complete SA-2 defense would make use of the U-2 extremely hazardous if not impossible, again stated a desire to use RF-101's over Cuba .
 General Carter urged its possible use against Cuba and State appeared enthusiastic . After its use over Kamchatka, it was disapproved, disapproved by General Carter .
 It would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in US-Soviet relations than the Soviet Union has displayed thus far . The move would have important policy implications with respect to other areas and other problems in East-West relations .
 The following day, 20 September, you cabled suggesting a most careful consideration of the conclusion that introduction of offensive missiles was unlikely . The next day, you sent a message to the U.S. suggesting that the introduction of such a missile is unlikely .
 President Obama must use troops if necessary in order to get Congressional approval for a formosa-type resolution . The resolution would authorize the president to use troops in the U.S. if necessary . The U.N. has been criticized for not using the resolution .
 Air Force U-2 operations to be stood down for 'Time Being Being, "" 19 . Air Force to stand down from U.2 operations for 'time being'
 The following is a reconstruction of the reasons for the meeting at the White House in Mr McGeorge 3undy's office on 10 September 1962 at approximately 5:45m., and a report on what transpired .
 This memorandum is based upen discussions with Mr Parrott of the White House, General Carter, Dr. Dr. Carter, and Dr. George W. Carter .
 A memorandum for the record prepared by Mr McMahon records that at approximately 10:00 on the morning of 10 September he received a telephone call from Mr Parrott passing on a request made by Mr Bundy on behalf of the Secretary of State .
 Mr Parrott indicated that Mr Bimdy desired an answer within a half hour . He indicated that he wanted to know if Mr Bimbdy could provide an answer to his request . The decision is expected to be made within half an hour .
 Mr McMahon immediately contacted the Chairman of COMOR which was in session at that moment, and they agreed to provide a response as quickly as possible . Mr McMahon then immediately contacted Mr McMahon .
 Mr Parrott called a second time to advise Mr McMahon that Mr Roger Hilsman had advised that he would accept the responsibility for providing the answers to the Secretary of State . He had scheduled a meeting that afternoon with Mr James Reber, the Chairman of COMOR, in order
 With the above background to the meeting, it is apparent that the primary concern was to insure that there would be no incidents involving a U-2 .
 The meeting opened with an analysis of the risk of incidents involved in the proposal for two extended overflights covering the remainder of Cuba which had not been covered in the 29 August and 5 September missions .
 He urged that the routes be so designed as to have the U-2's over the Island the minimum possible time . There was general discussion on the desirability of avoiding SAM sites .
 He raised the question as to whether some of the needed coverage couldn't be obtained from peripheral flights with oblique photography . He also asked whether it was possible to use oblique photographs to get more coverage .
 Carter's message to McCone procedures to effect release of the Cuban prisoners . Carter: "I want the prisoners to be released. I want them released"
 The site configuration and the equipnent observed are coapatible with a cruise nissile system and not compatible with surface-to-air or ballistic systeics . The site configurations and the equipment are not coapcompatible with surface to air or ballistic systems .
 We know of three systems which could fit those facilities observed at Banes . Although our knowledge of Soviet cruise missiles is incoaplate, it is incomoplate, we know of . three systems that could fit .
 He has eliminated other operational Soviet cruise nissile systems, with ranges froa 1000 to 4000 nn, because their missiles probably would be too large for the Banes facility .
 SS-N-1-a destroyer-launched cruise anti-ship homing missile launched from 30 foot inclined rails . SS- N-1 is a missile launched at 30 feet from inclined rails and launched from a 30 foot platform .
 Komar class patrol craft-launched cruise anti-ship homing missile, launched from inclined rails 25 to 30 feet long . SS-N-2-a Komar-class patrol craft launched by inclined rails . Komar missile launched by a Komar craft craft launched from a
 There are several items of circumstantial evidence which tend to support the conclusion that the Banes site, is for relatively short range coastal defense cruise missiles . The site is believed to be for short range missiles .
 Short-range aissiles could defend against seaborne assault on deep water ports in Nipe Bay, south of Banes . It is located where short-range weapons could be deployed .
 The Soviets apparently have not given Cuba any weapons which provide then a long range striking capability, suggesting that their policy is to provide for Cuba's defense only .
 If the analysis that the Banes missile site is a coastal defense installation is correct, it would follow that sinilar facilities should be set up at a number of other locations favorable for protecting beaches .
 We doubt that Cubans have been given sufficient training in the use of such aissiles to allow them to have operational control over the sites .
 It seems likely that Soviet technical training personnel would be needed for some tise to come and would be available for operating the installation in time of crisis .
 McCone to Carter, Cable, with attached note from MSC , 16 September 1962 . Get a copy to Cline & Kent and Helms and have Cline advise to do action. McCone .
 CIA and community must keep government IHFORMED of DANGER OF A SURPRISE, 3. DO NOT WISH TO BE OVERLY-ALARMING THIS MATTER, says CIA and Community .
 State of CUBAN ECONOMY is very bad and substantial UPTURN will be delayed until after 1963 . Substantual UptURN WILL be DELAYED UNTIL AFTER 1963 .
 The USSR values its position in Cuba primarily for the political advantages to be derived from it . The main purpose of the present military buildup in Cuba is to strengthen the Communist regime there . The U.S. and the Soviets conceive to be a danger that the United States may attempt to overthrow
 Soviet deliveries are substantially improving air defense and coastal defense capabilities in Cuba . In terms of military significance, the current Soviet deliveries have significant military significance . Cuba's air defense capabilities are being improved by the Soviet deliveries .
 A decision to provide such weapons will continue to depend heavily on the Soviet estimate as to whether they could be introduced without provoking a U.S. military reaction . The decision to give such weapons to the Soviet Union continues to depend on the estimate .
 The USSR could derive considerable military advantage from the establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba, or from establishment of a Soviet submarine base there . D
 The Latin American reaction will be to the evidence of an increased Soviet commitment to Cuba, rather than to the technical implications of the military buildup . E. E. writes.
 If it became clear that the USSR was establishing an ""offensive"" base in Cuba, most Latin Ameri­can governments would expect the U.S. to eliminate is, by whatever means were necessary . Many of them would still seek to avoid direct involvement .
 The possible establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Ciba, or the establishment of a Soviet submarine base there would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in US-Soviet relations that Soviet union has displayed so far .
 Since the moment of Castro's triumphal march into Havana, the Intelligence Community had on missile and missile activity in Cuba before 1 Jan 1962 .
 On 15 February 1962 an inter agency interrogation center was established by CIA at Opa Locka, near Miami, to handle Cu­ban refugees-.and improvs the quality of intelligence collected from them .
 NPIC began publishing a series of formal listings in which these reports were evaluated in the light of photographic coverage . NPIC published the listings in May 1962, which are now considered formal .
 Between August and mid-October this office sent NPIC 13 memoranda asking for a check of 25 separate reports containing information which was thought to raise the possibility of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba .
 HPIC either lacked the necessary coverage or made a negative finding . In all cases, HPIC failed to provide enough coverage or make a negative find .
 Readout of the 29 August coverage snowed an SA-2 site near Sagua La Grande which apparently was the basis for the reported activity . The target card was changed to show a confirmed SA-1 site .
 A substantial proportion of these dealt with the deployment of defensive nis-siles and related activities . The majority of these were deployed to combat the threat of terrorism .
 Untrained observers tended to throw a sort of saoke-screen around the Soviet offensive deployment when it finally began . The difficulties encountered by untrained observers in telling an offensive missile from a-defensive one .
 CIA analytic apparatus recognized and correlated the first authentic reports of HRBlt equipment ever to be received in Washington, and took action upon then .
 This information, received on 27 September, dovetailed, in many respects with the earlier report . This information was received from 27 September .
 Another report, too general to be used in the process described above, is nevertheless of interest . It is the first good information on the Soviet Offensive build-up .
 CIA disseminated a report that Castro's personal pilot, Claudio Morinas, had said on 9 September that he had 40-mile range guided missiles, both surface-to-surface and surface to-air missiles .
 A large zone in Pinar Del Rio province within a preimeter bounded by hte cities of San Cristobal, San Diego, Consolaciodn Del Norte, and Las Pozas is heavily gurded by Soviets with the assistance of Peruvian and Colombian nationals .
 After dark on 12 Sep 62, I was driving east on Avenida 23, when I observed and counted 20 Soviet trucks towing 20 long trailers . The trucks were towing long trailers going west on the highway .
 The trucks were driven by Soviets in civilian clothes short-sleeved shirts in various colors . The trucks are driven by Soviet soldiers in civilian clothing .
 The militia jeep was waved off, and the Soviet trucks and trailers proceeded into Campo Libertad . As the convoy neared its destination at Campo .
 The trailers, the longest I have ever seen in Cuba, were ... four wheeled . The trailers are the longest in Cuba I've ever seen .
 I believe the tranposrt trailers were carrying large missiles, so long that the tail end extended over the end of the trailer . The missiles are believed to have been carrying missiles .
 I would guess that the missiles were a few feet longer than the trailers . The missiles were probably longer than their trailers, the author says .
 From the tail end of the missile it locked as if the bottom and two sides had a wooden frame . The entire missile was canvas-covered . The missile was designed to be able to lock into a tight position .
 It looked as if the tail end of the canvas silhouetted the two fins of the four fins of a missile . It looked like if the . tail end end of . the canvas silhouetteed the two . fins .
 Top of canvas-covered missile was toller then the top of the truck towing it . Top of the canvas covered missile was then toller .
 I am not positive that the trailer was carrying a missile, but it surely looked that way . I'm not sure that the missile was carrying, but I'm sure it looked like a missile .
 Soviet cargo ships, names unknown, had docked at the Flota Blanca piers around 10 or 11 Sep 62 .
 All Cuban dock-workers and other Cubans who worked in that area were forbidden to to be in the area during the unloading of the ships . The unloading was handled only by Soviet personnel, he says .
 The cargo unloaded at the Flota Blanca docks consisted of missiles, he said . He said the cargo unloaded included missiles .
 "I do not know where he got his information, but he is usually pretty reliable," he said .
 On 17 Sep 62, about 2100 hours, while travelling by automobile from Havana toward Pinar Del Rio, I observed a convoy of 10 motorcycles, 16 trucks, and eight trailers proceeding southwest on the central Highway .
 I am of the opinion that they were all part of the same convoy . Although the vehicles were scattered over a distance, they were part of a convoy . I'm not sure if the convoy was part of any convoy .
 The motorcycles were followed by six MAZ-502 trucks, each carrying about 30 Rebel Army soldiers armed with 9 mm submachine guns ...and rifles . The motorcycles are followed by about 30 soldiers armed .
 The trucks were followed by eight Soviet-built flatbed-type trailers approximately 32 feet long . Seven of which were carrying tubes extending over the entire length of the flatbed and completely covered with canvas .
 I could not distinguish what the eight trailer was carrying since it was completely covered with canvas . The trailer was covered in canvas, and it is completely covered up .
 I did notice what looked like the large metal prongs sticking out from under the canvas at the rear of the trailer . However, I did not notice what appeared to be the large prongs .
 The trucks were in turn followed by five motorcycles driven by narmed Rebel Army soldiers . The trucks are followed by trucks driven by armed Rebel soldiers .
 Because of darkness and rain I could not distinguish the drivers of any of the vehicles in the convoy were. Because of the rain I was unable to distinguish any of them from the drivers .
 Attorney General reported on discnssions with President on Cuba; dissatisfied with lack of action in the sabotage field . Went on to stress that nothing was moving forward, stressed that one effort had failed .
 In effect it seemed to be the consensus that phase two as approved on September 6, was now outmoded, that more dynamic action was indicated, that hesitancy about overflights must be re­considered . Actions which could be attributed to indigenous Cubans would not be important
 During the meeting McCone reviewed the earlier meeting with General Lansdale, and pointed out to the group that this meeting clari­fied General Lanadale's authority over the entire MONGOOSE operation .
 McCone reviewed details of the Doaonn negotiations, discussions -with the President . McCone met with President Obama at the White House .
 Attorney General, Eisenhower, Eisenhower and Javits discussed the decision not to approach Congressional leadership . Donovan's final report from Donovan was released on Thursday .
 Me Cone stated there was a feeling in CIA and Defense that the ""activist policy" which founded the Mongoose operation was gone was gone . While no specific operational activities had been the amount of ""noise" from minor incidents, such, as the sugar, the students firing
 The U.S. Intelligence Community could not report with assurance the development of offensive capabilities in Coba . The decision to restrict U-2 flights had placed the U.K. in a position where it could not .
 McCone stated he felt it most probable that Soviet-Castro operations would end op with an established offensive capability in Cuba . In Cuba, inciudtng MRBMs. McCone said he felt most probable . McCone: 'Most probable'
 Bandy took issue stating that he felt the Soviets would not go that far, that he was satisified that no offensive capability would be installed in Cuba because of its world-wide effects . Bandy seemed relaxed over the fact that the Intelligence Community cannot produce hard information on this important
 McCone said that Bundy's viewpoint was reflected by many in the Intelligence Community, perhaps a majority, but be just did not agree . He added that the United States could not afford to take such a risk .
 Bundy then philosophized on Cuba stating that he felt that our policy was not clear, our objectives not determined and therefore our efforts ware not productive . Bundy then said that our efforts were not productive in Cuba . Bundy said that the U.S. policy on Cuba is not clear and that
 It was obvious that he was not in sympathy with a more active role such as those discussed at 5412 on Thursday as be felt none of them would bring Castro down nor would enhance US. position of world leadership .
 Buudy seemed inclined to support the Track Two idea and also inclined to play down the more active Lansdale operation . Buudi seemed to be inclined to back Track Two and play down Lansdale's active operation .
 Bundy had not talked to Laasdale . Bundy obviously had received some of the ""static"" that is being passed around in Washington . Bundy has not been in contact with Bundy . Bundy is not sure if Bundy will be back in touch with Bundy again .
 President repeated the views of the President and expressed by the Attorney General . McCone is reporting on the discussions at the 5412 meeting .
 It was agreed that the whole Government policy with reference to Cuba must be resolved promptly as basic to further actions on our part .
 Bandy's views were that we should either make a judgment that we would have to go in militarily or learn to live with Castro, and his Cuba . Bandy: "We should either learn to cope with Castro's Cuba and adjust our policies accordingly"
 McCone said he felt defense was just phase one, phase two would be followed by various offensive capabilities . McCone then elaborated on his views oi the evolution of Soviet-Castro military capability .
 McCone stated that the establishment of a very axjwnsive deffensive mechanism could not be the ultimate objective of the Soviets or Castro . The objective was to establish an offensive base or to insert sufficient Soviet specialists and military leaders to take Cuba away from Castro and establish it as
 McCono stated that he felt there were only two courses open — one was to taka military action at the appropriate time or to pursue an effort to split Castro off from the Communists . For this reason he, McCone. had vigorously supported the Donovan mission as it is the only
 Bundy rejected the idea of regular NSC meetings stating that every President has to organise his Government as he desires . Bundy said that the Eisenhower pattern was not necessarily adaptable to the Kennedy type of administration . Bundy also said that every president has to arrange his government as he wishes .
 Me Cone stated that if this is the case he intended to request occasional NSC meetings to review specific estimates or other intelligence situations . The next one would be a report and discussion of the estimate of Soviet air defense capabilities .
 Bandy rejected the idea the several Special Groupe 5412, CIA, Mongoose, and North Vietnam together together feeling it was better to keep them separated . Bandy said the idea was to keep the groups separated .
 The conclusions were reached by a panel of members of the Board of National Estimates and of the ONE Staff 1 .
 The President's announcement would be vigorously condemned by the Soviets and the Cubans as evincing an intention to commit acts of international aggression . The announcement would have been vigorously condemned .
 Americans would probably look upon it as incompatible with the principle of non-intervention . Americans would likely look upon the idea of intervention as incompatible .
 The U.S. has not taken action against Cuba . The announcement is a disappointingly weak manifestation of the Obama administration .
 The Cubans, or some other country, would probably bring the matter before the UN shortly after the announcement . Cubans or other countries would likely bring the issue before the United States .
 The Soviets and Cubans would probably be impressed by the U.S. government's willingness to raise tension over Cuba . The United States has committed itself to further risks in Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Avlon .
 "We do not believe, however, that this would lead to any change in Soviet policy toward Cuba," says CNN.com.com .
 While the announcement would create new strains in Soviet-American relations, this effect would not be so strong or so long-lasting as to influence basic Soviet choices with respect to Berlin .
 The demonstration of military capability which such an incident would provide would almost certainly impress many Liatin Americans, says CNN.com .
 The President made the judgment that we should proceed with the negotiations, recognizing there would be some political consequences and criticisms, but he was willing to aceept this as a fact .
 The President requested that the report be worded to indicate a probability rather than an actuality because of the crates, not the bombers themselves . The final analysis was that we only saw crates, rather than the bombers, as well as the bombers .
 The President requested that all future information be suppressed . The President further requested that the information was suppressed . President Obama has requested the information to be suppressed.
 A minimum number of exports must be informed within CIA circles, the CIA says . A minimum of a number of expatriates should be informed, the agency says .
 It w*i agreed that the US1B members would be instructed to restrict the information to their personal offices and fuUy and currently inform the Chlefa o£ Staff, the Chairman, the Service Secretaries and Secretary of Defense .
 Operational division* and the joint and specified commands would not be informed at this time, except at the direction of the above people who are receiving the information .
 At this point the President mentioned that ""we'll have to do something drastic about Cuba"" and I am anxiously looking forward to the JCS operational plan which U to be pvetented to ms next week .
 McCone effected the above instructions by calling Mr Cline, who was unavailable, and then Mr Sheldon . Sheldon agreed to prepare a procedure for review fan Thursday morning .
 McCone called the Attorney General and advi*ed him of bis talk with the Cannon Committee . McCone then called the attorney general and advised him of meeting with him .
 At 11:15 General Elsenhower called McCone to say he was leaving very early the following morning for Gettysburg . McCone said he was sorry a meeting could not be arranged, but was going to Gettysburg anyway .
 McCone told General Eisenhower there were vero torna defendable evidences of shipments of twin-engined light jet bombers . McCone said there were "vigorous" evidence of shipments .
 Positive action might be indicated and then he said there had bven two instances where action was warranted but had not been takes . Positive action was indicated but not indicated, he said .
 Eisenhower feels that when Castro embraced Communism publicly and announced publicly his allegiance to Moscow, we had then a reason to act militarily . If we had chosen to so act, such action would have been defendable, says Eisenhower .
 On Thursday morning McCone reported by telephone to Kennedy, reviewing the Eiaenhowar discussion and stating that he, McCone, was concerned over Donovan's safety . In view of the rash of publicity, most particularly ths Hsrald Tribune article, he had instructed that
 MeCone stated he was not so sure and that he concluded to bring Donovan out unless things were going well . He said he concluded that he would bring Donovan into the team unless things went well . Mecone stated that he did not know if Donovan would be brought out .
 McCone recalled that he told the President and tha AG that he would take all, or his full share of responsibility, that he wished ths AG to bear this In mind as the position taken in this respsct by Mr McCone stood .
 By September 14th, interpreters had been able to identify the installation as a cruise missile site . Subseauent research by the interpreters helped identify the site .
 Prior to the finding of offensive ballistic missiles in Cuba, quite a different public attitude existed . Prior to that, the public had a different attitude .
 In planning for any U-2 operations over well-defended, denied territory we were always aware of criticism that attended the U.2 incident over the USSR in May of 1960 . The U.S. Air Force was always aware that the incident had been criticized .
 The two incidents involving the straying of a U-2 over Sakhalin on August 30th and the loss of a Chinese Nationalist U.2 over the China mainland on September 8th served to sharpen the already existing apprehensions .
 There were expressions of extreme concern from some publ'c leaders over the increase in tension that might result from overflights . Others voiced the opinion that such flights were illegal or immoral .
 Public figures conceded the necessity of the United States securing intelligence by whatever means required . But they were quick to -jaution that the use of the U-2 was quite a different matter from the classical use of spies .
 Bach track was drawn to cover high priority targets agreed upon by an inter-agency group known as the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance, a committee of the Un ted States Intelligence Board . Bach track is used to target high-priority targets .
 At the time the Soviet arms build-up began in Cuba, flights over Cuba were being forecast and flown at the rate of two per month .
 McCone suggested to General Carter that low-level reconnaissance of Cuba be proposed . General Carter was acting as DCI during Mr McCone1 s absence .
 Carter requested the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance to consider the kind of information that could be obtained thus . General Carter requested that the information could be provided by the U.S. military .
 General Carter recommended the use of tactical-type reconnaissance against Banes, which was still unidentified, or other targets identified by the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance as being suitable for low-level reconnaissance .
 A special meeting was held on September 10th to ;onsider the specific track for that second flight . The meeting was also held to discuss the possibility of a second flight in the future .
 General Carter presented a CIA proposal for a single high-level flight designed specifically to photograph the Banes area, where earlier photography had not been conclusive . The September 5th flight was intended to search for SAM sites in those areas of central and eastern Cuba that hadn't been covered since the
 The long peripheral flight would draw undue attention to the mission, he said . If the aircraft fall into enemy hands after an overflight would put the U.S. in a very poor position for standing on its rights to overfly international waters .
 Taking these views into account, the plan was changed and four flights were substituted for the one . The plan was then changed to four flights .
 The delay in completing the photographic coverage was due solely to the unfavorable weather predicted durfng this period . The delay was due to the weather forecast .
 Much of Cuba was under heavy cloud cover throughout most of September . The cloud patterns were rapidly and continually changing .
 The few periods of acceptable weather were so fleeting that they had passed before flights could be mounted . The weather was so bad that flights could not be mounted in the UK .
 Weather was checked for a possible mission every day beginning on September 6th . The weather was checked every day for possible missions .
 There was a oneor twoday period around the middle of the month when the forecasts were moderately favorable . There was one day during that period of favorable weather .
 This was the first of the four flights agreed upon on September 10th, and it was the only day or which weather permitted a successful flight . This is the first day of four flights .
 A flight was launched but it aborted because of aircraft fuel problems . The flight was delayed due to fuel problems and was aborted .
 The flight along the northeastern coast was successfully flown the next day, October 7th . The flight was successfully completed .
 The September overflight program identified additional SAM sites . It became apparent that an island-wide SA-2 defense was being constructed .
 The group re-examined JCS, and CIA to examine all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnaissance and to report back as soon as possible .
 The track of the flight planned at the October 9th meeting was drawn to cover the area in which MRBM's were suspected . The flight will test the readiness of the known SAM sites .
 The weather was checked daily on October 10th, 11th and 12th, but the forecasts were unfavorable . The weather forecast was unfavorable .
 As of October 16th, blanket authority was given for unrestricted overflights of Cuba . This is the first time blanket authority has been granted to Cuba .
 A summary of weather forecasts and the status of missions, S September through 14 October 1962, is published at Tab A .
 In weighing their decision to install ballistic cissiles ia Cuba, tho Soviet leaders must have considered the military utility of these weapons with and without nuclear warheads, the author says .
 Ballistic missilcs have utility against fixed targets of known location, not against such targets as convoys or naval forces at sea . Because of their type of guidance and relative inaccuracy, they are not used against convoys and naval forces .
 It is highly unlikely that the Soviets would see' any advantage in deployment for this purpose, but they might regard this threat as contribution to the deterrence of Latin American support for the United States or Cuban refugee opera tions against the Castro regime .
 From the present base area in Cuba, 700m. missiles with nuclear warheads could reach eastern U.S. targets within an arc including Savannah and New Orleans, including 7 SAC bomber and tanker bases and at least one important naval base .
 The 1,100m, missile would threaten a much more significant number of critical military targets, including 18 SAC bomber and tanker bases, an ICBM base, and three major naval bases . The missile would also threaten an ICMB base, an SAC Bomber and tanker base,
 The Panama Canal and U.S. bases as far east as Puerto Rico could be targets, according to the report .
 Cuban U-2 photography indicated initial deployment of Medium Range Ballistic Missiles . U.S. President Barack Obama has been briefed on the missile deployment .
 I immediately authorised the dissemination of this information on. a very limited need-to-know basis to USIB members and their immediate commanders . I also authorised the . dissemination of the . information on a very . limited need to know basis .
 On Tuesday morning at 11:45 I attended an NSC Meeting at the White House which included the President, Secretary Rusk, Secretary Ball, Secretary Martin, Secretary McNamara, Secretary Cilpatric, General Taylor, Vice President Taylor, Secretary Dillon, the Attorney General, Mr
 I made a preliminary briefing to the group as to what we thought we saw and Mr Lund ah I and Mr Graybeal eacpanded thereon . Mr Lund said: "Mr Lund ah, I and others eac panded there on. I am happy to see the
 Secretary Rusk was greatly disturbed about this new development but pointed out that Mr Me Cone had predicted such a possibility back in mid-August . Mr Rusk said he was disturbed by this development but that he had predicted it back in August .
 We should review our policy on a provisional government and try to get all the various factions working together. Here he was referring to infiltration and sabotage efforts, he said . The government should try to work together, he added .
 In any event, we must keep Cuba isolated from the Free World, although in doing so we must not isolate ourselves . In doing so, we need to not isolate Cuba, but isolate ourselves ourselves .
 Mr McNamara said if we are going to take overt military action, it must at all costs be done on a 100% basis and before any of the missiles become operational . McNamara pointed out thai if we go to war with thai, it would be done before the missiles
 General Taylor pointed out that the element of surprise would be essential but since this would then be a one-shot operation, we should establish an immediate blockade and then look toward invasion . The latter prospect did not enthuse him .
 He stated that the decision to invade would be the hardest one to make because of the long-time involvements and the lack of any substitute for the Castro regime . He said the hardest decision would be made would be to invade .
 Mr Bundy pointed out that the Soviet decision must have been made early in the summer . These missiles probably arrived in Cuba at about the time the President was making bis policy statements .
 The President pointed out that the missiles certainly had to be removed one way or another, and stated that he would meet again at six o'clock thai evening with his advisers . In the meantime there was much information to be gathered and much analysis to be don* as to pros and
 He authorised as many U-2 flights as needed to get full, complete, 100% coverage of island .
 NSC Officials of Intelligence on Missile Bases in Cuba were notified of intelligence on missile bases in Cuba . The U.S. government was notified of the intelligence .
 At 2100 on the evening of 25 October, the President called me on the phone at a dinner party I was attending at the apartment of Mrs. Mrs. Obama . At a party she was attending, she said: "I'm not surprised that he called me at 2100"
 He said he had heard stories that CIA officers were alleging that intelligence on offensive missile bases in Cuba had been available for several days before it was called to the attention of the President . Anna Ghennault, widow of the late General, at 4101 Cathedral Avenue,
 He asked me to confirm that I was responsible for the analysis of this kind of intelligence, and appropriate dissemination of it to higher authorities, and to tell him the facts in the case .
 I told the President that I Tras responsible in CIA for substantive analysis of intelligence and the dissemination of current intelligence to the President and the National Security Council . I told him I was responsible for substantive intelligence analysis and dissemination to the president .
 The mission with the first photography of the MRBM offensive bases was flown on 14 October . It took approximately 24 hours for the film to be returned, processed, delivered to the National Photographic Interpreta­tion Center and scanned by PI analysts .
 I said I was sure the technical analysis did not turn up the evidence until late afternoon or early evening of 15 October, that I myself heard of it first at that time, and that we completed the analysis before passing the information formally to the White House on 16 October .
 In view of concern over this period of intelligence handling of this sensitive information, I have tried to reconstruct what I know of the events of the evening of 15 October and the morning of 16 October, as follows .
 President Carter ordered that intelligence on new offensive weapons in Cuba came to me as soon as analysis had identified the type of weapon . President Carter had ordered that no dissemination of this intelligence should be made without my approval .
 I spent all afternoon at the opening sessions of the Commonwealth Intelligence Methods Conference . Cn. Cn 15 October .
 When I returned to my office at 1730 I found a delegation of PI and military intelligence analysts awaiting me . I was greeted by a delegation from the PI, military and intelligence analysts .
 The DCI had gone to the tfest Coast and General Carter was then at an informal reception for Commonwealth conferees in the Executive Dining Rooa at the Headquarters building in LIcLean .
 I said it would take several hours to vnrap up a definitive report with fully considered analysis . I said this would take a number of hours to make a definitive analysis .
 General Garter said he was going to dinner with General Taylor and General Carroll . General Taylor said he would let them know . General Carroll and General Taylor agreed to go to dinner .
 McGeorge Bundy for the White House and he said he thought he might be at the dinner and would notify him there . Bundy said he would notify Bundy if he was there and would be at dinner . Bundy is a former POW and POW POW .
 "I instructed them to complete a written report and stand by for action early the next morning," said the mayor .
 A few minutes later I decided it was a mistake to wait until morning to alert the key officers at the White House and State Department, so they should insure early attention to the next day .
 I assumed General Garter would have alerted the Pentagon adequately via JCS and DIA but that he might have missed the ¥hite House . I assumed he would have alerted the Pentagon to the Pentagon but that might have .
 Mr McGeorge Bundy, found he had not seen General Carter, and double-talked the information to him in broad terms . Mr Bundy then double-tried to get the information back to Mr Carter .
 I had more difficulty indicating securely to him that I really meant MRBM's rather than aircraft or other equipment we had anticipated, but the light finally dawned . He called the Secretary of State to pass on the word .
 At Bundy's invitation I went immediately to his office, having cleared this with General Carter, who had another engagement . General Carter instructed me to follow through on the Vftiite House formal notification .
 If I remembeer correctly, Alex Johnson also came in to get the briefing . Alex Johnson came in for the briefings .
 Bundy said he had arranged an 1100 meeting with the President to discuss the U.S. policy problems involved . Bundy said that he had been briefed on the situation by the White House .
 I showed him a memorandum we had prepared, discussed the evidence, and advised his Graybeal could support him fully with analytical back-up . I showed the memorandum we . showed him the . evidence, he said . 'I advised his . Graybeals could support them fully with
 I said I felt the Acting DCI should handle the briefing of tie President, with which General Garter agreed; that he probably did not need me . General Carter heartily agreed, with all of which General Carter agreed .
 General Carter did surface the automation at 1100, the DCI returned later that afternoon, and the whirlwind of intelligence reporting and policy formulation on Cuba set in from which we have not yet recovered . I presume .
 At 2:30 this afternoon, the Attorney General convened in his office a meeting on Operation MONGOOSE . General Lansdale and Colanel Patebell, General Johnson of the Joint Staff, Robert Hurwitch of State , Hewson Ryan of USIA, and the undersigned
 He indicated there had been noticeable improvement during the year in the collection of intelligence but other actions had failed to influence significantly the course of events in Cuba .
 He spoke of weekly meetings of top officials on this problem and again noted the snail accomplishments despite the fact that Secretaries Husk and HcKamara, General Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, and he personally had all been charged by the President with finding a solution .
 He obviously did not like the earlier memarandum, since he felt it shoved no ""push"" in getting on witb the acts of sabotage . He felt there was no "push"
 I stated that we were prepared to get on with the new action program and that we would execute it aggressively . When aaked for my comments, I said that we . stated that . we would executed it aggressively. We would execute that aggressively .
 The objective of Operation MONGOOSE would have to be determined at same point as the Cubans with whom we have to work were seeking a reason for risking their lives in these operations . I pointed out, hovever, that .
 Cuban DRE are willing to commit their people only on operations which they regarded as sensible . The young Cuban from the DRE pointed out that they were prepared to commit people only to operations which are sensible .
 Cuban terminology these days means an action which would contribute to the liberation of the country, another way of saying that the United States, perhaps to conjunction with other Latin countries, would bail them out mili­tarily .
 She At­torney General's rejoinder was a plea for new ideas of things that could be done against Cuba . She said: "We need to find a way to get Cuba back in shape"
 He said that these meetings might later be changed to every other day when and if he finds a daily get-together is not necessary . The meetings are to last no more than one-half hour .
 An examination of photography from Mission 3101 dated 14 October 1962 has revealed an MRBM Launch Site and two new military encampments located along the southern edge of the Sierra Del Rosario .
 Equipment includes 5 canvas-covered missile trailers, 75 vehicles and 18 tents . Equipment includes at least 5 canvas trailers, approximately 75 vehicles, 18 tents and about 75 vehicles .
 Equipment includes 35 vehicles, 15 large tents, 8 small tents, 7 buildings and 1 building under constjmction . Equipment includes 15 large tent tents, 15 small tents and 1 large building .
 National Photographic Interpretation Center 51 . ARTHUR G LUNDAHL Director of the Center of Photographic Photography .
 McCone meeting schedule . 17 October 1962 Wednesday 8:30m. Wednesday 8 a.m. Thursday .
 Meeting at State Department with study group 20 October 1962 Saturday 8:30m. Meeting at the State Department .
 Kohler discussions with Khrushchev did not fit in with Soviet action in Cuba, Kohler said . Kohler discussed discussions with the Soviet Union in Cuba in 1960s and '60s .
 Suggested we might give Khrushchev an ""out"" on the grounds that he does not know what is going on in Cuba and discussed various types of action ranging from a limited military strike to minimise losses to the calling of a Summit conference . Suggested that we might . give
 IL 28's have been delivered . Three MRBM sites under construction and can be ready in two weeks . Warhead locations unknown; also unknown whether MRBM's are nuclear or conventional . Unknown if MRBM is nuclear .
 Me Cone responded by reading numbered paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of attached memorandum dated October 17th . Me COne responded by responding to the request for information from the public .
 Thompson emphasised Khrushchev wants Berlin settlement but on his terms . Thompson emphasises Khrushvic wanted Berlin settlement with Berlin but on terms . 'Krushchev wanted a settlement but it was not his way'
 Khrushchev recognises that action by us would be derisive among our allies . Also says action would be 'derisive among allies' in order to prevent further action .
 McCone reviewed recent Chicadee reports, indicated considerable automony in hands of field commanders much more so than we have . McCone: "There are considerable automonies in the hands of the field commanders"
 The establishment of a ""trading position"" to force removal of U.S. overseas baaes. The establishment . of a "trading . position" to force . removal of United States overseas baees .
 At the American Imperialistist. To satisfy their ambitions in Latin America by this show of determination and courage again at the U.S. Imperialist. This show of courage again .
 This will increase tension everywhere and undoubtedly bring retaliation against United States foreign military installations, where U.S. casualties would result . This will also increase tensions everywhere, including the United States itself .
 Several alternatives were posed for consideration at the close of meeting covered by memorandum dated October 7th. McCone memorandum, 17 October 1962 .
 Effect on the ""balance of nuclear powor equation"" of the MRBM installations in Cuba . Effect of the nuclear balance of the country's nuclear arsenal .
 Turkey, Turkey, and other countries had lived under the Soviet MRBMs for years; therefore, why should the U.S. be so concerned? The United States should not be worried about the situation, says CNN.com .
 Warning to Khrushchev and Castro and if . response is unsatisfactory, convening Congress, seeking a declaration of war, and proceeding with an all-out blockade . If . a response is . unsatisfactory . Congress convenes Congress, seeks . a declaration . of war .
 McCone memorandum, ""Brief Discussion with the President—9:30m. 17 October 1962" Confirmed the situation and explored possible actions . Confirmed that the situation was serious and explored the possibility of military action .
 President seamed inclined to act promptly if at all, without warning, targetting on MRBM's and possibly airfields . President Obama seemed inclined to strike without warning .
 I briefed Eisenhower on all aspects of the recent Cuban-Soviet build-up . I showed him the U-2 pictures of three MRBM missile sites under development .
 Eisenhower felt that it would prove to be intolerable, that its purposes can not be clearly defined . Eisenhower also felt that discussions or adamant demands to either Khrushchev or Castro or both, would be of no avail. With respect to the current situation,
 Secretary Ball emphasized the importance of time, stating that if action was over cuickly, the reoercussions would not he too serious . Secretary Ball said if action is over, it would not be too serious, and that time would be wasted .
 McNamara took issue claining that the military equation would not be changed by the appearance of these missiles . McNamara: "The military equation won't be changed" McNamara said .
 Bohlen and Thompson questioned the real purpose of the Soviet's actions in Cuba . They seemed to feel that their acts may be in preparation for a confrontation with President Kennedy .
 McCone presented most recent photographs and indicated CIA opinion that the first missiles will be operational wi&in one or two weeks . McCone said the first missile missiles are expected to be operational within weeks . The first missiles could be operational in a matter of weeks .
 MeCone stated that we must all bear in mind that we have two objectives, one, disposing of the missile sites, and the other, getting rid of Castro's communism in the Western Hemisphere .
 The meeting adjourned for dinner and in the evening Secretary Rnsk came forward with the following plan . The meeting was adjourned to dinner .
 We should be alert for an attack on Turkey and be prepared for the consequences in Berlin, Quernoy, Matsu, Korea, etc. etc. We should also be alert to the consequences of a Turkish attack . We need to be prepared to deal with the consequences .
 McCone reported to the group and later to the President the results of his discussions with General Eisenhower, as covered in the attached memorandum of October 17th .
 These were all referred to as State papers and some were revised the following day . Some of the papers were published the next day, and some of them were revised .
 Secretary McNamara called Secretary McCone at his residence expressing great concern over the reports from NPIC as a result of their examination of the two flights run .
 Lundahl was at the house with the enlargements which indicated that, in addition to the three mobile MRBM sites detected on flight October 14th, there appeared to be now two IRBM sites with fixed launchers zeroed in on the Eastern United States . Lundahl said that in addition
 Ke indicated that this would be an indication of weakness which would have serious effect on our Allies . Ke furthermore indicated that . this would . have serious . effect on . our Allies, he said .
 This, he indicated taught have the possibility of prevention of action and settlement by political meana, he said . This, according to him, could prevent the . possibility of preventing . action by political meansa .
 One to study the advantages of what might be called a Blow course of action which would involve a blockade to be followed by such further actions as appeared ' necessary' as the situation evolved .
 These mobile missiles must be considered operational now and could be launched within 18 hours after the decision to launch . Although there is continuing improvement of these sites, there is still a long way to go .
 A refire from each launcher could be accomplished within 5 hours after the initial firing . The refire process could be done within five hours of each firing .
 Fixed, soft sites which could achieve initial operational capability during December 1962 are now being developed near Havana . Soft sites could be used to launch Cuba's first air strikes in December 1962 . Soft soft sites are being developed in Cuba .
 We believe that the 2200-nm intermediate range ballistic missile is probably intended for these sites . We believe it is likely to be a missile that could be used to target the sites .
 Seven large Cuban munitions' storage areas south of Havana could be converted to Soviet needs in a relatively short time . However, there are seven, large, large storage areas which could be turned into Soviet needs .
 It is likely that the installations now being examined in photography will raise the number to 32 . All of the installations could be ready in the next week, all of which could be photographed .
 Offensive missiles systems being introduced into Cuba primarily through the Port of Mariel . Offensive missiles are being introduced in Cuba primarily .
 All three of the Soviet missiles now being deployed in Cuba probably use red fuming nitric acid as an oxidizer . The common propellant supply and storage could be used . It is significant that all three Soviet missiles probably use the same oxidizer as a common supply .
 By deploying stockpiled shorter range ballistic missiles at overseas bases against which we have no BMEWS warning capability, the Soviet Union will supplement its ICBM home force in a significant way .
 This same offensive force also poses a common threat to the U.S. and a large portion of Latin America for the first time . This is the same force that could threaten the United States and Latin America .
 This site is in a more advanced state of readiness and could have the essential features for an operational capability within one month . This site could be ready for operational use within a month . It could be operational for one month and could be fully operational within a year .
 These new sites are not included in the numbers appearing elsewhere in this paper .
 Continued surveillance would go "forward so that we would know of the siutation within Cuba, as it evolved," says the Cuban government . Continued surveillance "would go forward to know of ... the ... evolution of Cuba," said the government .
 The possibility of more extreme actions has not been dismissed,however initiating such actions was considered unwise . However, initiating such a move was deemed unwise by authorities .
 The argument in favor of the blockade was principally that it initiated a positive action which could be intensified at our will or relaxed depending upon evolving circumstances . The argument was that the blockade could be relaxed depending on evolving circumstances.
 Soviet reactions are expected to be severe and very probably involve a blockade of Berlin and a widespread propaganda effort, however it was considered that w«« could have some control over the extent of Soviet reaction . In the event of a confrontation, would be negotiating from a position of positive action which
 October 1962 Steps which would make air strike more acceptable to blockade group . October 1962 steps were taken to make air strikes more acceptable for blockade group. October 1962 .
 Prior notice to Khrushchev by message from the President gives Soviets capability of backing down and strengthening our case with our Allies and world opinion in the event of a blokade Berlin .
 Some effort to try to minimize number of Soviets killed, or at least show we wanted to avoid them . Some effort was made to show that Soviets were not being killed .
 Message to Khrushchev might urge him to remove Soviet technicians immediately . Message to him might urge them to remove them from Soviet technicians .
 President might make reference to Soviet construction of ""Fishing Port"" in Cuba, saying that in view other Soviet actions we are convinced Soviets were constructing Naval base . President might say that Soviet construction in Cuba was part of a fishing port .
 No attack on Havana to avoid killing foreign diplomats and thus arousing public opinion against us in those countries, says President Obama . No attack would be carried out to avoid arousing foreign diplomats, he says .
 A major Soviet objective in their military buildup in Cuba is to demonstrate that tbe world balance of forces has shifted so far in their favor that the United States can no longer prevent the advance of Soviet offensive power even into its own hemisphere .
 In this cnnection they assume, of course, that these deployments sooner or later will become publicly known . In this case, they assume that they will become known .
 The public withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would create serious problems in the USSR's relations with Castro . The withdrawal would cast doubt on the firmness of the Soviet intention to protect the Castro regime .
 Anti-Communists and those who relate their own interests to these of the U.S. would be strongly discouraged . Conversely, anti-Communist and anti-communist groups would be discouraged .
 It seems clear that, especially over the long run, there would be a loss of confidence in U.S. power, determination and determination . It would also be a serious decline of United States influence generally, says Julian Zelizer .
 If the U.S. confronts Khrushchev with its knowledge of the MRBM deployment and presses for a withdrawal, we do not believe the Soviets would halt ths deployment .
 The attitudes of other states toward a blockade action are not considered in this paper„ It is obvious that the Soviets would heavily exploit all adverse reactions. The attitudes . of other . states . not considered .
 This would be true whetter the action was limited to neutralizing strategic missiles or airfields, surface-to-air mnissile sites, or even an outright invasion designed to destroy the Castro regime .
 In reaction to any of the various forces of United States action, the Soviets would be alarmed and agitated, since they have to date estimated that the U.S. would not take military action in the face of Soviet warnings .
 U.S. military action posed a major challenge to the prestige of the USSR, We must of course recognize the possibility that the Soviets, under pressure to respond, vould again miscalculate . A series of actions and reactions, could escalate to general war, could .
 On the other hand, the Soviets have no public treaty with Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the island .
 We do net believe that the USSR would attack tbe US, either from Soviet bases or with Its missiles in Cuba, even if the latter were operational and not put out of action before they could be readied for firing .
 They might react with major barassments, interruptions of access to the city or even a blocfcade . With or without the signing of a separate peace treaty, they might react to the situation .
 We believe that whatever course of retaliation the USSR elected, the USSR leaders would not deliberately initiate general war or take military measures, which in their calculation, would run the gravest risks of general war .
 At least one Soviet regiment of 1020-nm medium range ballistic missiles is now deployed in western Cuba . At least two launch sites near San Cristobal are located in the west .
 Each of these sites presently contains eight missiles and four unrevetted, field-type launchers which rely on mobile erection, checkout, and support equipment . Each site has eight missiles, four launchers, and four unvetted launchers .
 We believe the 2200-nm IRBM is probably intended for these sites because they closely resemble Soviet sites believed to be associated with testing and deployment of this missile system . We believe that the IRBM was probably intended .
 Site 1 is considered :o be in a midto late-stage of construction and should be operational within six weeks . Site 1 should be in mid-to late stages of construction . Site 2 is expected to be operational in six weeks. Site 1 will be in the mid to late
 The 2200-nm IRBMs could have 3to 5-megaton warheads, if our planning estimate for the payload weight is correct . The IRBM could have a payload weight of up to 5 megaton warheads .
 Possible central missile checkout, storage, and repair bases have been located at Soroa, between the two estern deployment areas, and at Managua, south of Havana .
 It is significant that three of the Soviet missiles now being deployed in Cuba probably use red fuming nitric acid as the oxidizer . The missiles are likely to have a common system for propellant supply and storage .
 Cruise missiles have a range of 35 to 40 miles and are probably derived from the AS-1 . These cruise missiles are thought to have a long range of around 35 miles .
 SA-2 sites provide for six launchers with missiles, and an additional six missiles in an adjacent hold area . Such sites can be used to launch missiles and fire missiles, the South African government says .
 Reload and refire from a single launcher will take approximately 3 to 5 minutes . Use this reload reloading to reload the entire launcher . Use the mobile version of this article to help users with the latest version of the article .
 There are several refugee reports indicating the presence of tactical missiles in Cuba . There is no photographic confirmation thus far .
 By deploying stockpiled MRBMTRBMs at overseas bases, the Soviet Union will supplement its ICBM home force in a significant way .
 The planning for this operation must have started at least one year ago and the operation itself begun last spring . The operation itself began last spring, and planning for the operation began last year .
 Firm evidence indicates presence in Cuba of four MRBM and two IRB3M launch sites in various stages of construction and organized into at least three regiments . Firm evidence also indicates the presence of 4 MRBM, 2 IRBM launch sites .
 Of these, two regiments of eight launchers each are mobile and designed to launch MRBMs with a range of about 1,100m . One regiment of eight fixed launchers may be designed for IRBMs . One of these may have a range between about 2,200m and
 It's prudent to assume that when the missiles are otherwise operational, nuclear warheads will be available . In any case, it is prudent to . assume that . when . the missile is otherwise operational .
 We estimate operational MRBM missiles can be fired in eight hours or less after a decision to launch, depending on the condition of readiness . We estimate that operational MRMs can be launched in eight or less .
 It is possible that further evidence will uncover additional launch sites which are presently undetected, but the extent of our coverage leads us to believe that such evidence would not drastically iIncrease the total now deployed .
 Soviet gross capabilities for initial attack on United States mlitary and civilian targets can be increased considerably by Cuban-based nissiles . In the near future, therefore, Soviet . capabilities for . initial . attack on . United States . targets can . increase considerably .
 It is unlikely that the USSR is installing these missiles primarily in order to use them in bargaining for U.S. concessions elsewhere . Consequently, it is unlikely they are installing them primarily to use in bargaining .
 If the U.S. acquiesces to the presence of strategic nissiles in Cuba, we believe that the Soviets will continue the buildup . If the United States acquiesces, the Soviets may continue to build up their forces .
 We have no basis for estimating the force level whlch they would wish to reach, but it seems entirely clear now that they are going well beyond a token capability .
 This course of U.S. action would provide strong encouragement to pro-Communists and anti-American sectors of opinion in Latin America . The United States would be encouraging pro-communist groups to take advantage of the situation .
 We believe that, especially over the long run, there would be a loss of confidence in U.S. power and determination, particularly in Latin Anerica . We believe there would also be a serious decline of United States influence in Latin .
 The Soviets would feel free to establish bases in the country in question if they chose . Should any additional Latin American government fall to the Communists, the Soviets could establish bases .
 A major immediate consequence would be that the Soviets would probably estimate lower risks in pressing the U.S. in other confrontations, such as Berlin . The Soviets would likely estimate lower risk of pressing the United States ham in such confrontations .
 Tbey would propose negotiations on the general question of foreign bases . Claimed equal right to establish Soviet bases and assuring the U.S. of tight control over missiles .
 'They might risk violent encounters in attempts to penetrate the blockade, but they would not resort to major force in the area of Cuba or forceful retaliation' in Cuba, at least initially . 'They would not use force in Cuba or force retaliation' elsewhere .
 If United States enforcement of the blockade involved use of force by the US, the Soviets night respcad en an equivalent level, but vculd seek to avoid escalation . If U.S. enforcement of blockade involved using force, the Soviet response would be similar to that .
 Any blockade situation would place the Soviets under no immediate pressure to cheese a response with force with force . The situation would leave the Soviet Union under no pressure to respond with force.
 They rely on political means to compel the United States to desist, and reserve a resort to force until the U.S. had actually used force . They cculd rely on . political means, including the use of political means .
 U.S. would face enormous pressures on the United States to desist, the authors say . They would estiisate that the inherent difficulties of enforcing the blockade and the generally adverse reactions to it .
 They could heighten pressures by threatening retaliation in Berlin or actually undertaking major harassments on the access routes, which could become tantamount to a blockade, and would probably do so at some stage . They could also heighten these pressures by . threatening retaliation .
 He do not believe that even a severe blockade, of itself, would bring down the Cuban regime . He believes that even severe blockade would bring it down .
 Castro would tighten internal security and, unless action against the regime subsequently developed on Cuban soil, the Cuban population would be increasingly reluctant to oppose the regime . Castro's regime would tighten security and would lead to more resistance .
 In the case of U.S. use of force against Cuban territory, the likelihood of a Soviet response by force would be greater than in case of blockade . The likelihood of Soviet retaliation by force, either locally or for retaliation elsewhere, would fce greater in the case .
 The Soviets would be placed under great pressure to respond in ways which, if they could not save Cuba, would inflict an offsetting injury to U.S. interests . The Soviet Union would be under pressure to act in ways that would be offsetting to United States interests .
 This would be true whether the action was limited to an effort to neutralize missiles, or these missiles plus airfields, surface-to-air missile sites, or cruise missile sites . The action was designed to destroy the Castro regime .
 In reaction to any of the various forms of United States action, the Soviets would be surprised and probably alarmed . The United States would probably not take military action in the face of Soviet warnings of the danger of nuclear war .
 Since the USSR would almost certainly not resort to general war against Cuba, it could not hope to prevail locally . The Soviets would consider retaliatory actions outside Cuba, the author says .
 The timing and selection of such coves would depend heavily upon immediate context of events and the USSR'S appreciation of U.S. attitude . The timing of such a cove would depend on immediate context .
 'They vould probably react here with major harassments, interruptions of access to the city or even a blockade' with or without the signing of a separate peace treaty . They will probably react with major harassment or interruptions to access to city or blockade .
 Retaliation against some U.S. installations overseas is possible but unlikely, says CNN.com . Retaliation is possible, but likely unlikely, analysts say .
 There may be a difference between Soviet reaction to all-out invasion and limited U.S. use of force against selected objectives in Cuba . We believe that there vcmld probably be a different . reaction to more limited use of . force .
 We do not rule out the possibility of Soviet retaliation outside Cuba in case of invasion . We recognize that such an estimate cannot be made with very great assurance .
 We believe that, whatever course of retaliation, tbe Soviet leaders would not deliberately initiate general war or take military measures, which in their calculation, would run grave risks of general war .
 Soviet military weapons systems deployed to Cuba . Soviet weapons systems to Cuba have been deployed in the past decade .
 You have been briefed many times on the major buildup of equipment in Cuba prior to mid-October .
 There are four and possibky five MRBM aites deployed in field-type installations . The MRBM is a small-scale MRBM capable of carrying out a mission .
 Two of the sites probably are in a state of at least limited operational readiness at this time . Two of these sites are probably in a . state of a state . of a . limited . readiness .
 The remaining MRBM sites are expected to become operational in about one week . All of the sites are in a state of continuous construction and improvement .
 Two fixed IRBM sites {with four launch pads at each site and permanent storage facilities] are being constructed near Havana . In addition two fixedIRBM sites will be built near Havana, Cuba .
 One of these sites appears to be in a stage of construction that leads to an estimate of operational readiness of six weeks from now, i.e. about 1 December . The other is expected to be operational readiness between 15 December and the end of the year .
 We have not seen nuclear warheads for any of these missiles, but we do not rely on ever seeing them, in our photography . We do not expect to ever see nuclear warheads in our photographs .
 We have found what appears to be a nuclear storage facility at one of the IRBM sites at Guanajay, near Havana .
 It will probably be completed about 1 December along with the missile site itself . The missile site is expected to be completed by 1 December .
 Since the missile systems in question are relatively ineffective without them, we believe warheads either are or will be available . The U.S. believes warheads are likely to be available in the near future .
 The Poltava is thought to be the most likely carrier of security-sensitive military cargoes into the tightly guarded port of Mariel . The ship has made two trips to Cuba and is due back in ten days .
 In summary, we believe the evidence indicates the probability that eight MRBM missiles can be fired from Cuba today . The evidence suggests that eight missiles could be fired today .
 If able to refire, they could theoretically deliver the same load approximately five hours later . If they could refire they could be able to do the same five hours after .
 Analysis of the comparative photographic coverage of the offensive-missile sites in Cuba now leads us to conclude that the Soviets did not have as their main objective an immediate operational capability at any of the identified sites .
 Site 1 could now have full operational readiness and Site 2 could achieve this status by 25 October . Site 1 is expected to have full readiness by October 25 . Site 2 is also expected to be operational ready by October 1 .
 By full operational readiness we mean the ability to launch in salvo four missiles per site with a retire capability of four missile per site within 4 to 6 hours . By the end of the day we would be able to launch four missiles each site with the capability to launch salvo .
 We believe these sites may be ready to launch missiles between 1 December and 15 December . Although we are unable to determine a precise date for an operational capability, we believe this is possible .
 Foundations of structures which might be intended to be future nuclear warhead storage facilities have been observed at the San Cristobal Sites 1 and 3 and Sagua La Grande Site 1 .
 Tank trailers observed in the quay area of the Puma Gerardo port facility are similar to those seen in 22 May 1962 photography taken before security fences were erected . The tank trailers were seen in this photograph taken before the port facility was closed .
 Two of these sites, Santa Lucia and Deleite, each have alternate sites located 3 to 5 nm from the primary site . The alternate sites are located between 3 and 5 nautical miles away from the main site .
 The KOMARs must return to base or to a tender for reloading . The craft have not yet been identified in Cuba and must return .
 Tne remaining two have been observed operating in the Mariel area . It is not known nether they are based there or were operating from the Havana base .
 Tne KOMARs have all been transported to Cuba as deck cargo on Soviet ships . Two and four per shiploads were transported as decks cargo .
 The apparent Soviet objective is to rapidly achieve full operational status for their MRBM and IRBM regiments rather than to achieve an immediate operational capability at each site as the missiles and equipment arrive, may be very significant to the planners judging various Soviet courses of action .
 "It is believed that sufficient copies have been forwarded to you to meet the immediate operational requirement for preparation of briefings," says the White House .
 Marshall S Carter Lieutenant General, USA Deputy Director of Central Intelligence . EVALUATION OF OFFENSIVE THREAT IN CUBA . Marshall Carter was the U.S. President of Cuba in the 1990s . He was in charge of the Cuban government .
 The sizes of the missiles, associated equipment, and buildings found at the San Cristobal and Sagua La Grande sites are almost identical and are compatible with the 1000-nm missile system . The size of missiles and associated equipment is almost identical .
 Two fixed sices for 2200-nm, ballistic missiles are under construction in the Guanajay area near Havana . The missiles are expected to have a range of missiles .
 An additional fixed site has been observed at Remedios in Eastern Cuba which is similar to those at Guanajay . The site is located in eastern Cuba and has a similar site to those in Guanajays .
 This is probably a valid indicator of deployment of a second grouping of 2200-nm ballistic missiles . This is likely to be a sign of deployment, say experts .
 These craft have all been transported to Cuba as deck cargo on Soviet ships, two and four per shiploads .
 First craft probably took several weeks to become fully operational units . Additional units can probably become operational within one week after offloading . First craft can probably be fully operational within a week .
 It was decided that at a minimum an air strike must include both missile sites and the air fields and such SAM sites aa ara necessary . General Taylor was instructed to plan accordingly .
 Attorney General failed to make an absolute recommendation with respect to future military actions, indicating this question could be decided as the situation developed from day to day . Only preparatory steps should be taken now .
 McCone urged on the other hand that the President in a public statement indicate an intention to remove the missiles and other potential weapons by means and at a time of his own choosing if surveillance did not prove conclusively that the Soviets and Cubans were removing them .
 The meeting adjourned to be reconvened at 2:30, with additional principals in attendance . The meeting was adjourned .
 President Eisenhower spoke with Eisenhower at Eisenhower's residence this morning . Eisenhower's comments were given later to the Attorney General, the White House says .
 Eisenhower would accept the handicaps from a military point of view, of warning or notice . Eisenhower would follow the suggested plan of initiating a blockade, conducting intense surveillance, and announcing the intention of taking military action .
 On Sunday night, October 21 at 8:30 I briefed Vice President Lyndon Johnson . Meeting with the Vice President en 21 October 1962 .
 The briefing involved a review of photography by Lundahl paralleling briefings given to General Eisenhower and others . Lundahl's photography review was similar to that of General Eisenhower's .
 We discussed policy and details of the proposed speech by the President in considerable detail . We then discussed policy . We also discussed policy, proposals for the speech .
 The thrust of the Vice President's thinking was that he favored an unannounced strike rather than the agreed plan which Involved blockade and strike and invasion . Later if conditions warranted, invasion could be carried out .
 IX followed the position and arguments used in his briefing paper of 20 October . IX followed position and the arguments used by my briefing paper .
 The Vice President finally agreed reluctantly but only after learning among other things, the support Indicated by General Eisenhower . The vice president eventually agreed to the President's decision .
 Western resolve and unity in countering Soviet moves in the East-West global contest, particularly over Berlin and Germany . Thus weaken Western resolve, especially over Berlin, Germany .
 The first indication that the USSR had taken a decision on Cuba came in late July . IV. the first indication of a decision was made on Cuba in July .
 At that time, 4 Soviet passenger ships after a voyage under secrecy conditions arrived at the western Cuban naval base, Mariel . A Soviet passenger ship made its way to the base under secret conditions .
 As of 20 October, 15 such unpublicized passenger voyages have been counted .
 Dry cargo vessels began arriving in early August, arriving in unprecedented numbers . Dry cargo ships began arriving at the end of August .
 The earlier deliveries, up to about 1 September, appeared to consist largely of military construction, transportation, and electronics equipment, and led to speculation that the Soviets might be deploying a SAM system . The other deliveries appeared to be mostly military construction and transportation equipment .
 Photography of 29 August and 5 September confirmed that a SAM systen was being deployed . SAM systors were being deployed in the area .
 One MIG-21 was seen, as were eight Komar-class missile boats and one land-based anti-shipping cruise missile site . One Komar class missile boat was also seen, along with one Komar missile boat .
 Support sites—six presently identified, still field-type, but signs of permanent-type installation are appearing . Support sites are still being used in support of the project .
 As of 17 October, 17 sites appeared to have both missiles on launchers and the essential radar in position . Readiness of 17 sites appears to be ready to launch missiles .
 Only one of the radar-controlled guns which normally are installed to provide some defense against low-flying aircraft . Only one, however, has been emplaced around it, with radar guns .
 About 60 15's, 17's, 19's and 19's arrived prior to 1 January 62 . There are now at least 39 MIG-21s .
 There is no direct evidence of air-to-air missiles in Cuba . Such equipment is being supplied to Indonesia, Egypt, and probably to Iraq . We think it likely that Cuba will get at least equal treatment .
 Made connection between Berlin and Cuba as part of effort to demonstrate seriousness of Soviet commitment to Castro, but discreetly enough to avoid Western counteraction . Made connection with Berlin to demonstrate commitment to Cuba, but didn't want it to be counteracted .
 As of 17 October, four aircraft had been uncrated, of which one is partially assembled . Four aircraft had yet to be uncrated .
 The observation of IL-28 crates led us to mount an intensive reconnaissance effort, beginning on 15 October . The mission was led by the U.S. Air Force, which is now in operation in the Philippines .
 The photography showed, for the first time, the deployment of surface-to-surface ballistic missile systems . The photography was taken by a team of photographers at the Pentagon .
 A We have identified four and possibly six sites for the 1,100-n.m. missile and two fixed sites for 2,200-m.m . missile . The missile is believed to be capable of carrying a range of missiles .
 Ffe have identified six of the eight launchers and seven of the sixteen missiles . Another two sites are near Sagua La Grande just east of Havana, ffe say . Ffe identify six launchers, seven missiles and seven missiles .
 There is preliminary evidence of two additional sites near San Cristobal . Preliminary evidence has been found of two more sites near the city .
 The keys to identifying missiles are the size of the missile body, the unique erector-launcher equipment, and the position and spacing of equipment . The key to identifying a missile is the size and position of the launch equipment .
 The missile corresponds exactly in length to those observed in parades in Moscow . The missile is the same length as the ones seen in Moscow parades .
 The 1,020-mile-range missile is a single-stage ballistic missile using storable liquid fuels . The missile is the first to be developed in the U.S.
 Photography alone cannot permit us to be very precise about the operational readiness of these missiles . The missiles are thought to be capable of carrying out a range of missiles .
 The sites at Sagua La Grande will probably not achieve the same stage of construction until 1 November or later . The sites are expected to be completed by 1 November .
 These sites are still in fairly early stage of construction which we do not expect to be completed until some time in December .
 We know less about the 2,200-mile missile, but believe it to be also single-stage, using storable liquid fuels and with an autonomous guidance system . The missile is believed to have been able to reach 2,000 miles .
 There is new evidence of the beginning of construction of what may be a new fixed four-pad MRBM or IRBM missile site at Remedias, East of Havana .
 A facility being constructed near the IRBMH site at Guanajay is a nuclear storage facility . However, we are pretty sure that it is a facility .
 In any case it is prudent to assume that when the missiles are otherwise operational, nuclear warheads will be available . B. B
 At least 8,000 Soviet military and about 3,000 non-military personnel are now in Cuba . Based on known voyages of ships, we believe at least 8-000 Soviet troops are now there .
 This matches fairly well with our estimate that the Soviets would need about 10,000 military for the assembly activity now going on . The Soviets would probably need about ten,000 troops to build the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons .
 Cuban missiles have an advantage over Soviet-based ICBH's — shorter flight times and no BMEWS detection . For pre-emptive or first strike purposes, Cuban missiles can have a longer flight time than Soviet missiles .
 C Sites now identified will, when completed, give Soviets total of 36 launchers and 72 missiles . When completed, the Soviets will have 36 launchers, 72 missiles and 36 missiles . C Sites are now identified .
 There are clear indications that at least five Soviet offensive missile regiments, each with eight launchers and at least sixteen missiles, will become operational in Cuba . There are also indications that there will be at least 5 Soviet offensive missiles in the country .
 Director of Central Intelligence Director, Defense Intelligence Agency . Director of CIA Director, DIA Director, CIA Director . Defense Intelligence Director .
 A newly identified possible launch site was observed on Mission 3111 . Five oreviously reported MRBM launch sites and two IRBM launched sites were observed .
 A newly identified confirmed confirmed MRBM launch site has been located on Mission 3113 . A new confirmed confirmed launch site was located on the launch site .
 The seven canvas covered missiles are now draped with netting . Three of the four erectors are canvas covered, and three of the six missiles are covered .
 Cloud cover prevents a corrolete analysis; however, one erector and possibly two others are observed . One erector was observed in the area; two others were observed .
 The Sauga La Grande area MR Site 4 consists of four launch positions, two containing erectors and six canvas covered*-isslles or trailers . MH Site 5 consists of . four erectors or. pads and four canvas covered missiles on trailers . MR Site . 5 consists .
 National Photographic Interpretation Center 77 . ARTHUR C LUNDAHL Director of the Center of Photographic Photography .
 Attached are copies of cables Mr Karamessines discussed with you yesterday . Attached is copies of the cables Mr Karamessine discussed with us yesterday .
 The Soviet decision to embark on the current military buildup in Cuba probably was made in April 1962 . The decision was probably made in 1962 .
 The decision paralleled political and economic moves which gxeatly strengthened the Soviet-Cuban relationship . The decision was made by the Soviet government .
 The program probably was planned and set in motion during the period April through June, officials say .
 These units arrived in Cuba during the last week of July and by 1 August work had begun at several locations in Cuba .
 The buildup in Cuba has been taking place in stages which can be distinguished reasonably well . The buildup is taking place at the hands of the Cuban government .
 The first deliveries of men and equipment arrived in late July . They appear to have been primarily of equipment for SAM and coastal defense missile installations .
 Work started first in western Cuba and gradually spread throughout the island . Work began first in west Cuba and spread throughout Cuba .
 Eight of the 12 Komar guided-missile boats were delivered in August, as well as some land armaments . Some land weapons were also delivered as part of the deal .
 Most of the 39 or more MIG-21s arrived during the first week of September . Most of them arrived in the U.S. in September .
 Two shipments of IL-28 bombers have arrived in late September, and a third may be en route . 22 aircraft are believed to be in service .
 There is no sign of a slow-down in the military shipments . About 20 Soviet vessels are en route with probable military cargoes . One or two are leaving Soviet ports almost daily .
 There is no evidence of new rissile sites in Cuba since the report given to you at 2:30m. yesterday . No new sites have been found so far in Cuba .
 There are still 24 launcher positions for Medium Range Ballistic Missiles located at six base complexes, and 12 launch pads for Intermediate Eange ballistic Missiles . A total of 36 launchers at nine separate bases have been completed or urderway .
 As explained, we expect deployment of 2 missiles per launch position, but to date what we have actually seen are 30 and possibly 32 Medium Range Missiles . As explained we expect deploys two missiles each launch position .
 The remaining 2 MRBM sites will come into full and operational readiness on 25 October and 29 October respectively . The remaining MRBM site will come to full readiness on 29 October and 25 October .
 These MRBM's are considered mobile; they are fired from a trailer, bed type of launcher, and their location as now established right suddenly shift to a new location difficult to detersive by surveillance .
 The 3 IRBM sites still seem likely to reach full operational readiness in December . The IRBM site is expected to be operational ready for the first time ever .
 Emergency operational readiness of some of the IRBMs might be reached somewhat earlier . However, emergency operational readiness may be reached earlier .
 Of the 24 primary surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba, ve believe 22 are now operational . 22 of the 24 sites are believed to be operational . The Cuban government says 22 of Cuba's 24 missile sites are operational .
 Soviet fleet Bupport vessel, TEREK, is new in the Atlantic on a high-speed run from the Kola Inlet Northern Fleet Base near Murmansk in Russia .
 Leadership meeting on October 22nd at 5:00 ATTended by: The Leadership, except for Senator Hayden, The President, Rusk, McNamira, McCone, and Ambassador Thompson McCone .
 Hickenlooper asked when missiles would he say they would be operational status . There were a few questions of a substantive nature .
 Secretary Rusk then reviewed his current appraisal of the Soviet Union . Rusk said there had been some radical mores within the USSR which were indicating a tougher line .
 He stated that he immediately ordered extensive overflights; that McCone briefed President Eisenhower; that we most recognise that these missiles might be operational and therefore military action on our part might cause the firing of many of them with serious consequences to the United States .
 We have no idea how the Bloc will reatt but the indications are, from unconfirmed sources, they will attempt to run the blockade . The Bloc are expected to run a blockade, according to reports .
 It was the President's considere judgment that if we have to resort to active military action, then this would involve an invasion . The President's decision was made in the wake of the crisis in Syria .
 Senator Rusaell then demanded stronger steps, stated he did not think we needed time to pause . Senator Rus aell said he was not ready to pause, and that we need to take action immediately .
 McNamara then described the blockade, indicating that this might lead to some form of military action . McNamara: "There would be many alternative courses open to us" McNamara said .
 Vinson then asked if the Joint Chiefs of Staff actually approved the plans for the invasion . The President then reviewed in some detail time required . The Joint Chiefs then reviewed the plans in detail .
 He said: "One might question whether the misiiles are or not offensive. He said, ""One might . question whether they are or are not offensive."
 This was the first time anyone has raised doubt 2a to whether the MRBMa and the IRBMs are offensive missiles .
 He then raised many warnings including the dangers to Berlin, Turkey, Pakistan, Iran, etc., etc. etc. He then read the message received from the Prime Minister which in effect agreed to support as in the United Nations .
 A great many Senators expressed concern over the proposed action with the OA5 . Indicating that they felt the OAS would delay rather than act . The OAS will not act .
 Fulbright then stated that in his opinion the blockade was the worst of the alternatives open to us and it was a definite affront to Russia . The moment that we had to damage or sink a Soviet ship because of their failure to recognise or respect the blockade we would be at war with
 Fulb right then repeated his position and said it would be far better to launch an attack and to take out the bases from Cuba . Fulb then said he would be better to attack Cuba .
 Fulbright repeated that an act on Russian ships is an act of war against Russia . An attack or an invasion of Cuba was an act against Cuba, not Russia, he said . Fulbright said .
 The meeting was concluded at 6:35 60 to permit the President to prepare for his 7:00 o'clock talk to the nation .
 Senator Hickenlooper expressed himself a* opposed to the action and in favor of direct military action . During this meeting he expressed his support for direct action .
 He stated that in his opinion snips which were accosted on the high sea and turned back would be a more humiliating blow to the Soviets and a more serious involvement to their pride than the losing of as many as 5,000 Soviet military personnel illegally .
 Three additional MRBMs and four additional MRBM launchers raise the totals to 33 missiles and 23 launchers . The total now stands at 33 missiles, 23 launchers and 33 missiles . The U.S. also has a total of 23 launchers in addition to the missiles .
 Lundahl displayed the most recent photographs snd a map showlng 97 per east coverage of the island . Lundahl also displayed a map showing the island's most recent photos .
 Robert Kennedy stated that the question had been raised as to why the situation was not reported earlier, what was wrong with our Intelligence. Robert Kennedy said . Robert Kennedy: "What is wrong with the Intelligence. What was wrong?"
 It was agreed that the rapidity with which the MRBM site construction took place, and other events, accounted for the suddenness of the finding . Leadership and selected prats should be contacted privately, it was agreed .
 DCI was requested to contact Fulbright, Russell, Vinson, Halleck, Dirksen, and H. Krock . DCI also requested contact with Fulbright and Krock for the press .
 McNamara raised questios of when blockade proclamation will be issued, become effective, and discussed plane for intercept of the first ship which would be the Kimovsk . McNamara also raised the question of when the blockade proclamation was issued .
 OAS decided that if OAS acted on Tuesday, the proclamation would be issued, effective Wednesday morning, October 24 . It waa decided that Tuesday's decision would be made .
 The President discussed the steps taken, defending the steps . He said earlier action would not have shot off the possibility at missiles . He emphasised that mobile misailes can come in at any time and be sat up rapidly .
 McNamara discussed extension of tours of duty of Navy and Marina Corps personnel . McNamara also approved extension of tour of duty for Navy and Marine Corps .
 McNamara than raised question of reaction to firing on a U-2, indicated pilots instructed to take evasive action . McNamara: Pilots instructed to fire on U.2 .
 It was decided that we would bo immediately informed through JCS to the Secretary of Defense . A prompt decision for retaliation would then be made by the President, it was decided .
 Taylor reported eight attack aircraft are maintained in hot alert and can destroy SAM sites within two hours . The U-2 would get back if the attack on it failed, Taylor said .
 It was requested that CIA and Defense carefully analyze air traffic and report currently so that if there is a marked build-up, the Committee will be advised and appropriate action can be taken . The Committee has requested that the CIA and the Defense carefully analyzed air traffic .
 McCone suggested consideration be given to taking foreign flag ships on a bare boat basis . McCone suggests taking foreign flags off the coast .
 Xt was presumed that they will return not later than 1:00 o'clock today . Xt is presumed to be back in the UK not later today .
 It Is very important that NPIC and DCIs office receive prints at earliest moment . NPIC should receive prints from earliest moment. It is very important for NPIC to receive prints .
 Print at should be sent to Governor Stevenson at once . Also important is that if the photography is productive of new information, print at should send it to him .
 President raised question of security of our own air fields in Florida during surprise strafing, etc. etc. The President raised . The President also raised question .
 Bundy stated that subject under study by Dr. Dr. Bundy was subject of discussion . Bundy said the subject of the discussion was under study . Bundy then stated that the subject was a 'subject under study'
 Following meeting McCone, Wiesner, Smith and Edwarde met and reviewed the CIA Latin American communication syitem . Following meeting, they met to discuss the CIA's Latin American strategy .
 CIA is following up with CIA with Wlesner and all appropriate actions taken . CIA: "This whole communication problem is to be followed up energetically by CIA"
 Secretary Ball reported Goremor Stevenson and Mr McCloy felt they did not have enough information to make a convincing case before the UN Security Council .
 They requested a large map showing the actual locations of a few of the sites, possibly one MRBM site, one IRBM site and one or two air fields . Indication, but not necessarily the numbers, of all the sites; a pre-May 1. 1. May 1
 Bundy explained idea of creating staff to support the Committee . Bundy said each member should have a working staff member . Details to be worked out later on .
 DDCI should consider appropriate assignment after conferring with State and Defense and daterminiag their nominees . The DDC should be given appropriate assignment .
 At 12:40 Mr Arthur Krock called at my office at my invitation . Mr Krock, Mr David Lawrence, and Mr Scott attended meetings with Mr Lawrence .
 I reviewed the situation generally -with him answering questions concerning the background of the decisions, die arguments in favor of the coarse of action versus a blockade and a blockade coupled with a political debate .
 At 5:00 o'clock at my invitation Mr David I>awrence and Mr Scott called at my office and reviewed the situation with them . Mr David and Ms Scott called to my office at 5:30 p.m. to review the situation .
 "They questioned me in considerable detail as to why we did not know this sooner, how Keating got his information," he says . "I was asked why we had not known this sooner," he adds .
 "I explained the situation substantially as outlined to the leadership at their meeting," he said . "The leadership at this stage have been very supportive," he added .
 MRBM sites can be Installed quickly and with very little advanced preparation which can be detected which can't be detected . However, they did recognize that MRBM Sites can be installed quickly with little preparation .
 Administration spokesmen spoke ao categorically that the build-up was purely defensive and that no offensive capability was being installed . Both gentTemcn <jtestioned me at considerable length as to - why Administration . spokesmen said that no . offensive capability had been installed .
 They were concerned about repeated statements by the President, Chester Bowles, the Vice Fresident and other Administration spokesmen, but most particularly the State Department briefing held on Thursday, October 18th . They said they thought this briefing was a deceptive mistake .
 I inadvertently met with Mr Scott of the Scott/Allen combination who accosted me as I headed Senate Office Building . Mr Scott is a member of the Republican-led Senate majority in Florida .
 Ho said, "We're going to have to blow you out of this for not reorganising your estimating processes, most particularly your Board of National Estimates" Ho said .
 Scott said that he felt that such an Estimate was reckless, it did not serve the Government in establishing policy, and it was a frightful disservice to the people of the United States . Scott said he felt such a statement was reckless .
 Scott apparently has road the latest Cuban estimate published about'Septernbe r 20th, which contains wording as quoted above . Scott apparently refers to the latest estimate published by the Cuban government .
 Meetings with Senator Russell, Senator Hickenlooper, and Chairman Vinson 1. Meetings . Senator Russell met with Senator Vinson, Senator Russell and Senator Russell .
 In a meeting on October 23rd, Senator Russell indicated a less critical attitude toward Administration policy than was evident at the leadership meeting the night before . Russell indicated that he was less critical of Administration policy .
 He expressed concern over the Soviet/ United States confrontation which would result from the blockade . Accepted the course of action only because it would lead to the next phase which would be that of taking the missiles and offensive weapons out of Cuba at a time .
 "I outlined my feelings that our purposes must be to remove the missiles and also to remove Castro as is outlined in a separate memorandum," he said .
 He expressed confidence in the President as did Senator Russeli but serious reservations concerning some of the President's advisors . He felt they would influence the President to follow a very weak and compromising line .
 I pointed out that the warning now had been given and action could be taken now at a time of our own choosing . Russell agreed this was correct and agreed it was correct, adding that action could now be taken at a 'time'
 There was an extended discussion of actions to be taken under various as turned Soviet resistance activities such as failing to stop, refusing right to board, ships turning around, heading in another direction, etc. etc. There was also a discussion of how to take part in the resistance activities .
 McCone questioned Gilpatrie's findings, however Gilpatririe said that this had been thoroughly studied . McCone said that McCone concerns as expressed at the morning meeting were unfounded . GilPatririe: McCone's concerns are unfounded .
 Bundy indicated Lemnister might be used as CINCEUR with Norstad remaining as SACEUR, Bundy stated that this is complicated as the two posts are so co-mingled that they really must be held by one man . Bundy stated this was complicated as this is so
 Taylor raised question that if this was dona it would hart Lemnitser's prestige . If this was true, it would be a blow to the prestige of the country, he said . Taylor: If this is dona, it could be a big blow to Lemn
 The President said that he felt that Norstad was so experienced and so capable and his judgment bo sound, as evidenced by today's cable, a copy of which I have not seen, thai he would take the risk of NATO country criticisms, he did not thlnv that Lex
 President Boomed particularly concerned over the situation if we should launch attacks which might result in four or five missiles hftlng delivered on the United States . Boomed concerned about the situation .
 DOD ipoVesmen stated that the area covered by the 1100 mile missiles involved 92 million people . The area was covered by an 1100 mile missile range of 1100 miles .
 X got the conclusion that not very much could or would be done; that whatever was done would involve a great deal of publicity and public alarm . X concluded that not much could be done .
 Emphasis continues to be placed on the READINESS status of the offensive missiles in the region . The missile system is currently being tested in a range of missiles .
 Some of Mission 5002, the low altitude photographic coverage of 23 October 1962, arrived during the preparation of this report . Preliminary comments have been incorporated in the discussion of the Guanajay IRBM sites .
 We do not believe the measures to achieve a higher degree of action readiness for Soviet and bloc forces are being taken'on a crash basis. We believe measures are not being taken on a 'crash basis'
 Communist reaction to the U.S. quarantine action against Cuba has not gone beyond the highly critical statement issued yesterday by the Soviet government .
 Congressional Lesdership attended by President Rusk, McNamara, McCone and McCone . Attended by President Lovett and Secretary of State John Kerry .
 Secretary Rusk reported on the United Nations, stated there was no confirmed Soviet reaction or statement of intentions but discussed exchange with the U.S. Secretary of State Rusk . Rusk: "There is no confirmed . reaction"
 The President categorically stated oa several times through the meeting there vai no formal or Informal direct approach for a Kennedy/Khrushchev meeting . The President said there were no negotiations toward that end .
 It was the consensus that the discussions at leader­ship meetings must be kept most confidential . It was also a consensus that discussions at leaders' councils must be confidential .
 Russell complimented Secretary Rusk on the unanimous OAS action and his unusually complimentary remarks were strongly supported by Dirksen, Hickenlooper and Mansfield . Rusk's remarks were also strongly supported .
 Dirksen said he felt such a confrontation between Khrushchev and Kennedy at this moment would be as usless unless ground rules were established indicating that constructive results would develop . He then brought up the question of a Summit meeting .
 The President agreed; stated that we must now wait until the confrontation of the ships . The next 24 hours will bring out important developments, he said .
 Smathers qustioned about reported Cuban orders not to shoot unless attacked . He said they were ordered to stay away from Cuba unless attacked by the U.S.
 McCone stated that this information had come through intelligence channnels and seemed to be correct . McCone said this information came from intelligence sources and that the information was correct .
 McCone replied the Cubans were excluded except for camp construction . Then it was reported that they were kept under careful surveillance .
 Fulbright questioned McNamara at some length concerning his preparations for invasion . Fulbright asked McNamara specifically whether all steps were taken so that an invasion could be initiated in a minimum time . McNamara: "All steps taken" were taken to prepare for a possible invasion .
 McNamara atatud that all preliminary steps were being taken, outlining some of the details, hot not many o£ them . That preparations ware being made so that an invasion, could be accompanied by the 7-day lead tlme discussed .
 Meeting adjourned, with agreement that leadership would remain on 3-hour alert . Meeting adjourns, President seeiting agreement that the leadership would stay on 3 hour alert .
 Three of the Soviet ships suspected of being possible ballistic missile carriers enroute to Cuba are reportedly altering their course . The ships are believed to be carrying ballistic missile missiles .
 We are at this time unable to determine whether these bunkers are for storage or checkout of nuclear warheads, or for both .
 The BELOVODSK has 12 HOUND helicopters . Two dry cargo ships not known to have reversed course may be carrying non-military cargo . Two of the dry cargo ship's cargo ships are believed to be carrying military equipment .
 Changes in course appear to have been executed in midday on 23 October . President signed the proc­lamation establishing the quarantine .
 "We still see no signs of any crash procedure in measures to increase the readiness of Soviet armed forces," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 There is as yet no reaction to the turn-around of Soviet shipping, which had not become publicly apparent .
 McCone reported on intelligence, reviewing summary of 25 October, including penciled memorandums as indicated .
 S October on talks with Sir Kenneth Strong, and the Watch Report of same date . Watch Report: S October 2014 .
 McNamara raised the question of accelerating or raising the escalation of the actions we have so far taken . McNamara expressed concern over the plateau, indicating determination to meet our ultimate objective of taking out the missile sites .
 McCone gave intelligence briefing covered by Situation Report of 10/25 and followed with resume of Bloc shipping . Also referred briefly to reaction to Soviet government statement . All MEMBERS PRESENT .
 There followed a long discujsion of policy matters, notea of which are covered in the attached .
 The meeting considered three drafts of scenarios of three possible courses of action . Air strike, political path and progressive economic blockade, all are attached .
 SC 11064/62 Canadian Reaction (OCI 3569/62 Draft: Scenario for Alrstrike; Political Path; Political path; Progressive Economic Blockade 93. Two pages of notea on small White House note paper Situation Report 10/25 3 pages .
 You asked me to give you a paper by 5:00 in. today on the San Roman/Attorney General/Harvey/Lansdale/MonGCOSS problem in connection with submarines and the 50-Cuban project, he says . You asked him to give him a paper
 I have talked only to Bill Harvey but in the light of rny prior knowl­edge of Special Group/MONGOOSE/Lansdale/voice level, etc., etc., it is my clear opinion that this whole problem is centered around jurisdictional bureaucracy .
 The deliberative MONGOOSE system was not utilized for this particular project . Instead, the deliberative system was used to create the project .
 Harvey rightly realized that intelligence collection was essential . It should be geared to a turnover of the assets to the military in place in the event military operations took place .
 The detailed planning is still going on but cannot be firm until sub­marine commanders are available . Details of the detailed planning are still going to be kept in the dark .
 Cubans are not owned by San Roman but have been checked out by CIA . Cubans have been CIA agents for a long time and have been in contact with the CIA .
 "Unfor­tunately San Roman, like other exile group leaders, is looking out for the future of the future," says San Roman .
 The targets planned for this operation as have been previously indicated to you, are to include the MRBM and IRBM sites . The targets are to be included in the operation .
 CIA-JCS coordinated liaison and control must be effected - the time has long since passed for MONGOOSE-type, Special Group-type consideration . I am convinced that if we are to have military operations in Cuba, and even now .
 Emphasis placed on READINESS status, construction pace and any significant changes at the offensive missile sites in Cuba . Emphasis is placed on the READINESS Status of the missile sites and construction pace .
 No additional missiles, missile transporters, or erectors have been identified . 4 missiles, 5 missiles, 6 missiles, 3 missiles, and 4 erectors were identified .
 Road construction around Re-medios suggests the fourth IRBM site we have been expecting there . No additional sites, launchers or missiles have been located, but there is road construction around the site .
 We estimate that it would cost the USSR more than twice as much to add to its ICBM strike capability from the USSR as great an increment as the potential salvo from Cuban launching sites .
 Some Soviet and satellite elements, including air and ground elements in Eastern Europe and European Russia, are on an alert or readiness status . There are further indications that some Soviet elements, such as air or ground elements, are alerting or alerting .
 There is some evidence, that additional tactical aircraft have been placed on five-minutes alert in East Germany . Two areas along the West German border have been closed off for exercises .
 NATO members agree with minor reservations to deny landing and overflight rights to Soviet planes bound for Cuba . Most'of the OAS nations have offered to participate in some form in the quarantine . NATO members have agreed with minor reservation that they will deny landing rights .
 CIA plan to have ten teams go into Cuba by submarine to gather intelligence on missile bases and other points of interest . CIA also plan to send teams to Cuba by sub-seaplane to gather information .
 McCone stated there was an organizational problem with Lansdale under current conditions . A meeting had been called for this afternoon to resolve this problem and to establish a course of action .
 McCone also advised the President that plan for political organization, of Cuba in event of an invasion was under study and would be considered at tie 2:30 meeting .
 There followed an extended discussion of operational matters, details of which are covered in the attached notes . There followed a lengthy discussion of operations, including operational matters .
 Item 2N was approved and Mr Gilpatric undertook to expedite the construction work necessary to establish the 50 KW radio transmitters in the Florida Keys . The Florida Keys will be the first state to transmit 50KW radio in the Keys .
 The infiltration of agents is'to be held up pending a determination by the Department of Defense through General Carroll, as to just what military information is desired and determination by State .
 There has been no evidence of attempts at interdiction of U.S. reconnaissance aircraft .
 The probable nuclear bunkers adjacent to the MRBM sites are not yet ready for storage, assembly or checkout . The probable bunkers are still not ready to be stored or assembled .
 A prerequisite must be ""proof" that the United States does not intend to attack Cuba, the U.S. says . They indicate, however, that a pre-emptive attack would not be possible .
 This report does not attempt to estimate Soviet intent to attack the U.S. It is not an estimate of Soviet intent on attack .
 "This provides an increasing, integrated, operational readiness posture," says the Pentagon . This provides an increase in readiness posture, it says .
 Microwave relay towers have been noted at some of the MRBM and IRBM site areas covered on 27 October . This indicates an integrated microwave command and control communication system will be utilized in Cuba .
 All 24 MRBH launchers now appear to have reached full opera­tional readiness . All 24 of the launchers are believed to be ready for use .
 One nuclear storage facility is complete, but none of the bunkers observed is yet believed to be in operation . There are some indications that the -2 lost yesterday over Banes was brought down by the SA-2 system .
 As of 0700 EST, two or possibly three more Soviet ships are heading for Cuba in addition to two dry cargo ships and four tankers we have been watching . Two of these ships are headed for Cuba .
 McNamara: Have as our objectives a UN recon. plane on Monday . President: Secy. not go today but let's go on assumption either we or UN will go on Monday. Decision made to release a brief statement welcoming the K message .
 No reconnaissance flights today despite recommendation of Secretary of State supported by the Secretary of Defense . Air Force says no reconnaissance flights will take place .
 Cline was instructed to support the DCI's position that the removal of the missiles should not end by giving Castro's a sanctuary and thus sustain his subversive threat to other Latin American nations . Cline supported the position .
 Report was based on analysis of low-altitude photography taken on Saturday, 27 October 1962 . Report was compiled by Guided Missile and Astronautics .
 No new MRBM or lRBM sites have been detected; however, we have had no high altitude coverage appropriate for search since October 1962 .
 There is more evidence of the intent to have nuclear warhead bunkers at each launch site . There is also more evidence that the North Korean government is intent to build bunkers .
 The enclosed table includes a list of Soviet offensive aissile weapons aod associated equipment in Cuba . The list of weapons associated with Cuba includes Soviet weapons .
 Very little equipment has been observed at the three IRBM sites in Cuba . The only equipment identified has been two possible fuel trucks and two possible oxidant trucks .
 If the IRBMs and other associated equipjaent are in Cuba they are probably in an unlocated facility between the port of Maricl and the sites . It is likely they are in a facility somewhere in Cuba .
 A study of Soviet sea shipments to Cuba indicates that it is unlikely that aany IRBMs had reached Cuba prior to the institution of the Quarantine .
 There art, however, nuclear weapon storage bunkers under construction at each of the MRBM and IRBM sites .
 If nuclear weapons are in Cuba they are probably in an unlocated facility between the entry port of Mariel and the sites of the sites . The sites are probably located between the port and the entrance to Mariel .
 IL-28 aircraft are at San Julian in western Cuba; three or four appear to be assembled . Three or four aircraft are believed to have been assembled in Cuba . IL-27 aircraft were built in the 1960s .
 An additional 23 or 24 aircraft in crates have also been observed at this airfield . The aircraft are believed to have been in crates at the base .
 Each disassembled aircraft consists of 1 fuselage crate 60X8X10 feet; 2 wing cratos 9X40X8 feet; and 2 engine crates 9X30X8 . feet . Each crate contains a wing crate and engine crate of up to 60 feet .
 Implied numbers are those we estimate to be organic with Soviet MRBM/IRBM units or represent the highest number observed . Implied number is those estimated to be either organic with MRBM or IRBM units .
 On 23 October you gave a brief intelligence report saying that construction at tie sites was continuing . The report was based on an intelligence report from October 23 .
 At an evening meeting that day you. briefed on military developments within the WARSAW pact countries, .described an increased level of Soviet military communications .
 22 Soviet missile ships were en route to Cuba, says President Obama . President Obama briefed on progress in completion of the missile sites .
 On 25 October you told the Group there had. been no change in the construction pace; you covered the Watch Committee report stating that Soviet armed forces were increasing their state of readiness . You described the Soviet ships en route to Cuba carrying helicopters, . described the departure of a Cubana plane
 At an evening meeting you briefed in detail on the status of Soviet shipping 4.4.5.6.7.5 .
 Watch Committee report concluded that Soviet armed forces had completed measures for an alert but that ifaere were no significant deployments . Stevenson attended the Watch Committee meeting in Moscow on 26 October .
 You summarized the status of shipping and made the point that ships coutd carry Soviet arms . You said that ships were carrying Soviet arms and that they were carrying arms .
 You reviewed briefly Castro apprehensive reaction to the United States quaranting he seems to fear in uprising . Castro seems to be apprehensive about the quarantining of the U.S.
 You directed that Ray Cline participate in the draft reply to Khrushchev's letter . You directed him to write a reply to the letter .
 You asked that Cline insure supporting your position that the removal of the missiles should not end by giving Castro a sanctuary .
 You mentioned the point that press stories based on special intelligence must be prevented . CNN.com will feature a Q&A interview with John Sutter next week .
 Castro might remain in Cuba with a greater security and this is the situation we must be careful of. After the meeting you talked with the President and Secretary Rusk emphasizing that Castro might . Castro might stay in Cuba .
 You covered the shipping situation and pointed to the danger of sabotage in Latin American countries urging that all Embassies' and consulates be alerted . The shipping situation is a major concern in Latin America .
 Committee Report concluded that Soviet armed forces remain on alert . Committee Report which, concluded that . concluded . that Soviet . armed forces remained on alert and you reviewed briefly current developments in Laos, South Vietnam, and India, Soviet nuclear subs, and Soviet nuclear tests .
 Evidence that some of the launchers had been moved from the MRBM sites, might be construed as the first step at dismantling . On 31 October you told the Group that there was continued evidence of construction and concealment .
 You further pointed out that photos were compared with those taken on Saturday and orders to cease were probably not issued until Sunday night or Monday morning . You said photos were taken Saturday and photos were probably taken Saturday .
 You reviewed the Cuban SNIE of 19 September, noting that it failed to fully appraise all reports available . There was discussion of the""intelligence gap"" and you reviewed the SNIE .
 Cuba, probably would engage in reconnaissance with anti-aircraft fire with anti aircraft fire . Cuba had claimed that they had developed a pattern of reconnaissance .
 Decision made to cover IL-28 base in San Julian and MRBM sites . Decision was made at this meeting to . cover IL - 28 base in . San Julian . Decision made on the IL28 base .
 On 2 November you told the Group there was evidence that the Soviets were dismantling missiles, but the assembly of Il-28 bombers was continuing . In November, you said there were evidence of evidence of the Soviet dismantling missiles .
 This memorandum assesses evidence concerning the number of Soviet missiles deployed to and subse­quently withdrawn from Cuba . The chances that Soviet missiles remain in Cuba, and the situation and outlook with respect to rates of withdrawal of lL-28s .
 We cannot exclude the possibility that more actually arrived, and that some remain, but we think that any such number would be small . We think any such a number of people would be very small .
 The Soviets normally provide two missiles for every URBM and IRBH launcher and, since several of the launchers already had two, we believe that they intended to provide two each for the others, or a total of 72 for the 36 launchers identified .
 Of these, 48 would be MRBMs, of which we identified 33, and 33 would be IRBMs . We have no evidence that any had reached Cuba by 22 October . Of this, of these, the reminder would be 33 of which were identified .
 The pattern of the nise identified sites strongly suggests that at least one nore was planned to form a pair with the ninth .
 Among the Soviet ships which turned back from the Cuba run were five of the seven which we know to have been capable of carrying missiles .
 Analysis indicates missiles were shipped in one piece, less only warheads, on the transporter in a package about 68 feet long as hold cargo . Analysis indicates the missiles were shipping in one part . Analysis: The missiles were sent in one package, less warheads .
 The can in this way account for at least 36 missiles—six on each of six voyages . The can can be filled with six missiles each, six on each voyage .
 The Soviet claim of 42 is consistent with our evidence, but we cannot rule out a sonewhat higher nunber . The possibility that two or core of the seven other -voyages delivered nissiles is possible .
 Sources inside Cuba have provided numerous reports in recent weeks that strategic missiles have been retained in Cuba and concealed from aerial reconnaissance . Sources in Cuba have said the missiles are being kept in Cuba .
 Mayari Arriba, 40 miles northwest of Guantanamo, may be missile-associated, says U.S. State Dept. of Cuba .
 Such a renewed crisis would find the Soviets in an even core disadvantageous position than before . The Soviets would be in a position either to protect their interests or avoid humiliation .
 The White House President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board has completed a review of actions taken by the foreign Intelligence agencies of our Government to discharge their responsibility for intelligence coverage, assessment and reporting .
 U.S. Foreign Intelligence efforts as dislosed by the Cuba experience, review finds .
 We directed particular attention to areas of the intelligence process, which are concerned with such matters as the acquisition of intelligence, the analysis of intelligence and the production and dicssminatrion of intelligence reports .
 The second phase consisted of a much briefer period beginning on October 22 and culminating with the Presidential announcement on Oct. 22 concerning measures for meeting the Soviet offensive threat in Cuba .
 Soviet Union had taken steps to establish a strategic nuclear missile complex in Cuba . Soviet Union was planning to build the complex in Havana .
 We note that the definitive photographic evidence obtained as a result of the October 14 and subsequent overflights of Cuba was promptly processed and submitted to the President in time for decisisve action before the Soviet MRBM and IRBM systems become fully operational .
 It would be difficult for the intelligence community to operate with the same intensity and efficiency under less critical aonditions, says Tor .
 "One of our major problems remains the achievensnt of very high performance between crises," he says . "We still have a problem that we are not able to cope with crises. Thus one of our problems remains," he adds .
 As to the pre-OCTOBER 14 period, we conclude that our foreign intelligence effort should have been more effective in obtaining adequate and timely intelligence as to the scope of the Soviet military build-up .
 Soviet move came dangerously close to success in an area less than ninety miiles from our shores, the absence of useful early warning of the enemy's intention must be stressed .
 We did not find that during this period there was within the intelligence community the focused sense of urgency or alarm which might well have stimulate ""a effort" to find out what happened .
 Intelligence Acquisition Clandestine agent coverage within Cuba was inadequate . Clandestine agents were not included in the CIA's Cuba operation .
 The absence of more effective clandestine agent coverage contributed substantially to the failure of our Government to recognize at an earlier date the danger of the Soviet nove in Cuba, the authors say .
 V/e find also that full use was not made of aerial photographic surveillance, particularly during September and October, when the influx of Soviet military personnel and armaments had reached major proportions .
 The president granted authorisation for all U-2 flights which wero recommended to him by his policy advisers on the Special Group having responsibility for such matters .
 The Special Group approved, one instance with modifications, all U-2 overflights recommended to it . The U.2 program was approved by the Special Group with modifications .
 Until October 3, the Defense Intelligence Agency urged that suspicious areas of Cuba be covered by U-2 photographic missions . It appears that there was a failure on the part of the intelligence community as a whole to propose to the Special Group J-2 reconnaissance missions on a scale commensurate
 The need for more frequent and extensive aerial photographic surveillance during the summer and fall was even more pressing in view of the inadequacy of clandestine agent resources and the limited effectiveness of other collection methods .
 Central Intelligence Agency and others believed that such a restriction did in fact prevail . We were unable to establish the existence of the policy .
 Report: Operational elements were under the impression that such an injunction was in effect . We note in this regard that in the December 25 report of the Director of Central Intelligence it is impossible to determine whether there was such a restriction .
 The Special Group was not made fully aware of the delaying effects on the acquisition of aerial intelligence which could and did result from changes in a CIA proposal for the conduct of a U-2 mission .
 The CIA proposed that the Spscial Group approve and recommend the scheduling of a U-2 flight to provide extensive peripheral coverage of Cuba as well as two legs directly over Cuban airspace .
 The Secretary of State objected to this combining of an actual overflight with the overflying of international waters . The secretary of state objected .
 He felt that the long peripheral flight would draw attention, and if the aircraft were to fall into eneny hands after an overfliglit of Cuba, this would put the United States in a poor position to stand on its rights to overfly international waters .
 Secretary of State proposed that the September flights be broken into four, separate missions, two of them peripheral and two directly over Cuba, and the CIA made plans to do so . The September flights were scheduled to take place over Cuba .
 The next successful U-2 mission was not flown until September 26 . Director of Central Intelligence points out that the poor weather in September resulted in prolonging the time required to get the desired coverage of Cuba .
 We feel that under these circumstances the Special Group should have been informed of the factors operating to delay the four-flight coverage, and given an opportunity to reconsider the advisability of a mission over the critical target sreas urgently requiring surveillance .
 We also feel that the Special Group should be possessed of a mechanism, which would automatically pick up such omissions of reporting . We also want to see a mechanism that automatically picks up the missing .
 It appears that further consideration should have been given to proposals by the Acting director of Central Intelligence in August and September for low-level photographic reconnaissance of certain Targests in Cuba .
 The Secretary of Defense did not wish the low-level operations to be considered until results of U-2 coverage of the same area became available . When the Special Group took up the matter, note was taken .
 We must point out that when the U-2 flights were delayed there should have been immediate re-examination of the proposal for low-level flights . Granting the obvious appropriateness of the recommendtion of the Secretary of Defense .
 Estimate concluded that the establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba would be inconsistent with Soviet practice to date and with Soviet policy .
 This mistaken judgment, made at the very time when the Soviets were installing MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba, was made by the Soviets . We attribute to the lack of adequate intelligence coverage of Cuba, the authors say .
 Estimate of September 19 pointed away from the likelihood of the establishment of Soviet nuclear missile systems in Cuba . An important cautionary statement appeared in a discutssion paragraph, namely that the contingency of such a development should be examined carefully .
 This cautionary statement, however, was not carried forward into the conclusions of the Estimate . This is not the case for the first time in the world's history .
 We believe that the near-total intelligence surprise experienced by the United States with respect to the introduction and deployment of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba results in large part from a malfunction of the analytic process by which intelligence indicators are assessed and recorded .
 This nalfunction diminished ths effectiveness of policy advisers, national intelligence estimators, and civilian and military officers having command responsibilities . The problem was a problem for policy advisers and national intelligence analysts .
 We believe the manner in v/hich intelligence indicators were handled in the Cuba situation may well be the most serious flaw in our intelligence system, and one, which, if uncorrected, could lead to the gravest consequences . We believe that the manner . in which v/
 Our Government was not provided with the degree of early warning of hostile intentions and capabilities which should have been derived from the indicators contained in the incoming intelligence . The UK has been accused of failing to provide early warning to the Government of its own .
 Had the intelligence community prepared and periodically presented compilations of accumulated indicators, this would have permitted appropriate policy-level consideration of davelopments in Cuba and of alternative courses of action .
 The practice followed in the Cuba situation of providing White House stuff members with some of the raw indicator reports was not an acceptable substitute for professional analytical reporting on a developing crisis situation . The practice was not acceptable .
 Raw intelligence reports were used effectively in targeting the October 14 U-2 mission which led to the discovery of offensive missiles in Cuba . The significance of the important indicators involved was not communicated to the President .
 The Intelligence community did not revise its erroneous National Intelligence Estimate of September 19 . Despite the intelligence indicators which were accumulating even before the U-2 discovery on October 14, the Intelligence community didn't produce a revision of its erroneous estimate .
 "We believe a further and exhaustive examination, not limited to Cuba, should be made by the intelligence community of the complex analytic process employed throughout the community in the assessment of intelligence indicators," the authors say .
 We are aware that the illustrations listed are but a small number taken from the great volume of reports which were received and which included some demonstrably erroneous information . We are also aware of the fact that some of these illustrations are taken from some of the reports which we received .
 These indicators were acquired from a variety of intelligence sources, such as refugees, clandestine agents, and friendly foreign diplomats .
 Our review of the intelligence reporting process reveals that limitations placed on the publication and disseminaticn of reports and information concerning the situation in Cuba were either misinterpreprets or misapplied .
 One such limitation was imposed by the Director of Central Intelligence in May 1962 . One of the restrictions was imposed in 1962 .
 CIA did not publish information on the offensive build-up in Cuba in pre-October 14 period . It was not published by the CIA even in the President's Intelligence Checklist .
 The President placed limitations on the publication of reports on weapons which might be offensive, pending receipt of further information con­cerning suspected missile installation at Banes .
 President made olear that he wished to impose no limitation whatever on the collection and analysis of intelligence relating to offensive weapons . He emphasized that he wanted all such information collected, analyzed, and promptly reported to officials having a real need to know .
 The U.S. Intelligence Board interpreted the Presidential instructions as an injunction not to print any information on offensive weapons in Cuba in any intelligence publication . However, the board interpreted the instructions as a ruling .
 The Director of Central Intelligence exempted CIA's Presidential Intelligence Checklist from this injunction . Checklist issues prepared subsequent to the President's instructions failed to include information from any of the refugee or agent reports on the sightings of offensive missiles .
 The misinterpretations of this directive endangered the necessary flow of information, officials say . It is a warning that in future situations requiring such restrictions, attention must be given to establishing secure channels .
 The Cuba experience points up the neod for advance planning to ensure that our human end material intelligence resources are sufficient, and are adequately organised .
 As a result, signifi­cant information did not reach some elements of the Government, both in V/ashington and military commands, says the U.S. President and some other officials .
 Officials who checked in normal places concerning such matters were told that there was no evidence of offensive weapons . But raw intelligence had already led to the targeting of the San Cristobal area where offensive missile installations were subsequently found through U-2 photography on October 14 .
 As a result, it was necessary to call in certain military commanders from the field and give them oral briefings on the subject . As a consequence, the government called in some military commanders to give them briefings .
 The restriction served to hamper the commanders in their planning for possible military action involving Cuba . The restriction was meant to prevent the military action against Cuba .
 U-2 overflights of Cuba began on an accelerated basis on October 14 . No more than a 10-day supply of photographic film was on hand in the entire country .
 In the absence of a central processing facility for developing photographic film in quantity, under appropriate security safeguards, it was necessary to make use of film laboratories at scattered locations considerably removed from Washington .
 James R Killian, Jr., Chairman President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board William 0.0.0 . Killian is the chairman of the President's foreign intelligence advisory board . William is the son-in-law of President George W. Bush .
 Clark Clifford James Doolittle, Gordon Gray, Edwin H Land, William L Land, Robert Langer, Robert D Murphy FPrank Pace, Jr. Baker, Jr., Jr.
 I am returning the report of the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board dated February 4th commenting on the intelligence community's actions in connection with the Cuban crisis . The President
 It is understood that the Board will make recommendations to you for corrective measures which they feel should b« taken within the Intelligence community .
 When these re commendation* are received, I would hope for an opportunity to comment upon them as I did with the recommendations contained in their interim report of December 28th . I would also hope for a chance to comment on them as well .
 When I appeared before the Board on November 7th, December 9th, and December 28th, 1 stated that there was an understandable reluctance or timidity in programming U-2 overflights over Cuba after we had discovered the presence of surface-to-air missile installations .
 Thia caution was understandable not only because of the extremely severe criticism of ""U-2 incidents"" dating back to the Powers' incident on May 1, 1960, but also because of more recent loss of a Chinat U-2 and a U.2 intrusion over Sakhalin
 Secretary of State revises CIA-proposed flight at the Special Group meeting held in Mr Bundy's office on September 10th .
 JCS asked CIA to study all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnaissance and to report back on October 9th . It was the same attitude that caused the Special Group in considering extensive Cuban reconnaissance .
 Analysts were convinced that the Soviets would not accept the inevitable confrontation resulting from placement of offensive missiles in Cuba, he says . The State Department and intelligence community were convinced, he writes .
 This, I find, is one of th« difficulties of dealing with the imponderable a of what the other fellow will or will not do . This is a difficult task for a man to do, says the author .
 For two years the intelligence community had been surfeited with reports of 'missiles in Cuba, "" all of which proved to be incorrect prior to those which we received on or about September 20th .
 About 3,500 agent and refugee reports were analyzed in the preparation of my report to the Killian Board . Of this number, only eight were considered as reasonably valid indicators of the deployment of offensive missiles to Cuba .
 Intelligence community operated extensively and well in connection with Cuba . Inquiry into its actions during Cuban crisis revealed some areas where shortcomings existed .
 Every major weapons system introduced into Cuba by the Soviets was detected, identified, and reported before any one of these systems attained an operational capability . Every major weapon system introduced to Cuba was detected and identified before it was operational .
 The vary substantial effort directed toward Cuba was originated by an earlier concern with the situation in Cuba . The effort, already well under way, contributed to the detection and analysis of the Soviet build-up .
 The procedures adopted in September delayed photographic lntelligence, but this delay was not necessary, because photography obtained prior to about 17 October would not have been sufficient to warrant support from NATO allies .
 None of the information on offensive missiles reached the intelligence community or policy-makers until after mid-September . Agent reports helped materially, however, but none gave significant information .
 Some restrictions were placed on dissemination of information, but there was no Indication that these restrictions necessarily affected analytical work or actions by policy-makers . Some restrictions placed on disseminating of information .
 The 19 September estimate, while indicating the improbability that the Soviet Union would place MRBM's and IRBM's in Cuba, did state that ""this contingency must be examined carefully, even though it would run counter to current Soviet policy" The estimators in preparing the 19 September
 McCone to Carter, Cable, with attached note from MSC , 16 September 1962 29. 29. McCone .
 34. Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62: "The Military Buildup in Cuba,"" 19 September 1962 34. "The military buildup" was a major operation in Cuba .
 Supplement 1 to Joint Evaluation of Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba, 20 October 1962 70. 70. Soviet missile threat in Cuba was a threat to Cuba .
 THK to Elder, 22 October 1962, with copies of two cables sent to all Chiefs of Station 78 . The cables were sent to each other by THK and Elder .