 People also thought World War II will solve the problems left by World War I, and unfortunately that also did not happen . People also believed that the war would solve the issues left by WWI .
 The Cold War started because the two sides, United States led North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Soviet Union led Warsaw Pact, distrusted each other . U.S. led N.A. and Soviet . led . NATO led NATO and the Soviet . Warsaw Pact led NATO .
 The Soviet Union dislikes the United States because they thought that the U.S. purposely waited later to join the war to fight the Germans . The United States joined the war against the Germans in 1944 .
 There were also differences between the forms of government that the two sides had .
 The United States was a democratic country, but the Soviet Union was a communism country . The U.S. was a democracy country, and the USSR was a communist country .
 Even though there were many disagreements, they did come to some agreement . Even though they did disagree, they came to an agreement on some things .
 France, Britain, and U.S. agreed to separate Germany into four parts . One side was under the control of the Soviet Union . The other was under control of France and Britain .
 This setting created a border between the two sides, which caused the two to move further away from each other and turn more hostile against each other . The two sides moved further away and turned more hostile towards each other.
 There were numerous conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War . U.S. and Soviet Union was one of the most powerful allies in the world .
 During the Cold War, tension started to build up between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . During the 1950s, tensions began to rise between the United States and Russia .
 After the Crisis, the bomb started to be dismantled piece by piece . However, after the crisis, it has been dismantled piece-by-piece .
 Soviet Union withdrew missiles in Cuba and U.S. promised to remove missiles in Turkey as soon as possible . Soviet Union also withdrew missiles from Cuba and United States agreed to remove them in Turkey .
 President John F Kennedy established a blockade around Cuba to prevent more weapons from entering Cuba . The blockade was established in order to prevent the entry of weapons into Cuba .
 President delivered a speech on the television to inform the public about the Soviet nuclear missiles and bombers in Cuba . Then on 22 October 1962, the President delivered the speech .
 A naval quarantine around Cuba would be put into effect until the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw the missile from Cuba . At the same time, he announced a naval quarantine .
 Khrushchev proposed in a letter that U.S. would pledge not to invade Cuba and lift the quarantine in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . After days of argument in the United Nation and through letters between the two head of states, the Soviet Union Chairman Khrush
 The next day, however, the United States received another letter from the Soviet Union . The U.S. received a second letter from Russia .
 It demanded that the removal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey as part of the deal for the Soviet to remove missiles in Cuba . The deal was part of a deal to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 JFK told Khrushchev that the Jupiter missiles would be removed from Turkey as soon as possible . The president decided to pledge that United States would never invade Cuba .
 John F Kennedy asked his brother to tell Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that United States will make a public pledge not to invade Cuba and secretly remove missiles in Turkey as soon as possible . John F. Kennedy asked brother, Robert Kennedy to tell him to tell the Soviet ambassador Anatoly
 President Kennedy was willing to let both the U.S. and the Soviet Union to move back a step . This showed that President Kennedy wanted to resolve the crisis as peaceful as possible .
 The removal of missiles in Turkey reduced the tension between the Soviet Union and the U.S. The United States removed missiles from Turkey in the 1980s .
 Fifteen Jupiter nuclear missiles were first placed on Turkey in July 1960 . 15 Jupiter missiles were placed in Turkey in 1960 .
 In April 1963 the last missile was dismantled in Turkey and the missile warheads were transported back to the U.S. as part of the secret agreement between the United States and Soviet Union . The last of the missiles were dismantled in April 1963 .
 Jupiter missiles increased tension because of both its range and speed . Jupiter missiles were launched in the 1980s and '90s . Jupiter missile missiles increased tensions because of their speed and range .
 The missile is a type of intermediate range ballistic missile with a range of 1,500 miles . It is an intermediate range missile that can be fired at more than 1,000 miles .
 North Korea carries a nuclear warhead that could create mass destruction to the targeted area . Not to mention that it could also carry a nuclear weapon that could be used in mass destruction .
 NATO could easily fire missiles at Moscow, the capital of the Soviet Union, within around fifteen minutes . NATO could attack Moscow within around 15 minutes of the attack .
 In response to the NATO placing Jupiter missiles in Turkey, the Soviets placed missiles in Krasnovodsk and Kirovabad . The missiles were placed by the Soviet Union in response to NATO's Jupiter missiles .
 Some people believed that the removal of missiles in both Cuba and Italy did not decreased the tension in the Cold War . This started a arms race in the Eastern Europe with created tension between NATO and the Soviet Union .
 The removal did reduce the tension, because it decreased the armament of missiles on both sides . However, the removal of missiles reduced the tension . The removal of the missiles did reduce tension .
 The NATO placed nuclear missile in Turkey and Italy, they responded by placing nuclear missiles in Soviet Union facing the west . The Soviet Union found out that the NATO placed . NATO placed missiles in Turkey, Italy and Italy .
 This showed that by placing nuclear missile near another country starts an arms race between two nations . This showed by placing a missile near a country starts the arms race . This was a nuclear missile launch that started a nuclear arms race with Russia and China .
 This greatly increased tension, due to the fact that nuclear missiles could cause server devastation to a region and possibility of starting a nuclear war . The possibility of nuclear war has increased tension .
 Placing missiles in Turkey and Cuba increased the tension in the region and threatens peace between the Soviet Union and the U.S. The United States has placed missiles in Cuba and Turkey and Turkey . The missiles could have been placed in Turkey or Cuba .
 When missiles were placed in Turkey, the Soviet Union also placed additional missiles facing the west in Soviet Union . The Soviet Union placed missiles facing west in Russia .
 When Soviet Union placed missiles in Cuba, the chance of starting a nuclear war increased . Additionally, the risk of war increased when the missiles were placed in Cuba .
 By taking away the missiles, the tension could be decreased dramatically . The tension could also be decreased by removing the missiles .
 This brought the two sides a step away from having huge armament build-ups . The two sides are now less likely to have huge armaments build-up .
 The two nations signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . Afterwards, they worked together and signed a nuclear test ban treaty . The treaty was signed by the two sides .
 If any of the countries involved, Cuba, Soviet Union, and United States, decided to attack the other first, then a nuclear war many imagined would become reality . Cuba, Russia, and U.S. would be at risk of war .
 Limiting the nuclear weapon test decreased the tension in the Cold War by limiting nuclear weapon development . Limiting nuclear weapon tests decreased the tensions in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The United Nations Disarmament Commission brought together the United States, Soviet Union, France, Canada, Canada and United Kingdom to discuss banning nuclear testing . At that time, the U.S. and Soviet Union were discussing the topic of banning nuclear tests .
 There were no obvious results from the discussion because there were disagreement on how to verify underground testing and how many on site inspection is allowed . There were also disagreement over how many inspections allowed .
 The United States and the United Kingdom held that the number must be determined by scientific fact and detection capability . The U.K. and the U.S. disagreed on the number .
 This showed that the Soviets tried to limit the amount of times on site inspection is allowed . The Soviets were also trying to limit how many times they could inspect .
 The Soviets also feared that on site inspection would lead to spying on the military structures and might reveal the actual number of deliverable nuclear weapons . The Soviets feared that inspection might lead to the discovery of the nuclear weapons' deliverable weapons .
 This shows that John F Kennedy believed that an arms build up was not an efficient way to maintain peace . Kennedy believed arms build-up was not a efficient way of maintaining peace .
 This treaty prevented radioactive substance form polluting the environment . This treaty stopped arm buildup and stopped radioactive substance polluting environment .
 The agreement was discussed over a long period of time, after the Crisis the process speed up significantly . Even though, the agreement had been discussed over long periods of time . The agreement is expected to take place in the next few months .
 The three countries started negotiation on July 15, 1963 and reached a conclusion within ten days . The three nations reached a deal on July 17, 1963 .
 It was ratified by the president on October 7, and entered into force on October 10 . It was then ratified by President Barack Obama on October 6 .
 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty banned nuclear testing in the atmosphere, sea, and outer space for any reason . Treaty also banned testing in outer space and the atmosphere of the planet .
 Some people thought that the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty could not really limit nuclear testing and improve the environment . Underground testing was not part of the treaty, since underground testing is not part .
 With a Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the speed of developing nuclear weapons could be greatly decreased . However, with a nuclear test ban treaty, the risk of developing a nuclear weapon could greatly decrease .
 Nuclear fallout from the nuclear weapon would not fall into another country’s border . It could also prevent nuclear contamination of the environment .
 The treaty was the first step in limiting the development of nuclear weapons by limiting the testing of such weapons . The treaty greatly decreased the tension between both countries .
 The treaty banned any nuclear explosion that would cause radioactive substances to fall into another country . The treaty also banned any explosion causing radioactive substance to fall in another country.
 Limiting nuclear explosion test could prevent nuclear pollution and ultimately prevent the development of new nuclear weapons . Limiting explosion test would prevent pollution and prevent development of nuclear weapons, experts say .
 President Kennedy was willing to bring peace between nations and believes that this goal was important and needed both U.S. and Soviet Union’s attention . President Kennedy showed that he was willing .
 The treaty brought the two countries under a milder situation and they started to rebuild trust by following the treaty and keeping promises . The two countries are now rebuilding trust .
 After limiting the nuclear test United States and the Soviet Union formed direct communication between each other . After limiting nuclear test the U.S. and Soviet Union became direct communication . The Soviet Union and the United States limited nuclear tests in the 1960s .
 Tension increased between both sides because of distrust and lack of communication . Tensions increased between the two sides of the border .
 The treaty provided direct communication between the head of two states at Washington D.C. and Moscow . The treaty also provided direct communications between the two countries .
 This greatly decreased the chance of miscommunication thus decreasing tension between U.S. and Soviet Union . This decreased the chances of miscommunication thus decreasing tensions .
 There was a long process in the negotiation of a direct communication link between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Soviet Union proposed safeguards against surprised attack and expressed concern over accident war that may happen due to miscommunication . Soviet Union proposes safeguards against surprise attack . Concerned about miscommunication between Soviet Union and Soviet Union .
 It took the United States hours to receive and decode a message from the Soviet Union . In the crisis, it took the U.S. hours to get and decode the message .
 The crisis convinced the both sides that an efficient and secure direct communication was needed to resolve crisis faster . The crisis was convinced both sides wanted to resolve it faster .
 The communication during the crisis proved to be too slow, creating unnecessary tension . The communication between the government and the public was too slow to be effective .
 The working paper included a proposal of direct communication between major capitals .
 The memorandum that was signed by both countries states, “Each Government shall be responsible for the arrangements for the link on its own territory.”
 This outlined the basic agreement that was made between the two countries on direct communication . The agreement was outlined in the agreement between the U.S. and China .
 Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union believed that direct communication decreased tension between both countries . Both countries believed that a direct communication between them decreased tension .
 President Kennedy believed that in order for U.S. and Soviet Union to have peace they needed to have more understanding and communication . President Kennedy said in order to achieve peace, they needed more understanding .
 Soviet Union Chairman Nikita Khrushchev also believed that direct communication benefits Soviet Union in that it simplified the diplomatic procedures . Nikita also believed it simplified diplomatic procedures in the Soviet Union .
 Both the Soviet Union and the United States believed that a direct communication link could decrease the tension of the possibility of starting a war . This showed that both the U.S. and the . Soviet Union believed that such a link could reduce the tension .
 President Kennedy believes that it is the first step of maintaining peace . Chairman Khrushchev thought that the direct communication simplified the communication between both nations . President Kennedy believed that it was a first step toward peace .
 Some people believe that direct communication between the U.S. and Soviet Union was used rarely and almost never used . Some believe that the direct communication was rarely used .
 Direct communication was used a few times to prevent misinterpretation of military movements and decreased tension . However, the direct communication was not used in some cases .
 In the Arab-Israel war of 1967, the U.S. used the hotline to notify the Soviet Union on United States fleet movement in the Mediterranean Sea . The hotline was used to notify Soviet Union of movement in Mediterranean Sea.
 President Richard Nixon used the hotline during the India-Pakistan conflict in 1971 . Nixon used it during the war between India and Pakistan . President Nixon also used it in the 1970s .
 The hotline was modernized by the agreement made in 1971, 1984 and 1988 . The hotline has been modernized since then .
 There were three agreements within twenty years to modernize the hotline . This showed that the hotline was used significantly to the point that there were three .
 This proved that the hotline decreased the chance of miscommunication and suspicion during the later parts of the cold war . The hotline was used during the Cold War .
 The direct communication formed between the U.S. and the Soviet Union decreased the tension caused by inefficient communication and misinterpretation of military movements .
 During the crisis it took hours to receive and decode the three thousand words message from the Soviet Union . The message was sent during the crisis during which it took several hours to decode .
 New events could happen much faster than the speed of their communication, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 With a direct communication the time needed greatly decreased, thus decreasing tension . The time needed to communicate with each other greatly decreased .
 The outcome of the Crisis was removing nuclear missiles near each country . It was removed from each country's nuclear missiles .
 Publicly, the Soviet Union agreed to remove missiles in Cuba and as a secret deal between the both countries, the U.S. agreed . The Soviet Union and the United States removed nuclear missiles placed in Turkey . The deal was a secret agreement .
 This agreement set up a direct communication between the United Stated and the Soviet Union for emergency and prevents misinterpretation of events . This agreement was set up by the U.S. for emergency .
 The direction communication was used in many occasions to prevent interpretation of United Stated military movements . The direction communications were used in the United States military .
 This decreased tension between the two countries, and prevented accidental conflict . This decreased the tension between two countries . The two countries were friendly and friendly .
 Another agreement made by the two sides was the limited test ban treaty . The two sides also agreed to an agreement on a limited test test ban .
 The treaty banned nuclear testing in the atmosphere, outer space and under water . It also banned testing in outer space, under water and under the atmosphere .
 This limited the arms race between the U.S. and the Soviet Union to a degree since countries could no longer test nuclear weapons except testing it under ground . Countries could not use nuclear weapons under ground or underground .
 We have developed 5 beneficial guarantees that will make your experience with our service enjoyable, easy, and safe . That’s why we have developed these guarantees . The guarantees will be beneficial to customers .
 You have to be 100% sure of the quality of your product to give a money-back guarantee . Money-back guarantees are required to guarantee a product you buy .
 Each paper is composed from scratch, according to your instructions . Zero-plagiarism guarantee . Each paper will be written from scratch .
 Free-revision policy gives you the chance to be unsatisfied with our free revisions . Free revisions are available at the end of each month .
 We will work on your paper until you are completely happy with the result . Please submit your paper to be completely satisfied with the results .
 By sending us your money, you buy the service we provide . Read more Fair-cooperation guarantee by sending us our money .
 Check out our terms and conditions if you prefer business talks to be laid out in official language .
 Course Scholars a relatively cheap custom writing service is a great option . If you need a custom written term, thesis or research paper as well as an essay or dissertation sample, choosing Course Scholars is a good option .