 ActiveHistory provides award-winning interactive simulations, decision-making games, self-marking quizzes, high-quality worksheets and detailed lesson plans for teachers and students .
 Origins of the Cold War, 1945-61 . Origins of Cold War have not already been studied using the detailed unit at ActiveHistory .
 Presentation guides through the origins and development of the Cold War . Interactive Multimedia Presentation . Includes video clips, video clips and student activity sheet .
 This unit is based around extended roleplay activities firstly from the Soviet, then from the American, perspectives . This unit includes extended roleplaying activities from Soviet-American perspectives .
 Students gain a thorough understanding of the events and develop an appreciation of how close the world came to nuclear holocaust in 1962 and who deserves credit for their handling of the crisis .
 Soviet Roleplay involves thinking through the arguments for and against placing missiles in Cuba from the Soviet perspective in a general sense of historical context .
 Each member of class takes on the role of a named Soviet advisor with a clear agenda . Then, each member of the class plays a Soviet advisor .
 Teacher takes on the role of Khrushchev to talk through the arguments . After they have formed their proposal, the teacher talks through the argument .
 The final outcome is a detailed set of notes outlining the position of various Politburo members . The notes will be invaluable for the essay writing / sourcework analysis examination .
 Each student takes the role of a member of EX-COMM, and prepares a statement arguing for a course of action in response to Khrushchev's policy regarding Cuba .
 The rolecards have been carefully written so that the students do not simply learn about the policy of each key character . They also learn about relationships between the individuals concerned .
 Students produce a write-up reflecting on how effectively he dealt with the initial stage of the crisis . Students watch video clips about Kennedy's final decision .
 This slideshow rotates a gallery of images of the key characters involved in EX-COMM . It can be left running on the whiteboard during the reflection/roleplay phase of the activity .
 In this second roleplay, students witness the crisis unfold step-by-step . The Crisis Escalates is designed to last about an hour .
 At each stage, they have to discuss what they think Kennedy should do, then make comments about his actions after being told what he actually decided . At the end of the show, they must make a comment about Kennedy's actions .
 The Teacher-led Multimedia Presentation provides all the materials a teacher needs to help students complete the Student Worksheet . The teacher-led presentation is a free download from Amazon.com .
 ActiveHistory is the work of full-time history teacher Russel Tarr . War in Ukraine: Worksheet / Lesson Plan | Rise of Pinochet: Diplomatic Causes . Rise of the Chilean war machine: Domestic Causes . 1066: Battle of Hastings Simulation .
 ActiveHistory provides vast amounts of worksheets, lesson plans, interactive simulations, self-marking quizzes, model essays and teacher support materials for the history classroom . ActiveHistory is available in the U.S.