 The San Diego Union-Tribune will mark its 150th anniversary in 2018 by presenting a significant front page from the archives each day throughout the year . The newspaper will mark the anniversary by presenting significant front pages from its archives every day .
 President John F Kennedy imposed a United States naval blockade of Cuba after American spy planes found Soviet missile sites on the Communist-ruled island .
 The U.S. and Soviet Union ended a 13-day standoff in October . The crisis ended peacefully when the Soviets began to dismantle their missile sites . The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to end the standoff .
 Russia to Dismantle Cuba Missiles in Cuba and their return to the Soviet Union . Khrushchev ordered dismantling of Russian nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 President Kennedy replied with a pledge that there would be no air attack on the bases nor an invasion of Cuba, if this was accomplished . President Kennedy said he would not attack the bases or invade Cuba if it was achieved .
 Direct U.S. military action appeared imminent before Khrushchev offer . Direct American military action had appeared imminent prior to Khrushnik's offer .
 Khrushchev said he had ordered construction of the missile sites halted and the Soviet missiles in Cuba crated and shipped back to Russia . The missile sites in Cuba were halted .
 Soviet premiere said dismantling of bases could be done under U.N. supervision . United Nations supervision could be used to oversee the dismantling of the bases .
 Khrushchev agreed to all steps proposed by the President for a solution — or at least negotiations — of the crisis . The crisis in the Soviet Union broke out in 1956 .
 President described Khrushchev’s decision as “an important contribution to peace’ President described as ‘important contribution’ to peace . In turn, the President described the decision as an important contribution of peace .
 Mr Kennedy welcomed the Kremlin leader’s agreement that United Nations representatives should “verify” Soviet dismantling of the Cuban bases . Mr Kennedy also welcomed the deal .
 The president said verification would mean that the United States blockade could be lifted . The U.S. blockade could also be lifted if verified .