 Thomas Friedman continues to be the most dimwitted foreign policy commentator in U.S. media . And ""Blinks"" Over Ukraine over Ukraine . Thomas Friedman is a dim witted commentator .
 Putin 'blinked' on Ukraine by not invading it, something the Russian Federation never had any interest in . Putin never invaded Ukraine, something he never had a reason to do so . The Russian Federation was never interested in invading Ukraine .
 Friedman misreading history is a misreading of current foreign affairs events, Friedman says . But worse than that is, he misreads history, Friedman misreads the history of America's wars .
 In 1959/60 the United States planned and in 1961 proceeded to install nuclear armed ballistic ballistic intermediate range missiles in Italy and Turkey . In 1961 the U.S. installed nuclear armed missile bases in Italy, Turkey and Italy .
 These ""Jupiter"" missiles could have reached Moscow within minutes . The missiles would have given the U.S. a decapitating first strike capability against the Soviet Union .
 In April 1961, a CIA trained and supported force of exiles invaded Cuba . CIA trained a force of Cuban exiles and Cuban refugees .
 They were defeated and thrown out of Cuba but the incident intensified Cuban desire for protection by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was defeated and threw out of the country .
 Moscow initiated further talks with Cuba to counter U.S. missile threat in Europe . Agreement was found to counter the United States missile threat . Russia also installed similar missiles on Cuba .
 It also demanded that the United States refrained from any further invasions of Cuba . The U.S. should not invade Cuba, the Cuban government said .
 With Jupiter installations in Turkey and Italy the U.S. had gained an advantage . The Jupiter installations were in Turkey, Italy and Turkey .
 The Soviet Union countered and in the end the United States pulled back . The U.S. pulled back, but the Soviet Union did not .
 The United States sold out the interests of its allies Turkey and Italy, while the Soviets delivered security assurances for their allies in Havanna . The U.S. sold out its interests to the Soviet Union, the U.K. sold its interests in the area .
 Crimea and the attached seas with hundreds of billions worth of hydrocarbon reserves are now part of Russia . Hundreds of billions of dollars worth of oil and gas reserves now belong to Russia . The Crimea and Crimea are now Russia's most populous regions .
 The Ukraine will continue to depend on Russia for its energy needs and general economic exchange . The Ukraine is dependent on Russia's energy and economic exchange with Russia .
 New Ukraine government hangs as it grapples with its coming energy crisis . It will let the new Ukraine government hang as it scrambles to cope with the coming crisis . Ukraine's energy crisis will be the first of its kind .
 Russia will get its will in Ukraine and there is no way for the U.S., apart from nuking Moscow, to change that view . The United States is unlikely to change its perspective on the Ukraine situation .
 Friedman finds it necessary to create such a new myth can only be explained by the need to cover up the ongoing U.S. retreat over Ukraine, Friedman says . Friedman: The need to create the myth is behind the need for a cover-up over Ukraine .
 Joe Biden's son is on the board of the Ukraine Oil & Gas Company . US-IL has installed a dual-citizen Israeli Oiligarch as Ukrainian President, who intends to keep Israeli Prime Minister . Together they are engaged in wholesale slaughter in Donetsk .
 2000 was obvious to the World as a Globalist-Military coup takeover, after Clinton's failed 'Third Way' NeoLiberal policies . Fukuyama called it the 'End of Civilization' and the PNAC said, ""America needs a New Pearl Harbor"".
 Obama is Gorbechev, just an odd parallel to the Soviet Union's own collapse, but collapse America shall . Obama is the president of the U.S. and the country will collapse .
 In the wreck of the Soviet Union, and my direct involvement in Afghanistan, one thing led to another, Bada bing . In a Starbucks in Seattle with two Russian businessmen I never met, over a bottle of Russian vodka, with all the Yuppies Gen-X'rs
 Not the kind of BMWs you chop up BMWs for resale parts, the kind you break ships with . Not the sort of BMW BMWs that you chop them up with .
 The last of the Soviet military fleet to Bangladesh with, anchor on the beach, and with giant saws, break the ships into manageable pieces, the way Brazilian leaf-cutter ants raze a corn field . The kind you sail the last of Soviet military .
 The Soviet nuclear sub fleet had been successfully broken and sold off to Germany, he says . So long story short, the deal went through, my partners and I got a little taste .
 Kennedy-Cuba analysis, but we're a Million Miles down the Super Highway today . You are stuck in the 'Deep Throat' era with your analysis of the Kennedy/Cuba era .
 These juvenile taunts are all part of the United States strategy . TomV | May 28 2014 10:59 utc | 2 .
 From the very beginning they have been baiting Putin/Russia, hoping to draw Russia towards direct intervention in Ukraine . The long-prepared ""Putin is the new Hitler"" campaign can be ramped up world-wide, and more of their overpriced war toys sold to terrified governments
 I imagine many drawers full of such demonizing articles, caricatures and talking points are still waiting for the right moment to be deployed . I imagine there will be many more such articles waiting for a moment to deploy .
 Russia being too smart to fall into the obvious trap , the narrative ""Putin blinked"" is just another ploy to put domestic pressure on Putin . Russia being too smart to fall into a trap, the narrative "Putin blinked"
 Friedman: The humiliating treatment of the Russian journalists, the absurd sanctions, etc. etc., are all part of the ongoing and escalating provocation . Friedman: Such details as the humiliating treatment . of the journalists, sanctions . etc., etc. are part of an escalating provocation, to which Friedman
 If Putin invades Eastern Ukraine, that is the start to the long-ed-for wider new war . But as long as he doesn't, he will be mocked and taunted relentlessly, in an attempt to shame and weaken him .
 This particular piece of propaganda is not evidence of Friedman's stupidity, it ties in too well with neocon objectives . So while I agree that Friedman is stupid and contemptible, I agree with his views, this is not his stupidity .
 B, thanks for helping to weaken the hoary old myth that Kennedy ""won" the Cuban missile crisis .
 Fidel showed his true colors when he embraced the Soviet Union in his dispute with America .
 He can't be excused for partnering with the Soviet Union . Although, for some of it, he can be excuses, he is excused .
 By doing so, he damned any other possible revolution, bloody or not, in Central and South America, in South America . "By doing so he damned all other possible revolutions," he said .
 He became the perfect scapegoat example for any liberation movement from a PR standpoint . He was a perfect example of a scapegoat for any movement from PR standpoint.
 No sympathy could ever be granted by Americans because they'll always remember that Castro was willing to nuke them in the "blink" of an eye .
 The only conclusion is Fidel and his Marxist experiment in Cuba is that he is a useful idiot . Fidel is the only conclusion one can draw as to why it's not .
 Yeah yeah yeah yeah, but he's still dimwitted. Catcher In The Lie . Catcher in the Lie .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation sent a note to Ukraine . It draws attention of the Ukrainian side to the fact that the Russian side has received insistent appeals from individuals and organizations in the conflict zone in eastern Ukraine .
 Russian stressed that it is ready to provide the population in these regions with the required assistance, and proposed to the Ukrainian side to promptly take the necessary measures to ensure the immediate delivery of Russian humanitarian aid .
 Specific routes and transport conditions of such humanitarian assistance could be agreed in due course, note says . The note says the appropriate Russian and Ukrainian authorities could discuss the aid .
 In the 80s he did a book on the Middle East on the bais of his conversations with taxi drivers while doing a gig as reprter for the NYT, which no doubt got him the gig with the billionaire's daughter .
 He and Dvid Brooks, also of the same tribe, are what make the Times the great institution that it is today for thinking men and women who read one book a month .
 It is the neocons who, in the last analysis, are crude, unsophisticated and stupid, writes David Frum . It's the neocons, he says, who are crude and stupid .
 U.S. foreign policy is dominated by empty heads without any strategic sense, says George W. Bush . U. Bush administration has been criticized for its foreign policy .
 Everything that the U.S. has done, during the Ukrainian crisis, might as well have been calculated to serve China's interests . Everything that has happened during the Ukraine crisis might be calculated to help China, he says .
 China, historically, has always lived under the shadow of invasion from the west, Central Asia . China's history has always been plagued by the threat of Central Asian invasion .
 The various ""stans"" formerly Soviet Republics, will be squeezed into the SCO and U.S. bases squeezed out of them . United States bases will also be squeezed out from them .
 The new Sino Russian alliance will stretch from the Ukrainian border to the Pacific . The new alliance will include China, Russia and Russia .
 Look at what they are doing in Libya, with a 1000 marines hovering off shore waiting to help the latest coup there- which will inevitably lead, in months or years, to a neo-Ghadaffi restoration .
 Iran, Russia, the former Soviet states and China into an unbreakable alliance . Bad publicity, headaches for decades to come, a job for Joe Biden's feckless child .
 Despite all, they do have a pretty similar life expectancy to the U.S. at a whole less cost, and a very similar literacy rate . The United States has a similar life expectancies to the United States at a lot less cost .
 Haiti is top of life expectancy in the Carribean, better than the Bahamas . United States supported Haiti is bottom of the list, while the Bahamas is bottom .
 "The goal of the game is not to win, but to lose by letting the other win, going off the cliff," he says . The goal of winning is to not lose by losing, he says. The goal is to let the other lose, he adds .
 For the U.S. and the Kiev regime, though they say they want to keep the unity of Ukraine, they want the Russian invasion and/or partition of Ukraine . The Kiev regime says they want Russia to invade Ukraine .
 For Russia, though they appears to want to invade and partition Ukraine, they really want to preserve the unity of Ukraine . Russia wants to preserve Ukraine's unity, but not partition Ukraine .
 Russia knows unified Ukraine will never leave the Orbit of Russia . Russia knows that unified Ukraine never leaves the orbit of Russia. Russia knows it will never be unified Ukraine .
 The problem is they had many fake victories already, and doesn't seem to be satisfied, yet, yet . But, the problem is that they had already had a lot of fake victories .
 Crimea is now part of Russia, NATO membership for Ukraine is off the table for good . Ukraine's new president understands that good relations with Moscow are essential, just as Putin wanted .
 As most of their dealings are kept from the public, this fault-line where power is shared uneasily and in a chaotic fashion is invisible .
 Coal miners have taken to the streets to demand an end to the Kiev ""punishment"" operations . But now that the coal miners are demanding an end, it is way more difficult to spin this .
 They will find a way to do it while continuing to loose readership and credibility . However, they will find it while losing credibility and credibility.
 This is a game changer because the West can't whitewash the repression of ""terrorists"" miners . This is the case of the West being forced to deal with the problem of 'terrorists'
 Europe is uninterested in more sanctions against Russia and is likely interested in facilitating an end to a civil war at its doorstep . Europe is likely keen to facilitate an end of a civil civil war in its own backyard .
 Putin has not taken the bait in spite of the goading so the empire is very mad . The empire is mad. Thus far, Putin is not taking the bait .
 Poroshenko admitted to a closing window of time for the Kiev offensive to produce the desired effect . Poroshenko said to be intensifying Kiev offensive in Kiev .
 It also demanded that the U.S. refrained from any further invasions of Cuba . And that the United States should not invade Cuba .
 Allen Dulles, head of the CIA, board member of United Fruit, was the main force behind the Bay of Pigs invasion . Dulles would certainly have been surprised to hear of any CIA assistance for Castro .
 Castro was able to overthrow Batista and crime overlord Meyer Lansky, who together under the benevolent eyes of American business jointly ruled Cuba . There's no reason to blame Castro or Marx or the Soviet Union if today's U.S. protected international crime organizations take over Cuba again .
 Sheldon Adelson will be instrumental in making Cuba Vegas, according to his prediction . Lansky, considered the most powerful international crime boss of his day, had close connections to the CIA .
 Cuba ranks high in metrics of health and education, with a high Human Development Index of 0.780 as of 2013 . Wikipedia: "Cuba ranks high in metrics of health and education, with a high Human Development Index of 0.780
 Ten men went into the sierra to change things. And just think, think, it all came about because ten guys went into a sierra. Ten went to Sierra Leone .
 This worry about 'who blinked' is irrelevant to those being murdered by the west's bandera nazi terrorists . Ken Nari: "This worry about who blinked is irrelevant"
 Everything will be lost quickly once civil war intensifies and the partition of Ukraine sets in . However, everything will not be lost when civil war breaks out and partitioning of Ukraine .
 Kiev may be trying to put a lot of pressure on Kiev to come up with a government that respects sort of Russian interests in this, says CNN's John Defterios .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says the White House is looking to make deals with the European Union and other things . Sutter: "As they, you know, look to cut ... deals with European Union"
 The Kiev regime's terror campaign against the Russian speaking population continues . They only offered hostile rhetoric, more sanctions, and unconditional support for Kiev .
 Everything depend on whether the unity of Ukraine will be preserved, and it's not decided, yet, yet . The unity of the Ukraine is not yet decided, but it's still uncertain .
 The next is to apply meaningful pressure on the interim government to do what it has thus far refused to do—establish a government of national unity . The next step is to pressure them to establish a national unity government . The interim government has failed to do so far and has refused to act
 There is no doubt that the army in this case will return to the barracks . He also stressed that Poroshenko can easily do and there was no doubt the army would return to barracks .
 The following report includes some of the latest of that, along with background reporting that I have put together from other sources . The report includes links to videos of the actual historical events .
 The principle claim is that Russia was actually intransigent about Ukraine having to choose between the EU and the customs union . The claim is based on the fact that Ukraine had to choose whether to join the EU or Ukraine's customs union.
 I think I think here and elsewhere that Barosso was the one who gave the ultimatum . I have read I think . here, elsewhere that he gave the . one . I think this is not the only time he has been in charge of the Italian government .
 I find the guy kind of sinister and I think what he's saying needs to be challenged . Might seem like an oddly teeny hobby horse to be riding right now but I find it sinister .
 If anyone can point me to the sources to debunk the claim I'd appreciate it .
 Never seen that claim so boldly made either . Of course I know that most readers here are unsympathetic to that view and I agree .
 Any detailed thoughts on debunking this specific meme since, he actually baldly states it would be welcome .
 Thomas Friedman is what is known as a useful idiot . Grim Deadman: Friedman is an idiot .
 'All he really good for much like our esteemed present Secretary of State is to marry a rich woman. All he really is good for is to get married to rich women,' he said .
 Massinissa: Im not even sure why you bother watching that fake left nonsense, honestly. Im even not sure why we bother to watch that nonsense. I just want to say 'I don't believe in that nonsense'
 Think Berezovsky, Khodorklepto, Guzinsky, etc. etc. instead of them sitting in the corner like good little boys . Instead of sitting on the sidelines, they sat in the corners of the room like good boys .
 Freedman (Guardian, NYT, WSJ, Independent, etc, etc. etc hate Putin. That's why Freedman hates Putin .
 He snatched the Russian resources candy as they were about to gobble it down in front of their drunk friends . The candy candy was a popular candy bar .
 Gitmo was part of the permanent prize seized by the USA during the 1898 American-Spanish War . The U.S. Empire also gained the Philippines and subsequently slaughtered about a million as the natives wanted REAL independence not subordination .
 The Ukraine crisis surprised elites in the European Union as well as elites in Ukraine, says Julian Zelizer . "We are now just coming to terms with it. That’s the big thing that changed," he says .
 The traditional Ukrainian foreign policy has been to balance between east and west . When that doesn't work out, go east, go back east, and then when that doesn’t work, go west . Ukraine's foreign policy is to balance east, west and east, not east,
 Every Ukrainian president down to Yanukovych has done that in one form or another . Yanukovych, however, has done it in one way or another.
 Russia is no longer a state, Russia no longer is a state . The reason that that's no longer possible is that Russia is not a state. The reason for that is not possible is Russia's failure to be a state is that it no longer exists .
 Russia 'became an exclusive alternative' to the West, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin says Russia is now an 'exclusive alternative' in the world .
 Antonov, based near Kiev, also designed and manufactures a medium-size transport plane, the AN70, a series of gliders like the AN15, a regional jet and an advanced jet engine . Antonov also designed a medium sized transport plane and a glider . The company
 Russia designed, manufactured and today still services Russia's main intercontinental ballistic missile, the deadly SS18 . The SS18 was designed and manufactured by the Soviets in the 1960s .
 The Saker has already provided a response to this article . Frank says he will not comment on the comments . Frank: "The Saker is here to answer the questions"
 The Ukraine, just like Russia, has inherited a lot of top-quality Soviet technologies . The Ukraine has inherited some of the best Soviet-era technologies, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Ukraine and Russia could literally ""coast"" for almost 20 years on that technological basis without really developing any truly new systems . These technologies were, in fact, so good, that both the countries could literally "coast" for nearly 20 years without developing new systems.
 The SS-18 missile is still one of the most powerful ones on the planet . It is still a good example of how powerful the missile is now .
 The design is really late 1950s early 1960s technology and it runs on liquid fuel . But it's not the same as the original design, it's the same kind of technology .
 The Russian Ministry of Defense recently wanted to purchase more of these missile missiles . The missile was purchased by Russia's defense ministry . The Russian government recently purchased more of the missile .
 The passage is so abstract that on the topic it discusses there can be an infinite number of takes . Yonatan says there are infinite takes on the subject .
 Apart from the obvious absurdity that it is an exclusive alternative, the question boils down to ""What is Modern Russia?"", and that's where the fun begins .
 The possible answers range from kleptocracy to empire and from gas station to last European nation state . The country's gas station is one of the last gas stations in Europe .
 All of those mentioned and those inbetween are subject to criticism of various degrees of constructiveness, but none but for the most absurd ones can be refuted entirely . The most absurd one of the most ridiculous ones can't be refuted .
 Depending on whom you read you can get different takes on your second question . So depending on what you think the answer is different .
 Syria and Ukraine will remain the perfect ways for the U.S. to exert pressure on Europe . Europe's population are overwhelmingly against the Transatlantic trade negociations . Syria, Ukraine are the perfect places for the United States to pressure Europe, writes Julian Zelizer .
 Guantanamo Naval Base was a concession the U.S. acquired from Cuba long before Castro's revolution .
 After the 1993 attack, a crystal clear letter sent to the NYT explained the motive . Our DEMANDS ARE: 1 Stop all military, economical, and political aid to Israel .
 Bin Ladin has declared a jihad against the United States . He says he's declared a 'jihad' against the U.S.
 We declared jihad against the United States government, because the U.S. government is unjust, criminal and tyrannical . "We declared jihad" against the government, the group says . The United States is unjust and criminal, the Taliban says .
 We believe the United States is directly responsible for those who were killed in Palestine, Lebanon and Iraq . And we believe the U.S. is responsible for the deaths of those who died in those countries .
 This U.S. government abandoned even humanitarian feelings by these hideous crimes . This United States government abandoned human rights by these crimes . The United States abandoned even human feelings .
 'It transgressed all bounds and behaved in a way not witnessed before by any power or any imperialist power in the world,' says President Obama . 'We are not going to be surprised by this behaviour,' he says .
 Terrorists, he wrote in 1998, have no specific ideological program or demands . Terrorists have "no specific ideological demands," he said .
 After 9/11 attacks, Friedman had the audacity to continue to lie . Friedman continued to lie about the attacks after the attacks, then lied again . Friedman continues to lie on the attacks .
 Friedman claimed, ""the fact is that bin Laden never focused on this issue. The fact was that he never focused upon this issue," Friedman claimed .
 Osama bin Laden never mentioned the Palestinian cause as motivating his actions until he felt he was losing support in the Arab world . He only started talking about ""Palestine"" after September 11, when he sensed he might be losing the support of the Arab street .
 A winners/losers who-blinked-first paradigm is not particularly illuminating in this case . Tom Murphy | May 28 2014 .
 The U.S. military, for example, had developed a first-strike policy which was predicated on the total destruction of both the Soviet Union and China . If any shooting broke out over Cuba there was a high probability that this policy would have been put in action .
 Members of the Joint Chiefs were advocating a first strike even in the absence of any flash point . The Joint Chiefs are advocating a strike even though there are no flash points .
 The severity of the Missile Crisis forced the U.S. and USSR to back away from winner/loser paradigms . The severity forced the civilian leaders of both countries to back off from winner-loser paradigm .
 JFK didn't lose Jupiter missiles it was a gesture to Krushchev to help rein in the hawks on the USSR side . JFK didn:t lose the Jupiter missiles but was trying to keep them under control .
 In that context, we could say that everyone on the planet were the winners . "Everyone in the world were winners," says CNN.com .
 Talk of winners/losers and who blinked first is sandbox stuff, and reveals the emotional maturity of children . Talk of winning/losing and who blinking first are sandbox stuff . It reveals the children's emotional maturity .
 It is shocking that so many high up the food chain in the U.S. national security establishment and its associated courtiers presume this blunted maturity . It's shocking that many high-ups in the security establishment presume this .
 People retardly think that United States PTB don't have the American peons subjugated/brainwashed to such an extant that this shit can't continue on for AT LEAST another 20 years and until the fruits of their ""investments"" in chaos pay off they're effing
 There is NOTHING on the U.S. PTB landscape/horizon that threatens their position right now . There is nothing on the United States PTB that threatens them .
 Reports/studies of the U.S. being a non-democratic/war criminal/rogue state yet they STILL think they're dealing with a nation that can right itself . Jesus Christ, every one seems to read those reports/stud studies of the United States being a
 The election laws are even more egregiously rewritten to further entrench the elite war criminal class . Especially as the election laws were even more egregiously rewritten to entrench war criminals .
 The United States elite have ALL the time and COMPLIANT CANNON FODDER that they could possible hope for near, middle and long term to wait it out and turn events their way . So what if they suffer ""setbacks"", the U.S. elite
 Please point me to the data of the U.S. war criminal elite abiding by ANY SENSE of decency/humanity/morality over the last 4 decades . Please point out the data .
 I'd love to see the evidence that supports contentions that the U.S. war criminal elite are worried about moral hangups vis a vis the maintenance of their stations . I really don't see it at all. Really, I'd like to see evidence that . supports content
 They are brilliantly insane and there is NO ONE stating otherwise here. They are brilliant insane, there is no evidence that they are not .
 There is no reason for any of us to think that the U.S. war crimes are going to ebb, that the needless slaughters will subside . If anything they will only increase if the United States PTB do actually begin to feel threatened, he says .
 Look to how little the U.S. PTB care for their own citizens and then you'll see that there is not a moral hangup standing in their way . Look to the United States .
 These and other no-brainers are what should give the people of the world pause before proclaiming the premature end of the American empire .
 The myth of the Cuban missile crisis continues to poison U.S. thinking . The fact is that the United States promised to not invade Cuba and promised to remove those Jupiter missiles in Turkey in order to defuse that crisis .
 Alastair argues that U.S. leaders continue to believe the myth and as a result keep on using it as a precedence that prevents them from engaging in give and take negotiations . The myth is a myth that prevents U.K. leaders from engaging into giving and take .
 I don't know the background on Putin's taming of the oligarchs. Honestly I don''t know the back on Putin . And sigh beyond better informed I'm sure your cat is also cuter .
 The American and Russian leaders in the 1962 were sane, bucked the establishment, and had control of their governments .
 Vladimir Putin hasn’t won anything as the civil war engulfs Eastern Ukraine . Vladimir Putin has not won anything, despite his efforts to save his country .
 If the Eastern Provinces nationalize the Oligarchs’ holdings, as promised, the Fascist National Security Organizations in Kiev will get all the arms and mercenaries they want paid for by Western Plutocrats intent on wiping out socialism .
 If Vladimir Putin sends in Russian troops, NATO troops will counter invade Western Ukraine . NATO troops would counter invade the Western Ukraine, NATO says . NATO forces will be deployed in Ukraine to counter Russian invasion .
 If he does nothing, ultra-nationalists will overthrow his government and send in troops to protect fellow Russians from western vandals . If he doesn't do nothing, they will overthrow him and send troops in the troops . Russia's President Vladimir Putin is expected to face a backlash from ultra
 The only way to prevent a nuclear holocaust is to neuter the neoliberal/neoconservative cabal that is starting the wars across the globe and negotiate a peaceful settlement to the Ukraine Crisis .
 "obamaism" has been trying to goad Russia into invading Ukraine for months, to justify a NATO presence there . VietnamVet: Obamaism is trying to justify NATO presence in Ukraine .
 Russia for its part has resisted this while declaring any unilateral NATO encroachment in Ukraine would lead to something unpleasant . Russia hasn't deployed so much a 1 NATO helicopter so far . Russia has said it will not allow unilateral NATO intervention in Ukraine .
 The only way to "neuter" the neolib/neocon regime is for the working class to overthrow them . The only thing to 'neuter' is to overthrow the regime .
 Monopoly capitalism will continue to rot the planet until it collapses of its own dead weight and or were all dead . Short of a working class revolution, it will continue until the end of capitalism is gone . The world is not going to get rid of capitalism and it will collapse of its
 Marc | . Marc | May 28 2014 20:55 utc | 55 @VietnamVet #53: I think that time is on Russia's side. Marc | @vietnamvet: Time is on the side. I think it's time to Russia's
 If Russia sent in troops, it would have to maintain control of the territory in which its troops were present . Russia would then have to deal with an insurgency in that case, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Kyiv, including Poroshenko, seems to be laboring under the delusion that it can destroy the insurgency . Poroshenko's government seems to think it can defeat the insurgency, but it has failed .
 Russia will not tolerate having a virulently anti-Russian regime in Kiev controlling all of what is presently known as the Ukraine . Putin: "As I think you've stated yourself, Russia is not willing to tolerate having an anti-Russia regime in Ukraine"
 Only if such a regime remains in place, with a ""unified"" Ukraine, does Russia lose . Russia loses if such an 'unified' Ukraine does not succeed in Russia, writes Alexander Nekrinka .
 NATO troops are not going to enter any part of Ukraine as combatants, no matter what Russia does . Also, NATO troops will not enter any area of the country as combatants . NATO troops won't go into any area as combatants as well as Russia, NATO says .
 Demian: Unless they get their claws into Eurasia they are, in the long run, most definitely finished . I get the urgency of your feeling in that post, and its true they can make it a lot worse before they cant .
 NATO is trying to brow beat Germany and its satellites into paying more for the upkeep of the war machine, NATO . That's not going very far very fast, or rather, if the German public pays more it will demand more in return and that's already being seen .
 Germany is not a natural ally of the U.S. and won't remain one except here and there out of convenience, for another 70 years . Germany will not remain an ally with the United States for 70 years, says Obama .
 U.S. capitalists are going to bail out of the United States, says Julian Zelizer . "Long before we get to be some kind of end-of-the-world showdown between the powers of Eurasia," he says . Zelizer says.
 "They are in it for the candy and they will kiss the ass of whoever holds the keys to the candy store," says the author of a new book .
 The United States is an evil empire and at present it seems invincible, but time is not on its side . The U.S. seems invincible but it is not invincible, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In fact the American people , as they always have, hold the keys to the future in their hands, says President Obama . Obama says the U.S. has the "Keys to the Future"
 The conflict between financialized American capital and the American working class is sharpening and will continue to . Financialized American capitalism and the U.S. working class are sharpening, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The American people have not yet decapitated financialized American capital, but not because they're stupid . The U.S. has not yet severed its financialized capital, not because of the financialization .
 The American people are less stupid than they are completely depoliticized and therefore apathetic, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the U.S. is more likely to be apathetic than apathetic . He says it's a mistake that the American people don't care about
 Take away their social security and watch how fast they become re-politicized, he says . Take away social security, take away your social security. Watch how fast it becomes a political issue.
 When political conflict finally hits the US, its global imperial designs will evaporate . The U.S. will be hit by political conflict when it comes to political conflict .
 Obama: For the foreseeable future, the most direct threat to America at home and abroad remains terrorism . Obama: Terrorism is the biggest threat to the U.S. and abroad .
 A strategy that involves invading every country that harbors terrorist networks is naïve and unsustainable . But that strategy is naive and unsustainable, it is not the only solution to terrorism .
 I believe we must shift our counterterrorism strategy -drawing on the successes and shortcomings of our experience in Iraq and Afghanistan - to more effectively partner with countries where terrorist networks seek a foothold .
 There are no easy answers, no military solution that can eliminate the terrible suffering anytime soon . As frustrating as it is, there is no easy answer, there are no military solutions .
 As President, I made a decision that we should not put American troops into the middle of this sectarian war, and I believe that is the right decision . As President .
 Syrian dictator is a dictator who bombs and starves his own people . But that does not mean we shouldn’t help the Syrian people stand up against a dictator .
 Syrian President Bashar al-Assad vows to fight for the right of all Syrians to choose their own future . He vows to push back against extremists who find safe haven in the chaos .
 "They created the insurgents by their provocative actions and they want to keep it maintained," says President Obama . Obama says the U.S. wants to keep the insurgents in control .
 Ultra-nationalist and anti-Russian regime in a unified Ukraine will be short-lived. Also I think that Ultra-Nationalist and . anti-Russians regime in unified . Ukraine will not be short term-lived .
 @PuppetMaster #58: I am aware of the hypothesis that the Kyiv fascists want to split up the Ukraine so that the remaining western part is unreservedly Russia-hating. Russia .
 I can't understand a Ukie nationalist as a rational actor in any sense of the term . My difficulty is that I don't understand them as rational actors . I'm not sure if they are, but I'm sure they are .
 "It's not really possible for me to figure out what the intentions of the junta, which now includes Poroshenko, might be," he says . "Their American masters tell them to do. So it is not really . I'm not really able to ... figure out ... what
 Timoshenko called for the nuking of Russians, she also expressed regret that the Crimea was freed and reunited with its motherland . In that intercepted telephone conversation, she called for Russia to be bombed .
 Many Ukie nationalists want to keep all the territory that the legal fiction commonly referred to as the Ukraine now has. That makes me think that many Ukie nationalist want to . That makes it seem that they want all of Ukraine's territory .
 The fascists are pursuing their ""anti-terrorist" operation is simply because they want to kill Russians and because they believe that the sheer ""essence"" of the Ukie people is enough to overcome the anti-fascist resistance . The fascists want to create a rump Banderistan that
 Thomas Friedman's IQ, ethical levels, education, etc. etc. are irrelevant. Demian says . Demian: "I don't care about my IQ or ethical levels."
 He is doing his job well, or else he wouldn't be doing it for so many years, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm doing my job well. Or else he would have been doing it well"
 He may be writing it even though he disagrees with it, on any of the categories above . He may not agree with it. He may write it even if he disagrees .
 His writings resemble those of old Soviet editorials in Pravda and Izvestia . He has written for the past two decades of Soviet-era editorials .
 As a follow up to the recent posts, I agree that the Western Ukraine run Kiev government wants civil war and partition .
 To their patrons they spout freedom, liberty, democracy, and unity . I bet they even admit it among themselves . But, to their patrons, they spouts freedom .
 The “known unknown” is whether the ethnic Russians have the will, skill, armament and training to effectively combat the goons and mercenaries thrown at them . The "known unknown" is whether ethnic Russians can effectively combat goons, mercenaries .
 Hezbollah could, but, I still think that is a special case born and bred through occupation and war for decades on the Israeli border . Hezbollah could. But, he said, "I still think . that is still a . special case."
 I do not think the Eastern Ukrainians can throw the westerners and mercenaries out quickly or easily . I do think the eastern Ukrainians are capable of throwing them out of the country . I don't think they can throw westerners out quickly, easily, easily .
 Any people defending their homes, especially Russians, will fight to the bloody end, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "Any people defending [Putin's] homeland will fight," Putin says .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has declared a war against Syria that will last forever . Putin: "I think it will be a forever war that sooner or later will draw fellow Russians into the conflict"
 If Russia invades Eastern Ukraine, NATO will counter invade the Western Ukraine, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says NATO will respond to Russia's invasion of Western Ukraine .
 This would all be avoided if there was any sanity left in the West and a negotiated settlement was reached . This would have been avoided if the West had left sanity in mind .
 Friedman is a fantasist, a carnival barker calling his readers forever to sample the delicious fruits of predatory capitalism in this gee-whiz super-techno United States dominated flat world of ours .
 The column that argued that Putin blinked because Putin got pretty everything wrong in Ukraine was published today . The column was published by David Gergen, a New York Times columnist .
 Voters cannot support the European Union when it is relaunching the Cold War . Voters will not support the EU when it relaunches a Cold War, says Simon Tisdall .
 Cameron is promising Britain an in-or-out referendum on EU membership in 2017 . Now, in order to entice UKIP voters to turn out for the Conservatives, he has promised Britain an EU referendum .
 @VietnamVet #61: If Russia invades Eastern Ukraine, NATO will counter invade the Western Ukraine . NATO would counter invade Western Ukraine, says Vietnam vet Mike Maloney .
 What forces the U.S. once had were squandered in Iraq and Afghanistan, says Julian Zelizer . "What forces the United States once had are squandering," he says . Zelizer says .
 Today’s wheeled Army constabulary forces along with Army and Marine light infantry are incapable of challenging Russian ground forces anywhere in Central or Eastern Europe without risking .
 Not everyone has to be a rational actor, says Demian . Demian: "I don't believe in rational thinking"
 Despite chaotic appearances, the whole may form a discernible form and direction . However when mixed together, in spite of chaotic appearances the whole can be found to form a form or direction .
 Someone's unintended consequences could be somebody else's intended and expected consequences . And someone's unintended consequence could be someone's intended or expected consequences, say experts . Someone could have unintended consequences .
 We don't know who is aware of and agree to the plan, and if there is really a plan, it's not clear if it's true .
 They say they want to conquer and pacify the volatile eastern provinces . They want to pacify and conquer and conquer the volatile provinces .
 To do that, you have to secure as much political support you can get and mobilize an overwhelming force . To do this, you need to secure the support you get, say the president .
 The Ukrainian army and police were destroyed by the Russian-speaking population . However they took care of it by alienating the Russian speaking population and destroying the army and the police .
 The most probable result is a stalemate, and that means the partition of Ukraine . The most likely result is that Ukraine will be partitioned into a nation .
 I think one outcome that is certain, regardless of whether Ukraine is cracked, is the expansion of NATO into the former Warsaw Pact countries of Poland, the Baltics, Slovakia, Bulgaria, etc. I think that is more and more likely .
 With Afghanistan winding down, we can expect a sizable U.S. service bootprint all around Ukraine . Ukraine is a key ally of the United States .
 USG wants Ukraine to break apart, so that it can use that as a pretext for splitting ties between the EU and Russia . Mike Maloney: Yes, it is quite possible .
 Few Uki nationalists want the Ukraine to be reduced to those regions in which a virulent Russophobia can't be expected to continually fester . Few want to see the Ukraine reduced to regions with virulent Russianophobia .
 The original USG plan was to grab all of the Ukraine, including the Crimea and Sevastopol, says Julian Zelizer . Also, let us not lose sight of the fact that the original U.S. plan was for the Ukraine to grab .
 The original plan was to get all of the Ukraine, sans the Crimea . It is to be expected that some Western planners are still attached to the idea of getting all of Ukraine .
 Poroshenko says that he wants to get the Crimea back . But evidence in favor of your position is that Poroshenko wants to return Crimea to Ukraine, CNN.com reports .
 Russia's refusal to negotiate with the West has been seen as a thuggish refusal to talk with Moscow . That ridiculous position can be seen as nothing but a refusal to speak with Moscow, it is said .
 The possibility of WWIII won't be far away, says Demian Demian . Demian: "The possibility of WIIII is not far from far away"
 Crimea was taken without firing a shot and the Georgian counter attack was short lived . Crimea was also taken by the Georgian army in the same way as Crimea .
 Both America and Russia have experienced defeat against a supposedly less capable foe in Vietnam and Afghanistan/Iraq respectively . You could say that both U.S. and Russia experienced defeat in Vietnam/Iraq .
 Western Ukraine, Poland and the Baltics are neutering any advantage Russia may have for a battle in its own back yard . Russia is neutered by assistance to the U.S. by Western Ukraine .
 Finland could sit on the fence until it is clear who the winner would be . Finland could wait until it's clear who would be the winner .
 The asymmetric advantage for Russia is to deploy before the West can do anything about it . Russia is deploying before it is ready to deploy, and the West is powerless to stop it .
 If he said at West point that the hammer is not the only tool expect the opposite . Expect the opposite from West point .
 Sun Tzu: Putin's actions are more a wink than a blink . I think that Putin's . actions are . more than a wink . I don't think Putin is a dictator .
 Vladimir Putin's promise to protect Russian citizens of E Ukraine was a hollow pledge . The hundreds of dead and wounded illustrates clearly . Putin's promises to protect the Russian citizens were hollow .
 The People's uprising in the east is what he truly fears not the machinations of the Anglo/Zionists which he can effectively counter . The uprising is not what he fears, but what he really fears is the uprising .
 The real threat to Putin's Russia is the idea that regular citizens can organize and overthrow the Oligarchs in not only Ukraine but in Russia as well, this can not be allowed . This can't be allowed, says Alexander Nekrassov of Russia .
 I am not so sure about that. Wayoutwest | May 28 2014 23:50 utc | 70 .
 Getting Ukraine as a whole for ""democracy, Europe, economic prosperity or whatever"" could be a bait to get people onboard who would otherwise wouldn't . Besides, getting Ukraine whole for democracy, Europe or whatever" is a bait .
 The west needs conflict in the Ukraine, just like they do in Afghanistan . The west need conflict in Ukraine just like it does in Afghanistan, says David Cameron .
 The U.S. troops of the west's head flunky, the USA, wont be leaving Afghanistan now. Notice the troops are still in the country .
 Without some kind of conflict, it's difficult to keep the home population enthralled with their slavery . Without conflict it's hard to keep some of the world's most powerful slaves enthralling .
 Without ""hotspots"" on ""the enemy's"" borders, it's a lot more difficult to send the west's terrorists . The west's terrorist hotspots on the enemy's borders are a lot less likely to send terrorists .
 The repellant mafia sod already has that, his military is basically a western merc force . His military will be basically western merc forces, he says .
 PoroUSheado's ""request"" is essentially a western slight of hand to involve the USA directly and overtly in the Ukraine terror ops . The request was essentially a Western slight of . hand to . involve the U.S. directly in Ukraine terror operations .
 Future leader called for the conclusion of the conclusion, with Washington's new security Treaty . Future national leader called on the conclusion with Washington-Russia Treaty .
 The Russians and Chinese, and those allied with, know what's going on, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Russia and China know what is going on"
 To bring things to a ""head"", the west's population control requires it, to keep the dupes noticing how buttsore they are . The west needs it to keep its population control under control .
 Their strategy is essentially how to bring down ""nazi Germany"" without causing massive war . Their strategy was to bring Germany down without causing a war .
 Not all the western oligarchs are hell bent on a ""masada"" scenario of all or nothing for world dominance . They know there are ways to keep their position more or less through compromise, rather than conquest or crude domination .
 They offer a face saving ""out" to those oligarchs needing justification and support to counter the ""full spectrum dominance" wing of the western fascist plutocracy . The oligarchs need justification for their support .
 Many western oligarchs are into maintaining their local fiefdoms and realize that the sort of conflicts the NWO freaks will need to maintain dominance are not sustainable in the long run . Many of these Western oligarchs realize that such conflicts are unsustainable .
 These people are just as greedy, but they are not masada complex fanatical about it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia, China and allies are working on influencing the world's most powerful nations . It is these the Russians, Chinese and allies working to influence .
 This is the approach of people who have experience war personally and realize that violence is not an answer to problems, but an exacerbation of those problems . The U.S. should not engage in violence, the author says. This is not the answer to any problems, he says .
 Al Qaeda is more and more seen as an ally of the West by a significant segment of the voting public on both the Left and Right . My chiming in with VietnamVet on the WWIII thing was more in terms of a generalized ""existential threat,"" which is critically
 Both America and Russia have experienced defeat against a supposedly less capable foe in Vietnam and Afghanistan .
 A myth is apparently circulated in some circles that Mutually Assured Destruction no longer applies . I only linked to it because it seems to be the source of the myth that is circulating .
 The United States military defeats China and dictates the surrender terms . The U.S. military defeated China and dictated the terms .
 ASB requires that the U.S. be able to take the war to the mainland with the goal of defeating China, which quite likely would require striking first . ASB would require that the United States strike first .
 The U.S. volunteer army is way too small to fight a conventional war with the Russian Federation . The military knows the conditions of its troops .
 Units of the 173rd Airborne Brigade have already been moved to Poland and the Baltic States to serve as tripwires . Still, units of the Airborne brigade, which I served a year with in Vietnam, have already moved to the region .
 NATO military exercises will be held in Ukraine this summer, according to reports . There are reports that there will be NATO exercises held in the country .
 There is no way, if Russia invades Eastern Ukraine, that the Brigade wouldn’t be moved into Western Ukraine to stop Russia from invading even farther . The Brigade would be moved to stop the Russian invasion even further .
 NATO air superiority is not enough to halt an Army of Battle Tanks . Maybe, maybe, if NATO won air superiority, or the tanks stopped before the tripwire . But, in no way, they are able by themselves to halt the tanks . The U.S. military says it
 Tactical nuclear weapons would be used by the side in danger of being overrun . If not, tactical nuclear weapons could be used in the fight against the Taliban .
 We are sitting on the sidelines watching two nuclear powers play a game of chicken . We are watching two nukes play a 'game of chicken' in North Korea .
 Russia is being dragged into this very very reluctantly . Granted, the Russia Federation is being . dragged into . this very . very reluctantly, it is not the first time Russia has been dragged in .
 Until now no nuclear nation has got into a shooting war with another nuclear power . There is no way it would not escalate to a nuclear war . Until now, no nuclear nations have got into shooting war .
 The crazies who brought us Austerity and Privatization along with Iraq, Libya, Yemen, Yemen and Syria want to give it a try in order to destabilize Russia and loot it again . The craziest want to try it out again .
 The Goa'uld are parasites from the planet P3X-888, integrated within a host, most of the time a human . Most of the Goaulds are integrated into a host of humans .
 The resulting creatures are a powerful race bent on galactic conquest and domination, largely without pity, compassion or remorse . They are the resulting race bent upon galactic conquest .
 He was a member of the Palmach in the war that established the state of Israel . He served in the Israeli army during the Second World War .
 I had an opportunity to ask him if he ever apologized for the Nakba or ever made any attempt to apologize to those Palestinians he drove into exile . About 5 years ago I had a chance to ask if he had apologized for Nakba .
 Since then I have not taken him seriously - he is an unrepentant Zionist and whatever he might say on other matters just don't matter . Since then he has not been taken seriously . He is an 'unrepententant' Zionist .
 Afternoon was the city, now their howitzers pound ‘Semenovka’, quite a while, 2 hours by now . The city was the capital of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The Chocolate Gore Factory's proprietor, the newly minted Ukrainian president, Poroshenko, is a billionaire billionaire . Poroshenko is the new president of Ukraine .
 We arrive at the grim limits of our degenerate civilization, in a condition which is personified by the billionaire president, writes David Frum .
 "Here is something new, an entity that has heretofore shrunk from the light," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Those who have produced the global snuff film, , now make so bold as to front and represent, and issue executive commands as heads of state . for cities to be put under siege, for populations to be bombed and shelled .
 Billionaire hands are seen orchestrating the burning alive of protesters, as well as the strangling and torturing to death of those who survived the flames .
 Poroshenko must feel awfully lucky, bulletproof, and invulnerable, to tempt the Russians to tempt him . For after all, who is to say that they won't hang him, after they bag him, and try him .
 @ToivoS #82: Thanks for that; I had no idea. I was surprised. I had never heard of that. I'm glad to hear that. It's not the first time I've heard that .
 "I never took Etzioni seriously either, including his ""socio-economics" "So it's nice to know that my instinct was correct. I never took him seriously either," he says .
 Russia is approaching this geopolitically, so it calculates how much blood needs to be spilled to justify an intervention . You have to weigh how many lives are likely to be lost if you intervene compared to if you do nothing .
 In fact the doctor is a Ukrainian, and in light of subsequent events probably he was cooperating knowingly with the U.S. and with stories planted in the corporate media all along . In fact, the doctor was a Ukrainian .
 In this big brother world we live in its so very hard to make an informed decision . Just saying, that in this big . brother world .
 Poroshenko is a ""galtian ubermensch"" in that he came by his fortune the way 99.9% of them have . Poroshenko's fortune is based on his ability to make a fortune, rather than fortune .
 Poroshenko represents the fraud of western capitalism - ""democracy"" fulfilling its own brutal logic . Poroshenko also represents the . fraud of Western capitalism -""democracy."" fulfilling its . own brutal . logic .
 Billionaire-Presidents not only make sense under the present Monopoly Capitalist regime they are the only kind of President which makes sense . Billionaires-Presidents make sense in the current Monopoly-Capitalist regime .
 Cotton A Lie pushes his fake reality far past anything believable . Cotton a Lie is a troll. Cotton a lie . Cotton is a liar. Cotton is not a lie. Cotton A lie.
 The U.S. waged war on social reform in Latin America and the Caribbean viciously attacking people who lived into the 1960s it is no exaggeration to say, like medieval serfs . The United States waged war against social reform .
 The United States did this long before Castro ever sent a diplomatic note to the Soviet Union, and is still doing it long after the former Soviet Union has ceased to exist . And the U.S. still does it long long after that, even though it's no longer a Soviet Union
 The Navy had dropped the missile six or seven years earlier in favor of the Polaris, and the Air Force hated the damned thing . The Air Force had dropped it six years earlier . The missile was dropped by the Navy .
 It was liquid fueled and only medium range, and by 1962 was obsolete and scheduled to be discarded anyway . By 1962, it had been obsolete and set to be tossed anyway .
 You both make good points and likely we'll never know, Demian says .
 Kremlin planners don't care whether this is a deliberate effort to split Ukraine or just fascists in love with the power of brute force to get done whatever their perfect final solution is . But it doesn't matter to Kremlin planners whether it's a deliberate attempt to split the country or not .
 Russia needs patience and 'non-official' assistance to the federalists/separatists in Ukraine, writes Andrew Keen . Keen: 'Russia needs patience' in pursuit of what I think is inevitable .
 If it were 2020 or 2025 and not 2014 Russia might just say 'screw it' and directly intervene . Russia may intervene in the future, but not in 2014 .
 Fans will have to wait for the first time to see what's going to happen in the U.S. for a long time .
 A video reportedly filmed near the attacked facility has appeared on YouTube . A video of the attack appears to have been posted online .
 The attack took place on the territory of an Air Force academy . There are conflicting reports on casualties and the outcome of the attack .
 Earlier, at least one Ukrainian soldier was reported to be seriously injured . At least one of the Ukrainian soldiers is reported to have been seriously hurt .
 One anti-government protester was killed in the gunfight and there have been several injures on both sides . According to RT’s Paula Slier, there have also been several injuries .
 All of the 80 Ukrainian soldiers holed up at the base surrendered, reported RIA Novosti . The Ukrainian soldiers surrendered .
 The servicemen were escorted out of the building as the other side applauded . The other side of the crowd applauded as they escorted them out .
 Self-defense commander Gennady Tsepkalo also confirmed to journalists that all troops have surrendered . Self-defence forces have surrendered to Russia's self-defense forces .
 It had earlier been reported that only ten troops surrendered and others barricaded themselves inside the base . Some of the soldiers said that their captain had orbidden them from surrendering .
 Kiev has intensified military operations in eastern Ukraine . These events come as Kiev intensifies military operations against rebels .
 BM-21 launch vehicle “Grad’s are being used,” Donbas-based Ostrov agency says . BM 21 launch vehicle is being used in Donbas, agency says.
 Anti-government protesters in Slavyansk have downed a Ukrainian forces helicopter . The helicopter was downed in the south-east of the city in Donetsk region, eastern Ukraine, a local witness said .
 Still allowed missiles and fired from helicopters, and for the residential sector . Still allowed to fire missiles and fire from helicopters from helicopters .