 "The current situation within Cuba favors this consolidation," says CNN.com . "We believe that the current situation in Cuba favors it," says the Cuban government .
 The mere passage of time tends to favor Castro as Cubans and others become accustomed to the idea that he is here to stay . Castro's regime gains in experience as his regime grows in experience .
 It is unlikely that internal political opposition will cause the regime to collapse . The regime is unlikely to collapse if internal opposition or 'f"""""|°""^ d ^-ff y i S s n n n , will cause it to collapse.
 But his deatn ^^^^r^'omlorm ^^^'OMlorm: The regime could open civil war . The regime's leadership is divided by power struggles within the leadership .
 Any successor to Castro is likely to be more dependent upon the Soviets than Castro has been . He will lack Castro's ability to command the loyalty of substantial numbers of Cubans . Castro's successor will likely be dependent on the Soviets .
 Any opposition would have to have the support of a large part of the military before it could hope to overthrow the Communist regime . Even under the most favorable circumstances, any opposi»'on would have had to have support of the most of the . military before . it could . hope
 The Soviet military picture in Cuba is in transition with a scaling down of their forces becoming apparent . I The Cuban military picture is in a transition .
 The totolSoviet inima rv strength in Cuba is now estimated to be about JHSBBHSf ft . But we cannot exclude the possibility that there could be several thousand more .
 The Soviets remain in control of the key weapons systems, while training the Cubans to operate some of them . The Cubans are training some of the weapons systems in Cuba .
 We believe the Soviets have told the Cubans that they intend eventually to turn various weapons, systems over to them . The Cubans have been told they will eventually be turned over to the Soviets, says CNN.com .
 Castro probably still believes that revolution will come only through violence, but the regime's exhortations on the subject have been muted recently . Castro still believes revolution will only come through violence .
 The Soviets will continue with the more traditional efforts, at penetration through diplomacy and economic overtures . The Soviet Union will continue to try to penetrate the world through diplomacy .
 In general, we believe that situations are unlikely to develop in which Castro could intervene with substantial force withou^renderir.g himself vulnerable to United States or OAS counteraction . While the Soviets and Cubans have probably resolved their more immediate problems, we foresee varying degrees of friction
 Castro appears to insist on a unique position in the Bloc without submitting to the discipline and control imposed on Soviet Satellites . Nevertheless, Castro has taken a l ong st ep toward the Soviet side Sino-Soviet controversy .
 Significant policy differences between Castro and the Soviet leaders were apparent during the missile crisis of Q^ l^^,.,.--, 1 ,^,, |*A,S thr« or four months afterwards . The Soviets remain In control of most of the Cuban military facilities .
 The limited capabilities el the Cuban Armed Forces are gradually improving as a mult of tbeir experience and . Increased training aince last fall and their growing familiarity with Soviet equipment^ 4. Increased training last fall .
 Identifying Soviet military peraoanel entering Cuba and estimating their number has been, a problem ef gmti dif3culty f r om om om ^J^,,®^,' the buildup in 1&S2. 'The buildup in Cuba has been
 We believe that there has been & reduction in the Soviet personnel At the four armored camps . AM-iiS. -fc^ .-.'■' -i .-i . .- .-fc^ -fc .-'■'
 Some Cubcn military personnel are present and undergoing training at all four of the camps . One has bren evacuated by the Soviets and partially occupied by the Cubans . However, the equipment remains &t all the camps, however, .
 The numerical strength of the Cuban ground forces has been estimated at 275,000 . Some 75,000 are in the standing army and 100,000 In the ready reserve .
 The capabilities of Ihe standing army and ready reserve have been enhanced by new equipment, and by further training and experience including the mobilization during the missile crisis .
 A fevt . fevt divisions may now be capable of tactical operalions, althou gh the b a ttalio njcombat^tfa m^remains^ent .-ally the basic b tactical unit .
 Its capabilities have been enhanced by the provisionof . principally motor torpedo boats and subma rine chasers, and by . increa sed, . training in its use .
 The reduction in Soviet military personnel in Cuba since February has been accompanied by increasing Indications of Cubans training in the operation of Soviet equipment and lystems . The Soviet* plan a turnover of part or til of these systems to the Cubans .
 One class of 22 pilot* began training in March JCC3 and a second of about the same aize is scheduled to begin in September . Cubans are also almost certainly being trained in ground controi snd maintenance . Cuban Air Force could man | theM^2^T
 Evidence points to the complete political predominance of the Cuban government . Castro's charismatic appeal depends on his charismatic appeal . We believe that Cubans are also being trained on the surface-toair missile system .
 His persona has enabled him to surmount b*>th a challenge from old-hne Communists in Cube, and a crisis in relations with Moscow .
 The completion ■u^3Su5S""«lBhtTr^W« Castro wF* another jneam of control and an important instrument for political indjctrjnaMgnj^ tlon of the populace . It has also enabled fcixa
 The Cuban economy declined sharply during 1960-1962, and there Is almost certain to be some further decline In output during 1963 .
 The Cuban economic situation is not a critical source of weakness for the Castro regime and Is unlikely to become one . Nevertheless, the Cuban economic . situation is . not critical source . of weakness . The Castro regime is unlikely to be weakened .
 Whatever the level of Cuban export earnings in 1963, Bloc assistance probably will permit the malntenence of essential imports — foodstuffs, fuels, Industrial materials, and machine parts . The 1962 level is about the 1962 level .
 The political effects of economic decline have been mitigated by the radical change in the pattern of distribution of available consumer goods and nrtces . Meanwhile, the political effects have been offset by the changes in the distribution of nrtcs .
 Cuba's production of sugar has declined In SD63 and its volume of exports prUably will be more than one-third below that of 19S2 . Cuba's sugar production has declined .
 1, 00b*1.500 Latin Americans received Communist indoctrination or training in guerrilla warfare in 1062 . Castro's large-scale d> semination of printed and broadcast propaganda .
 At this time. pro-Castro revolutionaries are persistently active and aggressive only in Venezuela . Venezuela is Castro's priority target for revolution in Latin America. At this. time, Venezuela is Venezuela .
 On balance, the revolutionaries have lost ground in recent months in their efforts to weaken the Betancouit government through terrorism and sabotage, the government says . The government has been weakened by terrorism, sabotage and terrorism .
 The sense of urgency created throughout Latin America by the missile base crisis has faded, but a considerable residue remains, especially in Central America . The crisis created by the crisis has since faded but there is still a significant residue in the region .
 Among the small countries of Central America the crisis heightened pressures for a definite _olutlon to the Cuban problem . Central America's small countries are under pressure to find a solution .
 Castro and the Soviets are probably convinced that time can be made to work in Cuba's favor, providing the United States is not presented with a pretext for intervention or drastic measures . i In short, the USSR and Cuba probably Tntend to play for time .
 In Latin America varied according to the political situation in particular countries . Each will continue to employ flexible tactics in Latin America, says President Obama .
 Both the Soviets and Castro will adopt aggressive tactics whenever presented with tempting opportunities . Their appreciation of what constitutes a tempting opportunity will probably differ as tune passes .
 Castro regime would expect regime to be more firmly established a year later than it is today . HM: 'e would expect the Castro regime more firmly establi; a year hence'
 This is not k> say that alt Soviet military personnel will be withdrawn from Cuba; indeed, it Is highly likely that the Soviets will maintain ft algnlflcant presence there .
 With respect to the SAM system, we doubt that the Soviets have specified an jxact date for transfer of operational control or would u rrr j out luch an agreement if subsequent developments produced new dangers .
 We believe that the current situation favors the further consolidation of Castro's Communist regime in Cuba . The situation favors Castro's communist regime, we say .
 Castro were to die, members and supporters of the regime, p. p forces, would probably rail "" 44. Castro's supporters, including members of the Castro regime, would likely rail" Castro .
 We believe that economic recovery in Cub* will be slow . It will take at least several years before the 1958 level of production is regained .
 There has been noticeable improvement ao far in the key areas of economic organisation, managerial efflclencr and worker incentives, aotable weaknesses in Bloc countries generally .
 The Soviet Union is prepared to provide developmental assistance to Cuba for a prolonged period . On the other hand, the Soviet Union may be prepared to give developmental assistance for a long time .
 The Soviets have backed away from some of the more ambitious industrial projects talked of previously . A number of more modest industrial projects are moving ahead, as are proj ects for expanding agricultural production and for mineral exploration .
 Khruahchev-Castro communique held up Cuba as an example for the rest of Latin America . But without endorsing Castro's earlier general incitement to revolution throughout the area .
 Castro probably still believes that revolution will come only through violence, but the regime's exhortations on Ihe subject have been muted recently .
 Castro is disillusioned with the lack of revolutionary fervor among Latin American Communists, with the notable exception of Venezuela . He probably feels that he has no choice but to bide his time and build up subversive assets .
 Moscow and Latin American Communists fear Castro will upset their own strategics . Such a position has probably been strongly urged by Moscow and leading Latin American Communist leaders .
 The tenor of the joint communique of 23 Mav would suggest that Castro has accepted, at least for the present, a more cautious and flexible line with respect to revolution in Latin America . Castro accepted, for the moment, that he has accepted that Castro is willing to take a
 M *"" Cub TT^°~~ ~~ nlsts ani do not contemplate turning over their controls to Castro . M * "" Cub TT ^°~~ : nlst ani .
 Castro's views may tend to be more influential with other Latin American Communists . Nevertheless, they have given Castro a certain weight by describing him as the forerunner of Communist advance in Latin America .
 Soviet-Cuban relations are far from permanently stabilized, i 50 years ago . The Cuban situation is clouded by many uncertainties and uncertainties . i 50.
 Castro showed a willingness to accept the Soviet line of peaceful coexistence . Castro accepted the Soviet Union's leadership of the Communist movement . Castro was in the USSR at the time .
 Some of the more sensitive points of dispute between the Chinese and the Soviets were not mentioned in the communique .
 Castro took a long step toward the Soviet tide in the Sine-Soviet controversy . Nevertheless, Castro did take a long-step toward the Soviets .
 In turn Ctstro has received from the Soviet* a & g o;; assurancea of continued economic s upportj ^^^^j &nd'recog^r""
 Soviet and Cuban fortunes have been bound more close*y together . And their respective freedoms of action have been somewhat narrowed . Overall, Soviet and . Cuban fortunes are bound more closely together .
 Both the SovieLs and the Cubans hope to stabilize the situation and gird for a long-term effort in Latin America . For the present, however, we believe that both the . Sovie .L.A. and Cuba hope to stabilise the situation .