 All these collections will go in due course to the Kennedy Library in Boston . The Kennedy Library will be housed in the Kennedy library .
 Between them they conducted more than sixty interviews, and to many others . Hackman, who between them conducted over 60 interviews, was interviewed by more than 60 others .
 At Houghton Mifflin, Richard McAdoo watched the book stretch out in time and length . Helena Bentz Dorrance prepared the manuscript for the printer with exemplary thoroughness .
 "Once again | rejoice to express my unlimited gratitude to Gretchen Stewart and Mary Chiffriller for the devoted and meticulous care they expended on typing several drafts of the manuscript"
 Alexandra Emmet Schlesinger read the manuscript with fastidious and unerring eye . Alexandra also suffered and sustained the author during the throes of composition . The author's children still at home, Robert Emmet Kennedy and Peter Cushing Allan, for putting up with it all .
 Robert Kennedy’s older brother, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, is now a historical figure, a leader who belongs to the ages . For young Americans, Robert Kennedy's older brother is now an historical figure . The Kennedy family is proud of the Kennedy legacy .
 The causes with which he is identified, the Cold War, the missile crisis, Vietham, seem to the young almost as remote as the Spanish-American War was to my generation . The Cold War and missile crisis seem to be as remote to his generation as they were to the Spanish
 Robert Francis Kennedy has a contemporary feel about him, a sense of enduring identification with the woes and injustices of today’s world . But he also has a modern feel about himself, with an enduring identification to the world .
 His causes -- the growing disparities of income and opportunity in the U.S. in the United States, racial justice, the redemption of the dispossessed and humiliated -- are with us every hour. His causes, including racial justice and economic inequality, are his causes .
 Robert Kennedy represents certain unfulfilled possibilities—possibilities that we know in our hearts must be fulfilled if we are ever as a nation to redeem the promise of American life . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in New York City .
 They had very different personalities, and this too may in part explain the divergence in the way people think about them . Yet they had very much different personalities .
 John Kennedy was a realist brilliantly disguised as a romantic, Robert a romantic stubbornly disguised as realist . Robert Kennedy was the realist and the romantic, but the romantic was the romantic .
 Robert Kennedy had a capacity for growth, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Kennedy's career spanned more than 40 years . Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 He was the smallest of the four boys, the gentlest and shyest, the least articulate and the least coordinated, the most dutiful . He was also the smallest and the shyest of four boys .
 His father was absent during much of his childhood and when home was sometimes impatient with him . He was often impatient with his father, who was absent from his childhood .
 Determined to win his father’s respect and love, he began to harden his personality . ‘I am not afraid to win my dad’,’ he said. ‘‘I’ was determined to win the respect of my father,�
 The inner sensitivity remained, but a protective covering now formed over it . "The inner sensitivity remains, but the inner sensitivity now remains," she said .
 RFK worked for Joe McCarthy’s Senate committee on investigations . RFK returned to the committee as counsel for the Democratic minority and author of the minority report condemning McCarthy's investigation .
 RFK made his political debut as manager of JFK’s victorious campaign for the Senate from Massachusetts in 1952 . RFK worked for JFK in his successful Senate bid for Massachusetts .
 The two brothers, separated by nearly nine years, had hardly had time to get to Know each other . The brothers were separated by nine years .
 For all their personality differences, they now formed an intimate working partnership . They now form a partnership .
 Under his older brother’s influence, Robert began to lose his intolerance and rigidity . Robert lost his intolerance under the influence of his brother, Robert .
 He grew more relaxed and rueful, acquired more ironic views of life and himself . He developed a wry, self-mocking humor and developed a personal charm against which editors warned .
 Robert was drafted to run his brother’s campaign for the presidency in 1960 . Robert was tireless, intimidating and effective . Robert ran his brother's campaign for president .
 John persuaded reluctant Robert to become attorney general . Once elected, John persuaded Robert to be attorney general.
 He strove especially to bring the autocratic J. Edgar Hoover and his long untouchable Federal Bureau of Investigation under control . Hoover was the FBI's top law enforcement officer .
 Hoover was then a national idol, and his obsession was the pursuit of Communists . Hoover's obsession was to find Communists, and he was obsessed with them . Hoover was a national hero, and Hoover was national hero .
 RFK's 1960 book The Enemy Within dealt not with Communism but organized crime . RFK thought this nonsense. RFK, whose 1960s book The enemy Within dealt with organized crime, thought it nonsense.
 The fact that his brother was president gave him more leverage than most attorneys general . He forced Hoover against his will to divert budget and agents into two new fields: organized crime and racial justice . Hoover's brother was President .
 The spread across the South of violent resistance to court orders made civil rights legislation by 1963 both a political possibility and a moral necessity . The Kennedys' view of civil rights was that it was moral necessity for civil rights in the South .
 Opponents charged that Martin Luther King, Jr., the black civil rights leader, was controlled by Communist agents . Opponents say King was a black man controlled by communist agents .
 The attorney general acceded to Hoover's request that King’s telephone be wiretapped, confident that this would disprove the allegations . King's telephone was wiretapped by the attorney general .
 He called for legislation outlawing discrimination, whether based on race, color, religion, national origin or sex, in public accommodations, employment, voting and education . Meanwhile, he called for a bill that outlawed discrimination, which was passed in 1964 .
 His brother assigned Robert tasks considerably beyond the Department of Justice . Robert's brother was assigned tasks beyond the department of justice .
 He especially valued Robert’s ability to ask the tough questions and get to the heart of difficult problems. Robert was especially valued by Robert for his ability to get into difficult problems, he said .
 After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, he brought the attorney general increasingly into foreign affairs . He brought the secretary of state to focus more on foreign affairs after the Bay .
 Operation Mongoose was a foolish and ineffectual pinprick program of covert action against the Castro regime . RFK spurred on the Central Intelligence Agency to undertake the operation, but it was not RFK's finest hour .
 There is no hard evidence, however, that he was aware of CIA efforts to assassinate Fidel Castro . The CIA efforts, originating in the Eisenhower administration, to assassinate Castro were started in Eisenhower's administration .
 Castro himself provided the perfect pretext when he accepted Soviet nuclear missiles in the summer of 1962 . If some claim he was obsessed with overthrowing the Castro regime, some say he was .
 RFK led the opposition to a military solution to the missile crisis in October . RFK was in charge of the opposition during the crisis . He was in office at the time .
 President Obama negotiated a deal with the Russians to remove their missiles from Cuba . The deal would see the U.S. remove missiles from Turkey from Cuba and remove them from Turkey .
 He had repressed his inner self since childhood, first to prove himself to his father, then to help his brother . He said: "I had to prove myself to my father, and to help my brother"
 At last Robert Kennedy was free to become a voice and leader in his own right . At last, he was finally free to be a leader and voice of his own .
 As senator, he welcomed the reforms of Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society but found himself in growing disagreement over foreign policy . As Vietnam War swallowed the Great Society, he also found himself disagreeing over domestic policy as well .
 The press often refused to accept such disagreement on its merits, presenting it instead as a political maneuver by which ruthless Bobby Kennedy was out to reclaim the White House . The press was often unwilling to accept that .
 Kennedy returned from the South as the Kennedy family was sitting down for dinner at Hickory Hill . His oldest daughter, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, recalls his return as he returned . Kennedy's oldest daughter recalls his returning from the south .
 The children are covered with sores and their tummies stick out because they have no food . They are covered in sores because of lack of food and sores . The children have been covered in the sores, their stomachs stick out .
 "He sought new ways to empower people, to foster community self-development and self-reliance," he said . "Always challenging, probing, testing, testing"
 He criticized U.S. intervention in the Dominican Republic in 1965 . He concluded that Johnson had abandoned the reform aims of JFK’s Alliance for Progress .
 Kennedy called for bombing pauses and negotiation during Vietnam War . Kennedy was president of the U.S. in Vietnam in 1968 .
 When escalation continued, he evoked the ‘horror’ of the war in urgent speeches . When escalation . continued, the . ‘Horror” of the . war was evoked by the president in urgent . speeches, he said .
 His critique of the Vietnam War pointed toward a challenge to Johnson’s renomination in 1968 . The Vietnam War was the focus of his critique .
 Kennedy hung back, still fearing misconstruction of his motives, and antiwar Democrats rallied around Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota .
 After McCarthy’s success in the New Hampshire primary, Kennedy belatedly entered the contest . Kennedy entered the race after McCarthy's success in New Hampshire .
 Johnson withdrew soon afterward, and Vice President Hubert Humphrey became the administration candidate .
 RFK had a wry wit and a satiric sense of the absurdities of politics and life . RFK also had a sense of humor and sense of life .
 At the same time, Kennedy was embarked on a desperately serious mission . Kennedy was embarking on a mission to find the truth .
 Existing conditions in the U.S. were “not acceptable,” he said in speech after speech . We diminished ourselves as a moral community when we accepted them, he said .
 Many saw him as a divisive figure, but he saw himself as engaged in a mission of reconciliation . He sought to bridge schisms in American society, including white and nonwhite, rich and poor, between rich and young .
 The candidate took a shortcut through the kitchen of the Hotel Ambassador in Los Angeles . He won the California primary in June .
 The power of the Johnson administration and much of the party establishment was behind Humphrey . Humphrey was the only candidate to win a presidential nomination .
 The dynamism was behind Kennedy, and he might well have swept the convention . Still, the dynamism behind Kennedy was behind him, though .
 If nominated, he would most probably have beaten Republican candidate, Richard M Nixon .
 Robert Kennedy presidency would have brought an end to U.S. involvement in Vietnam War . Robert Kennedy would have ended the Vietnam War with a quick end .
 Vietnamese and Cambodians killed from 1969 to 1973 would have been at home with their families . Thousands of Americans were killed in Vietnam and Cambodia from 1969-73 .
 A Robert Kennedy presidency would have consolidated and extended the achievements of John Kennedy’s New Frontier and Lyndon Johnson's Great Society . Robert Kennedy would have extended and extended John Kennedy's New Frontier .
 The liberal tide of the 1960s was still running strong enough in 1969 to affect Nixon’s domestic policies . Nixon's domestic policies were still strong enough to affect his policies .
 The Environmental Protection Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act and the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act with its CETA employment program were all enacted under Nixon . Nixon signed the act in 1972 .
 The confidence that both black and white working-class Americans had in Robert Kennedy would have created the possibility of progress toward racial reconciliation . Robert Kennedy's death would have led to racial reconciliation in America .
 His appeal to the young might have mitigated some of the under-thirty excesses of the time . He appealed to the youngsters .
 The election of Robert Kennedy would have delivered the republic from Watergate, author says . And of course, the election would have brought Watergate from the U.S., he says .
 He was at the same time a tough and experienced politician who understood the uses of power and government . He was known as a tough, experienced politician but also an experienced politician .
 He was a compelling speaker with unusual capacity to inform, move and inspire the electorate . And he was a powerful speaker, he said. He was able to rally popular support for his programs .
 His blunt challenge to the complacencies of American society made many uncomfortable . But his insistence that any individual who “stands up for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot of others, or strikes out against injustice” plucked a moral nerve, especially among the young
 RFK was one of only five men in American political history to be known by his initials . RFK is one of just five men to have been known by their initials .
 Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, Lyndon Baines Johnson were all presidents . The others were Theodore Roosevelt, FDR, Franklin Roosevelt, JFK, JFK .
 ROBERT KENNEDY died on June 6, 1968, at the age of forty-two — a decade ago as | write today .
 He lived through a time of unusual turbulence in American history . He responded to that turbulence more directly and sensitively than any other political leader of the era .
 He was equipped with certitudes of family and faith, which sustained him till his death . He was armed with family, faith and family, he said .
 History changed him, and, had time permitted, he might have changed history . He may have changed the world .
 His relationship to his age makes him a “representative man” in Emerson’s phrase, he says . He is one who embodies the consciousness of an epoch, who perceives things in fresh lights .
 "He never had the chance to fulfill his own possibilities, which is why his memory haunts so many of us now," he says . He says. "He was never able to fulfill any of his own potentials."
 "Because he wanted to get things done, because he was often impatient and combative, he made his share of mistakes, and enemies" "He felt simply and cared deeply, he cared deeply," he said .
 He was a romantic and idealist, and he was prudent, expedient, demanding and ambitious . He was also prudent and expedient and ambitious, he said .
 His insights were earned in a labor of selfeducation that only death could stop . He saw power as a means of redeeming the powerless, not an end in itself .
 Any historian who has written about the 1930s as well as the 1960s must recognize a terrible monotony in our national problems . Any historian must recognize the monotonality of the '30s and '60s, but also the '50s,' historian says .
 The conditions of misery and inequity that troubled Franklin Roosevelt and the New Dealers troubled the Kennedys twenty years later . People in power were untroubled during an interval during which misery, inequity persisted, while misery persisted .
 Robert Kennedy’s message of commitment to the desolate and the disinherited is rarely sounded in the 1970s . Robert Kennedy's message was rarely heard in the 70s .
 The time will surely come again when the richest nation in the world will overcome its indifference to the degradation of its citizens, says President Obama .
 Robert Kennedy’s journey will, | believe, be seen to have exemplary value . When that time returns, Robert Kennedy's journey will be seen as having exemplary value, says CNN.com .
 Any book about Robert Kennedy is inextricably bound up with John Kennedy and his Presidency . Robert Kennedy's life is tied to his father's life and his presidency .
 This work treats the Kennedy administration primarily as Robert Kennedy took part in events or as his papers cast particular light on them . This work focuses on events in which Robert Kennedy was involved in .
 On occasion, we have added information that | did not know when | wrote A Thousand Days or that seemed inappropriate for publication in 1965 . We have also taken the opportunity to look at some of the more controversial issues of the Kennedy years .
 The passage of time, the knowledge of consequences, the illumination of hindsight, the rise of new preoccupations, all give problems of the past new form and perplexity . The past is a new form of perplexity, says the author .
 There would appear considerable point in assessing latter-day interpretations of the Cuban missile crisis, Indochina War, the civil rights struggle, the Central Intelligence Agency .
 In this sense, Robert Kennedy and His Times is a sort of sequel to A Thousand Days . The earlier work was a personal memoir and this one is a biography . Robert Kennedy is a biographer .
 It draws heavily on the personal papers of Robert Kennedy, made available to me through the generosity of Ethel Skakel Kennedy and of the Kennedy family .
 Robert Kennedy was a direct and candid man, often brusque in manner and opinion . Kennedy was an outspoken advocate for public speaking . He died at age 81 .
 His instinct was to cloak idealism in throwaway phrases and laconic jokes, he said . He said: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future"
 His deflationary, self-mocking, sometimes grim wit was employed often as a means of relieving tension in the midst of crisis . He often used his deflationary and grim wit to relieve tension in a crisis .
 The serious reader will be able to set Robert Kennedy’s words in the totality of his life, says the author . The Kennedy family made no attempt to influence my use of the papers and that the interpretations and judgments are exclusively my own .
 Some readers may wonder about the extensive use made in these pages of oral history . This includes transcribed interviews conducted with participants after the fact .
 We all know that interviews can be no better than a person’s memory and that little is more treacherous than that . We are all better than that. We know that .
 Historians have rarely hesitated to draw on written reminiscences, which are no less self-promoting . Yet historians have extended this tolerance to oral history and employed the literary convention with the same critical caution, hope, illustrious predecessors have applied .
 The recollected material cannot pretend to the exactitude of, say, the White House tapes of the Nixon years . The recollections material cannot be compared to that of Nixon tapes .
 Robert Kennedy was a great admirer and devoted friend of Robert Kennedy’s. It is necessary to declare an interest in this article .
 " association with him over the last decade of his life was one of the joys of his own life," says author . "He was a great human being," he says .
 It was not only that he deepened one’s understanding of America, of its problems and possibilities, but that he was the occasion of such good and happy times, he said . "He deepened [America's] understanding of it," he wrote .
 No one could be more fun than Robert Kennedy, no one more appealing, with those impulses of irony, bravado, gentleness and vulnerability intermingled in his vivid personality . No one in our politics, as I deeply believed, held out more promise for the future .
 If it is necessary for a biographer of Robert Kennedy to regard him as evil, then I am not qualified to be his biographer . P. Taylor used in his life of Lord Beaverbrook, if it was necessary to regard Robert Kennedy as evil then I'm not qualified .
 Robert Kennedy's life tells a great deal about the American ordeal in the middle decades of the twentieth century . The last thing Robert Kennedy would have wished was hagiography, he says .
 He valued bluntness, precision and truth, says CNN.com . "Can imagine no better way to serve his memory," he says .
 What he had in the way of weakness was an essential part of his strength, he says . He adds: "What he had was an important part of the strength of his character. He was not afraid to be vulnerable."
 He was truly a perceiver of the terror of life, and he manned himself nobly to face it. For he was truly an perceiver of the terror of life, he said .
 In the last of twenty-two cars lay a coffin, covered by an American flag . The last of the 22 cars lay in a coffin covered by a flag .
 A diversity of people filled the cars ahead, including astronauts and agitators, social workers and athletes . Politicians and writers, government officials and entertainers filled the roads ahead .
 They talked in somber tones, they rejoiced in the happier past, they said . They despaired of the future, they stared out of the window. They stared out the window .
 Or, desperately,WE HAVE LOST OUR LESS OUR last HOPE, Or, Starkly,PRAY FOR US, BopBy. Bop .
 As the train crossed rivers on its journey south, boats, clustered by the bridges, sounded their whistles . The train was on its way from London to New York .
 On a river before Newark, New Jersey, three men on a fireboat saluted; the boat bore the name John F Kennedy . Three men on the fireboat salute .
 The train slowed to a crawl with thousands—perhaps a million in all—crowding the way . Perhaps a million people are expected to board the train .
 At Elizabeth, New Jersey, a northbound express, rounding a curve at high speed, plowed into mourners overflowing onto the tracks . A man and a woman were killed in the crash .
 As the train moved south through Pennsylvania countryside, one occasionally saw a man or woman, far from any visible town, standing gravely and alone, enveloped in private grief .
 In Baltimore a great silent mass of people, mostly black, had waited for hours . In Baltimore, Baltimore, a silent crowd of mostly black people had waited hours .
 Shortly after nine o’clock the train reached Washington in the glimmering dark . Shortly after 9:30 p.m., the train left Washington .
 Robert Kennedy was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, on November 20, 1925 . He was the seventh child of Rose Fitzgerald and Joseph Patrick Kennedy .
 His great-grandparents had come from Ireland some three quarters of a century before . He was born in Ireland and his parents were originally from Ireland . He is the son of one of the world's most famous people .
 The legacy they brought to Boston was but mildly diluted in the next two generations . The legacy of the two generations of Bostonians has been mildly diluted .
 They had lost their national independence, their personal dignity, their land, even their language, to intruders from across the sea . They had . lost their . national independence and personal dignity .
 They countered fate by talk, incessant and extravagant; by . irony and self-mockery; by fantasy and by drink . They counter fate by talking incessantly, incessantly and extravagant, they say .
 "They evaded fate, as oppressed people do, by donning masks to deceive the oppressors," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "They don't want to die. They don't have to die"
 Some came to believe the blarney act they put on to bemuse the English . Some thought it was a mockery of the British .
 The struggle for Catholic emancipation had initiated the Irish in the arts of political organization well before they began to leave for the U.S.
 Tribal politics dominated by expectations of unswerving loyalty and vindictive against what was often too eagerly seen as defection or betrayal . It was a tribal politics, dominated by . expectations of . unswerve loyalty .
 "Most important in securing life, along with the family, was the church," she says . Most important in her life, she says, was securing the family .
 Jansenism pervaded the Irish church, encouraging clerical tendencies toward censoriousness and bigotry . The Irish church was led by Jansenists, the author says .
 The priests remained with the people, and faith was the ultimate consolation in a hopeless world . But the priests remained in the people's faith .
 Catholicism absorbed and vindicated the Irish experience—the suffering, the bloodshed, the fatalism . The suffering, bloodshed, fatalism and fatalism of the Irish were all part of the experience .
 It explained that man was weak and life more than a little absurd, unless redeemed by the grace of God mediated through the church . The Bible explained that life was absurd unless redeemed by the church mediated by God .
 The culture Robert Kennedy’s great-grandparents transported to Boston was filled with this conviction of the bloodiness of life . The culture of the Kennedy family is filled with a conviction of life.
 The sense of disorder, tragedy and evil was not unlike that of the Puritans, three centuries earlier, says historian . "The sense of chaos and evil is not unlike the Puritan," he says .
 The Puritans had placed on the isolated soul in the quest for salvation the Irish assigned to the family and the church . The Irish assigned the family to the church and the Catholic church .
 By the time the Fitzgeralds and Kennedys arrived, the descendants of the Puritans were turning away from Calvin and Jonathan Edwards to embrace the inevitability of progress and the perfectibility of man .
 The Irish newcomers were set apart by their awareness of historic failure and human sinfulness and by their faith in the redemptive magic of family .
 They were set apart by their addiction to the scathing comedy that relieved the gloom of life . The pair are set apart from each other in the world .
 They were set apart by their lack of power, money, education and self-esteem . And by the complacent contempt in which the Yankees held them .
 Robert Kennedy’s grandfathers— Patrick Joseph Kennedy, born in Boston in 1858; John Francis Fitzgerald in 1863—prospered in the new land . Robert Kennedy's grandfathers were born in the city of Boston and lived there .
 Kennedy was a saloonkeeper and ward boss, wielding influence softly . He was indifferent to publicity and to noise, indifferent to noise . Kennedy was quiet man, a quiet man .
 The two men were together in the state senate in the early 1890s . They did not like each other then or later . They were together when they were in the Senate .
 Rose, the oldest of Honey Fitz’s six children, was born on July aa, 1890 . Honey Fitz was born in July 1890 .
 She grew up in a great Dorchester house, with mansard roof and stained-glass windows . She was raised in a Dorchester home with a mansard and stained glass window .
 Her father took her on vacations to Old Orchard Beach in Maine and Palm Beach in Florida . Her father gave her a spectacular comingout party in 1911 .
 By this time rich Irish Catholics were creating a social world of their own, paralleling the rich Yankee Protestant society that excluded them . The rich Yankee Protestants were excluded from them .
 Rose Fitzgerald, a bright and pretty girl, found life in this world enjoyable and fulfilling . Rose Fitzgerald was a bright, pretty girl who found life enjoyable .
 She learned French and German in Europe and spoke them fluently for the rest of her life . She spoke fluent French, German and English fluently .
 The Fitzgeralds believed in duplicating the institutions of Yankee society, the Kennedys believed in infiltrating them . Where the Fitzgeralds wanted to duplicate the institutions, they wanted to infiltrate them .
 Young Kennedy went with the Yankee boys to the Boston Latin School and Harvard College . Kennedy went to Harvard College, where he went on to study at Latin School .
 He graduated from the University of Ulster in 1912 . He was a moderate Catholic who made a moderate mark in his studies .
 In the meantime, Rose Fitzgerald and Joseph Kennedy had fallen in love . Joseph Kennedy and Rose Fitzgerald were married at the end of the day .
 John F Fitzgerald thought it was a most unsuitable match and tried to steer his daughter in other directions . Fitzgerald tried through domestic admonition and foreign travel to steer her daughter away . Fitzgerald's daughter was born into a family of four .
 A fortnight later Joseph Kennedy moved his bride into a house in Yankee Brookline . Joseph Kennedy and his bride moved into a home a fortnight later . The Kennedy family moved into the home of the Kennedy family .
 Instead of becoming a contractor in the Irish style, he chose banking, a Protestant preserve . Instead of being a contractor, he became a banker, he went to banking .
 He met Franklin D Roosevelt, then assistant secretary of the Navy . Roosevelt was the president of the United States in the 1930s .
 After the war, Kennedy joined the Yankee investment banking house of Hayden, Stone & Company and began his bold career in the stock market . Kennedy was a pioneer in the New York-based investment banking .
 Kennedy was a loner who operated with a small staff and an astute instinct . Kennedy was known for his small-staffed staff and his astute instincts .
 He used to say, “Only a fool holds out for the top dollar” — a piece of wisdom that enabled him to escape the Wall Street crash relatively unscathed . He says he was lucky to escape unscathed from the crash of 2008 .
 By 1926, he was a millionaire and far more successful than his Yankee contemporaries . By 1926 he had made millions .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday . Visit CNN.uk for a new gallery of snapshots of life in New York .
 Kennedy observed that the Boston Irish “suffered under the handicap of not possessing family tradition adequate to win the respect and confidence of the Puritan neighbors’s neighbors .
 Both my parents felt very strongly about the discrimination so you'll have to take the matter up with them . Undoubtedly lack of opportunity which had nothing to do with racial or religious background but were just Boston had something to do .
 He would very likely have left in 1926 even if he had been elected president of the Somerset Club .
 He could be endlessly charming when he wished but could also be—and often was—blunt and brusque to the point of rudeness . He was endlessly charming .
 He reacted against the stage-Irishman stereotype, all gregariousness and blarney, as embodied in his irrepressible father-in-law . At any rate, he had no trouble being as frosty as the frostiest Yankee .
 He had little regard for businessmen per se and few close friends in the business world, beyond a circle of cronies who stayed with him through the years . He also had little respect for businessmen .
 His daughter Eunice said, “He always trusted experience as the greatest creator of character”
 Kennedy played symphonies so incessantly that cronies with whom he was sharing his house complained . One summer in Washington, while his family was in Hyannis Port, he played so loud that his cronies complained . Kennedy played a symphony so loud he played it incessantly,
 His children did not inherit his love of serious music any more than they inherited their mother’s aptitude for foreign languages . His children didn't inherit his interest in serious music much more than their mother's .
 This was, in any case, far more than money, the Irish American road to power . "This was, indeed, the way to power," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 In 1928, Kennedy had been too deeply engaged in business to do more than vote for the first Irish Catholic to run for the Presidency as a major party candidate .
 Henry Morgenthau, Franklin D Roosevelt’s conservation commissioner, brought the two men together again . The two men met in the 1930s at the White House .
 Kennedy hardly knew Smith personally, but may have felt he knew Smith’s Irish American generation too well . Kennedy may not have known Smith personally but may feel he knew his generation .
 Roosevelt’s possessive and populist-minded adviser, disliked Wall Street speculators in general and Kennedy in particular . For whatever reason, the post went to William H Woodin, and, when Woodin retired in a few months because of ill health, to Morgenthau .
 Roosevelt had an exact sense of Kennedy’s ability and of his intractability . Roosevelt had a exact sense both of Kennedy's ability and that of his inveigability .
 Kennedy in the Treasury, for example, would have been a constant problem for a President with a penchant for experiment . Kennedy in a Treasury would have had to deal with a constant issue .
 At the same time, Kennedy knew all the tricks of the trade and was evidently ambitious to establish himself as a public servant . At the time, he was clearly ambitious, but was also ambitious .
 Word that a notorious speculator was scheduled to police Wall Street provoked a minor New Deal revolt .
 Roy Howard ran an editorial in the Scripps-Howard papers calling the proposal “a slap in the face” to Roosevelt’s most loyal supporters . Roy Howard called the proposal a “slap in the . face’
 Moley asked whether there was anything in Kennedy’s business career that could hurt the President . Moley, who was present, said there was nothing in Kennedy's business that could harm him . Kennedy died at the age of 92 in March 1968 .
 Harold Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior, sourly recounted the meeting in which Roosevelt told the cabinet . Harold Ickses said, "Ickes was not happy to hear what he had to do"
 The SEC was a complex and demanding assignment, requiring enormous knowledge, toughness and Skill. The SEC is a complex, demanding assignment. It requires enormous knowledge and toughness .
 "Over the next fifteen months he did a first-class job in establishing a vigilant and effective regulatory agency. Over the next 15 months, he did an excellent job," he said .
 Kennedy restored the capital market and secured the adoption of new trading rules . In September 1935 Kennedy resigned from the Treasury .
 Winston Churchill invited them to luncheon at Chartwell, his country house in Kent . Churchill invited the group to Chartwell at his home in Chartwell .
 England and the U.S. should build a navy strong enough to police the world, he says . This was the way to counter Nazism, he said, and this was the answer .
 Churchill asked if Eleanor Roosevelt was an exhibitionist using her husband’s high office to court publicity for herself . Churchill asked whether she was using husband's high office as a publicity stunt .
 Kennedy’s second son, John, had just entered the London School of Economics, was seriously ill with hepatitis . Kennedy's second son John, who had just left the school, suffered from the disease .
 Of course you must not think of being at all hampered by this engagement. Of course, you must think of yourself as a good person .
 Kennedy found the business attack on government planning especially mindless . Kennedy found it especially mindless to attack government planning .
 The St. Louis Post-Dispatch described the mood in his book They Hate Roosevelt .
 He is made to doubt secretly that he represents the American system in its most perfect expression . "He represents the U.S. system," he said .
 "Being unable to analyze with coolness the cause of his anxiety, he seeks relief in vituperation and hatred," he writes . "He is unable—and certainly unwilling—to analyze ... He seeks relief"
 Vi Kennedy had his forty-eighth birthday two months before the 1936 election . Vi Kennedy was born in April 1936 .
 This proud, profane, imperious, . frank, frank, indiscreet, scheming, relentless, . relentless, sensitive, vital man had had spectacular success in business and government . He was a proud, . profane and imperious man .
 He owned houses in Bronxville, Hyannis Port and, after 1934, Palm Beach .
 He left far behind the Yankees who had patronized him at Harvard and on State Street . He had left far in his wake .
 Still he had not quite achieved the goal he had long since set himself. Still, he still had not achieved the dream he had set himself .
 When a Boston newspaper described him as an Irishman, he exclaimed, “I was born here.” He said he was born in Boston .
 He did not resent being Irish but the condescending Yankee theory of what being Irish involved, he said . "He didn't resent being . Irish," he said. "He did not hate being Irish"
 His character was formed by his Irish cultural inheritance . He fused these traits with a strictly American passion for competition, achievement and victory, he says .
 His passion was conditioned by the Irish tradition; above all by his supreme belief in the family—in his family . Still, powerful as powerful as this passion was, his passion was also conditioned by Irish tradition .
 LeMoyne Billings, John Kennedy’s Choate roommate and intimate of the household after 1934, could not remember visiting the Kennedys when Mr Kennedy was not there .
 He was twenty-one years old in 1936, a sophomore at Harvard after spending 1933-34 with Harold Laski at the London School of Economics . He was also a junior at Harvard and spent three years at the University of Cambridge .
 Joe was robust and, for all his gentleness with the younger children, he was hot-tempered . Joe is robust and for all he gentleness, he is still a keen observer of his family .
 When asked if anything had really bothered him as a child, he could think only of his big brother . Jack MacGregor Burns said he was worried about his brother .
 Rosemary, 18 in 1936, who her parents now realized was mentally retarded; Kathleen, 16, gay and pretty; Eunice, 15, and Patricia, 12, still tomboys . Rosemary is now mentally retarded . Kathleen is now a lesbian .
 His houses were designed not to impress his guests but to cherish his children . His homes were designed to be loved by his children, not his guests, but his family .
 In Hyannis Port, the Kennedys had an open, rambling, white Cape Cod house separated by eel grass from a fringe of beach along Nantucket Sound . The house was separated from the shoreline by eer grass and was set apart from the beach .
 Palm Beach house was a white stucco 1920s 1920s villa overlooking the ocean .
 The Bronxville house, which they had moved from Riverdale in 1929, was a large brick Georgian mansion on six acres of ground . It was the Bronxville home they had lived in .
 All were notable for their large rooms, comfortable rooms, their soace and sunlight and flowers . The lawns were easily converted into touch football fields and staging areas for pets .
 Joseph Kennedy expended all the power, conscious and unconscious, of a demanding personality on pressing his children, especially the boys, to develop their potentialities to the full, on driving them beyond themselves .
 The athletic code was accompanied by equally incessant pressure for intellectual development . Vil Vil Vil says the athletic code is accompanied by the pressure to develop intellectual skills . Vil: "The athletic code has been accompanied by enormous pressure on intellectual development"
 Joseph Kennedy liked to preside over a family seminar at mealtime at the Kennedys . Joseph Kennedy was known for his role in the Kennedy family .
 Their father sometimes took the other side in order to sharpen the discussion . Their father often took the opposing sides of debate .
 If an outsider, such as myself would ask the Ambassador a question ... he would just answer it curtly as though he didn’t want to be bothered with your questions . However, if an outsider would ask him a question, he would say 'no' to the Ambassador
 Excerpts from letters to John convey the flavor; . I strongly urge you to pay a little more attention to penmanship. John .
 It is very difficult to make up fundamentals that you have neglected when you were very young and that is why I am always urging you to do the best you can . It is difficult to find a way to improve your skills when you are very young, says coach .
 Don’t let me lose confidence in you again, because it will be pretty nearly an impossible task to restore it, he says . Don't lose confidence again. It will be a loss to you and a distinct loss to me, he writes .
 The mere trying to do a good job is not enough—real honestto-goodness effort is what | expect . Real honest to goodness is what you should expect, says CNN.com .
 His commanding presence awed their young friends, most of whom their father ignored but a few of whom, like Billings and Spalding, were received into the bosom of the family .
 Even they thought Mr Kennedy remote, a little humorless and infinitely intimidating, he was remote . Kennedy was a TV personality with a reputation for being humorless .
 She was a remarkably handsome, controlled, organized, and impervious woman . "She was remarkably handsome and controlled," she said .
 She was also a cultivated woman, better read and more worldly than her husband . She was better read, more worldly and more intelligent than his wife .
 Her father instilled in her an enthusiasm for history; she kept up her languages . All her life she remained a student, dedicated to self-improvement . Her father had instilled . in her enthusiasm for . history .
 She adored balls and trips to Paris, while Joseph Kennedy, as she later said, considered parties a waste of time . Joseph Kennedy would either be solicited for tips on the stock market or argue about the New Deal .
 Her husband’s conventional religious faith paled next to her serene and inexhaustible piety . Her husband's conventional faith pales next to that of hers .
 The result was predictable in a family culturally bound to regard girls as less important than boys . The result of this is predictable in the family culture, it is expected to be a family .
 The boys went in the main to secular institutions; the girls went to convents and then to Catholic colleges . Girls went to Catholic schools; boys went to secular colleges .
 Robert, always the overachiever, was the most religious among the sons . Robert was always the most overachieving among the boys . He was always religious .
 As a small child in Bronxville, he aspired to be an altar boy . He could be heard practicing Latin in his room .
 She was as articulate as he on the virtues of winning, as given to didactic questions at the dinner table . As stern in her discipline, she was as unrelenting in her determination to make the children meet high standards .
 The Kennedy boys worked hard and were usually at the top of their classes in Boston . He says he graduated from Dorchester High School with honors myself .
 You might ask him questions like who the President of France is; what holidays are national holidays or church holidays, or both; the name of the Queen of England, etc. etc. You might also ask him about who the French President is .
 The reason is that youngsters should get used to a few disappointments or jolts when they are young . The reason I am sometimes reluctant about extra goodies for the children is that I read once that . once said once that youngsters . should get . used to be used to get used
 They thus build up an immunity against them, so that when they encounter life’s vicissitudes when they are older, they are not too shocked and they can take them with a smile . The children build up their immunity against life's vicissitudes .
 The desire to please parents forces children to some degree into roles set for them from above . The desire for pleasing parents forces them into roles they must accept, say experts .
 Such a process can create doubts about worth and identity and lead to overcompensation or to despair . The process creates doubts about the person's worth or identity and leads to depression .
 American life is littered with the wrecks of men and women who cared too much about pleasing their parents . American life has been littered with wrecks, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The mystery is why the Kennedy children did not crush their parents' demands . It's a mystery why they didn't crush the Kennedy family .
 Randolph Churchill and Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr. never fulfilled their potentialities . Churchill and Roosevelt were youths of ability and ambition, but never fulfilled potential .
 The Kennedy sons, for whatever reason, pursued their capacities to the uttermost limits . "The Kennedy sons" pursued their capacity to the utmost limits, says historian John Sutter .
 Joseph Kennedy was a great father, says FDR Jr . FDR Jr: "From everything | saw he was a good father" FDR Jr says JFK was a 'great father'
 He was walking to his father’s house for dinner when Caroline, his daughter, came off the porch crying to him . Caroline, Caroline, was walking with him when he was attacked .
 Nothing that will happen during your Presidency will be as important as how Caroline turns out, says President Obama .
 If pressure created problems for the children, love gave them strength to meet those problems . Love gave the children strength to deal with those problems, the author says .
 It was a love that put ‘Daddy’s look’ and his eternal emphasis on competition in context . It was also a love for his love of the game, and his emphasis on competing in competition .
 "His whole effort, in one aspect, was to make his children independent of him," he said . "He was trying to make himself independent of himself," he added .
 Joseph Kennedy did not require his children to adopt his opinions . Joseph Kennedy was a highly opinionated man .
 Kennedy regarded Laski as “a nut and a crank” and disagreed with everything he wrote . Kennedy regarded him as a “nut and crank.”
 'Never taught the boys to disapprove of some one just because | didn’t accept his ideas. But | never taught them to disapprove . Never taught them not to accept some one’s ideas,’ says author .
 In the 1920s he had consulted his friend Hearst about setting up a trust fund for each child . He had consulted Hearst on setting up the trust fund .
 Hearst warned Hearst not to make them independent . Hearst told Hearst that when they got older they would leave him and go off with their money . He warned him not to keep them independent; Hearst said he would be disappointed if he did .
 Joseph Kennedy’s “fierce sense of family” was perhaps the key to the mystery . Joseph Kennedy had a ‘fierce family’ (Morton Downey's phrase)
 The family provided a protection against inordinate parental demands in part, it may be surmised, because it was an Irish Catholic family . And it may also be because it may have been a protection .
 Salvation was an individual responsibility in Protestant family . Competition threw each child back on himself and parental demands could become an individual burden . Salvation was a Protestant family, where Salvation was individual responsibility .
 In an Irish Catholic family, salvation was culturally mediated through institutions . The destructive effect of competition, the suffocating effect of love, could be tempered by corporate solidity and mutual reinforcement .
 Of course, lest one appear to endorse theories of parental determinism, it is necessary to add that the character of the children themselves—their spirit, vitality, toughness, irreverence—had something to do with their capacity to survive .
 Apprehensions of inferiority were no doubt intensified when it became apparent that he would be a good deal shorter than his tall older brothers; even, in time, than his petted younger brother .
 When at home, Joseph Kennedy was impatient and rough with him . He was often rough with Joseph Kennedy, the president of the country .
 His father's approval and love inspired him to strive to win his father’s approval, he says .
 Once Billings commented to Joseph Kennedy on Bobby’s exceptional generosity with possessions . Bobby Kennedy was known to be generous with possessions, Billings said .
 Dave, Frank, and Tommie went with me and we liked it very much . wish you were with me. wish you could have been with me .
 Beatty the lion trainer wasn’t there this year . liked the horses jumping over the fire the best . Will probably see you this week.
 Bobby says he's going to frame his letter and will keep it in his room . Bobby: 'I'm just starting my collection and it would be great fun to see yours'
 "Daddy, mother, and all my brothers and sisters want to be remembered to you. Daddy, mother and all of my brothers, sisters . Remember you with your love of life."
 At times he is aS good as any boy in the tent group, but at other times he's quite diffident . He is best known for his performances, but is often diffident at times .
 He was the gentlest and shyest in the roaring family, the least articulate orally and the least coordinated physically . The most conscientious and the most dutiful, he was also the most conscientious .
 Bobby was four when he was four, rushing to be on time for dinner, he careened into a heavy glass door and gashed his head . Bobby's parents say he's a good Samaritan, but he's never been hurt .
 Cod has not lost the sight of his eye and will probably come out of it all right . But it was a very narrow escape for Cod, who is now recovering in hospital .
 Slow in swimming, he threw himself off a yawl into Nantucket Sound as if he was determined to learn all at once or to drown .
 Early in 1937, Joseph Kennedy returned to Washington as chairman of the Maritime Commission . Kennedy was the first president of the U.S. Navy .
 Roosevelt had other reasons to want Kennedy in the administration . Roosevelt wanted a strong executive in a tough job . Roosevelt had many reasons for wanting Kennedy .
 Franklin D Roosevelt, '04, told Harvard '12, at the twenty-fifth class reunion in 1937, that big government “is not foisted on us by politicians.” The President must particularly have appreciated Kennedy’s loyalty in telling the President “big government
 Kennedy: If businessmen disturbed by sitdown strikes and "bloody warfare at the factory gates, they should realize they were “reaping the whirlwind of a quarter century mishandling of labor relations” Kennedy said . Kennedy: Businessmen should realize that they are ‘reaping
 President Obama's administration is under attack, but he remains a precious symbol . He is seen as a symbol of unity in the White House .
 As Kennedy was a Roosevelt ambassador to the business community, he was also a Catholic Church ambassador . Kennedy was the president of the Catholic Church in the 1960s .
 In the early thirties he had tried to keep Father Coughlin, the radio priest from Detroit, on the New Deal reservation . In the 1930s, he had been trying to keep the priest, who was a radio priest, from Detroit . He died at the age of
 When Cardinal Pacelli visited the United States in 1936, Kennedy arranged a luncheon for him with Roosevelt at Hyde Park and later had him to a family tea at Bronxville .
 Kennedy did mention Leo XIII’s encyclical “The Condition of the Working Classes” in /’m for Roosevelt . Kennedy also mentioned Leo XIII's encyclicals ‘The Condition . of the working Classes’ in /'m for FDR .
 Father John A Ryan labored in the spirit of De Rerum Novarum . But he had no particular contact with those Catholic New Dealers, like Father John Ryan .
 Roosevelt liked Kennedy, liked Rose Kennedy even more and was touched by Kennedy’s preoccupation with his family . Roosevelt liked her even more .
 James A Farley, it is true, claimed that Roosevelt “never liked” Kennedy . Farley also said that Roosevelt never liked Kennedy .
 Farley, who felt snubbed by the Roosevelts, may have concluded that Roosevelt was socially opposed to all Irish Catholics . But Farley may not have concluded .
 The Kennedys, unlike the Farleys, came often to the White House, and, what was more unusual, Roosevelt went on occasion to Kennedy’s house along the Potomac .
 Roosevelt complained that he always had to hold Joe Kennedy's hand . Morgenthau and Ickes also noted with satisfaction Roosevelt’s complaints with satisfaction with satisfaction .
 Roosevelt spent a great deal of time holding Morgenthau's and Ickes’s hands too . Roosevelt spent time with the presidents of both parties .
 "Always think of the Roosevelts with great affection, as they all were very gracious to us as a family," Rose Kennedy wrote .
 FDR’s refusal to admit pain was admired for his refusal to accept pain . A family that had no tolerance for selfpity could not but admire FDR . FDR's refusal to say 'I'm sorry'
 There must have been times when the braces seemed insupportable, and his limbs ached, but still he would keep smiling . He said: "There must be times when he would have to keep smiling"
 The only indication of suffering was in the stronger determination of that jaw . It was the only indication that he was suffering, he said .
 Amidst horns blowing and special police, we arrived at the pier which he slowly traversed amidst shouting applauding audiences still smiling and beaming . The pier was filled with cheering crowds and people still smiling .
 At the Securities and Exchange Commission he struck up unexpected friendships with two young New Deal lawyers . James Landis of the Harvard Law School and William O Douglas of Yale Law School, whom he brought down to head a study of corporate reorganization .
 Kennedy had gotten Roosevelt to appoint Landis his successor as chairman in 1935 . Kennedy had got him to appoint Douglas to the SEC in 1936 . Kennedy also got FDR to appoint him as chairman .
 Landis was scheduled to return to Cambridge in September 1937 as dean of Harvard Law School . Landis resolved to stay in the job long enough to keep the more radical Douglas, who had been named dean of Yale Law School, from becoming the next chairman .
 Kennedy told Douglas to expect a call from the White House . Kennedy had just left FDR, Kennedy said, and everything was back on the track . Kennedy said he was going to New Haven, Connecticut, on his way to New York .
 A missionary’s son, born in Japan, was a kid from the wrong side of the tracks in Yakima, Washington . They were outsiders too—one a missionary's son and the other a boy from Yakima . The two men were missionaries from Japan and one from Yak
 Douglas’s position was probably, on the merits, less acceptable to Kennedy . On the issues that now divided them, Douglas's position was less acceptable than Kennedy's . Kennedy's position may have been less acceptable .
 Kennedy had been loyal to Landis in 1935, so he was determined to be loyal to Douglas in 1937 . Kennedy was loyal to the president of the United States in 1937, but not Landis .
 He remained close to Landis, but something especially delighted him about Douglas, he says . Douglas shared bluntness of speech, skepticism about motives and an expansive scorn for the eastern establishment .
 Douglas had been five years old when his father died . Kennedy, though only ten years his senior, filled a vacancy in Douglas' life .
 Roosevelt said that this was the spot for Kennedy . Declaring himself “thoroughly dissatisfied” with Daniel C Roper, the Secretary of Commerce, he said .
 Robert W Bingham, the ambassador to England, was in poor health . The Kennedys, Rose too, set their hearts on London, and set their sights on London .
 Robert launched a handmade parachute through a porthole in his stateroom . Robert launched the parachute through the porthhole in his room .
 Felix Frankfurter wrote to the new ambassador that his Massachusetts predecessors at the Court of St. Edward VII were his predecessors . The ambassador to the U.S. was a member of the Massachusetts Supreme Court .
 St. James’s, John Adams and Charles Francis Adams, had used their sons as personal assistants . John Adams had used his sons as assistants .
 Joseph Kennedy Jr. put Joe Jr. on the embassy staff; John too, when he was in London on holiday . John Jr. was also put on embassy staff .
 Joe went to Czechoslovakia during the Munich crisis and to Spain in the last months of the Civil War . John went to Spain at the time of the Spanish Civil War in 1939 . Joe also went to Germany in 1939 and Spain in 1940s .
 Robert, now 13, did well in mathematics, but poorly in Latin, which he finally dropped . He also did the best he could in cricket and rugby, and the best in cricket .
 He also discharged occasional diplomatic tasks, such as laying a foundation stone at a newsboys’ club . He also carried out a number of other tasks, including laying foundation stones .
 Joe had six stitches taken in his elbow after an accident in the elbow . The accident kept him off the skis for three days . Joe Skated in the meantime while he was recovering .
 “We thought of all the interesting and stimulating experiences which we had enjoyed during 1938... made possible through the honor which you had conferred upon Joe. Moritz,” Rose Kennedy wrote Franklin Roosevelt .
 When he appointed Kennedy, Roosevelt seems not to have talked to him at length about Hitler . Roosevelt seems to not have talked about Hitler at length .
 President Kennedy supposed that Kennedy would give the same generally loyal support in foreign policy he had given the New Deal at home . Kennedy thought he would give same loyalty to the President as he did at home, but he did not .
 He was sure that Kennedy, as a good Irishman, would be ethnically immune to the blandishments of the Chamberlain government . He thought that Kennedy would be immune to blandishment of the government .
 Kennedy had no clear ideas about foreign affairs when he set forth for London . And it was probably the case that Kennedy himself had no idea of foreign affairs .
 As a businessman, he believed that prosperity required a peaceful world . He said prosperity requires a peaceful environment . As a politician, he said he wanted a peaceful future .
 Kennedy and Chamberlain famously hit it off famously . Roosevelt’s expectations were met with Roosevelt's expectations .
 His dread of war was leading him to a general view of America’s role in the world . He advocated honestly and stubbornly at the cost of his political career and held it for the rest of his life .
 On Trafalgar Day in 1938, Kennedy spoke again, this time eluding Hull’s blue pencil by presenting his view as only “a pet theory of my own,” not a policy of his government . Kennedy said his view was only a pet theory, not
 There is simply no sense, common or otherwise, in letting these differences grow into unrelenting antagonisms . There is no sense in letting differences grow to uniting antagonism, especially in the United States .
 He has drunk the draught which makes the eagle cease to flap and induces it to lie down with the lion . But he “has drunk the . draught’s drunk which made the eagle stop to flap,” he says . “The eagle ceased to flap
 At times, he was sure that America would ultimately be dragged in . At times he was also sure that . America would be dragged into .
 Harold Ickes fed Roosevelt gossip about Kennedy’s association with the Cliveden set, his disloyalty to the President, his own presidential ambitions . Kennedy was accused of being disloyal to President Roosevelt .
 Roosevelt was receiving ardently pro-allied messages from Bullitt in Paris . But he evidently saw value in hearing something different from London . Bullitt was not the only person to send messages to Roosevelt .
 Joe Jr. had sailed on the Mauretania; John was about to fly on the Clipper . Joe Jr.'s father and son were sailing in the same ship . Joe Sr. was flying on the Clipper when he died .
 His judgment is pathetic and | am afraid of his influence on F.D.R. because they think alike on many things . His judgement is pathetic, he says, and I'm afraid he will influence his influence .
 Joseph Kennedy had enrolled him at St. Edward Kennedy's private school . Exercising his paternal preference for secular education, Joseph Kennedy opted for secular schooling .
 St. Paul’s turned out not to be all that secular; and its unremitting Episcopalianism was too much for Rose . Rose died at the end of her life at the hospital .
 His worst grades were in history and Christian doctrine . His father had bombarded Joe and John with counsel and reprimand, he was now across the Atlantic .
 The letters of admonition came from Rose Kennedy, who was particularly concerned that Robert read more books . Rose Kennedy was concerned about Robert's ability to read more .
 In the spring of 1940, the associate headmaster, thanking the ambassador for his contribution to the fund for a new gymnasium, added that Bobby was getting along better . The associate headteacher thanked the ambassador, thanking him for his contributions, said that Bobby had improved .
 His mother hoped for social graces and wanted to send him to dancing school in Providence . His mother decided to send her son to dance school .
 In May 1941, Teddy was deposited at the Priory, though he was much younger than most of the students . Teddy was a member of the Order of Heaven .
 He remembers complaining to his older brother that the bigger boys were picking on him . He says he complained to him that he was being picked on by bigger boys .
 The first year of the European war was a lonely time for Joseph Kennedy—lonely and bitter . Vi The First World War was the first year for Kennedy .
 He said he wanted to quit but didn't see how he could before the elections . He said everything he could do in London could just as well be done by a $50-a-month clerk .
 The British may have considered declaring Kennedy persona non grata . Kennedy may have been declared persona non-grata .
 "My sympathies are completely with the Allies, but they must not run away with my judgment of what can happen to the United States," he says . "I'm not worried about what happens to the U.S. but I'm very concerned about what could happen to America,"
 In May 1940 the Nazi armies swept into the Low Countries and France . Vil Vil in May 1940 was the first time the Nazis had invaded France and Belgium . Vil in France was the last French capital to stand by the Nazis .
 The English will fight to the end but | just don’t think they can stand up to the bombing indefinitely . The English are not going to give up on the bombing .
 What will happen then is probably a dictated peace with Hitler probably getting the British Navy, and we will find ourselves in a terrible mess . Hitler probably will probably get the British navy, says the historian .
 He does not seem to seem to be interested particularly in reading or sailing or his stamps .
 It is funny that he should have them this time of year, the same as Joe. Joe. It's funny that they should have come at the same time, he says .
 We once thought it was from eating corn, but these days we do not have any corn . We now have no corn, and it's been hard to find out what caused it .
 After all the lives and fortunes of their compatriots were being destroyed by Hitler . After all, the lives of the citizens of Germany and the rest of the world were destroyed .
 Kennedy threatened resignation after being left out of Roosevelt and Churchill negotiated the exchange of overage American destroyers for British bases in the Western Hemisphere . Kennedy wired Hull that he did not enjoy being a dummy .
 Roosevelt reckoned Kennedy would cause less trouble in England than in America . Kennedy's influence among businessmen and Catholics would give his criticisms of the administration’s foreign policy, Roosevelt reckoned .
 Kennedy was “primed,” said General Lee, “for a vindictive and vigorous assault upon Roosevelt” Kennedy was determined to get back before the election, General Lee said . Kennedy’s campaign for the White House was a success .
 In October, Kennedy phoned Sumner Welles, the under secretary, to complain that he had been ignored for three months . Kennedy (or so he later told his friend Krock) later told Krock that he phoned Welles to complain .
 President Roosevelt invited the Kennedys to spend the night at the White House . Rose Kennedy met her husband at the airport to escort him to Washington . The Kennedy family spent the night in Washington .
 Senator Byrnes and his wife were there along with Marguerite LeHand, the President’s secretary . The President's secretary was also there .
 State Department humiliations inflicted on him by the State Department . He used them that night to denounce them as humiliations .
 Roosevelt was sympathetic, obliged by denouncing the Department himself . By the end of the evening he had talkied Kennedy around to making a radio speech advocating his reelection .
 For all Kennedy’s inner misgivings about its theme, his speech was accounted one of the most effective in the campaign . For all . Kennedy's inner misguidges about its . theme, he said .
 The day after Roosevelt won his third term Kennedy called at the White House and submitted his resignation . Kennedy resigned the day after he was elected to a third term . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1944 .
 Kennedy was unwilling to take an irrevocable anti-Roosevelt, anti-Britain line . Kennedy was not willing to take a 'anti-British' line .
 This complicated his life when the lend-lease bill came up early in 1941 . His life was complicated by the issue of a lend-leasing bill .
 In a radio speech he simultaneously disclaimed the bill and advocated further aid to England . In the same speech he also advocated further help to the UK .
 He criticized the bill “in its present form” on constitutional grounds because it involved surrender of too much power by Congress to the President, but went on to insist that he trusted this President, hated Nazism, supported aid to Great Britain short of war . Years later Robert claimed
 By the spring of 1941 he had decided to give up the Bronxville house and settle in Palm Beach, maintaining his summer residence in Hyannis Port . He had also decided to move to Palm Beach in 1941 .
 Kennedy pointed at breaks in the sea wall and said he wasn’t going to fix the goddamn thing . Frank Waldrop, editor of the isolationist D.C. Times-Herald, recalls Kennedy . Waldrop: Kennedy pointed out the breaks and said, “I
 The whole world was falling apart, so why should he bother to bother with a house in Palm Beach? "The whole world is falling apart. Why should you bother to have a house?" he asks .
 To all this he added a new theme, he added an attack on the idea of a military crusade for democracy . "To all this [the] idea of the . idea of . democracy," he said .
 "It would not last even if we were able to present [other nations] with the most up-to-date constitutional system," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to give other nations the most modern constitutional system."
 In our very attempt to this colossal crusade we would end up in failure and disgrace abroad, in disillusionment and bankruptcy at home. In . Our very attempt would end in failure, disgrace abroad and disgrace at home, he writes . In .
 The U.S. must not overestimate its power to decide the destiny of other nations, says President Obama . The United States must not underestimate its power, he says, to decide its destiny .
 "We cannot, my fellow Americans, divert the tides of the mighty revolution now sweeping Asia and Europe," Obama says .
 They were not of our making and they will not be subject to our control, no matter how courageously or exhaustingly we strive to subject them . They will never be able to be subjected to them, even if they are not of their making, they will be .
 Let us forswear ringing phrases, Kennedy said, and concentrate on the struggle for justice in our own society . Kennedy: Let us concentrate on our own struggle to achieve justice in society .
 In another few days at Notre Dame, Kennedy said that “there is much in our Western civilization that does not deserve to survive” He also said that the president deserved the “unlimited loyalty” of all Americans .
 Hoover asked Kennedy to join with him, Alfred M Landon, Robert M Hutchins and others in a new manifesto against intervention in Russia . After the Nazi invasion of Russia on June 82, Hoover asked JFK to join him . Kennedy was the only person to join the manifesto .
 American entry into the war was “far more likely to destroy democracy in this country” than to establish democracy in Europe and Asia, author says . American entry to the war “was far more likely” to destroy U.S. democracy than Europe, Asia, he
 Landis intended to go to law school, his father wrote James Landis from London . He thought he would go to Yale, principally because he feels it would be better not to be constandy in direct competition with his brother, he wrote .
 The bit about setting up a world order was hardly in the paternal line . It's hardly the same as setting up the world order .
 His father cared less what his son had written in his book than that he had written a book at all, and a successful one .
 Kennedys were strong advocates of preparedness . Still, they hoped that America could avoid involvement in World War II .
 Captain Alan Kirk somehow contrived to spirit John Kennedy past the Navy’s stringent physical standards . His father sought the assistance of Captain Kirk, who was now director of the Office of Naval Intelligence .
 When the Japanese struck on December 7, the oldest Kennedy sons were both in naval training . Both were in training at the time of the attack .
 The War found Robert Kennedy, just turned sixteen, in his third year at Portsmouth Priory . Robert Kennedy was just turned 16 when he was found .
 The school, only a few miles from the naval base at Newport, responded quickly to the tremors of war . The school responded quickly and responded quickly .
 A fortnight after the Japanese attack, Robert went to Palm Beach for Christmas . Robert went for a fortnight to see family at his home in Florida .
 You owe it to 5 yourself as well as to me to make the most of your advantages . Make most of the advantages you can have in the future .
 Remember, too, that it is a reflection on my brains as the boys in the family are supposed to get their intellect from their mother, and certainly | do not expect my own little pet to let me down . Remember, also, that . it is also a reflection of my own
 Joseph Kennedy worried that his third son was not learning enough to get into Harvard, decided to shift Robert to Milton Academy in the autumn of 1942 . Joseph Kennedy was worried that Robert would not learn enough for Harvard .
 A new boy entering an upper form of a boarding school does not have an easy time at best . The incident happened in the early hours of September 1 .
 For a shy Irish Catholic boy, who had already attended six schools in ten years, he was now plunged into what a Milton friend described with precision as “a consummate WASP school .” 4 it could have been an ordeal.
 Robert lived in Forbes House, never complained and worked doggedly on his studies . Robert lived with Forbes House and never complained about it .
 One classmate, Samuel Adams, said he had never met anyone his own age so well informed of international politics . Samuel Adams: "I've met anyone my own age who is very well informed about international politics"
 Asked me to have him signed on so that nobody would know who he was and would have to work just as hard as any fisherman . Asked for him to be signed on because he wanted to make sure he didn't have to be identified .
 His ma objected and had her way saying, “Two of our boys are at the front now.” Her son was in the middle of the crowd .
 He is very punctual and very neat in the way he keeps his clothes about the room . He is also very neat and punctual in the manner of keeping his clothes around the room.
 He doesn't object to riding on the Elevated railway with common people, rather likes it . He doesn’t object to being on the elevated railway with people .
 His letters home were sometimes assertions in a small way of his own identity . The letters home from his time in the U.S. were often assertions in small ways of his identity .
 The Cocoanut Grove fire killed nearly five hundred people in Boston on a Saturday night in November 1942 . Robert noted that if Boston College had beaten Holy Cross in football in the afternoon, the B.C. team would have celebrated at the nightclub .
 To another 16-year-old kid this Gung-ho attitude seemed a little weird . To another sixteen-years-old, it seemed like it was a little strange to him .
 Milton had a girls’ school; and, while there was no coeducation, there was social contact . Milton had no co-education, but there were social contact. Milton had the girls' school; .
 The year before he had had a consuming crush on Ann Appleton but had never dared to speak to her at all . He had never spoken to her in a year before .
 He showed absolute determination, he decided to do something, he just gave it everything he had . He showed 'absolute determination', he said. He just gave everything he could .
 He didn’t care whether people noticed he was doing it, or kidded him because of it, he said . He didn't care if people noticed him, or if they didn't, he did it . He said, "I don't care what people notice he
 "He didn't participate too much when the conversation involved dirty jokes and that sort of thing. He joined in bull sessions, but he didn’t participate too often," his father says .
 Eunice suggested that | have Father Keller come to speak ... so | am working on that . Father Keller will speak at the end of this week .
 Wendell Willkie addressed the school, and Robert persuaded his father to follow . Robert persuaded Wendell to follow his father's example . Wendell willkie spoke to Robert Willkie at the school .
 In these years he formed his first strong friendship outside the family . It was his first friendship outside of the family, he formed a strong friendship .
 He was Phineas at Devon Academy in A Separate Peace,“the best athlete in the school,” who “possessed an extra vigor, a heightened confidence in himself, a serene capacity for affection which saved him.”
 He had a set of handicaps and a fantastic determination to overcome them . What he had was a set . set of . handicaps . He had to overcome . what he had been handicapped and was determined to overcome it .
 Because he had problems of his own, because he was “an underdog in sports, with studies and girls and as a Catholic,” he was sensitive to the problems of others . “He went directly to their assistance however personally inconvenient it might be to himself or those with
 If a Sunday mass was short an altar boy, he volunteered at once, though older and larger than the rest of the congregation . He volunteered to be a Sunday Mass altar boy at once .
 Hackett admired Kennedy’s readiness to do the things one knew one should do oneself but flinched from doing because they violated the iron conventions of adolescence . Hackett: "I admired Kennedy's readiness to . do the . things I knew I should do myself but didn't
 Robert Kennedy’s years at Milton passed tranquilly, at least as tranquilly as could be with the violent sounds of war in the background . V-mail letters from brothers overseas, a burning desire to get into uniform oneself .
 Bobby also deserves a good pat on the back for the way he has adapted himself generally generally . Bobby deserves to be proud of his ability to adapt himself to life in England .
 Bobby has done it successfully, participating generously in school activities and winning himself warm friends . Entering a group which has been together for several years is not easy, but he has succeeded .
 He also recalled his sense of humor, “delightful” if sometimes “pretty caustic,” his concern for “those who were less fortunate than he was” and his piety .
 It is not altogether clear why the President brought so many inveterate opponents into the defense establishment, did not use a man of tested administrative ability .
 Roosevelt himself had lost confidence in Kennedy’s judgment during the London experience . Very likely, as James Roosevelt later surmised, it was likely he had lost trust in Kennedy .
 The President added that unfortunately Joe Kennedy told everything he knew to Arthur Krock and Frank Kent, both columnists notoriously unsympathetic to the administration . The President said that unfortunately unfortunately, unfortunately, Joe Kennedy . Joe Kennedy's story was not good enough for the administration, he said
 Wallace observed dryly that other high officials leaked to Krock and Kent . Senator Lister Hill of Alabama suggested that Kennedy be put in charge of the problems of small business . Wallace: "Other high officials leaked"
 He wanted to warn Roosevelt not to disregard the conservative Democrats . Roosevelt wanted to be wary of the conservative Republicans .
 Kennedy had a precautionary eye on the future, Casey came to believe . Kennedy was president of the U.S. House of Representatives in 1973 .
 Once elected to the Senate, an Irish Democrat with Casey’s ability and broad appeal would very likely stay there indefinitely . Casey's ability and appeal would make him a senator .
 The Yankees had a lien on the other Senate seat, this would place a considerable impediment in the political future of Joseph P Kennedy, Jr. Since in those days the Yankees had . The Yankees . had a . lien for the other . Senate seat . This would be a
 John F Fitzgerald, who had nearly beaten Cabot Lodge’s grandfather for the Senate a quarter century before, was only seventy-nine and delighted at the prospect of a last hurrah . Fitzgerald had nearly beat Lodge's grandfather for a Senate seat .
 The crumpled cartoon lay at his feet like a withered leaf blown by a wintry wind . It lay at the feet of the cartoon cartoonist .
 Kennedy was surely under no illusion that his father-inlaw could beat Casey Casey . Kennedy was under no illusions that he would beat Casey, but he did . Casey is the son of the late President Kennedy .
 Honey Fitz’s more fervent supporters might move on to Lodge in the general election . But no doubt the thought passed through his mind that Honey Fitz might move to Lodge . Honey Fitz's supporters may move on in general election in general .
 His parents waited eagerly for his letters, duplicated them and sent them on to the other children . His parents were waiting eagerly for him to write them, duplicating them .
 On good nights it’s beautiful—the water is amazingly phosphorescent— flying fishes which shine like lights are zooming around . You usually get two or three porpoises who lodge right under the bow and no matter how fast the boat goes keep just about six inches ahead .
 There is no doubt that as men start to come back that ‘DougOut-Doug’ will soread— and would probably kill him off . There is also a possibility that “Doug” would be killed off .
 Some cooks are in more danger out here than a lot of flyers . You can’t estimate risks, some cooks are more likely to be in danger than flyers . "Some cookers are more dangerous than flyers," says the author .
 In August, the Japanese destroyer rammed John Kennedy’s PT-109 in Blackett Strait west of New Georgia, plunging Kennedy and his crew into the waters of Ferguson Passage, now suddenly aflame with burning gasoline .
 With calm bravery he led most of the crew to refuge on a tiny island . He towing one man through the water by gripping the end of the lifejacket belt in his teeth .
 On the bright side of an otherwise completely black time was the way that everyone stood up to it, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 'Previous to that | had become somewhat cynical about the American as a fighting man. Previous to that . had seen too much bellyaching and laying off. | had been too much . laying off.'
 With the chips down, the stories of Bataan and Wake faded away . The stories of Wake and Wake have faded away, but can now believe them again .
 He had been somewhat shocked by a bomb that had landed near the boat about two weeks before . The bomb landed two weeks earlier .
 He never really got over it; he always seemed to have the feeling that something was going to happen to him . "He was always worried about something happening to him," he says of his son .
 He never said anything about being put ashore, he didn't want to go, but the next time we came down the line | was going to let him work on the base force . He didn’t say he wanted to go .
 When I read that we will fight the Japs for years if necessary and will sacrifice hundreds of thousands if we must—lI always like to check from where he is talking— it’s seldom out here. When | read that . we will . fight the . Japs
 People get too used to talking about billions of dollars and millions of soldiers that thousands of dead sounds like a drop in the bucket . Thousands of people are killed in Iraq and Afghanistan wars, but thousands of them are still important .
 Thousands of thousands want to live as much as the ten | saw —they should measure their words with great, great care . But if those thousands want, they should measure them carefully .
 Kathleen Kennedy, now twenty-three, had gone to London in June to work in a Red Cross canteen . In the meantime, Kathleen Kennedy had been working in a canteen in London .
 She was witty and enchanting, “full of charm and love of life and uncertainty,” Susan Mary Patten wrote . Patten had the transcendent quality of making life gay when things were desperate, a friend said .
 Joseph Jr. had been chafing in the U.S. while his younger brother was becoming a hero in the Pacific . Joseph Jr.'s brother was killed in the Battle of the Pacific in the early 1950s . Joseph Sr. was killed by a Japanese plane crash in the
 He distinguished himself in dangerous winter missions over the Bay of Biscay . Here he distinguished himself over the winter .
 For a guy who never could find Gardiners Rock, Florida seems like a hell of a distance . For a man who never managed to find the rock, it's not a long way from Florida .
 In the spring his father went to Washington, Washington, to see about getting Robert into Navy V-12 training . Robert's father says he hopes to get him into the Navy .
 In regard to Bobby, he said something about wanting to get in the boats. I don’t think he should. I think it’s not a good idea. I’m not sure if he should get in boats. He said he didn't want to get
 By the time he’s ready to get out here the usefulness of the boats will be done, | think. Think. By the . time he's ready to . get out of the . boats, he says . Think. think .
 "I think he should go into that V-12 and stay there for a good long time," says X. X . "He should stay there, stay there," says McLaren .
 When he has at least a year of college he'll be more effective and he will be better able to handle a job, coach says . "He'll be able to deal with a job. He'll be better at college," he says. "When he's at least at least
 'I don’t think Bobby is ready yet to come out. It's just that the fun goes out of war in a fairly short time,' he says . 'I'm not ready yet, I just don't think Bobby's ready yet'
 In October 1943, Robert enlisted in the Naval Reserve as apprentice seaman . He was released from active duty until the following March when (after some behind-the-scenes intervention by his father) he was scheduled to enter V-12 training unit at Harvard .
 Robert Kennedy was a pensive and exceedingly youthful seventeen and his proud father standing by his side . His photograph appeared in the newspapers—“Kennedy’s Third Son in Navy”— with Robert . Robert's father stood by him .
 'The sight of you up there, just as a boy, was really moving particularly as a close examination showed that you had my checked London coat on. The sight of your London coat is really moving,' she says .
 In that picture you looked as if you were going to step outside the room, grab your gun, and knock off several of the houseboys before lunch . In the picture, you looked like you were about to knock off a houseboy .
 After reading Dad’s letter, | gathered that the cold vicious look in your eyes was due to the thought of that big blocking back from Groton, Groton . After reading the letter, . gathered that . I gather that the . cold vicious . look in the . eyes
 In March 1944 Robert reported for active duty at the V-12 headquarters at Harvard . Robert reported to active duty in March 1944 . Robert served in World War II with the Navy .
 'I’d be thinking too much about what’s going to happen three, four, five, or six months from today,' she said . Previous to that time, 'don't think any real strides had been made'
 You’ve got your life ahead of you and heaven knows it’s going to require all the brains anyone has to work out a satisfactory existence . The only way to do that is to be well prepared, so stick in there and work as hard as you possibly can .
 The spring of 1944 brought a new threat to the integrity of the family . “I’m the toughest Irishman that lives which makes me the toughest man that lives,” says Kennedy .
 William John Robert Hartington was the eldest son of the Duke of Devonshire, a descendant of Cavendishes and Cecils . He was now an officer in the Coldstream Guards . Kathleen Saw him again in London .
 Devonshires were as ineradicably Anglican as the Kennedys were invincibly Catholic . But the Devonshire family was ineradically Anglican . The Devonhire family is now the most powerful family in the world .
 Cavendish family had played a notorious role as British viceroys in Ireland . The Duke of Devonshire was a leading Freemason, and the family were Freemasons .
 Honey Fitz had taken his daughter Rose to Dublin long ago, he had shown her the spot in Dublin where Irish revolutionaries had assassinated Billy Hartington’s grandunde .
 The apostolic delegate in London was brought in, Cardinal Spellman, even the Vatican . Even the Vatican. Even the Apostolic delegate .
 Kathleen could be married within the church to a non-Catholic only if Hartington agreed to have the children raised as Catholics, and this the son of the Duke of Devonshire could not do . Kathleen could not be married to the non-Catholics in order to have children raised
 His attitude seemed to be that if they loved each other a lot, then marry outside the church . He seemed to have said: 'If they love each other, then they should marry outside of the church'
 Billy should make some kind of concession on the girls, for it wouldn’t affect his family line . If this is the love of her life, and she will not be happy with anyone else, then she will probably be unhappy for not having done it .
 He thinks it would be difficult to have half the family one thing, and the rest the other one thing .
 'She was quite worried as to what Mother would think of the wholebusiness. She was worried about what she was going to do,' she said .
 Her mother was much distressed by the prospect of her daughter marrying outside the church . Her mother said she was 'distressed' by her daughter's decision .
 She said that of all the children, and she made no exceptions whatsoever, She felt that basically your judgment was the soundest . You will be interested to know that as Mother and | walked down the street last Saturday she said that . As Mother and . walked . down the . street
 Now none of this means that | I am attempting to tell you how you should handle your life. Now . I am not attempting to . tell you what you should do with your life, I'm not telling you how to handle it .
 You are the one that has to live it and it is along one and also quite difficult one, but as I have said to you before you are “tops” with me and you always will be. You are ‘tops’ with me,’ says the
 Cardinal O'Connell had died, and they had been having masses, processions and parades . Cardinal O’Connell died, but they were having masses and processions . They had been celebrating his death .
 Jean Kennedy was in a convent; her father, concerned that the nuns would upset her by condemning Kathleen's decision, came to see her . "I see now that I’ve lost one of my daughters to England,” Joseph Kennedy wrote Beaverbrook .
 He added that young Joe had just volunteered for an extra month’s duty, which would give him forty missions . Joe volunteered for the extra month's duty .
 Joe volunteered to fly an experimental Navy plane designed to strike German flying bomb sites on the French coast . The plane was designed to hit German air bomb sites .
 It was the most terrible moment of his father’s life, the annihilation of the hope and dream of nearly thirty years, his son says . The family was devastated by the loss of their hope and dreams .
 A few weeks later, Harry S Truman, the Democratic candidate for Vice President, came to Boston . Truman was a few weeks after he was elected to be Vice President .
 With one brother killed and another nearly killed, the global war had ravaged the family itself . With one sister married outside the faith and the country and then her husband killed, her husband also killed .
 Rosemary would live more tranquilly with the nuns in a Wisconsin convent . In the meantime, another sister retired from the family; Rosemary, falling farther and farther behind, would live in the convent .
 Robert Kennedy in his 19th year was receiving abrupt instruction in the incertitudes of life . Robert Kennedy was receiving an abrupt instruction . Kennedy's death was an accident .
 It has been written that he objected to Kathleen’s marriage;® but this finds no corroboration in evidence or memory . He objected to the marriage but this is not corroborated in evidence .
 His father, summoning the children, told them they must be brave; that was what their brother would want from them . His father told them to be brave. That was what he told them .
 No one knows how Robert Kennedy, in his solitary life, dealt with the inner turmoil incited by these events . Instead he walked for a long time on the beach in front of our house .
 A rollicking lot bridled under the ambassador’s strict one-cocktail-before-dinner rule and took to foraging in the kitchen liquor closet after the cooks had departed . The ambassador's strict one cocktail before dinner rule was strict .
 Robert was "a scrawny little guy in a white Sailor suit ... very upset that we were sneaking booze in the kitchen," says Robert's wife . Robert and his wife were married for more than 20 years .
 "He was afraid his father might catch us and he knew his father’s wrath," says the author of the book . He was afraid he might catch his father's wrath and was afraid of his own death .
 Lewiston turned out to be far away from family, from friends, from the war, even from the faith . For the local church held mass for its French Canadian constituency in French, a language that continued to elude him .
 Finally he located an English-speaking church; he wrote his parents that by the end of the week his soul should be “as white as snow.” He wrote that he wanted his soul to be white as white by the week .
 There will be a cry that the only way to solve all these problems is to let the Government do it, and that will be the beginning of some form of socialism in this country . The Government will have to deal with the problems of the economy, says David Cameron .
 Of course, it was never his plan—he wouldn't know enough to have a plan . Of course it was not his plan, he said .
 It was conceived by a Jew named Bernstein, who is now Assistant Secretary of the Treasury . Bernstein is now an assistant Treasury Secretary .
 This morning1Lread of the discussion about three votes for Russia , and one can begin to see plenty of disputes for the future . Russia is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Joseph Kennedy looked on the postwar world with unremitting apprehension . His pessimism about the war so sadly verified, Joseph Kennedy's pessimism .
 He could not share Beaverbrook’s hope about postwar collaboration with the Soviet Union . Kennedy thought the Russians would play the game, Kennedy thought, only so long as it was going their way .
 Without telling his family, Robert went to Washington and asked the Secretary of the Navy to release him from officers’ training and assign him to the ship as a seaman . Robert was released from officers' training and assigned to the Navy's first ship .
 On February 1, 1946, Robert Francis Kennedy, Apprentice Seaman, Class V-12, United States Naval Reserve, left the Naval Reserve Officers’ Training Corps program to join the new boat .
 He is leaving ... at his own request so that he may acquire sea experience . He says he is leaving at the own request to learn sea skills .
 It is recommended that when possible he be given a Quartermaster rating because of his intense interest in navigation . It is also recommended when possible that he should be given an 'Intense interest' rating .
 Most of the crew was from the south and had spent even less time in the Navy than he had had . Most of his crew had spent less than a year on the ship . He was surprised to discover that he had never been in the navy .
 The war had hardly brushed him, but it had altered things nevertheless . He had been in the war, but the war had not brushed him off .
 Joseph Kennedy was paying more attention than ever before to his third son . With young Joe dead and John confirmed by war in attitudes of detachment and independence, Joseph Kennedy paid more attention .
 The transformations and griefs of war intensified a process of change that had begun much earlier . War's griefs intensified in the form of griefs that began much earlier, says historian .
 The sweetness and defenselessness of the small boy had gone underground . The sweetness of the little boy has gone underground, he said .
 The code of the Kennedys discouraged undue emotion, unless disguised as humor . The code was set up to discourage undue emotion unless it was in humor .
 Unlike John, who imperturbably went his casual and cool way, Bobby felt an overpowering need to please his father . Bobby felt a need to demonstrate his sense of family, always more sustained than John’s .
 Emotionalism remained, both as concern and as vulnerability, expressed in moodiness, taciturnity or a certain brusque harshness . It was expressed too in persisting sympathy for other underdogs .
 He was learning not to expose himself too much, not to seem to care too much . He said he was learning to not expose himself to the media .
 There was perhaps something very Irish about it all—the loyalty to family, the irony and self-mockery, the mingling of romantic defiance with a deep sadness . Something very Irish American too, for the Irish legacy in its Kennedy form had to accommodate itself to the puritan
 Being an Irish American, Henry James might have said, was a complex fate . Being Irish American was a complicated fate, he said .
 John Kennedy had not lived in the state for nearly twenty years . Apart from Summers on the Cape and four winters at Harvard, he had not been there for 20 years .
 His residence was Boston's famous political hotel, the Bellevue, across the street from Bulfinch's State House .
 The Eleventh District, which wandered from East Boston and the North End into Charlestown, Somerville and Cambridge, was rich in Fitzgerald and Kennedy memories .
 Robert spent a day during a naval leave accompanying John on his rounds . Robert spent the day accompanying John during his naval leave .
 One picture of the two brothers together will show that we’re all in this for Jack . One photo of the brothers together shows that we're all in it for Jack.
 When Robert arrived, Fay knew he was present, he later wrote, “only because | could see him.” Fay knew Robert only because he was there, he wrote . Fay: “I know he's there only because I can see him"
 Fay tried to make conversation, Robert Kennedy responding with a terse yes or no . Off they went to the movies, Fay trying to make up for Robert Kennedy .
 When the stage show began, a comedian reduced Fay to helpless laughter . “1 looked over to make sure he was enjoying this as much as | was. was. “Funny’s reaction to the show, Fay said. ‘I looked over and made sure
 Joseph Kennedy had set up headquarters at the Ritz Hotel, where he telephoned politicians of his own age, briefed the press and dispensed Campaign funds . Joseph Kennedy set up HQ at the hotel, which he used to call politicians' own age .
 Honey Fitz, a still sprightly eighty-three, and other . politicos crowded John Kennedy’s rooms at the Bellevue, filling the air with cigar smoke and ancient tales .
 John Kennedy summoned his contemporaries —schoolmates like Billings, Navy pals like Fay, young Irish veterans like his campaign manager Mark Dalton . Kennedy summoned schoolmates and Navy buddies like Fay and Billings like Fay .
 Jean Kennedy brought along her Manhattanville roommate, Ethel Skakel . Ethel was a spirited girl from Greenwich, Connecticut, named Ethel . Jean Kennedy and Ethel were roommates at the time .
 Grandpa, he said, “felt very strongly about , and he felt very close to my brother’s brother. Grandpa felt strongly strongly about .
 "I think that his effectiveness, in some of these areas, was not overwhelming," he said . "But | think that he effectiveness ... not overwhelming"
 He had some important introductions and contacts which were significant . He had a lot of important contacts and contacts with people in the world .
 John Kennedy's appeal was to an entirely different group of people . But the appeal that John Kennedy had was to a different group. John Kennedy appealed to them .
 For both brothers it was an initiation into politics; also, in a sense, into their Irish legacy . Both brothers say they are proud of their Irish heritage .
 The young Kennedys relished the stories and characters of the past . Though traditional Boston politicians left them skeptical or exasperated, they relished their past .
 David Powers, whose friendship with John Kennedy began in this campaign, said, “It took Jack three months before he found out that Mother Galvin wasn’t a woman”—Mother Galvin so called because of his maternal solicitude .
 Robert joins Lem Billings on a trip to Latin America . The primary primary is over .
 Robert appalled his friend by insisting on plunging into the surf of Copacabana Beach in the pitch dark of midnight . They began at Rio de Janeiro, where Robert plunged into the treacherous surf in the dark .
 They went on to Montevideo and Buenos Aires, to Chile and Peru, ending in Panama and Mexico . The group then traveled to Uruguay, Buenos Aires and Chile .
 Apart from Robert’s athletic excesses, it was, somewhat to Billings's dismay, an exceedingly seemly trip .
 Robert was determined to win the $2000 prize offered by Joseph Kennedy to all his children who did not drink or smoke till their twenty-first birthday . Robert won the prize after winning the prize for all children .
 When they went to bars, he ordered Coca-Colas and demanded to move on as speedily as possible to dinner . He ordered them Coca-colas and ordered them to move quickly to dinner, he said .
 Graying veterans of Anzio and Okinawa mingled with boys fresh from secondary school . The boys' parents were in Okinawa at the time .
 He had received academic credit for his work in V12 and, now almost twenty-one, was entering his junior year . He had also received academic credits for the work .
 His marks had been mediocre, except for a B in International Law in the winter term of 1945-46 .
 He was prompdy put on probation, from which he was relieved in the spring of 1947 . He was relieved from his probation in the fall of that year .
 Mcllwain, Roscoe Pound, Payson S Wild, William Y. Elliott, Rupert Emerson, Rupert. Emerson, Bruce Hopper, William .
 No one can remember a professor who particularly interested him; no professor can particularly remember him . "No professor can remember him. No professor can . remember him," he says .
 Wild, who had known his brothers well, had no impression of Robert at all . Wild said he did not think of Robert as a good man .
 A string of C's was broken only by D’s in Anglo-American Law and in the Principles of Economics . ‘D’ was only broken by D in Anglo American Law and D in Principles of Economic .
 Like his older brothers, he was elected to the Spee Club, but he got mad when another Irish Catholic was blackballed . He never went to the club again and never went back to it .
 Knowles added that he was looked on as “kind of a nasty, brutal, humorless little fellow when he got going” Knowles: “I was a nasty and brutal, brutal fellow when I got going.”
 Father Leonard Feeney inveighed against the infidel at the Benedict Center where he was accused of being an atheist . The infidel was killed in the Battle of St. Benedict at the center of the Catholic Church .
 Feeney expounded a rigid version of the doctrine extra ecclesiam nulla salus . He anathematized Harvard as “a pest-hole” of atheists and Jews . Harvard was called a "pest-hole" of atheists, Jews .
 Robert Kennedy angrily abandoned the center and shocked his mother by denouncing Father Feeney at the Kennedy dinner table . Robert Kennedy put up an argument, angrily abandoned his mother and shocked her .
 Feeney’s suspension by Cardinal Cushing in 1949 and excommunication by the Vatican in 1953 no doubt gave Rose Kennedy retrospective comfort . The former president of the Catholic Church was excommunicated in 1953 .
 Jean had brought Ethel Skakel along on a Skiing expedition at Mont Tremblant in Canada . Over the Christmas holiday of 1945-46 Jean had been skiing with Ethel . Jean had taken Ethel with him on a skiing expedition .
 Robert liked Ethel and, after the 1946 congressional campaign, invited her occasionally to Cambridge . Robert liked her and invited her to his home in Cambridge .
 In his senior year, Robert invited Pat Skakel to Palm Beach, Ethel managed an invitation for herself from Jean . Jean managed to invite Ethel to the Palm Beach house .
 'Perhaps this seemed the most direct way to prove to his family, and to himself, that he was approaching paternal standards of toughness. Perhaps this seemed to be the best way to show his family and himself,’ he said .
 An early football friend was Kenneth O'Donnell of Worcester, Massachusetts, whose father was football coach at Holy Cross and whose older brother was captain of the 1946 Harvard team . Kenneth O’Donnell was also a friend of the Harvard football team .
 Veterans from across the country were Rocking to Harvard under the GI bill . The GI bill was passed by Congress in 2010 . The bill was signed by President Barack Obama .
 He arrived on the field an hour early every afternoon every afternoon and stayed an hour late every afternoon . He arrived at the end of the day an hour earlier every afternoon, but stayed late .
 If you were blocking Bobby, you’d knock him down, but he'd be up again going after the play . Bobby would be up and running again, even if he was knocked down, he said .
 A few days later he broke his leg in practice but characteristically told no one and kept on trying to play till he collapsed on the field . It was either a lot of guts or no sense at all, depending on how you looked at it, as his brother John had said,
 Coach sent him in for his letter during the closing moments of the game with Yale . The sympathetic coach sent him into the game during the game .
 His leg was still in an enormous cast, and he somehow got mixed up in the final scrimmage but emerged unscathed . His leg is still in a cast, but he was able to play without a major injury .
 His father had won a Harvard letter, but neither of his older brothers had done so . Neither of his brothers had ever won a letter .
 "They were all two, three, four, sometimes five years older than he was," he said . They were all 2, 3, 4, 4 and 5 years old when he was born .
 They didn't want to pay any attention to him; they didn't think he was that good a football player, and they thought he was just a rich kid who was hanging around . They didn’t think he’d be a good player, he says .
 John’s friends were tough and rough... all big and bulky and very unsophisticated” Eunice thought . They weren’t in the usual social stream at all; they were tough, rough and rough .
 "1 used to talk and argue a lot, mostly about sports and politics,” he said later . But, if his college years were spent with athletes, they were not altogether consumed by athletics . “I used to say 'I'm not a sports fan,' he said
 Joseph Kennedy in the years after the war lived according to quiet routine at the Cape or in Palm Beach, plugged into the world of affairs by the omnipresent telephone . Joseph Kennedy lived in a quiet routine in the 1960s and '60s .
 While there is no evidence of great activity, that was certainly his preference . His preference was to play in the centre of the action .
 Arthur Krock wrote in 1952 that Douglas was always Kennedy’s first choice for the presidency . Arthur . Krock: "Douglas was always JFK's first choice" for President .
 Douglas remembers Kennedy saying to him at Palm Beach in the late 1940s, “I must be nuts.” Douglas says Kennedy told him he was “nuts” Kennedy said to Douglas that he must have been nuts . Douglas: Kennedy told me he was nuts.
 He saw communism in the forties as he had seen Nazism in the thirties . He saw it as a detestable system but not as a mortal threat to U.S. security .
 The Soviet Union had an ideological hope for the worldwide victory of communism, he says . But in practice, he said, Communist ambitions would be subordinate to Russian national interests .
 The United States, as Joseph Kennedy saw it, had the choice of two foreign policies . The U.S. had a choice between two foreign policy options, Kennedy said .
 The idea of “pressing steadily and persistently to establish liberal democracy throughout the world” attracted supporters who were “ardent, sincere, active and optimistic,” the author said .
 Kennedy’s recommendation was to “permit Communism to have its trial outside the Soviet Union if that shall be the fate or will of certain people.” Kennedy: “Permit Communism . to have . its trial . outside the . Soviet Union . If that is
 He added that we were now told that the Marshall Plan would bring about European recovery in a few years and halt the rising tide of communism . The Marshall Plan was “the grandiose subsidization of the world”
 Europe’s real difficulties, he said, were not physical but moral, but moral . European capitalism in declining to share its gains with the workers, he added .
 The U.S. had no great stake in the balance of power in Europe, he said . Nor could he see that the United States had any great stake, he added .
 We cannot base our foreign policy on the thesis that the U.S. cannot tolerate the attainment by any nation of a predominant position in Europe. We cannot tolerate any nation's dominance in Europe, says President Obama .
 If we do this, we Shall either have to fill the vacuum ourselves or fight war after war to prevent some other nation from achieving that paramount position . If this is the case, we will have to fight war against some other nations .
 This, however, is what we are asked to do when we are urged to make defensive and offensive alliances with the sixteen or more nations to whom we contemplate extending aid .
 "No nation that has sought to assume that burden has been able to stand the strain," says Obama . No nation that sought to take the burden of carrying that burden will be able to cope with it, he says .
 President Obama rejected idea that the U.S. had no stake in the European balance . That's an ancient theme in American foreign policy, he said .
 He visualized “the Western Hemisphere as a self-sufficient economic unit” under North American protection . The Western Hemisphere would be self-sustained economic unit, he said .
 The pursuit of hemisphere selfsufficiency would be far less costly than the world war to which global meddling would eventually lead .
 Congressman John F Kennedy strongly backed both the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan . Congressman Kennedy strongly supported the Truman Plan .
 Robert Kennedy said he began thinking about issues when he went to college . The disagreement between his father and brother may have been one explanation of Robert Kennedy's remark .
 The know-it-alls gathered in the evening at the Varsity Club . These were certainly among the questions vigorously debated .
 Of the Varsity Club group O’Donnell had the most lively interest in politics . O'Donnell had an interest in the politics .
 On an early visit, Robert outlined an argument and provoked his father into a vehement rejoinder . Robert outlined the argument, provoking his father to respond .
 Once the two boys joked at dinner about finishing last in a sailing race . Once the boys joked that they were going to finish last in the race .
 His father regarded him with increasing hope but still evidently with a certain dubiety . He said: 'His father regarded his son as a good boy'
 He arranged for the Boston Post to accredit his son as a correspondent and for Cardinal Spellman and James M Landis to supply letters of introduction .
 When his father discovered that Beaverbrook was crossing on the same boat, he enjoined Robert to go and speak to him . Robert's father was also enjoined to go to talk to Beaverbrook about his son .
 This perhaps was one of the last things Robert, diffident as ever, wished to do; but, as his mother said later, he knew that his father would be disappointed if he didn’t do it, so he did it . Robert, who was diffident, wished
 Churchill attacked Chamberlain's policies riot the reason Churchill did not go far enough . Attacked Chamberlain’s policies riot for not going far enough, but because they didn't go too far .
 Dad believed War between Germany and Russia would bring on a Universal War . Dad believed that War between Russia and Germany would bring about Universal War. Dad believed this would happen to happen .
 Beaverbrook believes we are living in potentially the most happy of times, because it is the most exciting of times . Beaverbrook: 'We are in the middle of a very exciting time'
 Happiness comes only from the facing and the attempting of answers for problems . Happiness comes from the face and the attempt to find solutions for problems, says Dr. Martin .
 The Victorian age could not achieve happiness except thru the pursuit of women, says author . The Victorian era could not . achieve happiness  except thru . the pursuit . of women . Author: "The Victorian age was not happy. It was happy to have a happy life"
 He is clever, has good character, energy, a clear understanding, and fine philosophy . He has a good character and energy, and a good understanding, he says .
 Poor children have a terrible existence with flies crawling in eyes & nose & it seems to bother them not one iota . Poor children suffer from flies crawling into their eyes, nose & eyes . They seem to be oblivious to the fact that flies are crawling in their eyes .
 He met a young Jew from Tel Aviv who gave him letters to leaders of Haganah, the Jewish defense organization, and then a representative of the Arab League who “became most vehement & said he doubted very much if the people to whom . have the letters would still be
 On March 26, Good Friday, they flew to Lydda airport and traveled to Tel Aviv by armored car, with Haganah escort . They traveled along roads menaced by Arab guerrillas, along roads .
 In Tel Aviv, soldiers took them to Haganah headquarters for an examination of their credentials . They were then taken to the Israeli military headquarters for a test .
 After release, “went for a walk, but picked up by the police & as large crowd gathered were blindfolded & put in car . Put in car & again taken to headquarters to be interrogated by Security Police. After release went for walk, ‘picked up by police
 Ambassador Kennedy was killed in a car crash in an armored car . He was taken by a British major who had heard of Ambassador Kennedy and offered them a ride .
 Robert talked to everyone he could find, including Haganah soldiers who held the British responsible for everything . He talked to a British soldier who had been there for two years and was sympathetic toward the Jews . Robert talked about his assignment for the Boston Post .
 He talked to members of Irgun, the resistance organization that had recently dynamited a British train and the King David Hotel . The group was recently dynamiting a train and a hotel in London .
 'It was through her that | really began to see the intense tragedy & horribleness of it all,' says the author . 'It's through her ... that I began to really begin to see it all'
 She was 6th generation & has four brothers in the Haganah starting at 13 years of age . Has four brothers who started as 13 years old .
 Before the youngest was finally taken her mother used to make him behave by threatening him the Haganah wouldn’t take him unless he behaved . The youngest's mother also threatened to take him away from the country .
 Told one story of a girl who carried on with the British police until finally the Stern Gang caught up with her and shaved her head . Told story of girl who kept on with police until she was caught by Stern Gang .
 When her brother returned from the front of the front and saw her, he shot and killed her . Her brother was also killed when he saw her and returned to the front .
 He visited a kibbutz through the kindness of a Jew who, forty years before, had made speeches in Boston for Honey Fitz . Honey Fitz had a very good time as she laughed a great deal but— he said .
 A letter arrived in Beirut from his mother bringing news of Ethel Skakel's prowess on the tennis court . Ethel's mother Ethel told him about her mother's prowess in the sport .
 A Jewish provisional government proclaimed the republic of Israel, and the Arab League soon launched an attack on the new state . The Arab League attacked the Jewish government .
 The Boston Post ran four articles from its “Special Writer’s in the Middle East on June 3-6 .
 The author gave objective statements of the Arab and Jewish viewpoints . The author, after commenting on the ambiguity of the Balfour Declaration, gave .
 The Jews in Palestine, he wrote, “have become an immensely proud and determined people.” The Jews have become ‘immensely proud’ and ‘determined,” he wrote .
 He gave a lyrical account of his kibbutz visit, omitting the reservations expressed in his diary . He also gave a detailed account of the visit, including reservations .
 Israel reversed its decision temporarily to allow Jews to have a homeland in Israel . Israeli Prime Minister Yossi Netanyahu's government reversed the decision temporarily .
 'We believe we have burdened ourselves with a great responsibility in our own eyes and in the eyes of the world. Because of this action | believe we . believe we are burdened by this responsibility,' he said .
 We fail to live up to that responsibility if we knowingly support the British government who are trying to crush a cause with which they are not in accord .
 If the American people knew the facts, | I am certain a more honest and forthright policy would be substituted for the benefit of all .
 The final piece dismissed the notion, then prevalent, that a Jewish state might go Communist . The piece dismisses the notion that the state might become Communist .
 He recalled how Robert Emmet met the accusation that he was in league with Napoleon by saying he had not fought one foreign oppressor in order to replace him by another . Emmet said he had fought not to replace Napoleon by replacing him with another .
 He had seen Jews and Arabs working side by side in the fields and orange groves outside Tel Aviv . Perhaps these would make a greater contribution than those who carried guns, he said .
 If a Jewish state were formed, it might be the “only stabilizing factor” in the Middle East, he says . Israel is the only Arab state in the region, and Israel has a history of instability .
 Peace-loving nations could not stand by and watch people kill each other, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Peace-loving countries could not tolerate people killing each other," he says .
 His father, with his dread of American meddling, conceivably winced a little at this last proposition . His father may winced at this .
 The pieces showed a maturity, cogency and, from time to time, literary finish creditable for a football player of twenty-two hardly out of college . The pieces show maturity and cogency .
 From the Middle East the wayfarers went on to Istanbul, Athens and Rome . They arrived in Rome on April 15, three days before the election of 1948 . Vi From the Mideast the journey was made to Rome .
 The crowd sang “The Internationale’s” again and again . The speech did not appear to arouse uncontrollable enthusiasm .
 Christian Democratic planes, no doubt subsidized by the CIA, circled overhead dropping leaflets . Christian Democrat planes were flying over Washington, DC .
 Kathleen Hartington had flown from London in a private plane for a weekend in the south of France . The plane crashed in fog in fog near Lyons; the ravishing girl was dead . Kathleen was flying from London to the south .
 It was one more appalling blow for the Kennedy family, already sorely tried by the hand of God . The Kennedy family has been deeply troubled in recent years .
 Joseph Kennedy, who was in Paris, brought his beloved daughter's body back to England . Joseph Kennedy was in France when his daughter was killed in Paris .
 Robert Kennedy, unable because of jaundice to attend Kathleen’s funeral, went to London immediately thereafter . Forbes: "Upon whose gravestone at Chatsworth is most truthfully written ‘Joy she gave,’""22"
 'People around the area where war has passed through so many times take it all rather objectively which is hard for me to understand' 'It's hard for them to understand. People around the region take it very seriously,' he says .
 They went thru all the motions of how Billy was killed & how he fell etc. which was a little much for me. They went through all the . motions of . how Billy died . which was . a little bit much for . me. Billy .
 The farm house he was killed attacking & into which he threw his grenade now houses a couple of little children & parents with the man having difficulty keeping his pants up .
 The people all tell their stories of the war as if they just came out of a wild western movie . The people tell their tales of the conflict as if it just came from a wild west movie .
 They entered Germany by way by way of Aachen, not far from the convent that Rose Kennedy had attended forty years earlier . Rose Kennedy attended the convent forty years before .
 Passed blocks and blocks where only the shells of houses were left standing . Passed blocks of blocks . Only the shells and blocks of houses left standing standing .
 They went to Cologne, where tourists were forbidden to go into the cathedral, “but as | looked like a workman dressed as | was | went through inside.” “As | looked | like | was . going through inside, they went through . Cologne’
 17 &18 year olds Sc bitter displaced nationals Sc Jews because they could speak German were placed in prominent positions where justice was anything but imparted . He was also critical of the American occupation .
 If you were in a concentration camp you automatically received without investigation an administrative post without investigation . People who had been placed in the camps because they were sex perverts or such became mayors. People who were placed in camps because of such things became mayors .
 "The intrigues, plots, and counterplots make even a visitor feel that he is part of something unreal," says the author .
 Everybody in Embassy wants to go to war with their comprehension of results built not on history but on their own rather idealistic beliefs .
 "Many here believe we want war now as we have A Bomb and Russia is not yet back on her feet," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Many here believe war now is now as Russia is back on its feet .
 Many also evidently believe we are imperialistic ranging from the extreme that we actually want to take over the territory till that we want to impose such business ties on the countries that we are supposedly helping that they will virtually be our colony .
 Many think we are using Marshall Plan because we have to have export market . Many think it is because we need to have an export market. We have to use Marshall Plan to have a bigger export market, he says .
 Military Men Sc Civs always shooting mouths off that U.S. is best in everything alienates them, particularly when they refuse to take criticism on own country . Military Men often say they are proud of their country, not their country .
 "Belief infused by the fact we are supporting these countries & have a right to say what we wish," she said .
 In Vienna as in Frankfurt he heard much complaint from the U.S. military about the wartime and postwar agreements with the Soviet Union . In Vienna and Frankfurt, he said he heard complaints from the American military .
 Czechoslovakia was four months after the death of Jan Masaryk and a month after the resignation of President Benes . The country was in the grip of a crisis in the 1980s and 1990s .
 He had applied for a visa in London but was stalled, and no visa ever arrived . He had been assured there would be no problem, but was told there would not be a problem .
 Someone told him later that the Hungarians feared he might be carrying secret messages from Cardinal Spellman to Cardinal Mindszenty . Someone said he was carrying messages from the cardinal to the cardinal .
 The airlift, by which the allies hoped to circumvent the Soviet blockade of ground traffic into West Berlin, was now, in mid-July, two and a half weeks old . Instead the travelers went back to London and then back again to West Germany, where the great airlift was
 Planes taking off and landing every three or four minutes at the Frankfurt airport . Planes take off and land every 3 or 4 minutes at Frankfurt airport. Planes were taking off, landing every 3 to 4 minutes .
 The travelers journeyed on to meet a couple of Kennedy sisters in Copenhagen, Denmark .
 He did not evidently share his father’s view that the U.S. should stop minding other people's business . He said the United States should not mind what other people do in the world .
 He was appalled at the talk of war and was not, at least in the field, an ideological crusader . On the other hand, he was appalled by the talk about war .
 The Hungarian government arrested Mindszenty and put him on trial in Hungary . Mindzenty was arrested at the end of the year and put on trial .
 We can look back over the last four or five years, see the colossal mistakes that we have made. We can't look back at the mistakes that have been made, says David Cameron . We can also look back to the past four years, he says .
 All eyes will now be turned our way to see if will be betrayed, or if resistance to evil can expect support .
 Think the idea of me at business school has more comical than serious aspects . There has been some mention of business school ... ... think the idea is more funny than serious .
 "As usual, nothing came easy, but, as usual, will was hardened by difficulty" "Nothing came easy," says the author of the book "as usual, but ... will be hardened by difficulties"
 "He did not talk much in the classroom but listened carefully and applied himself diligently," he said . He said he was impressed by his work in his classroom .
 The Korean War had begun; the Cold War was growing colder . Robert Kennedy shared enthusiastically in the conservative revulsion of the time against the diplomacy of Franklin Roosevelt .
 If the U.S. had gone to Yalta knowing the real problems and “the correct philosophy,” it would not have been too late to rectify earlier errors . The United States should have known the real issues and "correct philosophy"
 “We were there seeking solutions to the wrong problems and we were there with a bankrupt philosophy.” But “we were there looking at the wrong things,” he says . ‘We were seeking solutions,’ he adds .
 It had not been in our interest, he wrote, to beg for Russia’s entry into the Pacific war . He wrote .
 As for the agreement on liberated Europe, this was a clear violation of the basic tenets of International Law, says the UK . The agreement was a 'clear violation of international law', says the Foreign Office .
 "With a stroke of the pen we made forever farcial the principles for which we had repeatedly told the world we were fighting," says David Cameron . "We are not going to be able to live up to the expectations of the world," says Cameron .
 The United States had failed to place itself on the right side morally, “and it will be to our everlasting dishonor.” This was the philosophy that he and his lieutenants, Hopkins, Harriman, Winant, etc. kept as their guiding star throughout
 It was written, long before later fashions in revisionism condemned Roosevelt as an imperialist . Roosevelt ignored legitimate Soviet security concerns and proposed to dominate eastern Europe in the interests of expanding American capitalism .
 Yalta was written after Alger Hiss’s conviction for perjury and after Senator Joseph McCarthy’�s discovery that Communists had been running U.S. foreign policy . It attributed the errors of the errors to bad judgment, not to sinister intent .
 Vill Robert Kennedy came into his own at Charlottesville in the extracurricular life . He was president of the Student Legal Forum, an institution set up to bring outside speakers to the Law School . Kennedy was also president of a moribund student legal forum in his last year .
 He produced in rapid succession James M Landis, William O Douglas, Arthur Krock and Joe McCarthy . In rapid succession he produced in succession James Landis and William O . Douglas .
 Thurman Arnold and Ralph Bunche came too, as well as Congressman John F Kennedy and Congressman John J Kennedy . Joseph P Kennedy was assassinated on December 12, 1950 .
 The elder Kennedy spoke six months after Truman administration brought the U.S. into the Korean War and three weeks after MacArthur’s insistence on invading North Korea had provoked massive Chinese intervention . The elder JFK spoke in the 1950s .
 In Kennedy’s view the Korean debacle vindicated every apprehension he had felt about postwar U.S. policy . Kennedy: In his view, it vindicated his apprehension about postwar American policy .
 "It won no dependable friends; it scattered military power over the globe," he says . "It thrust us into battlefields impossibly removed from our sources of supply," he adds .
 It may be that Europe for a decade or a generation or more will turn Communistic . Europe may become more Communistic in the next decade or more .
 Communism still has to prove itself to its people as a government that will achieve for them a better way of living . Communism still must be proved to them as a good government, says Dzhzhnev .
 The more people that it will have to govern, the more necessary it becomes for those who govern to justify themselves to those being governed, says David Cameron .
 "The more people that are under its yoke, the greater are the possibilities of revolt," says President Obama .
 It seems certain that Communism spread over Europe will not rest content with being governed by a handful of men in the Kremlin . Moreover, it seems that Communism spreads over Europe not content with Russia .
 French or Italian Communists will soon develop splinter organizations that will destroy the singleness that today characterizes Russian Communism . The split will destroy singleness of the Russian Communist Party, writes Julian Zelizer .
 The debate was speedily derailed, once Senator Robert A Taft entered it, into an argument over the President’s constitutional power to commit troops abroad . The debate, however, was quickly derailed, as Senator Taft .
 Kennedy’s substantive propositions, especially his opposition to American armies on the Asian mainland, were ignored . Kennedy's conviction that communism would not be a monolith to the end of time was ignored . He was also opposed to the idea of American armies in Asia .
 His contention that the U.S. should not commit itself to the defense of untenable positions also deserved more attentive hearing .
 He defined tenable as penuriously as he did globalists defined it extravagantly . Unfortunately, tenable is not tenable, as he defined it penurously, as globalists did .
 Western Europe, even South Korea, were not beyond the reach of U.S. military power . Western Europe and South Korea were not in fact beyond the . reach of American military power, the author says .
 His critics, fixing on the excesses in his argument, found it easy to dismiss him as an incorrigible appeaser repeating in 1950 his folly of 1940 .
 Ralph Bunche caused considerably more excitement locally than Joseph Kennedy at the Student Legal Forum . Bunche was a national event, but Bunche is a local event .
 Remembering Charlottesville’s agitation over the black tackle on the Harvard football team, Robert Kennedy must have anticipated trouble . Robert Kennedy will be remembered for his actions in the wake of the incident .
 Kennedy decided to ask the student government to call for an integrated audience . Kennedy asked for the call for the audience to be integrated . Kennedy is a junior at the University of Cambridge .
 The Southern boys began to say, “I’ve got to go home to Alabama later—I can’t sign it.” Then the Southern boys said, ‘I've got to . go home . Later, they said they couldn't sign it .
 He had a lack of understanding of the problems these people faced, he said . To him it seemed illogical to support something but be unwilling to sign for it, he added .
 Student Legal Forum adopted the statement, and it went to the university president under Kennedy’s signature . Kennedy signed the statement on behalf of the student group .
 In the past, the university had evaded the state law by posting one section of the hall for blacks and then letting people sit where they pleased . The state law prevents the university from posting a section for blacks .
 Kennedy rejected the compromise; he felt the principle was bad and had to be confronted . When Dillard proposed this as the way out, Kennedy rejected it . Kennedy rejected Dillard's proposal as a compromise .
 He carried the case to the Law School’s governing body, the Board of Visitors, where “the madder he got, the worse he got at talking.” Davison says . Davison: “The madder [Davison] got ... the
 Professors Gregory and Dillard, impressed by his concern, accompanied the Law School dean to see the university president, Colgate Darden .
 Darden, who came from an old Virginia family and had been governor of the state, was personally opposed to this form of segregation . Darden was a former governor of Virginia .
 Bunche found an integrated audience, one third black, and was visibly affected . Bunche's audience was one third African-American, one of the audience members .
 He had struck a blow for decency and, after some instruction in the limitations of rage, had learned the efficacy of law . In any case he had struck .
 His best course was Constitutional Law, where he was marked 3.00 out of 4.00, followed by Labor Law . His average for all courses was 2.54 .
 The impression among faculty was that he had not worked hard academically because native ability enabled him to do sufficiently well with a minimum of effort .
 "If he had not distinguished himself, he had shown that he could handle the material," he said . "He had shown himself that he was capable of dealing with the material"
 He called on her at Manhattanville College; she visited him at Charlottesville . By 1949, they were enthusiastically in love .
 Ethel, born in Chicago on April 11, 1928, was two and a half years younger than her sister . Ethel was born in 1928 in Chicago .
 George Skakel built a self-made millionaire into the Great Lakes Carbon Corporation . He sold his petroleum coke around the world . The company was sold around the globe .
 A Dutch Protestant, he had married Ann Brannack, an Irish Catholic, fat, warm-hearted, eccentric and fervently religious . He was fat, fat and eccentric and had fat wife Ann, a Dutch Protestant .
 The Skakels moved east in the mid-thirties, into a stupendous brick mansion in the midst of a large estate outside Greenwich, Connecticut, in the 1930s . The estate is now located in the heart of Greenwich .
 The Skakel family, like the Kennedy family, was athletic, boisterous, competitive and filled with the will to win . The family was athletic and competitive, and like the Kennedys, they were filled with will and determination .
 The Kennedys had absorbed enough of the Boston ethos to have a certain reserve, discipline and frugality as well as a large measure of civic aspiration .
 The Skakels, more in the style of Chicago and Fairfield County, did not conceal their wealth or restrain their children . They did not hide their wealth, nor did they restrain their kids .
 The two oldest boys were always swinging from trees, shooting air rifles from bedroom windows, driving cars into the pond . They were always hanging from trees and shooting air guns .
 The Skakels, in so far as they cared about public affairs, were conservative Republicans . They were conservatives, but were also conservative Republicans.
 She was bright and responsive, not, at this point, much of a reader but indefatigably curious . "She was bright, responsive and responsive," she said .
 Her gregariousness, teasing humor and endless vitality made her the jolliest of companions . She was one of the world's "jolliest" companions .
 Ethel's sudden conviction that instead of marrying she should become a nun . Ethel’s sudden conviction . instead of marriage she should . become a . nun .
 Most of his ushers were football players, so big that they could hardly get down the aisle side by side . Most of the ushers are football players . The ceremony was held in New York City .
 Robert and Ethel were married at the time of their honeymoon in Hawaii . They settled in Charlottesville, Virginia, for Robert’s last year at law school .
 She was a flop at cooking and sewing, detested cleaning and spent money carelessly . She was also a 'flop' at sewing, cooking and cleaning .
 In fundamental ways she was a superb wife, at least in the old sense of being her husband’s helpmate . She was in fundamental ways, but she was still a wife, even though she was not a wife .
 For Ethel Kennedy, ministering to her husband was not self-sacrifice or self-betrayal, but selffulfillment . For the Kennedy family, it was a life of service, not sacrifice, but service .
 "It did not result in any manifest repression of the irrepressible personality," he said . It did result in no manifest repression, he added .
 Her inextinguishable gaiety lightened his times of moodiness and pessimism, he says . She lightens his moods during his darkest times .
 She awakened his sympathy and humor and brought him out emotionally, he said . She awakened him to his sympathy, his humor and his sense of humor .
 Ethel gave him unquestioning confidence, unquenchable admiration, unstinted love, he says . She gave him "unquestionable confidence"
 In another year Joseph Patrick Kennedy Ill was born; early in 1954 Robert Francis Kennedy, Jr.; in 1955 David Anthony Kennedy; in 1956 Mary Courtney Kennedy was born . In 1956, Mary Kennedy was also born Mary Kennedy .
 In September 1951, before he went to work, the Boston Post sent him to cover the conference in San Francisco where fifty nations had gathered to conclude a peace treaty with Japan . The Boston Post covered the conference .
 The U.S. had to act warily, with “communism rampant throughout the world,” the president said . But, he said, “Communism rampant in the world” was “rampy”
 If we adopt the policy of intervention, the temptation is presented to those in power to picture all opposition forces as communistic in order to gain American aid, remain in control and incidentally save their own lives . Still, if we adopt a strong temptation is to picture the opposition forces in order
 The United States if it wishes to keep its friends in Asia cannot afford to be duped . The U.S. needs to keep allies in Asia from being duped by the Chinese .
 This was an early formulation of the problem that harassed American policy for the next generation . This was the early formulation, and it's a problem that will persist for American policy .
 Congressman John F Kennedy invited him and their sister Patricia to come along on a trip from Israel to Japan in early October . He learned more about Asian nationalism when he and his sister Patricia traveled to Japan .
 Congressman Franklin D Roosevelt Jr. Jr. received all the attention in Israel . Roosevelt Jr.'s visit to Israel was an old friend of the Roosevelt family .
 One Arab with whom they talked suggested United States join itself with the liberal elements of the countries of Asia . The Arab nations are preparing for the nationalistic revolutions that are sweeping over the land .
 FDR, Jr. & rest of State Dept. that was present said this impossible to do as U.S. not that kind of nation . U.N. is not that type of nation, it's not the kind of country, it says . FDR Jr. and others said
 Nehru had them to dinner but gazed, bored, at the ceiling as if he did not know why he was thus wasting his time . Nehru gazed bored and bored as he gazed at ceiling as he was so wasting time .
 On October 19 they were in Saigon, where the French were fighting Ho Chi Minh and his Viet Minh . The French were in the midst of the French-backed invasion of Vietnam .
 General de Lattre de Tassigny assured them the French army could not be beaten, adding that, if the west lost the Mekong Delta, it would lose Asia . The west would also lose Asia, he said .
 Bao Dai, the former emperor of Annam, was installed as token chief of state by the French . The French had installed him as token state of state in Annam . The former emperor was the French's token head of state .
 To check the southern drive of Communism makes sense but not only through reliance on the force of arms . The southern drive makes sense to check Communism's southern drive, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The task is to build strong native non-Communist sentiment within these areas and rely on that as a spearhead of defense rather than upon the legions of General de Lattre . To do this apart from and in defiance of innately nationalistic aims spells foredoomed failure
 In their view, the more a nation did for its have-nots the better, so long as its foreign policy was not made in Moscow, they say . Russia's foreign policy is not a matter of concern in the United States .
 At the end of the decade John Kennedy said, “We don’t even discuss any more because we’re just so far apart, there’s just no point in it.” John Kennedy: “There’ll be no way of talking
 The Internal Security Division was engaged in investigations of Soviet agents, real and fancied, real . Soviet agents were investigated by the department .
 Kennedy helped present before a Brooklyn grand jury a case against two former Truman officials charged with corruption . After a short time Kennedy transferred to the Criminal Division .
 Challenging the popular Republican senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., Jr., was hardly a project without risk . "Challenging" Lodge Jr. Jr. was hardly an issue without risk.
 Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr, Jr. campaigned in Jewish areas where John Kennedy, because of his father’s reputation, was supposed to be weak . Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr. Jr. won the White House election in 1944 .
 Robert worked eighteen hours a day, losing a dozen pounds in the process . Robert's weight loss was a result of the weight loss .
 Perhaps, perhaps, he felt that a tough exterior was the only means by which a novice could hope to keep the campaign under control . Perhaps, he also felt that he felt it was the best way to keep a novice under control, perhaps .
 A local pol, celebrated for singing ‘Danny Boy’ from a sound truck, was incredulous to discover that Robert Kennedy had never heard of him .
 Dever sent word to keep that ‘young kid’ out of his office, saying that hereafter he would deal only with the ambassador . Dever said he would only deal with ambassador .
 Adlai Stevenson of Illinois "has made a sensational start,” Kennedy wrote Beaverbrook. Stevenson is the Democratic nominee for president . Kennedy: Stevenson has made a " sensational start"
 John understood the supreme importance in politics of a partner on whom he could count absolutely, for loyalty and for results . John understood too, too, that in politics, he would count absolutely on .
 Along with the difference in age, there remained differences in temperament and outlook . Along with age, differences in age and temperament remained .
 Seeking the paternal approval for which he had longed as a small boy, he somberly took on the obligations from which his older brother had casually disengaged himself himself .
 John had got along better with his father, Robert with his mother; and the result was not unexpectedly paradoxical . John got along with Robert better than his mother, Robert better with John .
 The head of the family was equally impressed by Robert’s work in the campaign . Robert was also impressed by the work of his family .
 In 1960 he denied to John Seigenthaler of the Nashville Tennessean that he had ever said this . In 1960, he denied ever saying it .
 Robert Kennedy’s soul and persona took the form of dialectic rather than war . The gentle self was never extinguished, and the tension between his soul and his persona was not extinguished . Robert Kennedy's gentle self never extinguished .
 Friendships—Hackett, O’Donnell, Billings —nourished the self; marriage nourished it even more . Friendships —Hackett and O‘Donnell — nourished the the self, and marriage .
 "The inner tension, instead of stultifying, eventually enlarged and enhanced sensibility and character," says the author .
 It took long years to reintegrate the elements of personality loosened by the shock, in so many respects, of his upbringing . It took years, a family of his own, experience with life and experience with death, he says .
 Robert and Ethel O'Donnell, Kenneth O’Donnell and Lawrence O‘Brien and their wives joined the new senator in Hyannis Port for the family celebration . The new senator is a Massachusetts senator .
 John Kennedy was the only Democrat running statewide in Massachusetts to have survived the Eisenhower sweep . Kennedy was only Democrat in Massachusetts in the Eisenhower-Eisenhower era .
 Joseph Kennedy telephoned to Senator Joseph McCarthy, Republican, of Wisconsin . McCarthy was chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Government Operations Committee . McCarthy had made Eisenhower's victory in the 1952 election .
 He claimed to have met John Kennedy fleetingly in the Solomon Islands in 1943;2 and in the late 1940s, after he slipped into the Washington scene as senator in 1947, he had come to know other members of the family .
 He took Pat and Jean out amiably in the evening and spoke for Robert's forum in Charlottesville . He took them out after the forum and took them to dinner .
 Eunice liked him, as did Sargent Shriver, who was the ambassador's staff assistant . Shriver was the wife of the late President Richard Nixon, who died in 1953 .
 Joseph Kennedy liked him most of all and invited him from time to Hyannis Port . Joseph Kennedy invited him to his brother's home in Hyannis .
 "He was a black Irishman, lowbrow and roughneck, with a certain animal vitality, coarse charm, broad humor and amusing impudence," he said .
 Joseph Kennedy may have reminded Joseph Kennedy agreeably of his own youth . Something about him, perhaps this instinctual insolence toward the establishment, may have .
 In the 1940s he was a man of marked personality without known political principles . He was known for his marked personality but had no political principles, he was not political .
 Jack Alexander noted that McCarthy was studying Russian in 1947 . McCarthy was the Senate's Remarkable Upstart .
 The crusade against Communists was inadvertently launched inadvertently at Wheeling, West Virginia, in February 1950 . It quickly became the vehicle for his freefloating destructiveness .
 McCarthy explored the frustrations of limited war with cunning and skill . McCarthy explores the frustrations with limited war in a novel called "The Second World"
 A natural demagogue, he had rare ability to implant suspicions, to confuse issues and, when challenged, to change subjects . He was a 'natural demagogue' who could implant suspicions and confuse issues with ease .
 The ambassador himself criticized smearing all leftists as Communists . None of it worried the ambassador, even though he himself criticized the practice of smearing Communists .
 He understood that the adoration McCarthy aroused in one section of his constituents was matched by the loathing of another section, less numerous but more influential and influential . McCarthy understood perfectly that the approval of McCarthy meant a good deal to him .
 He told his bright new senatorial assistant Theodore Sorensen that he hoped Bobby would not take the job . Bobby hoped Theodore would not have taken the job, but he said he hoped he would not .
 McCarthy feared that Robert Kennedy's appointment might be taken as a payoff for his father’s help in McCarthy's Campaigns . Cohn feared that the appointment might have been a reward for Kennedy's help in his campaigns .
 McCarthy sat irritably in his office listening to Joseph Kennedy’s voice crackling over the telephone . One day Cohn found McCarthy sitting irritably . McCarthy found McCarthy's office full of dust-up and dust-ups .
 McCarthy and Cohn set noisily to work to unearth subversives in the State Department and the Voice of America . The two men worked to find out what was going on at the time of the Cold War .
 Kennedy, assisted by LaVern Duffy, a young investigator, undertook a more prosaic inquiry into the trade carried on by American allies with Communist China . Kennedy was assisted by Duffy, an investigator, to the inquiry .
 Duffy later recalled his first sight of Robert Kennedy: "Most remarkable" was his white, woolen athletic sweat socks . Duffy: 'Most remarkable' was his "most remarkable" appearance of Kennedy .
 Duffy said he always wore business suits until Ethel or someone persuaded him that they did not go with business suits . Duffy's last suit was a business suit, Duffy said . He said he would wear it until someone convinced him that it was appropriate .
 Kennedy and Duffy pored over the Lloyds of London shipping index, parliamentary debates and reports from the Maritime Commission and the Central Intelligence Agency . They also looked at the British parliamentary debates, reports and intelligence reports . The pair's work was published in the book "The Daily Mail on
 Since the outbreak of the Korean War, 75 percent of all ships carrying goods to mainland China had sailed under western flags . Most of this while Chinese troops were shooting at Americans in Korea .
 Kennedy also discovered that some shippers were collecting large sums from the U.S. government for delivering defense materials to western Europe . Kennedy also found that some of the shippers also collected large sums of money from the United States government .
 The British role in the China trade appeared particularly reprehensible, it has been claimed . The British government's role in China trade was 'reprehensible'
 He said, typically, that he could not ‘appreciate’ the English position .
 The Senate offered the Senate a photograph of Attlee reviewing the International Brigade in Madrid, his hand raised, in the Communist salute .
 Kennedy’s statistics also showed a large Greek role in the China trade . Kennedy's statistics show a large proportion of Greek trade in China .
 This infuriated the State Department, which had been trying to persuade allied carriers to abandon the China trade . McCarthy’s action was regarded as a flagrant violation of the separation of powers .
 Richard M Nixon arranged a summit meeting between McCarthy and Dulles, the Secretary of State . Fearing a brawl, Nixon arranged the meeting to avoid a brawl .
 Robert Kennedy was at McCarthy’s side when he announced the Greek arrangement . Kennedy was also at his side when McCarthy announced the arrangement .
 The Boston Post reported Kennedy was “alarmed and shocked at the manner in which the McCarthy haters hopped all over the deal’s . ‘| don’t know,’ said Kennedy. Kennedy said .
 Kennedy has not taken part in any of the committee's probes into subversives in the State Department, the Voice of America, and other government agencies, the Post said .
 North Korea is working on ways to shut off strategic materials of war to countries in the Russian zone, including North Korea . North Korea has not been able to reach out to the U.S.
 On April 2 his salary was increased from $4952.20 to $5334.57 . "This raise is given in recognition of the very excellent job you have been doing," Flanagan told him .
 John Leddy, the acting deputy assistant secretary of state for economic affairs, set forth the complexities . Leddy: "It's not easy to explain to the public. It's complicated"
 England had interests in Hong Kong and Malaya that would be damaged by a cut-off of trade with mainland China . China's economic ties to Hong Kong, Malaya and Hong Kong would be severely affected .
 Japan had been shipping seaweed to China and receiving iron ore in return . Seaweed was shipped to China from Japan and received iron ore from China .
 American efforts to force allies to stop trading with China might use up diplomatic bargaining power needed for more vital purposes . U.S. efforts to stop allies' trade with China could use diplomatic power needed more than ever .
 Of 81 million tons of shipping available to the entire world, non-Communist nations control 78 million tons . Non-Communists control 78million tons of shipments to the world .
 We can do it by simply telling our allies that they will not get one American dollar while any of their flag ships are plying this immoral, dishonest, indecent trade trade .
 The next day, testimony made it clear that the Defense Department tended to agree with McCarthy . Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri, a Democratic member of the committee, proposed that the chairman ask Eisenhower what the American policy was .
 It inquired whether State or Defense was speaking for the President, whether the White House thought it a breach of security to disclose the volume of strategic materials shipped to China and whether the government would refuse contracts to allied shipping firms trading with Communist China .
 McCarthy had retired for a moment to the Bethesda Naval Hospital, where the letter went for his signature . McCarthy's signature was sent to the hospital .
 The document was respectful in tone, and Congress had every claim to the information sought . It was respectful and the document was respected in tone . Congress has every right to ask for information from the public .
 McCarthy's request exasperated a White House staff already sorely tried by McCarthy . McCarthy has been criticized for his handling of the National Security Council .
 As so often, the executive branch began talking about national security and the need to protect secret information . The executive branch is often talking about protecting national security .
 The information was no secret from the Chinese Communists, who were after all the recipients of the strategic materials . The Chinese Communist Party was after all of the recipients .
 At no point did the report hint, in the McCarthy manner, that traitors were making U.S. policy . The report did not hint, nor did it hint, that . traitors are making American policy .
 McCarthy and Roy Cohn had been loudly hunting Communists in the U.S. government . While he had been tediously analyzing commercial statistics, they had been hunting Communists .
 He paused now and again to bellow about the ‘blood trade’ with China, but he had juicier fish to fry at home . Though he paused now, again, he had .
 McCarthy had been right in making him chief counsel, since this was McCarthy’s style too . McCarthy's style is his style, but this was his style too, he says . McCarthy was right to be chief counsel .
 Kennedy was no doubt irritated from the start by the fact that he had been passed over in favor of a man eighteen months younger . The twenty-seven-year-old Kennedy was not happy with the decision to replace him .
 As Cohn proceeded to cater to McCarthy’s hit-and-run inquisitorial instincts, personal dislike was compounded by genuine concern . As Cohn continued to cater for McCarthy, his personal dislike of McCarthy was compounded with concern .
 Cohn attached to the committee staff as “chief consultant” G David Schine . Schine wrote a hair-brained tract called “Definition of Communism,” copies of which had been placed next to the Gideon Bible in hotels owned by Schine’s father
 Cohn and Schine were pursuing subversives in the Voice of America in western Europe in 1953 . They went on a mystery tour of western Europe, plucking offending books from the shelves and terrorizing hapless employees . Cohn, Schine left for a magical mystery tour .
 Later he commented, “Cohn and Schine took him up the mountain and showed him all those wonderful things.” Later he said, ‘Cohn, Schine ... showed him some wonderful things”
 Most of the investigations were instituted on the basis of some preconceived notion by the chief counsel or his staff members . Most of these investigations were not based on any information that had been developed, the lawyer says .
 Cohn and Schine claimed they knew from the outset what was wrong; and they were not going to allow the facts to interfere . Cohn, Schine said, "They knew it was wrong. They knew it."
 Senator McCarthy thought McCarthy made a mistake in allowing the Committee to operate in such a fashion, told him so and resigned . Therefore no real soade work that might have destroyed some of their pet theories was ever undertaken .
 Robert Kennedy’s partnership with Joe McCarthy ended after six months . Robert Kennedy's partnership with McCarthy ended in McCarthy's defeat .
 By May 1953 he had sufficiently distanced himself so that McCarthy introduced him to the Senate as the minority counsel . In July he completed the only solid report ever issued by the committee, he got out .
 In later years he bore criticism over the McCarthy relationship stoically . He bore criticism stoically stoically. He was criticized for his treatment of McCarthy .
 He rarely tried to explain, partly because this was not his way, but also because he had initially shared McCarthy’s concern . He rarely explained himself, partly partly because of his lack of ability to explain .
 McCarthy was an affable fellow who put on a show of beastliness and somehow did not expect his victims to take it personally . McCarthy was affable and did not think his victims were taking it personally, he said. McCarthy was a good guy, he added .
 William McCormick Blair, Jr., Adlai Stevenson’s personal aide in 1952 and now his law partner, was asked about McCarthy at a Kennedy dinner . Blair: McCarthy's views of McCarthy were "a little like that of McCarthy"
 Robert Lovett, the former Secretary of Defense, had observed to Robert’s father, “That’�s pretty tough company he's travelling with,” the ambassador replied . “Put your mind to rest about that.” Ambassador to U.S
 He was learning that patriotic declarations did not make due process of law superfluous . He owed a debt to his own inner standards, he said, and that he owed it to himself .
 His father had been a member of the Commission on Reorganization of the Executive Branch, headed by Herbert Hoover in 1947-49 . He was now a second Hoover commission appointed by Eisenhower . His father was also a member .
 In August 1953 young Kennedy joined the staff as his father’s assistant . Kennedy was his father's assistant at the time .
 In the twenty years since he had opposed Hoover’s reelection, Joseph Kennedy had come to have inordinate admiration for the old man . In the past twenty years, he had become an admirer of Hoover . Hoover's reelection was Hoover's first presidential election .
 Hoover, who had his eightieth birthday the month young Kennedy came aboard, presided over the commission in a fairly arbitrary way . Hoover had been in charge of the Navy's first ship .
 Hoover flatly turned down a proposal to create a task force on military procurement . Hoover turned down the proposal when it was proposed by a conservative Republican congressman .
 Hoover had replied by telling Brown that, if these disputes continued, he might resign . Hoover had told Brown that he may resign if the disputes continued . Hoover replied by saying, "I might resign. I might resign"
 Lawrence O’Brien recalled Kennedy touch football one afternoon in a Georgetown park . Lawrence O'Brien recalls Kennedy touching football in a park in Georgetown . O‘Brien: "Kennedy touch football is a great thing for the world"
 Ted squared off for a fight with one of the larger among the enemy . Ted and Ted were finally able to get back together for the first time .
 Robert, though he gave away about thirty pounds, pushed his younger brother aside . Robert gave the younger brother about 30 pounds .
 Robert was a “very very cross, unhappy, angry young man,” Billings remembered . Robert was always telling people off and getting into fights, Billings said .
 This letter, he wrote crisply, ought to “clarify the record sufficiently for you to make the necessary public apology”42 | replied in like spirit .
 In July 1953 the three Democratic members of the Investigations subcommittee walked out when the Republican majority voted to give McCarthy sole control over the hiring and firing of committee staff . V. V .
 The Democrats ended their boycott of McCarthy in January 1954 . McCarthy was forced to relinquish control over appointments .
 As part of the settlement, they received the authority to appoint a minority counsel . The settlement was part of a settlement with the government .
 J William Fulbright of Arkansas was the single senator to vote against his hectoring demand for a larger appropriation than ever . Fulbright was the only senator who voted against Fulbright's request for a bigger appropriation .
 McCarthyism was losing its emotional base, and McCarthy himself had become embroiled with the U.S. Army . McCarthyism had become an increasingly erratic course, with McCarthy himself embroiled with a formidable antagonist .
 In the fall of 1953 he had launched a sensational, if unproductive, search for Communists and spies in a Signal Corps installation at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey .
 Roy Cohn demanded an Army commission or a soft job in the CIA for his sidekick . Roy Cohn got him treatment and privileges never before accorded buck privates . G David Schine had been threatened by the draft .
 An Army document later recorded forty-four specific instances of improper pressure . The Army document says there were four instances of inappropriate pressure in the Army .
 In a high point he told one much decorated general he was not fit to wear his uniform .
 The Army retaliated in March 1954 by releasing a chronological record of Cohn’s interventions on behalf of Schine . The Army, at last tormented beyond endurance, retaliated by releasing the record .
 McCarthy, seeing things were going badly, excused himself, leaving the questioning to Cohn . McCarthy was forced to leave the questioning, leaving him with the help of Cohn .
 Moss insinuated that a black man named Robert Hall had left a copy of the Daily Worker in her house, insinuating that Hall was a Communist organizer . Moss was asked about her statement by Moss about Hall's presence in her home . Moss said Hall was not a Communist .
 A newspaperman informed Robert Kennedy that the Communist Hall was white . Robert Kennedy was told it was white by a newspaperman .
 COHN. was talking about a Communist organizer who at that time was in charge of subscriptions for the Daily Worker in the D.C. area .
 Kennedy: "| think so too too,” said Kennedy . Cohn: Perhaps this is something the committee should “get some more exact information on”
 At the end of her testimony, he told her he thought she was telling the truth . He added that if the Signal Corps did not take her back, he would get her a job himself .
 Symington says he would check with the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Symington said he would be checking with the FBI . He said he will check with them .
 Kennedy “stormed in and demanded” the Moss dossier, Cohn says . Cohn: Kennedy was not an unbiased source, not a unbiased source .
 The assistant to the director, Louis Nichols, told him that no outsider could See FBI files . No outsider could see FBI files.
 Joseph Welch, a softspoken and elaborately ironic Boston lawyer, represented the Army . Joseph Welch was the Army's lawyer . Welch represented the Boston lawyer .
 A fascinated television audience, amount to at times to 20 million people, watched the hearings . The hearings were held in front of 20 million viewers .
 If they looked hard, they could see Robert Kennedy, sitting quietly behind the Democratic senators . Kennedy sat quietly behind them and passed them occasional notes as witnesses testified . Kennedy was a senator in the late 1960s .
 On June 11, Jackson was interrogating McCarthy about an antiCommunist plan proposed by G David Schine . Jackson was interrogated about the plan by McCarthy on June 11 .
 Bobby Kennedy’s job was to write out pertinent questions for the Democratic senators to ask at the hearing . Bobby Kennedy's job is to write pertinent questions to Democratic senators . Kennedy: "It's a good thing that you have to ask for the truth"
 They picked at point after point in Dave’s plan, finding something hilarious in each . They found something funny in each of the points in the plan .
 Senator Jackson became angrier and angrier when Kennedy handed him something . Kennedy would go into fits of laughter and laughter . 'Every time Kennedy gave him something, Senator Jackson would go to fits of laughing,' he said .
 Cohn accused Kennedy of “having a personal hatred” for the McCarthy side . Cohn told reporters he had accused Kennedy . Cohn said Kennedy had a ‘personal hatred’ for McCarthy supporters .
 Kennedy, with a small, contemptuous smile, turned away from the woman . Two men separated them, and Kennedy turned away . Kennedy was separated by two men .
 In visible distress Kennedy went to the Capitol in search of his brother, finally finding him in the Senate cloakroom . Kennedy was found in the cloakroom of the Senate .
 President Obama can't excuse the irresponsibility attaching to too many of his charges, he says . Nor can he excuse the 'irresponsibility' attaching to many of the charges .
 The national audience, well trained by TV westerns to distinguish between white hats and black hats, had little trouble deciding which category McCarthy belonged . McCarthy is best known for his role in the 1980s westerns .
 McCarthy had wrought his own downfall after thirtyfive days of the grating voice, the sarcastic condescension, the weird giggle, and the irrelevant interruption (“point of order, Mr Chairman, point of order”) McCarthy's own downfall . McCarthy's voice, sarcastic condesc
 On July 30, Ralph Flanders of Vermont submitted a resolution of censure against McCarthy . Flanders said McCarthy should not have been allowed to speak .
 At the end of August a committee under the chairmanship of Arthur Watkins of Utah, began hearings . The committee includes such respected conservatives as John Stennis of Mississippi and Sam Ervin of North Carolina .
 John Kennedy prepared a speech in support of censure, but he made his case on exceedingly narrow grounds . John Kennedy: "C censure is not a matter of principle, but it's an issue of principle"
 McCarthy's judgment involved “purely a question of the dignity of the U.S. Senate’s dignity,” he said . Cohn impeached by Cohn, acting with McCarthy's full support . McCarthy's decision to step down from the Senate was a mistake .
 The show had great impact, though even anti-McCarthy commentators criticized the technique of offering as a “report” what was in fact a superbly calculated attack . The show was a brilliant attack on McCarthyism .
 In January 1955, Murrow spoke at the banquet honoring those, Kennedy among them, who had been selected by the Junior Chamber of Commerce as the Ten Outstanding Young Men of 1954 . Kennedy was one of those honored with Murrow in 1955 .
 St. Clair says he saw him briefly at a football game last fall and he looked so relaxed he hardly recognized him . He hopes to see him again in Boston .
 "It shall be sad indeed if you come this way and don’t come in," he says of Boston .
 John McClellan became chairman of the Investigations Subcommittee, and Robert Kennedy chief counsel . Robert Kennedy was chief counsel to the Committee of Investigation .
 He said he thought the Investigations Subcommittee would gradually return to its old function— looking into waste, fraud and corruption in government .
 Kennedy reviewed McCarthy's files on Communist infiltration into defense plants . Kennedy also reviewed McCarthy’s files on Communists infiltrating plants .
 Most of the persons accused did not work at plants handling classified material . Most of those who worked at such plants mostly did not do classified work .
 Professor Philip Mosely of Columbia. Matthews and Louis Budenz as his experts, he turned to scholars like Professor Philip. Matthews .
 Browder found Kennedy “pleasant and eager” and was impressed that anyone from a congressional committee should try to learn what communism was all about . Browder was impressed with Kennedy's willingness to learn about communism .
 Kennedy had forecast in Louisville that the committee was returning to its old functions . More and more, however, as Kennedy had predicted in Louisville, the committee is back in its old function .
 It now focuses on fraud in the government purchase of military uniforms, contracts let by the Foreign Operations Administration for the erection of grain storage elevators in Pakistan . Inefficiencies in the Department of Agriculture’s grain storage bin program .
 The counsel for the Republican minority protested, and the investigation stopped . The investigation was stopped after a Republican minority lawyer protested .
 Eisenhower's Secretary of the Air Force retained halfownership in Paul B Mulligan & Company, a firm of so-called efficiency engineers .
 John Kennedy’s friend Charles Bartlett heard that Talbott was hustling business for the firm out of his Pentagon office . Talbott worked for the Kennedy administration in the 1950s .
 Bartlett proposed a joint inquiry to Robert Kennedy, an alliance of the newspaperman and the Senate investigator . Bartlett and Kennedy tapped his own sources and pooled the results of the results .
 They were Palm Beach acquaintances of the elder Kennedys and had many friends in the Senate . They were friends in Palm Beach, Florida .
 Bartlett published letters by Talbott soliciting contracts for Mulligan from firms doing business with the Pentagon . Bartlett soon published letters on Air Force stationery . Talbott's letters solicited contracts .
 He asked Talbott whether he had ever instructed anyone in the Air Force to make representations to RCA for not renewing a Mulligan contract . Talbott, aged sixty-seven, said he had never instructed anyone .
 Arthur Krock: Talbott was not a crook but a man whose “excessive egotism” led him to suppose that no one could question his motives . Talbott, he wrote, was a man with ‘excessive egotism,”
 "Robert" was working hard and cared deeply about what he was doing, says CNN.com's Bob Greene .
 Ethel was raising children —five by 1956—and rushing to cheer Bobby on in hearing rooms at the Capitol . Ethel had five children by 1956, and was raising five more by 1956 .
 They lived unpretentiously on S Street, simple in their tastes, unsophisticated ways . They lived in their ways, unpretendingly on the street .
 Ormsby-Gore later said the dogs still outnumbered the children . These were the days when, as he later said, the dogs were outnumbered by the children.
 We went into every single house for ten miles, | suppose, until we finally found... the owner . The owner of the house was found by the police .
 Acquaintances did not understand it, misconceived his laconic humor, and sometimes found him curt and contentious . "Academademics sometimes think he was curt, contentious, and contentious"
 He avoided this, in the family style, by asking his own questions before others could question him first . He did not like to be put on the defensive and avoided this by asking himself questions .
 John Kennedy asked questions impersonally, but asked them with curious intensity . Bobby Kennedy often asked questions about his father's legacy . Kennedy's son Bobby Kennedy died in 1968 .
 Politically he was accounted a conservative Democrat, his father’s son, though more interested in investigations than in politics . Politically, he was more of an investigator than a politician .
 No doubt the ‘number one member’ crack was induced by Krock’s apprehensions about John Kennedy, whose politics had begun to display what he doubtless saw as wayward tendencies . Krock: “Number one member of the crack was John Kennedy. No doubt
 Secretary of State Dulles and Vice President Nixon advocated U.S. military intervention in Vietnam in Vietnam .
 The world’s biggest democracy could not ‘stand idly by’ while communism swallowed small countries and toppled the dominoes of Asia . The world's biggest democracy did not “stand idlin by” while communism swept the world, it said .
 The makers of foreign policy looked with “disdain” on those who challenge their omniscience . Supposed to be unable to comprehend the ‘intelligent intricacies” of diplomacy .
 His brother, though now a member of the Government Operations Committee, was not on the Investigations Subcommittee . His brother is now a government operations committee member .
 The four often met at the end of the day for dinner and a movie . The courtship was on occasion conducted at the younger Kennedys’ house in Georgetown, Georgetown .
 At Hyannis Port, the boys were playing touch football on the lawn while Jacqueline read on the veranda . At one big Kennedy weekend at Hyannis .
 In a few moments Robert came over and said that he could well understand why she might think football barbaric, but it did mean a lot to Jack . Jack said he could understand why he thought football was barbaric .
 Bobby and Teddy, completing their assignment in a scavenger hunt, stole a policeman’s hat . Spirits were high .
 An outraged father called the family together and delivered a polemic on the enormity of this offense; it would get into the columns and make the family look ridiculous, he says . The father of the victim says the family was outraged by the incident .
 John was increasingly drawn toward foreign policy, Robert increasingly to the exposure of corruption . John was drawn to foreign policy . Robert was drawn increasingly to exposing corruption in corruption .
 For a season the two brothers, their fondness undiminished, had separate preoccupations . For the season, they had separate interests in their lives .
 The TALBOTT investigation ended at 1:30 p.M. on July 28, 1955 . William O Douglas and Adlai Stevenson were the subject of the investigation .
 Robert Kennedy, in the same rumpled, dripdry seersucker suit he had worn at the last hearing, was on a transatlantic plane . Two hours later, Robert Kennedy was in the middle of the hearing .
 His mother gathered that making the trip was about the last thing he wanted to do . His mother, who flew with him to Paris, gathered that .
 At 7:30 a.m. the next morning, dead tired and harassed, he arrived in Teheran . The next day, he returned to the U.S. and arrived in Iran .
 Joseph Kennedy was the only man in the country who could preserve simultaneous friendships with Senator McCarthy, the deadly enemy of the Bill of Rights, and Justice Douglas, its devoted champion . Kennedy was only man to preserve friendships with McCarthy and Douglas, who were both enemies of the Constitution .
 He preferred high mountains, primitive lands and places where few men had traveled before . "I prefer high mountains and primitive lands," he said .
 In 1950 he conceived the plan of visiting the contiguous Soviet republics to find out whether communism had made a difference . He had already traversed non-Soviet central Asia .
 Joseph Kennedy asked Douglas Kennedy to take Robert along with his son . Joseph Kennedy, never neglecting a chance to widen a son’s experience, asked Douglas to take him along .
 Douglas recalled only the “very much subdued” little boy he had seen years before . Douglas said he liked the young law student he soon encountered when he spoke at the Charlottesville Forum . Douglas: "I like the young student I spoke to"
 The Soviet press had unmasked Douglas as an American spy when he climbed Mt. Douglas . Douglas had been photographed by the Soviet press as a spy . Douglas was killed in the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Mercedes Douglas asked her husband why he still wanted to take this rigid and hostile young man to Russia . Mercedes Douglas: "I don't know why I'm going to take him to Russia"
 Stalin was dead, the line had changed, and the Kremlin was preparing for a conference with Eisenhower at Geneva at Geneva . Stalin died in 1953, but the Kremlin had been preparing for the conference .
 When Kennedy arrived, Flott’s impression was of a highstrung, take-charge young man . Flott's impression of Kennedy was that he was a high-strung young man, he said .
 The bush jackets came in three sizes and were distributed according to seniority . The bush jacket came in at least three sizes .
 Flott, who had not yet received his Soviet visa, parted company with them at Pahlevi . Flott was not allowed to travel to the Soviet republic .
 "They put this terrific soread before us of soup, all kinds of fruit, watermelon, honeydew, apples, cherries, chicken, etc. etc. They put it all before us," the author says of the soup .
 Douglas said the Soviet embassy in Washington had promised them a Soviet embassy . Douglas said that the embassy had promised to give them one of their own . Douglas: "It's a good thing that we have been promised a Soviet Embassy"
 They went to the hotel, holding on the way to a whispered conversation on strategy . They held a whispered discussion about strategy .
 Douglas said he would call Khrushchev and tell him of their wretched treatment . Douglas said loudly to the concealed microphones that he would tell him . Douglas: "I'm going to tell him I'm sorry for your treatment"
 At a collective farm near Baku, they were served a twenty-one-course meal . The guests were served at a Baku collective farm by Azerbaijan's government .
 Someone toasted Douglas and his family and then Ethel and the four children . Douglas and Ethel were toasted at the end of the meal .
 Kennedy, an ardent photographer, was arrested in Ashkhabad, Turkmenistan . He was arrested for taking snapshots of the country's capital, Ashkabad . Kennedy was arrested on suspicion of taking photos of the people in the country .
 The Emir Nasullah consigned two adventurous Englishmen for refusing to acknowledge Mohammedism as the true faith . After two months among reptiles and vermin, they were beheaded .
 They watched Tadzhik dancing, “everyone by himself—jumping up and down —moving in rhythm, swaying and moving heads back and forth.” “Everyone by himself,” the group said. “Jumping around, jumping and swaying,
 Cultural notes alternated in Kennedy’s diary with data about wages, prices, working conditions, housing, child care, courts, factories, factories and churches .
 His technique was to appear interested and accommodating, drawing out the people with whom he talked until, having won their confidence, he could hit them with a factual issue and hope for a frank response . He could then ask them what they thought he was going on to say .
 Kennedy, the investigator, was exasperated and hostile, as if determined to find nothing good . Kennedy, an ex-investigator, was also exasperated, hostile .
 Fred Flott, who finally got his visa, followed their trail through central Asia . Fred Flotte, who followed them, followed them through Central Asia .
 Throughout the trip Kennedy ate very little and drank nothing, subsisting mainly on watermelon and nervous energy . The trip was the first of its kind in the world .
 Flott explained to Flott that he hardly knew the boy; his father, to whom he owed his Supreme Court seat, had said that Bobby had never gone on a he-man trip and asked that he be taken along . He explained that Bobby's father had said he had never
 Kennedy: "We in the United States had been brought up on the fundamental we possessed to find fault with government where we found things going wrong" Douglas joined the discussion, pointing out, Kennedy wrote in his journal .
 Douglas brought up academic freedom, suggesting that professors would be in trouble if they criticized communism in their classrooms . Douglas: "Academical freedom is a matter of academic freedom"
 High cheekbones and dark complexions, language, schools and customs set them so sharply apart from their Russian overlords . The indigenous peoples of central Asia, whose high cheekbones .
 They were as different, the travelers thought, as the Moroccan from the Frenchman or the Malay from the Englishman, and quite as subject to imperial rule . The travelers thought that they were quite as different as the French from the French .
 When Douglas mentioned that one third of Kazakh population had apparently been liquidated during the collectivization of the farms, the professor dismissed the figure as the invention of British intelligence .
 Douglas and Kennedy pointed out that Soviet census statistics showed a decline of almost one million Kazakhs between 1926 and 1939 . “| hope,” Kennedy wrote the children from Tashkent in mid-August, “you are all...doing what your mother and Ena
 Cables of congratulation to Kennedy over the Talbott affair pursued them . His companions took pleasure in introducing him as the People’s Prosecutor, the American Vyshinsky .
 Kennedy was forever sending postcards, when he could find any, to Cardinal Spellman . He sent a portrait of Lenin, for example, to Spellman with a cryptic message scratched on the back . Kennedy also sent postcards with cryptic messages .
 The group visited a Baptist church with a congregation of more than a thousand . They visited a church with an estimated 1,000 people .
 In Alma Ata, to the east, they visited more collective farms and were served more gargantuan meals . The group also visited collective farms .
 At another, there were “many toasts, the host got looped, spilled champagne over Douglas Douglas,” the author says . At another time, the "host got loop" and "spoiled champagne" over Douglas, she says .
 In Alma Ata, the rector, a biochemist, observed that, while Soviet scientists read American scientific journals, American scientists, judging from the absence of citation, did not read Soviet scientific journals .
 Douglas insisted that the travelers stop for a breather in the Tien Shan range . Douglas insisted on stopping for a break during the trip .
 He was struck by the wholehearted way Kennedy threw himself into mountaineering . He said he was impressed by the way he threw himself in to the mountains .
 It took three hours for a large, heavy-boned woman physician to appear at the hospital . The hospital was forced to pay $1.5 million in taxes .
 He was shot full of penicillin and rushed to bed, while the others went on, as scheduled, by train .
 In this laconic fashion he glided over both an intense illness and the devotion of the Soviet doctor . In this style, he was able to glide over both intense illness .
 Perhaps he was disinclined to yield too much credit either to his own weakness or to Communist medical care . Perhaps he didn't want to give credit to himself or to the Soviet Union .
 In another twenty-four hours he had recovered sufficiently to take the plane west . In another 24 hours he was flying west .
 Ethel Kennedy, accompanied by Jean and Pat, met the party in Moscow on September 2 . The Kennedy family traveled to Moscow to meet the party .
 A few hours later, a hotel maid knocked at the door of Fred Flott’s room and handed him, with a note from Robert Kennedy, an Army bush jacket, ‘medium,’ freshly laundered . The jacket was a 'medium' jacket .
 In the aftermath of the Geneva summit, the travelers encountered a confusion of moods in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was still reeling from a series of Soviet tensions .
 CNN's John Sutter says he was more distrustful of Russia's intentions than other travelers . He says his visit to Russia differed ‘from some of the other people who visited Russia in that regard’
 He had called Angie Novello, the most efficient stenographer on the Investigations Subcommittee staff, to Hyannis Port where he dictated a text . Angie was a stenographer for the subcommittee .
 Slides selected from more than a thousand photographs he had taken on the trip illustrated the lecture . Slides were selected from the more than thousand photographs taken by the photographer .
 Angie, sitting in the middle of the auditorium, could hardly hear the speaker . Angie was sitting on the floor, but Angie couldn't hear the words from the speakers .
 All | ask is that before we take any more drastic steps that we receive something from the Soviet Union other than a smile and a promise . A smile that could be as crooked and a . promise that could . be as empty as they have been in the past .
 We must have peaceful coexistence with Russia but if we and our allies are weak, there will be no peace, says President Obama . "There will not be no coexistence. There will be peace," he said .
 Douglas Douglas of the Russian treatment of ethnic nationalities in central Asia . Douglas: "The question is whether Russia has done so much to protect its own people's rights in Asia"
 Kennedy gave the Soviet government full credit for economic development . Kennedy also gave the Soviets credit for the success of the Soviet Union .
 Unlike more obdurate Cold Warriors, he did not see western empire as a bulwark against communism . He did not suppose that anticolonialism in Asia and Africa was organized in Moscow .
 The regime was detestable, and he detested it; but he came back with a considerably more differentiated sense of the Soviet Union . He came back from his tour of Soviet Union with a different sense of Russia .
 His notes include a paper entitled “Good Things”; More school construction work . More school work work .
 People seem generally better off than people in comparable areas of Middle East. Great deal of hustle—people seem generally good off . People in Mideast seem to be more hustle and hustle .
 Nurseries at the centre of a new generation of nurseries in the UK are well managed . Nurseries were well managed by staff and parents .
 Government loosening up in Azerbaijan . Amnesty for criminals, farmers and visitors allowed in country . Sentences being reviewed and farmers allowed more freedom . Music good—Azerbaijan music group in Baku .
 The administration denied information about trade policy to Congress . The investigation led to a prolonged wrangle in which the administration denied it .
 The term “executive privilege” had not yet been coined to give such denial specious constitutional status . The term was not yet coined to describe such denial .
 The idea had emerged in full force and with the support of rightminded people during the Army-McCarthy hearings . But the idea was not supported by the rightminded .
 The ambassador was equally disapproving of his older son’s growing interest in the vice presidential nomination . The ambassador also disapproved of his son's interest in Vice Presidential nomination .
 Theodore Sorensen was busy lining up support for Kennedy as Vice President . Kennedy was running for the White House in 1964 .
 Peter Lawford offered them the penthouse suite he rented by the year in the Ambassador East . Lawford, who had married Patricia Kennedy in 1954, had rented the suite .
 Robert's puritanism was offended by the idea of keeping so expensive an apartment and using it so rarely . Robert’s puritanist was offended .
 O’Donnell insisted that they move to a double room several floors below . He insisted that the room be moved to another room .
 HST thinks Humphrey ‘too radical’; dismisses Kennedy as a Catholic . HST has no use for Kefauver. HST also dismisses Humphrey as a conservative .
 Stevenson made his decision to throw the vice presidential nomination to the convention . In the end, Stevenson made a nondecision, to throw it out .
 Robert left while Robert put the call through to Cap d’Antibibes . He then intelligently departed . Robert then put the phone through to France .
 John McCormack, “literally propelled toward the platform at the last minute by Bob Kennedy,” as Sorensen described it, seconded the nomination . McCormack’s nomination was secured by the late Kennedy, a Democrat, a Republican .
 Confederate resentment over Kefauver’s courage on civil rights . So did much of the south in Confederate resentment . Confederate resentment of civil rights leader .
 McCarthy replied concisely, “All we have are Protestants and farmers,” later complaining that Kennedy had sent a boy to talk to him . McCarthy later complained that Kennedy sent him to speak to him. McCarthy later said, "All we had are Protestants, farmers"
 Tennessee shifted from Albert Gore to Kefauver, and the fight was over . Then Tennessee shifted its allegiance to the governor .
 Kennedy in a graceful speech asked that Kefauver be named by acclamation . Kennedy: "I'm not a politician. I'm a guy who's got a lot of respect"
 Jacqueline, now pregnant, was with her mother in Newport . Robert and Ethel had said they would pray for her every morning if she wanted to have a baby .
 When she recovered consciousness around two in the morning, her baby lost, the first person she saw, sitting by her bed, was Robert. Robert. When she was unconscious, Robert was by her side of the bed, she said .
 Her mother phoned him, and he had driven over from the Cape . He had driven from Cape Town to the Cape Coast to see his daughter .
 Jacqueline learned that Robert had arranged for the burial of the dead child . Many years later she learned that he had arranged to bury the child . Jacqueline later learned that her husband had arranged the burial .
 Stevenson: Robert Kennedy’s presence would signal Catholics, conservatives and friends of his father that all was not lost . From the Stevenson viewpoint, Robert Kennedy's presence would send a signal that all is not lost, he says .
 From the Kennedy viewpoint, here was a chance to find out how to run a presidential campaign . The Kennedy viewpoint is different from that of a presidential candidate .
 Robert Kennedy seemed an alien presence, sullen and rather ominous, says little, looking grim and looking grim . From my own viewpoint on Stevenson’s staff, Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy looked grim and exuding an atmosphere of bleak disapproval .
 "My reaction was colored by recollections of our altercation two years before," he said . "I'm not surprised at what happened to me," he added. "It's not the first time I've seen a person who has been arrested for a crime."
 Blair may have had his mind in mind the whistle stop in Lewiston, Pennsylvania, when a group of children made so much noise that Stevenson could not begin his speech .
 Kennedy climbed down from the train, shouted, “I can beat anyone from here to the lamppost,” and took off with the children in hot pursuit . After a moment of confusion, Kennedy climbs down and takes off with children in pursuit . Kennedy: "I can
 One’s memory was of of Bobby making notes, whether huddled by the window in the rear of the bus or plane, or even sitting on a railroad track while the candidate spoke from the rear .
 Kennedy said to Newton N Minow, Stevenson's law partner, “Il have heard the Governor speak before, but | have never been in Springfield before. When we came into Springfield, Illinois, Kennedy said . ‘Il have . heard the governor speak before. But | have
 Kennedy grew even more silent than usual, and Minow saw that he was deeply moved . Kennedy was silent as Minow asked him to speak .
 Fog and rain set in, and a single plane was available to By the candidate out of Morgantown . By the end of the day, the candidate was forced to evacuate .
 'I could never take seriously thereafter the picture of Robert Kennedy as a bearer of grudges, vindictive and unforgiving,' she says . 'We became friends at once and remained so for the rest of his life. We became friends once and once,' she writes .
 'Because of his looks and his accent and his known background, this gave an appearance of insincerity' 'This gave the appearance of . insincerity. Because of his . looks and . his accent, this . gave the . appearance of being insincerity,' said the BBC presenter .
 'We could never get it clear that it was not so much what he said but how he said it. We spoke again and again to people around him to try to get him to change his technique but he never would do it. He would never do it.'
 Kennedy said he didn't think it would go over in Boston but Schlesinger and Galbraith were of a different opinion . Kennedy pronounced it “incredibly bad.” As for his Boston speech, an attack on big business, Kennedy said .
 Stevenson’s proposal for a ban on nuclear testing in particular is controversial . He joined us one Sunday at Stevenson's house in Libertyville for an exasperating session on Campaign planning .
 It was a conference that really disturbed me as far as thinking that he should be president of the United States. "It was really disturbing me," she says .
 He spent all day long discussing matters that should have taken, at the most, a half hour . He spent the most of the day long debating matters with the media .
 For instance, for four hours, with 8 12 people there, we discussed who should go on his television program—Senator Anderson, Senator Jackson or Senator Symington . For example, for example, Senator Anderson, Sen. Jackson or Sen. Symington would go on a television program .
 For another couple of hours we discussed whether the hydrogen bomb was fission or fusion . We also discussed whether it was safe to say hydrogen bomb tests should be stopped at one mega-ton .
 At the first discussion, | thought one of his clerks could have made that decision and contacted Anderson, Jackson or Symington and made the arrangements . At least one of them could have done that, he said .
 On the second question, | didn’t think it made much sense for 8 or 12 men to discuss scientific matters about which no one knew anything, he said .
 The ostensible purpose of the meeting was to plan how the campaign for the last three weeks would be handled . That was hardly discussed at all, with the campaign barely being discussed .
 "These matters were discussed rather pleadingly, and again no decisions were made," said the mayor . "No decision was made. These matters are very important," he said .
 Robert Kennedy, back as counsel for the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, arrived in Los Angeles . Jimmy Hoffa was the leader of the Communist Party in the United States .
 An investigation earlier in the year into government procurement of uniforms had turned the committee’s attention to a fresh subject—labor racketeering .
 Hoodlums and mobsters were, it appeared, engaged in a systematic invasion of the American labor movement . Mobsters were attracted by the spectacular growth of trade-union welfare and pension funds .
 The idealism generated in the great organizing battles of the 1930s was largely spent, except in the United Automobile Workers and a few other unions . It was spent largely on the auto industry, except for the U.S. Auto Workers .
 The American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations, mending their historic split in 1955, had chosen George Meany of the AFL Plumbers as president . Meany was chosen by the two unions, the AFL plumbers .
 State or federal law did not provide effective standards for the management of welfare and pension funds . Nor, for that matter, did state or federal . Law didn't provide standards for management of the burgeoning welfare and pensions funds, he says .
 In the meantime, newspapermen across the country — Edwin Guthman in Seatde, John Seigenthaler in Nashville, William Lambert and Wallace Turner in Portland and Pierre Salinger in San Francisco—dug into the problem . In Washington, Clark Mollenhoff in Washington,
 Teamsters found the International Brotherhood of Teamsters an especially rewarding field . The union is the largest in the world .
 Mollenhoff, a lawyer as well as a newspaperman, was a fearless reporter . Hectoring and fearless reporter in the fashion of the old muckrakers .
 Early in 1956 he began to importune Kennedy about setting the Investigations Subcommittee on the trail of labor racketeers . The hearings began in 1956 .
 He doubted whether the Government Operations Committee had jurisdiction . Trade union affairs belonged to the labor committees, he said . He said he doubted whether he had jurisdiction in the government .
 Mollenhoff replied that the labor committees were afraid of labor’s political power . The committee was afraid of the political power of labor .
 If unions were misusing tax-exempt funds and rendering dishonest financial reports to the Labor Department, this involved government operations . This involves government operations, the attorney general says .
 In August he got Senator McClellan to authorize a preliminary check into labor racketeering .
 Kennedy remembered something about labor law from Charlottesville, but he knew little about the labor movement . Kennedy was especially innocent about the Teamsters, especially about Teamsters . Kennedy remembered some of the labor laws from Charlottesville but was innocent .
 Daniel J Tobin, president for nearly half a century, had been everybody’s friend, especially Franklin Roosevelt's . Tobin had been the president of the United States for nearly 50 years .
 It was to the Teamsters that FDR had given the famous speech in the 1944 campaign about his little dog Fala . The speech was given to the teamsters in 1944 campaign .
 Cheyfitz, an ex-Communist, confided to Kennedy that he had seen Walter and Victor Reuther in Russia in 1933 . He said he was still not sure the Reuther brothers had ever broken with communism .
 In 1933 the union membership was only about 75,000, hardly three times what it had been when Dan Tobin became president in 1907 . The union membership in the U.S. was about three times that of when Tobin was president .
 Tobin, a craft unionist of the old school, had no use for the mass unionism of the 1930s . Tobin was an old school unionist who was a member of the Craft Union .
 In Minneapolis a group of Trotskyites, led by Farrell Dobbs and the Dunne brothers, controlled the Teamster locals . In Minneapolis, the union was controlled by a group led by the Dobbs brothers .
 Farrell Dobbs’s particular goal was to bring in the “over-theroad” drivers . The old leadership had disdained the long-haul interstate truckers . Dobbs: "Over-the-road" drivers were the drivers the old leadership disd
 One of his ardent disciples was a young organizer from Detroit named James Riddle Hoffa . Hoffa was an admirer of the young leader of Detroit .
 Hoffa disavowed his mentor’s Trotskyism . Hoffa moved to the fore after Dobbs's departure, disavowing his mentor's Trotskyism. Hoffa was a prominent figure in the Soviet Union .
 He never disavowed his admiration for Dobbs as an organizer and later offered large salaries to lure him back to union . Dobbs was a union organizer who later joined the U.S. Senate of Representatives .
 Even Dobb’s Trotskyism may have had more influence than Hoffa admitted . Hoffa admits that Dobb's influence may have been more than he admitted .
 Dobbs, Hoffa told the writer John Bartlow Martin, “was a very far-seeing man.” Dobbs was a ‘far-seeing’ man. Dobbs’s life was “a very far, seeing man. He was a
 Hoffa was designed for fighting, five feet, five and a half inches tall, with broad shoulders, big hands, thick legs . He was built, as John Bartlow Martin observed, like one of his own trucks . Hoffa died at the age of 92 at the end of
 He had an incisive intelligence, an unparalleled knowledge of the trucking industry, a stinging tongue, unlimited energy and, for his followers, unlimited charm . He also had an unparalleled knowledge of trucking .
 His achievements in raising wages, reducing hours and improving working conditions for the drivers were beyond dispute . His achievements are beyond dispute.
 Even trucking associations were soon grateful to him for stabilizing labor relations in the industry . Trucking is notoriously vulnerable to unexpected work stoppages . The trucking industry is a notoriously unpredictable industry .
 He was also devious and perverse, had a raging temper, a bullying and sadistic disposition, a total absence of scruple and an impressive capacity for hatred . He also had a severe temper and had a very sadistic and bullying disposition, according to the book .
 Paul Jacobs, an ex-Trotskyite himself, wrote, “When Hoffa becomes really angry, his gray-green eyes get incredibly cold and menacing.”
 By 1956 the Teamsters, with a million and a third members and welfare and pension funds rising toward a quarter of a billion dollars, were the richest union in the country .
 There was one other exception to the prevailing labor stagnation -- the United Auto Workers . The U.S. Auto Workers is the largest union in the country .
 The Auto Workers owe their vitality to the intellectual drive of another Detroit trade unionist, Walter Reuther . Reuther was a labor organizer of Detroit, Michigan, and the Auto Workers . The union was founded by the Teamsters in 1964 .
 Reuther opposed John L Lewis when he conducted a raid against the Detroit Teamsters . He opposed Lewis and saved Hoffa . Reuther was a union leader in the union movement .
 Walter would have stayed in the labor movement rather than getting into politics, she says . He depends on us and we depend on him, she adds .
 Reuther represented the afterglow of the labor idealism of the thirties . Reuther's commitment to union democracy, his modest salary, his personal frugality, his activity in the Democratic party .
 Hoffa was the epitome of business unionism . Hoffa, with his dictatorial control, his high salary, his expensive suits, his Cadillacs, his manifold deals on the side, his sweetheart relations with employers .
 Bellino, who had run the accounting unit in the FBI before becoming a consultant to congressional committees, was an artist in his profession . Bellino ran the FBI's accounting unit before becoming an accountant .
 With ledgers and canceled checks spread out before him, he could reconstruct the most carefully disguised financial transactions . He could reconstruct some carefully disguised transactions .
 He had watched earlier congressional investigations into labor racketeering come to nothing . Earlier congressional probes into labor rations have failed .
 In Los Angeles they learned of collusive arrangements between the Teamsters Union and trucker associations . Truckers associations were involved in the union, union officials said .
 Kennedy met a union organizer who had traveled to San Diego to organize juke-box operators . They met a Los Angeles union organizer, who was organizing juke box operators .
 When he regained consciousness the next morning he was covered with blood and had terrible pains in his stomach . He was covered in blood and covered in pain in the morning . He suffered from terrible stomach pains .
 The pains were so intense that he was unable to drive back to his home in Los Angeles and stopped at a hospital . The pain was so bad that he stopped at the hospital and went to the hospital .
 He was told that if he ever returned to San Diego it would be a watermelon . Later he was told he would have to eat it if he returned .
 William Lambert and Wallace Turner of the Oregonian explained to him the complex local relations among politicians, Teamster officials and the underworld .
 Clark Mollenhoff phoned Edwin Guthman of the Seattle Times, a Beck specialist, to say that Kennedy was coming . The Beck specialist had phoned Guthman to say he was coming to Seattle .
 He had never heard of Kennedy and told Mollenhoff he had no interest in being used by the Senate committee . He was then left high-dry .
 Guthman says Kennedy assured him that committee was serious and that informants would be protected . Guthman decided to cooperate with committee after Kennedy said committee would protect informants .
 Kennedy’s informant also told him that Nathan W. Shefferman, head of a Chicago labor relations (i.e. union-busting) firm, held the key to Beck's financial operations . Kennedy's informant also said he knew about the key of Beck’
 Shefferman had been making purchases for Beck and receiving payment from union funds . Beck had been buying for Beck, receiving payment for union funds, police say .
 Shefferman yielded up his records, and they carried them back through a blizzard to the hotel for examination . The team carried the records back through the blizzard .
 His father thought the inquiry into labor racketeering was a terrible idea . His father also thought it was a bad idea .
 An investigation, he says, would not produce reform; it would only turn the labor movement against the Kennedys . An investigation would not result in reform, he said .
 He was deeply, emotionally opposed, and father and son had an unprecedentedly furious argument . Father and son were deeply opposed to each other's views on the issue .
 The ambassador asked Justice Douglas to intervene . The ambassador did not give up easily, asking for Justice Douglas' intervention .
 Kennedy "jolted" the AFL-CIO president by telling him Beck was a crook, a biographer says . Kennedy told Beck that Beck was an "crook" and that the union president was a fraud .
 CIO leaders like Reuther reminded Meany that they had dealt with their Communists . Now the AFL leaders had to deai with their criminals, he said .
 The AFL-CIO constitution allows the executive council to suspend or expel unions involved in corrupt practices . The new constitution breaks with hallowed traditions of union autonomy . The union's executive council is authorized to suspend, expel or expel members of corrupt unions .
 Meany got the executive council, over Beck’s bellowing opposition, to pledge full cooperation with a congressional investigating committee . Meany was the president of the White House in 1957 .
 Meany thought John McClellan “an antilabor nut” and objected to the Investigations Subcommittee . Meany objected to McClellan’s use of the subcommittee as a “anti-abor” tool .
 The Senate compromised by establishing a select committee with four members drawn from Investigations and four from Labor . The select committee will include four members from Investigations . The committee will also have four members of Labor .
 Jackson declined the assignment because Beck had “a great deal of power and ... could make things most difficult” in 1958 when he was up for reelection . Jackson, declining the assignment, explained to Kennedy that Beck had a “great deal” of power .
 Symington, who had presidential ambitions, followed Jackson’s example . After some vacillation, Symington followed Jackson's example . Symington had been considering presidential ambitions .
 Sam Ervin, a conservative on labor issues, is the second Democrat from Investigations on the select committee . This made Ervin the second conservative Democrat on the committee .
 Senator Patrick McNamara of Michigan agreed to be one of the two Democrats from the Labor Committee . Senator McNamara is a former trade unionist .
 He felt at first that one Kennedy investigating the labor movement was quite enough . He felt it was enough for one Kennedy to investigate .
 Lyndon Johnson, the majority leader, told Kennedy it was madness for him to think he could take on labor and survive as a serious contender in 1960 . Still, if Kennedy refused, his place would go to Strom Thurmond of South Carolina .
 "He asked me to come and give him some support or the committee would be top conservative and would have seemed anti-labor," she said . "I'm glad to see him back," she added .
 On January 30, 1957, the Senate unanimously approved the Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field with an appropriation of $350,000 . McClellan was chairman of the committee .
 The office, cluttered with documents stacked in piles, had, John Bartlow Martin thought, had the air of a secondhand bookshop . The office had, he thought, the . air of the . office .
 Angie Novello was Carmine Bellino’s sister-in-law . She was the secretary of Kennedy's secretary . Angie was also the sister of Bellino's sister, Carmine's sister in law .
 When she said she would think about it, he said, “You’re not going to thinking about it.” He told her she would not think about her decision to leave the hospital .
 He drafted his old friend Kenneth O’Donnell as his administrative assistant . O'Donnell is a longtime friend of the former president .
 "A lot of people think he’s the Kennedy running the investigation, not me," he said . A lot of those people thought he was the Kennedy, he said. "Not me. Not me."
 O’Donnell came to Washington. Assuming that the job had been cleared with John Kennedy, she came to D.C. to take on the job .
 When the senator heard about it, he had words with his brother and later told O’Donnell irritably, “| need you up in Massachusetts.” The senator later told his brother that he needed to be back in Massachusetts .
 Scientists used to pass a football back and forth as if they were still at Harvard . They used to play football together in a football team .
 Kennedy took the reliable LaVern Duffy from the Investigations Subcommittee . Kennedy took Duffy to the Committee of Representatives .
 In February he broke from the usual committee pattern by hiring a portly, cigar-smoking newspaperman, Pierre Salinger .
 Colliers had asked John Bartlow Martin to do an expose of the Teamsters . The previous summer, Colliers asked him to do the expose of Teamsters.
 When Martin joined the Stevenson campaign, the assignment fell to Salinger, an experienced reporter in San Francisco . Salinger is a veteran reporter in the area .
 In December, as the Salinger series was awaiting publication, Collier's expired as a magazine .
 Einar Mohn, a Teamsters vice president, asked Salinger to be public relations director for the Teamsters . Salinger knew Mohn from California . Mohn was a Teamster vice president and Salinger worked for the union .
 Salinger suspected the Teamster offer was a device to insure his silence . Salinger turned his material over to Kennedy .
 On Salinger’s first day in the office, Kennedy directed him to serve a subpoena; it turned out to be for Einar Mohn . Kennedy directed Salinger to serve the subpoena on Salinger's first day .
 Salinger walked over to Mohn’s office in the marble palace and said, “Einar, you know you offered me a job as public relations director for the Teamsters. was also offered another job at the same time and that was investigator for the Senate Labor R
 Kennedy kidded him about his cigars, devised contests to bring down his weight, without much success . Kennedy took the Salingers along on Christmas skiing expeditions .
 In April another investigator joined the staff, Walter Sheridan, a lawyer and former FBI agent named Walter Sheridan . Sheridan is also a lawyer .
 Kennedy hired Sheridan going up the stairs from his office . Kennedy, rushing to a hearing, hired Sheridan . Sheridan was hired by Kennedy in rush to get his job .
 Later they discovered they were both born on the same day in the same year . Later they found out they had been born on same day as each other in same year.
 Kennedy ordered Sheridan to Chicago to join Salinger on the investigation of Nathan Shefferman . Sheridan was taken on by Kennedy and Salinger in Chicago .
 Kennedy sat under photographs of Franklin Roosevelt and Douglas MacArthur . Kennedy's jacket off, shirtsleeves rolled up, necktie pulled loose under collar, horn-rimmed glasses pushed to the top of his head . Kennedy sat in photos of Roosevelt and MacArthur .
 The staff, numbering more than a hundred by 1958, was devoted to him, and he to them . The staff of his staff numbered more than 100 by 1958 .
 "He had an uncanny ability to get people to do more than they thought they could do," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "He was an amazing leader. He had the ability to inspire people to take things beyond their limits."
 He gave people a sense of personal interest in themselves, their work, their families, their family . He gave them a personal interest, he said .
 People wrote about union officials who declined to call union meetings or audit union books . Union officials have been criticized for not calling union meetings, auditing books .
 They wrote about rigged elections and theft of union funds, about racial discrimination, goons, intimidation, extortion, extortion . They also wrote about beatings, acid throwing, murder. They said they wrote about .
 A second attempt in Washington produced the same result; so did a third approach through Senator McClellan . A third attempt in D.C. was unsuccessful; a second attempt was unsuccessful .
 Kennedy called Seigenthaler in Nashville and said he was sending down two investigators . Kennedy said he would send investigators down to Nashville .
 The investigation led to the impeachment and conviction of a judge, the dismissal of a district attorney, the defeat of a sheriff and the conviction of several police officials . The investigation eventually led to a number of police officials being convicted of corruption .
 Robert called Ethel to say where he was and spent so much time with her that he nearly missed the second plane . They went to the Hermitage, where Robert called her to say he was, and she spent so long there she nearly missed it .
 The countdown on Dave Beck had begun even before the formation of the select committee . The countdown to Dave Beck's retirement had begun before the appointment of the committee .
 It was as if he felt ‘he could yell us into believing in the righteousness” of his cause . It was like he felt he could yell ‘we’d believe in his cause,’ he said .
 Kennedy listened politely and then began to ask questions, derived from the Shefferman papers, about Beck’s financial life . Kennedy asked questions about Beck's financial life and Beck's finances .
 Beck said he had nothing to hide, but he could not indulge in a discussion of private matters . Beck said that, though he had . nothing to . hide, he would not discuss private matters in private matters, he said .
 Kennedy was struck by Beck's large, moonlike face, but "soon you realized it was Dave Beck's eyes more than anything else that attracted your attention"
 Shefferman took $370,000 from Western Conference of Teamsters, $85,000 to pay for personal purchases . $370K from Teamsters was taken from a trust fund set up for a friend’s widow . $85K was turned into personal purchases by She
 Mundt and Goldwater fed him general questions to which he returned the pontifical answers of a certified labor statesman . Mundt: Goldwater and Mundt asked him questions of labor .
 Beck retreated to the Fifth Amendment, invoking it sixty-five times before the hearing was over . Beck was forced to take the stand during the hearing . Beck has been accused of lying to the FBI in the wake of the scandal .
 The abrupt downfall of one of the most powerful and respected labor leaders in the country made the Rackets Committee overnight a national phenomenon .
 To those of us who see your brother, John Kennedy, as probably the most dramatic liberal personality on the national scene today, the unfortunate possibility that he might be a victim of “guilt by association” and suffer from your current juvenile antics is depressing .
 It was this same insolent and overbearing manner which was the downfall of Senator McCarthy . Senator McCarthy was an overbearing, insolent, overbearing politician .
 "To see people sit in front of us and lie and evade makes me boil inside. To see people . sit in . front of them and lie, evade makes [people] boil inside," she says .
 He was committed to something that mattered; he was convinced of the rectitude of his cause; and he knew he was doing a good job . "He was committed ... to something he mattered," he said .
 Early in 1957 he bought from his brother John—for the same price, $135,000, that John had paid three years earlier . Known as Hickory Hill, once the Civil War headquarters of General George B McClellan, latterly owned by Justice Robert H Jackson of the
 After Jacqueline’s miscarriage in 1956, the great house, complete with its new nursery, was too sad and echoing for the senator and his wife . The couple moved into the house after Jacqueline's miscarriage .
 Bobby and Ethel's five lively children were overflowing their small house in Georgetown . It was ideal for Bobby to Ethel to have five children in a small house . Bobby's wife died at the age of 92 .
 Hickory Hill is a handsome white quasi-Georgian mansion, rich in historical association, with high ceilings, white woodwork and crystal chandeliers . It is surrounded by five and a half acres of rolling green land . The Kennedys, their children and assorted dogs, horses
 Nothing discouraged her, and it took a good deal to rein in her high spirits . But nothing discouraged her and she was never discouraged .
 Ethel was photographed standing cheerfully next to a couple identified by the hostess as Mr and Mrs. Ethel in Stamford, Connecticut, in August 1957 .
 The local newspaper reported that Dave Beck had been at the party too . Dave Beck himself had been there too .
 Cheyfitz suggested that Hoffa could be a force for good, urging Kennedy to sit down with him . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1972 .
 Hoffa had hired him, he said, as a spy, charged with penetrating the McClellan committee and reporting back on the progress of the Teamsters investigation . He said Hoffa hired him to report back on progress of investigation .
 Cheasty, an Irish Catholic, had served in the Navy, Secret Service and Internal Revenue Service . Cheasty was a member of the Secret Service .
 Kennedy went to Cheyfitz’s house on the snowy evening of February 19, 1957 . He was already handing selected information to Hoffa when Kennedy went there . Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 Hoffa's enthusiasm about the meeting had been even less than Kennedy’s . Hoffa had been less enthusiastic about Kennedy's visit to Washington .
 Hoffa “made rather a point of the fact that he did not drink,” Kennedy noted in a memorandum two days later . Kennedy noted that Hoffa made a point that he didn't drink .
 He said people were always trying to destroy him and therefore he had to destroy them . He added that people always tried to . destroy him . Therefore he said people . always . try to destroy himself . He said he had no choice but to destroy people .
 Many officers in these paper organizations were hoodlums who had worked with Johnny Dio , Tony Corrallo and other eminent racketeers . Many officers worked with Dio and other prominent racketeers.
 Hoffa freely admitted organizing the phony locals but claimed it was done to circumvent the noraiding pact scheduled to go into effect after the AFL-CIO merger . Hoffa: "I'm not going to be surprised by what happened to me"
 Ethel said that a driver, skidding on the icy road, had banged into a tree at Hickory Hill and was now sitting, hysterical, in their living room . The driver was sitting hysterical in the family's living room when he crashed into the tree .
 Hoffa saw Kennedy as the arrogant rich kid for whom everything in life had been easy . Hoffa said Kennedy was arrogant rich kids for whom life was easy for him .
 Kennedy saw Hoffa as the cynic who betrayed honest workingmen and had no object in life beyond money and power for himself . Kennedy saw him as a cynic .
 Their next meeting took place at midnight three weeks later in the federal courthouse . Vill Vill Vill and Vill met for the first time in three weeks at a federal courthouse in New Jersey .
 John Cye Cheasty had continued to supply Hoffa with material, especially Carmine Bellino's analyses of Beck's financial sprees . Cheasty continued to provide analysis of Beck’s spending spree .
 Hoffa stuffed a wadded wadded two thousand dollars in his palm . Hoffa, shaking hands with him, stuffed it in the palm. Hoffa: "I'm not afraid to say anything. I'm glad to say yes"
 As Hoffa entered the Dupont Plaza Hotel, the FBI arrested him on charges of bribery and conspiracy . Hoffa was arrested in the early days of the Second World War . The FBI arrested Hoffa in 1945 .
 Hoffa and Kennedy sat in uneasy silence at the courthouse an hour later . At the courthouse, they sat in an uneasy silence .
 After an interval they fell into an almost friendly conversation about who could do the more pushups . The pair fell in love with pushups and joked about each other's pushups.
 Hoffa remembered saying at the time, “Listen, Bobby, you run your business and I'll run mine.” Hoffa said . He said he would run his own business .
 He contended that he had hired Cheasty as a lawyer and as a matter of course accepted any documents he gave him .
 The federal attorney, caught off guard by Hoffa’s appearance, was feeble in cross-examination . Hoffa was charged with racketeering, racketeering and other crimes .
 The jury was two-thirds black; the sight one day of Joe Louis embracing Hoffa in the courtroom no doubt had its effect . Joe Louis embraced Hoffa one day after the trial . Louis: "Joe Louis' embrace with Hoffa may have had an effect on the jury .
 The Washington Afro-American published what was in effect a pro-Hoffa issue . Columns and advertisements portrayed the defendant as a lifetime friend of the Negro people .
 Angie went to the hearing room, where Kennedy was interrogating a witness, and passed him a note . Angie passed the note to Kennedy, who was questioning a witness in the hearing .
 By midafternoon he had served subpoenas on officials in five Teamster locals . He arrived, it need hardly be said, on an early morning plane, on early morning .
 When he returned to his office in the federal building, the phone rang . The phone rang. "When I returned to my office, I was greeted by the phone," he said .
 The next morning Salinger, reinforced by Carmine Bellino, went to Teamster headquarters . Salinger and Bellino were reinforced by the Teamster . The next day Salinger was reinforced by Bellino .
 After more than an hour’s wait, they were ushered into Hoffa's office . They were seated in low chairs in front of his desk . Hoffa: "I’m going to be a hero. I’ve been a hero for a decade."
 Hoffa, his own chair placed, like Mussolini’s, on a slightly raised platform, stared down at them . Mussolini's own chair was placed on the raised platform . Hoffa was a member of the Nazi Party .
 Five union officials, clutching subpoenas, stood uncomfortably in a semicircle behind . The union officials had subpoenas issued by the federal government .
 The records were in poor shape, with names torn off checks and hotel bills . Names were ripped off checks, hotel bills and even checks were torn off .
 'He’s got to investigate for weeks and weeks to find out what we already know... | know what | done wrong and what | didn’t.
 Management and labor must at all times have something in common because one without the other cannot survive . Well, there certainly is, and it is going to remain so, says author .
 Determined not to plead the Fifth Amendment, he chose instead to plead to the imperfections of memory . He chose to plead not guilty to the charges .
 Under the pressure, Hoffa’s eyes narrowed, his lips tightened, his facial muscles twitched, newspapers reported . Hoffa's eyes narrowed and lips tightened .
 "To the best of my recollection, | must recall on my memory, | cannot remember," says the author .
 HOFFA. cannot recall the substance of this telephone call, nor place the facts together concerning what it pertains to .
 If these things do not refresh your memory, it would take the power of God to do it, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 You have had the worst case of amnesia in the last 2 days | have ever heard of. You have never heard of . Have you had a case of amnesia in the last two days? Have you ever had amnesia? Email us at: http://www.
 Told him | did not want him to talk to our investigators as he had been doing. Told them he would not be talking to them again . 'Told him: 'I'm not going to let him talk to my investigators'
 The last two days of hearing he was a beaten man compared to the beginning of the hearing, he said . The last day of hearing was a 'beaten man' compared to before the beginning .
 A little later Kennedy wrote that things were much more relaxed after the Hoffa hearings; the committee, he thought, might be able to finish its job in another year .
 The Teamsters voted Beck their new president in September by a vast majority . Beck has an annual pension of $50,000 . Beck was elected by the Teamsters in September . Beck is expected to retire in January .
 At a highly emotional AFL-CIO convention in December, Meany succeeded in expelling the Teamsters . Meany: "I don't want to keep the union forever"
 In the same month his trial on the wiretapping charge ended in a hung jury—11-1 for conviction . In that month, he was convicted of wiretapping charges .
 He traveled around the country in triumph, proclaiming new organizing drives and haranguing the faithful . He traveled to the U.S. in triumph . He went on to harangu the faithful. He traveled .
 After a parade of mobsters marched across the stand, Hoffa himself returned grimly to the Senate Caucus room . Hoffa was a member of the House of Representatives .
 Kennedy wrote in his journal, morose and discouraged . Sometimes, for an hour or so, he appeared . Kennedy was morose . Sometimes he appeared, sometimes depressed .
 At the end of one grueling afternoon McClellan proposed a night session . The session was adjourned after a grueling day .
 We have been going on for a long time without a break & | have about had it. | shall be happy when Hoffa is finished next week. We shall be . happy when we have a break. I'm not going to have it. I'll be happy to have a
 Kennedy: "I felt a little like 1864, when Grant took the Union Army to go back into the Wilderness—to go back slugging it out" Kennedy said he didn't pin his hopes on any one thing, but felt like he wanted to fight back .
 Kennedy accused him of threatening to kill Sol Lippmann, the general counsel of the Retail Clerks Union . Just before lunch, Kennedy accused the union's attorney general of threatening his life .
 During the luncheon recess, Kennedy slumped at his desk before a sandwich and a glass of milk . Pierre Salinger called Lippmann while he was on the phone .
 The fact he threatened you and made these statements to a leading union official like you—everybody would know you’re telling the truth,’s lawyer says . “The fact he . threatened you ... would be able to tell the truth," he says .
 Retail Clerks depend on the Teamsters in many ways, says Salinger . Salinger: "Retailers depend on [the Teamsters] in a lot of ways"
 Both, in separate ways, had an instinct for the underdog . Both had the instinct of underdogs themselves themselves .
 Martin retained passage; his relations with Kennedy were not impaired . Martin retained the passage; Kennedy's relations with Martin remained friendly .
 As they drove along, Kennedy noticed a light burning in Hoffa’s office . Kennedy noticed the light in the office .
 Hoffa often did indeed work late, but he also, according to Williams, heard of Kennedy’s reaction . He took special pleasure in leaving his office lights blazing away .
 "You take any industry and look at the problems they ran into while they were building up," he says . "Look at how they did it, who they associated with, how they cut corners," he adds. "They cut corners. You look at what they did and how they
 The look sometimes went on for five minutes or so, as if he thought that by staring long and hard enough he could destroy his adversary . The look was sometimes so long that he thought he could kill his opponent .
 Whenever Bobby would get tangled up in one of his involved questions, | would wink at him . Bobby would also wink at Bobby when he got tangled up with his questions .
 It was widely supposed he hated Hoffa; but some who worked most closely with him did not think so . Some who worked with Hoffa thought he hated him, but some thought he did .
 In later times, Kennedy might have seen Hoffa in another context, appreciated his vitality, his impudence, his struggle and the material benefits he had won for the Teamsters . Kennedy may have seen him in later times when he was younger .
 Kennedy could never forgive Hoffa for his vindictiveness toward dissenting members of his own union, for his ties with the underworld . But, just as Hoffa never forgave Kennedy for having been born rich and for believing in the possibility of justice under capitalism, Kennedy could not forgive Hoff
 Kennedy’s exposure to the labor movement had given him impassioned sympathy for those in the Teamsters who, at tremendous personal risk to themselves, opposed the Hoffa dictatorship .
 He came to identify himself with workers who were expelled, beaten, murdered, murdered . He said he came to identification himself with those who had been expelled or murdered .
 Between birth and burial, the Teamsters drive the trucks that clothe and feed us and provide the vital necessities of life . As he concluded his case, he said, "The Teamsters are the teamsters who drive the truck that clothes and feed"
 They control the pickup and deliveries of milk, frozen meat, fresh fruit, department store merchandise, newspapers, railroad express, air freight, and cargo to and from the sea docks .
 The life of every person in the United States is in the hands of Hoffa and his Teamsters . Quite literally your life—the life of the U.S. --is in the . hands of the Teamsters, Hoffa .
 The Teamsters no doubt occupied a strategic position in the economy . But their power to bring the nation to a stop was theoretical .
 The Teamsters were traditionally cautious about calling strikes . Indeed, the Teamsters have been cautious about striking .
 It was true also, as Paul Jacobs insisted, that many of Hoffa’s sins were practiced by his brethren in the labor movement . Jacobs: It was also true that many other labor leaders were guilty of his sins .
 Gallo pounced on him, frisked him and explained to the bemused Kennedy staff, “No one is going to see Mr Kennedy with a gun on him.” Gallo said . Gallo then explained that no one was going to be seen with a
 Joey Gallo had been a suspect in a murder case where the victim had been shot so many times in the face that identification was impossible . Gallo was found guilty of shooting a man in the head so badly that it was impossible to identify him .
 There was Paul Dorfman who took over the Waste Handlers local union in Chicago when the president was murdered in 1939 . Dorfman was a member of the union who took control of the waste handlers in the city .
 Allen Dorfman, who did not even have an insurance brokerage license at the start, became a rich man in short order and a convict in the longer run . Dorfman was convicted of attempted murder in 1998 .
 He evaded a committee subpoena until investigators finally tracked him down in Las Vegas . The committee chairman evaded the committee subpoena .
 "Everybody says it is a bad thing. Two or three of us get together on a deal and everybody says it's bad thing," he says .
 He took the Fifth Amendment thirtythree times while Pierre Salinger set forth the more colorful features of his record . Called before the committee, he took the fifth Amendment thirty-three times .
 GIANCANA. declined to answer because he feared his answer might incriminate him. GIANcana. decline to answer .
 One son-in-law ended up on the payroll of an Illinois congressman . The congressman emerged as a doughty defender of Jimmy Hoffa . Giancana was a dapper fifty in 1958 .
 The singer Frank Sinatra became his buddy;24& another singer, Phyllis McGuire, was his mistress . The singer became his friend;24 & his mistress was Phyllise McGuire .
 In 1966, Chicago Tribune reported that he had been haled before a syndicate tribunal in order to “defend himself against charges of having permitted his international playboy activities to interfere with more serious, day-to-day business of running the organization .
 Giancana’s activities were far more international than anyone could have supposed, according to the author of the book, "Giancana's activities are far more than anyone expected"
 A fellow hood named John Rosselli approached him on behalf of the Central Intelligence Agency to solicit his help in a plot to murder Fidel Castro . Fifteen months after he giggled before the Rackets Committee, he was approached by a fellow hood .
 The syndicates were penetrating corridors of power that not even McClellan or Kennedy in their worst imaginings would have suspected . Kennedy in his worst imagination would have considered the syndicates' penetration of power .
 In 1963, he was convicted of extortion and sentenced to seven years in prison . In 1963 he was sentenced to 7 years in jail for extortion .
 In the meantime, he rose to an international vice presidency in the Teamsters .
 His longtime alliance with Hoffa came to a bitter end in the early 1970s . He and Hoffa had a bitter split in the 1970s, when Hoffa died .
 Jimmy Hoffa may have thought he had a rendezvous with Tony Pro when he himself disappeared on July 30, 1975 . With his quasi-Trotskyite views of capitalism, Hoffa probably considered gangsters no more immoral than businessmen or politicians .
 The hearings documented in grim detail the brutality with which they punished those who would not go along . They documented the brutal treatment of those who did not comply .
 Hoffa had begun by hiring hoods as business agents in Detroit because he needed strong-arm men . As Kennedy saw it, Hoffa hired hoods to be business agents . Kennedy: "It's a good start to a great start to life in Detroit"
 Hoffa was a “right guy’s” and they should let him in. Then they told colleagues in other cities that he was the right guy . Then they said he was a "right guy" and should be allowed in, they said .
 To get into Chicago he needed the okay of Joey Glimco and Paul Dorfman, and he gave Dorfman the Teamsters’ insurance business . To get in Chicago he had to get the OK of Joey . Dorfman's insurance business was the teamsters' insurance business,
 He was becoming a vital link between the underworld and respectable society . He was also becoming a 'vital link' to the underworld .
 Kennedy learned from Hoffa's testimony that organized crime was a great unseen power . Kennedy was learning from testimony what Hoffa had learned from life . Organized crime was an unseen power, Kennedy said .
 The Eighteenth Amendment, by driving the liquor business underground, had first changed gangsters into businessmen . The Amendment had driven the liquor trade underground .
 The word racket first appeared in the 1920s to describe the passage of crime from the free enterprise stage to the era of cartels and syndicates . The word 'racket' was used to describe crime's passage into cartel and syndicate era .
 The Twenty-first Amendment ended prohibition but not the criminal organizations prohibition had spawned . Prohibition prohibition ended but did not end all criminal organizations it spawned .
 The ‘gangster-outlaw’ like John Dillinger and Pretty Boy Floyd, gave way to the ‘businessman’ whose specialty was not simple and reckless deeds, like robbing banks, stealing automobiles, kidnapping, but the provision of services . The 'gangster
 The nature of these criminal organizations remained a mystery . "Many racketeers have a social function ... for which there is some kind of public demand," he said .
 In 1950-51 a Senate committee headed by Estes Kefauver suggested that “a loose-kni organization” called the Mafia provided the connection among the major criminal syndicates in the U.S. The Mafia is still a major crime syndicate in the United
 The theory of the Mafia plucked chords of romantic memory going back not only to the ancient secret society in Sicily but to the Camorra and Black Hand of America at the turn of the century . The theory goes back to ancient secret societies in Sicily .
 It hardly did credit, however, to the notable contributions that Irish and Jewish gangsters had made to the rise of organized crime . It hardly credited the contributions made by the Irish, Jewish gangs .
 Thomas E Dewey conducted his Campaign against organized crime, including Lucky Luciano, without ever mentioning the Mafia . Dewey never mentioned the Mafia in his campaign .
 A sergeant of the state police, his curiosity piqued by the influx of black limousines, frightened the gangsters into ignominious flight into the surrounding forests . The gangsters fled into the forests .
 Fifty-eight conferees, including Vito Genovese himself, were picked up . Twenty-two of these were involved in labor or labor-management relations .
 This group has made fortunes in the illegal liquor traffic during prohibition, and later in narcotics, vice, and gambling . This group made fortunes during prohibition .
 These illicit profits present the syndicate with a financial problem, which they solve through investment in legitimate business . The syndicate has invested in legitimate businesses in the past .
 The word Mafia did not appear in Robert Kennedy’s book about the Rackets Committee, The Enemy Within . Robert Kennedy's book, The Racket Committee, is published by Robert Kennedy .
 "the gangsters of today work in a highly organized fashion and are far more powerful now than at any time in the history of the country," he said . But he took from the hearings an appalled sense, defined more carefully than McClellan did .
 They have stretched their tentacles of corruption and fear into industries both large and small . The government has stretched its tentacles of fear and corruption into industries such as finance .
 Robert Kennedy had asked for the FBI files on conventioneers . After Apalachin, Robert Kennedy asked for files from the FBI . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Robert Kennedy: FBI won't keep these fellows under surveillance . The FBI, Robert Kennedy said, “won’t keep them under surveillance.” Robert Kennedy says . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was assassinated by a Navy SEAL team .
 Angie Novello recalls that he generally mistrusted and sometimes disliked investigators who had once worked for the Bureau . Bellino and Sheridan were exceptions, but were exceptions .
 All the RACKETS COMMITTEE was enthusiastic about the pursuit of Jimmy Hoffa . Walter Reuther No. 1 was enthusiastic . No. 2 was a member of the U.S. Union .
 He was a model of cozy relations with employers and a model for private enterprise . He was, after all, a supporter of Republican candidates . But he was a declared believer in private enterprise.
 His purpose was to get a better deal for his Teamsters, not to transform the system, he said . His purpose, he explained to the committee, was to secure a deal with the union .
 Hoffa obligingly condemned the use of union power to bring about political and economic change . Hoffa: Union power is necessary to change the status quo .
 Walter Reuther had become the supreme bogeyman for American conservatives . Reuther was the union president of the United States' largest trade group, the U.S. Supreme Court said .
 Hoffa, for all his sentimental memories of Reuther, craftily nourished this fear . Hoffa: "For all the sentimental memories, Reuther's fear of this fear has been reinforced by this fear."
 Kennedy insinuated Reuther was protecting organized gambling in the auto plants . Kennedy hinted that Robert Kennedy was going easy on him in order to get the United Auto Workers behind his brother in 1960 .
 He bragged to Clark Mollenhoff that he had passed this “information” to the Republicans on the Racket Committee .
 Kennedy: "We have no information at the present time showing that Mr Walter Reuther personally misused any union funds" Kennedy said on Meet the Press that Reuther had misused union funds .
 Republicans now set up a cry for an investigation of the strike, the UAW and Reuther . Republicans set up an investigation into the strike and the U.S. union .
 At this point, they had to confront the rather private way Senator McClellan and Robert Kennedy ran the committee . The committee had a chance to confront how private they ran the Senate .
 He was exasperated by Pat McNamara who had both Hoffa and Reuther among his constituents . McNamara regarded the investigation of unions with extreme discomfort .
 McNamara resigned from the committee in 1958 . Frank Church of Idaho took his place in his place .
 Kennedy and Salinger sent the eight senators a draft report in which the key page was written in eight different ways . The key page is written in the same way eight times, Kennedy says . Kennedy: "It's not a mystery. It's a mystery"
 The version that promptly appeared in the newspapers was the one sent to Mundt. The version of the original version was that of Mundt . Mundt: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm glad to see what happened."
 In the spring of 1957 the Rackets Committee underwent its first change in membership . The committee was the first to have a change in its membership .
 Joe McCarthy was in marked decline, a specter haunting the scenes where he had so recently swaggered . McCarthy's popularity in the 1950s and '60s is fading . McCarthy was a national figure in the '50s, '80s, and '90s .
 He had no core of inner certitude to sustain him in adversity . Because he was a sensationalist rather than a true believer, he had no inner strength .
 Kennedy ascertained that McCarthy was talking about a man named Robert Greene . Greene was an Irish Catholic and could not be considered antiCatholic, Kennedy said . Kennedy said Greene's indictment had been dismissed and denounced as a political indictment .
 The next thing | heard was that he made a speech on the Senate Floor stating that the Committee had hired an investigator who had been indicted . Greene told the press that afternoon that he had great confidence in Greene and also told the facts .
 McCarthy persisted, explaining to the committee that anyone who wallowed with hogs must be a hog himself . Greene had worked for the anti-McCarthy Long Island paper Newsday .
 Senators Mundt and McNamara were designated to look into the matter and promptly cleared Greene . Greene was cleared of any wrongdoing .
 A Wisconsin newspaperman had heard the same thing because latter told me he was going to print it . Am sure that Joe McCarthy knew of this & | felt a little strain about him. | am glad that we talked in the manner we did before he died.
 "It was all very difficult for me as | feel that | have lost an important part of my life," she said . "I feel that I have lost a part of that life," the actress said .
 Robert Kennedy attended the ultimate funeral in Appleton, Wisconsin . Robert Kennedy also attended the funeral of the late senator .
 The Republicans, except Irving Ives, were now more deeply conservative than ever . Ives: The GOP is now deeply conservative, except for Ives .
 Kennedy detested Curtis, as he later did Homer Capehart of Indiana, who replaced Ives in 1959 . Ives was replaced in 1959 by Ives, a Republican who later became a Democrat .
 Republicans increased their demand that Reuther and the Kohler strike receive equal time . As the Rackets Committee set out after Hoffa, the Republicans demanded equal time for both sides .
 The National Labor Relations Board had concluded two years of hearings on Kohler . Kohler's company has been accused of sexual harassment in the workplace .
 Newspaper stories quoted unidentified Republican senators saying that the Kennedys were covering up for Reuther . Reuther was the leader of the U.S. Auto Association of Automobile Industry in Germany .
 Reuther distrusted Robert because of the McCarthy committee . Reuther had supported Kefauver against John Kennedy during the vice presidential contest in 1956 .
 At the next meeting of the committee, John Kennedy said that, if this were the way Republican senators felt, let them speak up . John Kennedy, a Democrat, said that if this was the way Republicans felt, they would speak out .
 Mundt proposed a reorganization designed to reduce Robert Kennedy’s control of the investigations . Mundt said the reorganization was designed to cut Robert Kennedy's control of investigations . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 This was rejected, but the counsel agreed to give the committee a full briefing on investigative developments every Monday morning . The committee was also rejected, and agreed to meet with the counsel on Monday morning instead .
 Kennedy suggested that Jack McGovern, a Republican hired at Goldwater’s request, be assigned to the UAW-Kohler investigation . Kennedy said that McGovern was the only appointment made “because of political considerations”
 Curtis, Kennedy wrote later, “made no comparison between himself and animals or birds” but expressed general happiness . Curtis made no comparison to himself and other animals, Kennedy said .
 McGovern sent a long memorandum to McClellan in October . The Republican senators received regular reports from McGovern .
 Reuther placed his administrative assistant, Jack Conway, in charge of the operation . Reuther's administrative assistant Jack Conway was in charge .
 Kennedy said, “I will,” and, to the astonishment of Conway, flew to Wisconsin the same night . Conway thought he thought he might go in a month or so, Conway said . Conway: "I will.”
 Kohler, a family-owned corporation operating a company town, was the second largest manufacturer of plumbing ware in the U.S. Kohler was a family owned company town . The company town is located in Kohler's hometown .
 In 1934 it had brought in armed guards to break a strike, killing two strikers and wounding nearly fifty more . In 1934, armed guards killed two strikers in a strike .
 In 1954, with the contract up for renewal, the company rejected union demands . The company rejected the union demands in 1954 . The union was forced to accept the union's demands .
 There were violence and vandalism, condoned if not encouraged by UAW officials . Violence and vandalism was condoned by U.W. officials, according to a report .
 After a time the union was ready to concede every point except for a small wage increase . After a long period of negotiations, the union agreed to a wage hike . The union has been in talks with the government for years .
 He saw the enamel shop, where the heat of the ovens brought the temperature well above a hundred degrees, where workers took off face shields for a moment to gobble lunch . The UAW had been asking for a thirty-minute luncheon break .
 He talked to Lyman Conger, the company attorney, who "made no secret of his deep and abiding hate for the union," he says . He talked with Lyman .
 On his return to Washington, he joined members of the committee at a dinner with Meany and other labor leaders .
 Meany sat on a couch with Ives on one hand and McClellan on the other . After dinner, Meany and Ives sat on the couch together .
 Meany, though no fan of Reuther’s, observed that the UAW investigation was “a political investigation because we knew as well as he did that there wasn’t anything to look for” Meany says . Meany: “We knew as
 Kennedy and O'Donnell didn't neglect the political possibilities in the UAW connection . Nor did they neglect the potential for the U.W. connection .
 Robert Kennedy said bluntly that if they went into the 1960 convention, they did not want to get caught in the situation of 1956 . One night, at dinner with John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy told him bluntly that, at . night, he said bluntly, if . they went to the 1960
 At least five different texts of the letter were in circulation by 1958 . At least 5 different texts were published in 1958 .
 The recipient of the letter, Melvin Bishop, had long since turned against the Reuthers . Melvin Bishop was long since a friend of the Reuton family .
 Bishop said that he had given the original to a schoolteacher in 1935 and had not seen a copy since . Bishop said he gave the original of the book to a teacher in 1935 .
 Carmine Bellino tracked down a schoolteacher who said she had never heard of the letter . Bellino found the school teacher at the time of the incident .
 McClellan spoke contemptuously of Bishop’s “established unreliability” and dismissed the whole thing . McClellllan said Bishop was ‘established unreliable’
 Republicans, repenting their enthusiasm for hearings, urged postponement of hearings . The Republicans, however, called for postponement . The hearings have been postponed .
 The Kennedys, Knowing they would be blamed for protecting Reuther, insisted that the committee go ahead . The committee was held in the United States .
 McClellan said he could not understand what the Republicans had to fear from letting Reuther lead off . He said he did not understand why Reuther was allowed to lead off.
 McClellan, Ervin and Kennedy argued through four more executive sessions for the early calling of Reuther . Reuther was the leader of the U.S. Auto-Industry movement in Germany .
 Jack Conway favored the Washington civil liberties lawyer Joseph L Rauh, Jr. But Conway favored a Washington civil rights lawyer . Conway's campaign for the White House won't support Conway .
 Goldberg himself, when approached, felt that his own first obligation was to the Steelworkers, of which he was counsel, and also recommended Rauh . Goldberg himself felt that he had a first obligation to his own Steelworkers .
 The men can put the equipment in the oven, then they can step back and eat their lunch during that period of time . You say that the men can . put the . equipment in . the oven . Then they can put it in the . oven, and the men . can step
 There were those who felt, and | felt, at the time, he looked so bad there might be some sympathy created for him . There were some who felt at the . time, that he looked . so bad that perhaps some sympathy might be created .
 He says he found no support on the committee for bringing out the material, “other than Jack and of course, he and | were both suspect.”
 Every time we were getting into trouble, Jack would enter the Hearing Room, take his seat on the Committee dais and help us out . Jack would often help us get out of trouble, helping us out.
 After one session he called Conger “a despicable———,""as Kennedy primly reported the scene in his notes, and the following day Conger raised a big stink about it . The following day, Kennedy reported the incident to Conger, who then raised a huge stink
 Joe Rauh then got into a shouting match with McClellan in which Mundt joined in . Mundt then joined in on the shouting match between the two men . Joe Mundt also joined in in the argument .
 Mazey lost his temper again and raged against the Catholic priests of Sheboygan for signing a proKohler statement . Mazey also lashed out at the priests for signing the statement . The Catholic priests signed a statement of support for the Kohler .
 Rauh stopped by Kennedy's office each afternoon to check the next day’s schedule . Kennedy and O'Donnell often pass the inevitable football back and forth .
 Once on the stand, with his inexhaustible intelligence, confidence and fluency, he dominated the hearing . He dominated the testimony, with inexhaustive intelligence and confidence .
 He freely admitted past UAW error—mass picketing, violence—and then went on the offensive . The U.S. auto industry has been accused of violence against U.W. members of the union .
 The long, cruel strike came to an end, with most strikers given their old jobs and the largest back payment award in American history . Most strikers were given the largest amount of back payment in history .
 Goldwater had wished the philosophy of Hoffa to prevail over Reuther, he found himself trapped in a paradox . As for Goldwater, he had wished to prevail against Reuther .
 The Rackets Committee was presumably required by its title to inquire into improper activities in management as well as in labor . The committee was likely required by the title to look at improper activities .
 Kennedy’s response was that because of limited jurisdiction, the committee could not go into improper business activities unless there was some direct connection with labor . Kennedy said the committee had limited jurisdiction because of its limited business activities .
 The trail of Nathan Shefferman thus led not only to Dave Beck but also to the venerated American house of Sears, Roebuck . Certain investigations, however, did involve what Kennedy later called “the respectables, ""1
 Shefferman specialized in wrecking union organization drives in the name of labor relations . The former union leader was known for wrecking unions drives in his own name .
 After a quarter century diddling labor for Sears, Roebuck, he established a firm that engaged in union-busting activities on behalf of Sears, its subsidiaries and suppliers . Walter Sheridan said the firm was a Sears "creation” and engaged in unions .
 Salinger and Sheridan first asked about Shefferman, the Sears vice president “outright, Hatly lied” to them for several hours and weeks, they say . When they first asked, shefferman ‘outright’ to them, she says, �
 Nothing took place in the hearings to alter Robert Kennedy’s bleak view of business . Robert Kennedy: "Nothing took place" to alter his bleak views of business.
 Only subpoena power of government can ferret corruption out, says Machinist . AFL-CIO Ethical Practices Committee chairman says subpoena power is needed .
 The committee released reports on dismal situations in other unions . The Meat Cutters, the Carpenters, the Hotel and Restaurant Workers, the Sheet Metal Workers, and the Sheet metal Workers are among the worst .
 Kohler investigation proved that the committee could distinguish between honest and crooked unions . At the same time, the Kohler probe proved that, the committee was able to distinguish between crooked and honest unions .
 Among thoughtful labor leaders, the committee soon lost its initial ant-abor reputation . The committee soon had a reputation for being anti-union labor .
 You have every reason to be proud of your outstanding work ... and of the contribution that you have made to decent honest democratic American trade unionism . The U.S. trade unionists are proud of their outstanding work, the president says .
 In March he told McClellan that he planned to leave the committee in August . In March, he said he would step down from the committee .
 Communities infected by corruption had given ‘the merest lip-service’ to clean-up efforts, he says . Communities infected with corruption gave ‘merest lip service” to clean up, he said .
 The National Association of Manufacturers and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce had taken no action whatever against businessmen engaged in questionable activities . The U.N. and the United States .
 Bar associations had done nothing to discipline lawyers engaged in unethical practices, lawyers say . Bar associations did not discipline lawyers involved in unethical practice, they say .
 Hundley shared the prejudice of Department of Justice lawyers against congressional committees . He simply did not think that Kennedy’s cases were solid, as they came from the Hill .
 Business, Teamsters and Eisenhower administration killed the bill in the House . Two months later a strange coalition of business, the Teamsters, and the Eisenhower administration backed it .
 In the meantime, the House was considering a far more severe bill . The bill was proposed by Robert Griffin and Philip Landrum .
 Robert Kennedy has launched a personal campaign in support of his brother’s bill . Robert Kennedy: "I'm not a politician but I'm a fighter. I want to be a fighter," he said .
 Kennedy-Ervin and LandrumGriffin bills failed to discriminate between them . The House passed Landrum-Griffin, responding to a personal appeal by President Eisenhower .
 Only heroic effort by John Kennedy in conference achieved a tolerable compromise between the House and Senate bills . John Kennedy's "heroic effort" in conference helped compromise compromise between Senate and House bills .
 Labor leaders harshly denounced the new law, but it made a vital contribution in later years to union democracy . The law established for honest and supervised elections made a crucial contribution to the United Mine Workers, the Steelworkers and other unions .
 John Bartlow Martin’s absorbing Saturday Evening Post series “The Struggle to Get Hoffa” came out in the summer of 1959 . Even McClellan seemed a little annoyed perhaps that Robert Kennedy was getting all the glory .
 Kennedy was emerging as a national figure in his own right . No longer merely his father's son or his brother's brother, he was emerging . Kennedy was not merely his dad’s son, but his brother and sister were his own .
 Goldwater had snapped out a statement accusing Kennedy of running out on the UAW investigation . Goldwater was still on the trail of Reuther, Reuther . Reuther was a union leader .
 Kennedy, indignant, asked if there was anything further Goldwater thought he ought to do . Kennedy was indignant and asked if he had anything more he could do . Goldwater said Kennedy should have done more .
 Kennedy said he did not consider himself in politics; it was a bipartisan committee . He had tried to run the investigation on nonpolitical lines, Kennedy said .
 Some observers rejoiced to see a fearless young crusader exposing wickedness . Others rejoiced that he exposed wickedness to the world .
 Some saw more than ever a merciless prosecutor, battering witnesses and overriding constitutional rights . Others saw more of ever-present prosecutor, hammering witnesses . Some say the case is a miscarriage of justice .
 An assessment of Kennedy’s performance requires an understanding of the congressional investigative power . Kennedy's performance requires understanding of congressional investigative powers .
 Felix Frankfurter had rejected the analogy between atrial in the courtroom and a hearing before a congressional committee . In defending congressional inquiries into the Harding scandals thirty years before, FelixFrankfurter rejected analogy .
 The first, he said, placed a man’s liberty in jeopardy and therefore, called for stringent rules of evidence and procedure . The second was an “exercise of the informing function of Congress” and had different standards, he added .
 Anything the committee reasonably claimed as necessary to the exercise of a valid legislative function was permissible, the court said . The committee's claim was necessary to exercise a valid function, the Court concluded .
 Newspapers might complain about the “bullying and badgering" of witnesses . Black, reprinting passages of disingenuous and evasive testimony, observed that after an investigator has tried every technique, politeness, kindness, blandishments... he is sometimes driven in the presence
 The embarrassing question from the Senator or Congressman sitting at the end of the table serves a high function . That is why the embarrassing question is asked by the Senator .
 His right to demand an answer spells in a crucial way the difference between the totalitarian and the democratic regime . The right to ask an answer is crucial to understanding the difference in the totalitarian state .
 In 1954 a former Communist named John T Watkins told the House Committee on Un-American Activities that he would answer questions about himself or about persons he believed still to be members of the Communist party but not about people who had left the Communist movement . Watkins said he would not be asked about
 In overturning the conviction in 1957, the Court vigorously reaffirmed the right of Congress to conduct inquiries in furtherance of law-making tasks . In 1957, Congress overturned the conviction of President Eisenhower .
 The investigative power was subject to the restraints of the Bill of Rights, the Court ruled .
 The Rackets Committee, unlike Black’s committee twenty years before, was not charged with abusing the subpoena power . In spite of the multitude of investigators, Kennedy said, “ever to operate from Capitol Hill” Kennedy said .
 Kennedy, Pierre Salinger said, talked “to every investigator before he went on the road about the proper use of the subpoena— the fact that these were not to be used for fishing expeditions.”
 Carmine Bellino developed a technique by analyzing toll tickets . He could find out to whom anyone talked on a given day . Bellino's technique is based on close analysis of long distance telephone toll tickets.
 The committee rules were designed to avoid the excesses of the McCarthy era . Committee rules were meant to avoid McCarthy excesses . The committee's rules were in fact designed for the 1950s .
 Witnesses were assured the right to counsel and the . right to submit questions for cross-examination . Witnesses were also assured that they had the right . to counsel . Witnesses are assured they will be able to defend themselves .
 Kennedy notified him in advance and offered the opportunity for instant denial . Kennedy notified the committee anticipated derogatory testimony about a person not present, Kennedy said .
 Kennedy prided himself on the care with which his own hearings were prepared . Remembering the slovenliness of the McCarthy investigations, Kennedy was careful to prepare his hearings .
 He checked and rechecked testimony before he put witnesses on the stand . He rarely asked a question in public hearings to which he did not know the answer .
 For every hour a witness testified on the stand before the Committee, he was interviewed on an average of five hours . The Committee interviewed witnesses on average for five hours each .
 Kennedy, he later told Victor Lasky, often became flustrated before labor hoods or their lawyers . Kennedy often became frustrated with labor hooders or lawyers, he said . Kennedy, who died in 1968, was a member of the Kennedy family .
 He considered Kennedy’s questioning “painfully amateurish” and said it was “ridiculously simple’ to get him to lose his temper . He said the questioning of Kennedy was ‘painfully Amateurish’
 Rauh viewed congressional investigations in the spirit of Professor Frankfurter, Bickel, the twentieth clerk, viewed them in the . spirit of the original law clerk, a more conservative figure . Bicke was a member of the first law clerk in the 1920s .
 In such cases, Kennedy was not discharging the informing function but rather trying to punish by publicity, Bickel argued . Kennedy's actions were not informing the public, but punishing by publicity . Kennedy has been charged with a federal crime of perjury .
 The committee was plainly dealing with questions on which legislation could be had . It is hard to see that Bickel’s horrid examples were greatly different from things that Hugo Black and other sorely tried congressional investigators had done in the past .
 Kennedy raised a troubling point about the Fifth Amendment . Kennedy himself was sporadically sensitive about the issue .
 Edward Kennedy, now at the Virginia Law School, challenged Williams’s assertion . Edward Kennedy is now a law professor at Virginia-based Virginia College .
 He also reported Williams’s charge to his brother, who wrote angrily in his journal, “As of yet we have not had a witness in Executive who has taken 5th & whom we have had in open.” He also wrote angrily that Williams had not taken 5
 Kennedy stoutly defended the Fifth Amendment and called it one of the distinguishing marks between democracy and dictatorship . Kennedy said it was a distinguishing mark between dictatorship and democracy .
 Practically, Beck and Glimco may well have been right, but he may not be right. Practically it's not a good idea, but it's a good thing to say .
 Sen. Curtis admitted he did not always have “positive proof” on such matters . But he admitted that he didn’t always have positive proof’s on matters .
 Bickel: Kennedy in these matters had displayed an excess of zeal . Kennedy was driven by a conviction of righteousness, a fanaticism of virtue, a certitude about guilt that vaulted over gaps in evidence .
 The courts might acquit Hoffa, but Kennedy accepted that as a citizen or a lawyer, but still in some sense, Bickel felt, he Knew Hoffa to be guilty . Kennedy might say he accepts that as “a citizen or lawyer,” but still
 John Seigenthaler, who was completing a year as a Neiman Fellow at Harvard, helped on the manuscript . He asked him to come to Hickory Hill to help with the manuscript, and he wrote it in the summer .
 Most books and articles in America in the 1950s with titles like The Enemy Within had a single subject— communism . Most books in America had titles like "The Enemy Within" that focused on communism .
 Robert Kennedy saw organized corruption spreading from the underworld into labor, business and politics . He asserted, he asserted, the moral sickness of a greedy society . But the enemy within was organized corruption, he said .
 For the first time he had been forced to confront the power structures of organized labor, organized business, of organized crime and of law enforcement, he says . He says he had to confront power structures in the U.S.
 He saw men lie, cry, run terrible risks, display great cowardice and great courage . He also saw men run great risks and display great courage and courage, he said .
 He learned, as in the case of the jolly rogue Frank Brewster, that he could quite like people he morally disapproved . He learned to like people of whom he moral disapproved, he said .
 The experience helped strengthen the instinct of sympathy within him, he says . "It gave it for the first time social direction," he writes .
 He understood more than ever that toughness and concern were not necessarily enemies . Moreover, he understood that toughness and concern weren't necessarily enemies, he said .
 Too often, | think he felt that liberals articulated this sense of compassion, but never did anything about it . 'This is the thing that finally rang the bell with Bobby Kennedy,' he says .
 John Kennedy might once have been intolerant of liberals as such, his brother said . John Kennedy himself himself said later of his younger brother, “He might . once have had an early experience with that high-minded, high-speaking kind who never got anything done.”
 His concern with organized crime, for example, did not fit into their categories . Such a preoccupation appeared unseemly and irrelevant, he said . He said .
 Kennedy had proceeded into the jungle of labor racketeering, Kempton wrote in 1960, without guide or experience . Kennedy had gone without guide, experience .
 Robert Kennedy, Kempton wrote, looked upon labor racketeers as men who had betrayed a priesthood . Robert Kennedy's son, Robert, was a labor racketeer .
 When John Kennedy came up for reelection in 1958, Robert Kennedy's main contribution was to fly to Boston and hear the returns . Robert’s main contribution to the Kennedy campaign was to travel to Boston to listen to the returns of his opponent .
 Robert did not enter the campaign full-time until the end of 1959 . Preoccupied with the Rackets Committee and then with The Enemy Within, Robert did .
 Stephen Smith, who had married Jean Kennedy in 1956, took charge in an inconspicuous Washington office . Later Stephen Smith took charge of the office .
 John Kennedy was thirty-one years old, had received his political Initiation in John Kennedy’s 1958 campaign . He was softspoken, sharp and funny . He died at age 31 .
 In the course of the year Robert added David Hackett, the great friend of his youth, to his youth . In the past year he has also added a number of friends to his side .
 Former Milton High School English teacher says he's ideal to handle Senator Kennedy's political correspondence . Kennedy's old chum told him over the phone that since he had done so well in English at Milton, he would be ideal for Kennedy .
 The next day John asked Salinger with some asperity who had authorized it . John asked the next day if he had been authorized by Salinger . John was not pleased with the decision .
 Inside the campaign he was the tireless invigorator and goad, responsible for everything except the speeches . He was responsible for the speeches, but also for everything else .
 Outside he became the man to do the harsh jobs, saying no, telling people off, whipping the reluctant and the recalcitrant into line . He became a man to say no, tell people off and whip them into line.
 When reporters began to write about the ‘well-oiled Kennedy machine, the myth arose that the Kennedys were master political planners . The myth arose in due course that the Kennedy machine was a master planner .
 Governor Michael DiSalle of Ohio, a jovial veteran of Truman days, aspired to be his state’s favorite son . Governor of Ohio was a popular governor of the Truman era .
 Kennedy offered DiSalle this distinction if he endorsed him forthwith for President . Kennedy offered the distinction if DiSala would agree to endorse him againwith . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy died of a heart attack at the age of 92 .
 DiSalle knew that Kennedy could probably beat him in the primary but had no desire to be the first governor to come out for Kennedy . Perhaps, perhaps, because Truman was so hostile to the Kennedys, perhaps .
 Robert Kennedy and John Bailey met DiSalle to put on additional pressure . Kennedy and Bailey met Kennedy and put on pressure to pressure him . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Bailey and Kennedy were assassinated in March 1968 .
 This left the Kennedys free to concentrate on their first critical test — Wisconsin . This left them free to focus on their next test —Wisconsin .
 Though he and John Kennedy were in broad agreement on issues, their lives could hardly have been more different . John Kennedy's life was very different .
 Humphrey had come of age during the depression, growing up a druggist’s son amidst the dust storms of South Dakota . Nearly forty-nine, six years older than Kennedy, Humphrey was six years younger than Kennedy .
 He flashed into national attention as a fiery champion of civil rights in the Democratic convention of 1948 . He worked his way through college, taught, entered politics and entered politics .
 He was a man of swift intelligence, immense sympathy and great gusto, a stem-winding orator in the style of midwestern populism . He was sentimental, sentimental, vulnerable, accommodating, and generous and open man but easily hurt .
 His implacably loyal wife, Muriel, joined him in Wisconsin, as did a group of devoted supporters from Minnesota . “1 should be the candidate for President,” McCarthy was supposed to have said, but he died in 1987 .
 Humphrey’s Minnesotans worked hard. Kennedy said, “Never trust a Catholic politician who reads his missal in the trolley carn” Kennedy said .
 Patrick Lucey, the state chairman, told him he should decide whether to be manager or campaigner . Patrick Luccey told him to decide whether he should be a campaigner or a manager . Mr Lucke said: "I'm not a manager but a campaigner"
 He drove from town to town along roads piled high with snow, stopping at high schools, Rotary clubs and political rallies to explain why his brother should be President . A slight figure, he lost a pound a week in Wisconsin .
 John Kennedy persuaded an Italian American named Jerry Bruno to leave his job to organize Kennedy clubs around the state . The summer before, Bruno had been on the staff of Senator William Proxmire . Bruno was one of the Kennedy supporters .
 Bruno had dropped out of school in the ninth grade . He later wrote: “John and Robert Kennedy sized you up very quickly.”
 If a meeting was a success, credit went to the candidate; if a failure, everyone blamed the advance man . Everyone blamed him for the failure of the meeting . If the meeting was successful, credit was given to the candidates .
 At one period very close to the Communist party, at another a devotee of Joe McCarthy, he had lived by his wits on the fringes of the labor movement and the Democratic party . Forty-six years old, of . Canadian birth, of Canadian birth .
 With gravelly voice, authoritative manner and unlimited effrontery, he was a natural-born con man . He was the voice of a man who was a master of con art .
 "He took cheerful delight in causing trouble and in reorganizing the truth," he said . He took a "chirious delight" of causing trouble, he added .
 When Helen Keyes of Boston came to help in Wisconsin, Robert Kennedy committed her to Corbin’s doubtful protection . Keyes was one of the first women to be committed to Robert Kennedy's protection .
 He was prepared thereafter to do anything he conceived to be in Kennedy’s interests, whether or not Kennedy, if he had known what Corbin intended, would have approved, he says .
 Corbin even became a Catholic himself in order to have Robert and Ethel as godparents . In time Corbin became a priest himself .
 Corbin could have been a character out of Ed O’Connor’s Boston . His impudence perhaps touched some Irish folk memory . Corbin's impudence may have touched some .
 His entirely cynical view of people’s motives was joined to wondrous investigative skills . He was joined by his investigative skills and cynical views on people's motives .
 Robert Kennedy himself was defensive about him and exasperated by him . Robert Kennedy was often exasperated with Kennedy's behavior .
 In later years, Robert McNamara suggested that he be given a lie detector test . McNamara, hearing of some Corbin mischief, suggested that the test be given to him .
 Anti-Catholic tracts were mailed to Catholic households across the state . Governor says he was enraged by the anonymous mailing of the tracts .
 Whenever Kennedy shook hands with a nun, the picture appeared in the papers . The picture of him shaking hands with the nun was always in the news .
 Corbin, inviting a group of seminarians to a Kennedy rally, begged them to wear sport Shirts . Corbin was invited to the Kennedy rally by the president .
 After harrowing night, it was evident that the margin was too small to be conclusive . But, after a harrowing night of campaigning, the margin of victory was not conclusive .
 Commentators diminished it further by attributing it to the crossover of Catholic Republicans . Commentators also attributed it to a crossover of Catholics .
 In an election-night interview Walter Cronkite of CBS asked John Kennedy about the Catholic vote . John Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1968 .
 In fact, the agreement had not been communicated to Cronkite, and he was to have many more interviews with both Kennedys . The agreement was not communicated to the reporter .
 In December, the reply came: "No one had known that Kennedy was a Catholic" Kennedy was Catholic . The reply came in December .
 In his speeches he gives answers to rational questions, then he must go on to show that there is something more important to those people than anything to do with religion . Once that is done and in . Jack’s speeches he . give answers to . rational questions . Then he must
 John Kennedy addressed the religious issue, “Nobody asked me if | was a Catholic when | joined the United States Navy”22—and a state filled with kindly and patriotic people responded .
 He was appalled by what he saw as he traveled across the verdant countryside . Hungry, hollow-eyed children, dispirited families living on cornmeal and surplus lard, gray towns .
 Bob Kennedy would arrive at the tipple of coal mines as the shifts were changing, he would speak to the miners . “My name is Bob Kennedy.” He would tell the miners: “I name my name. Bob Kennedy”
 My brother is running for President. | want your help’—and then drive on, his own hands now black with coal dust, his face grim .
 Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr., Jr. met with his sons in Palm Beach, Florida . Shortly after Wisconsin he asked Franklin D. Roosevelt to meet with him in Florida .
 In July 1957 John Kennedy had made his speech in the Senate calling for the independence of Algeria .
 Kennedy was criticizing an ally, imperiling the unity of NATO and so on. Kennedy was criticizing an ally . Kennedy was critical of NATO, but his criticism of the U.S. military has never been seen .
 Joseph Kennedy privately told James Landis the speech was bad policy and bad politics . Joseph Kennedy told Landis Landis it was bad politics and bad policy . Landis said the speech would be bad policy, bad politics. Landis called the speech 'bad policy'
 John Kennedy, disturbed by the criticism, called his father, John Kennedy said, “You lucky mush.” Mr Kennedy said when John Kennedy was disturbed by criticism he called his dad .
 When John entered the room, his father said he would bet a million dollars in Las Vegas on winning the nomination and the election . John said his father would bet $1 million on his son's success .
 Slating provided a quasilegal cover under which money flowed to local politicians in the guise of campaign expenses . Slating has been a long-running problem in the US for years, but it has been revealed that it is now a problem .
 Walter Lippmann had written to John Kennedy in January . “Obviously, our highest possible contribution was peanuts compared to what they had received from the Kennedy organization,” he wrote .
 “| can’t afford to run through this state with a little black bag and a checkbook,” Humphrey cried . “You both will be doing and saying things that as President you would wish you hadn't had to say and do.”
 They decided retaliation should come from Franklin Roosevelt, not the Kennedys . Franklin Roosevelt passed on the material to them, they said .
 What happened thereafter is beyond the capacity of history to reconstruct. What happened was beyond the . capacity of . history to . reconstruct .
 Roosevelt’s memory is that, as Humphrey became more intemperate, he was under insistent pressure, especially from Robert Kennedy, to bring up Humphrey's war record . Roosevelt was under pressure from Kennedy, especially in the war .
 According to O’Brien, Roosevelt, exasperated by ‘Humphrey’s demagoguery, brought it up on his own . The president was exasperated with Humphrey's demagogery .
 Humphrey had been turned down by both services during the war because of his physical disabilities . He had been refused by both sides of the war .
 He later wrote that his organization “made repeated contacts with the Kennedys demonstrating the untruth of the allegations’s allegations .
 He praised Roosevelt's contribution to the Campaign, which indeed had been great, and kept him on as a campaigner . But he praised Roosevelt’s contributions to the campaign .
 Robert Kennedy and O’Donnell did not think their gains had sufficed to overcome the anti-Catholic prejudice . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . O'Donnell died in a house firehouse fire .
 Others urged Humphrey to keep his delegates together till the convention . Others urged him to keep delegates together until convention .
 Rauh said this would only prove that Humphrey was part of a stop-Kennedy movement . He said Humphrey's actions would prove that he was not part of the movement .
 Humphrey approved it, "and | called Bobby Kennedy,” Rauh said later, “and read it to him.” “Bobby Kennedy” was Bobby Kennedy’s father .
 Of course, we thought it was Senator Kennedy coming over to thank Hubert . "Of course, [Senator Kennedy] came over and said 'thank you' Hubert."
 Everybody walked backwards, and there was a path from the door to the other side of the room where Hubert and Muriel were standing . Hubert, Muriel and Hubert were standing in the room at the time .
 "I’ve always wondered whether she had on her mind at that moment that she was going to poke him because she was really not very happy about the outcome," she said . "I've always wondered if she had . on her . mind at the moment," she added .
 "It was the right thing for him to have done. Anyway, he was very nice and very gracious, and it was very gracious," she said .
 Humphrey’s withdrawal left Lyndon Johnson, as Robert Kennedy had predicted in February, the principal opposition . But at the moment, it was sure something was sure .
 The shooting down of a CIA U2 over the Soviet Union galvanized his candidacy . Khrushchev and Eisenhower's Paris conference cancelled after the shooting .
 If foreign affairs were crucial, Stevenson appeared the most qualified Democrat . Stevenson appeared to be most qualified for the job .
 It seemed to some of us that he might develop enough strength to stop Kennedy without developing enough to nominate himself . "Some of us seemed to think he might not be enough strong to stop JFK without developing himself," he said .
 Kennedy talked about Johnson with a mixture of admiration and despair at Hyannis Port in June . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not surprised"
 Early in June | joined a group of liberals endorsing Kennedy . Rauh, Galbraith, Commager, Goldberg and Goldberg endorsed Kennedy .
 A few days later | received a letter on another matter from Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy also sent a letter of support for his son .
 North Dakota had unit system system . "We won it by half a vote. Well, North Dakota, they had the unit system ... we won it," he says .
 Carmine de Sapio said to hell with that; we’re going to win it on the first ballot, he said . Lyndon Johnson won the White House on first ballot in 1964 .
 If Kennedy did not win at once, there might have been some strength held in reserve . But there were also delegates, as in Pennsylvania, who would have left him after the first ballot .
 Stevenson aroused far more emotion among the people who flocked around the sports arena . Stevenson aroused more emotion than anyone else in the crowd .
 The operation organized on Stevenson's behalf consisted not just of true believers, but of surprising newcomers, like Hubert Humphrey and Eugene McCarthy .
 The Stevenson drive at the convention struck many of us as a Johnson front, including Reuther and Rauh, to Robert Kennedy, as a . Johnson fronted to prevent a Kennedy nomination on the first ballot . Stevenson drive struck many, from Reuther to Kennedy, to Rau
 If it succeeded, Johnson, with his southern delegates and his potential support among northern bosses, appeared far more likely to benefit than Stevenson . Stevenson, a two-time loser with few delegates, has few delegates with few .
 John Connally of Texas announced in press conference that Kennedy had Addison’s disease and was physically unfit for the Presidency . Connally said Kennedy was physically fit for the presidency . Kennedy died of Addison's disease in 1963 .
 Jean Kennedy Smith said, “I know, Daddy, but he’s challenged him toa debate”; and to Seigenthaler, ‘You'll see.” Smith said .
 Kennedy has accepted the challenge . Kennedy will be the first person to accept the challenge in the U.S. history .
 Kennedy, who probably had not Slept at all, fixed him with a cold eye and said, “Look, nobody asked you here.” Kennedy . Kennedy .
 Joseph Tydings of Maryland misjudged the situation in Delaware and, by agreeing to a unit rule, lost the state to Johnson . Yet, when he agreed to the rule, he went at once to the Biltmore to tell Robert Kennedy he had blown Delaware .
 Kennedy said, “The important thing is that you told me right away so that we knew it,’s not counting on them. Kennedy said. “We’ll not count on them," Kennedy said .
 'I was impressed with the sharpness of his direction of the campaign. Once again, | was impressed . I'm impressed with his sharpness, he said. 'Once again, he was impressed'
 He insisted on the name of the name, address and telephone number of every half-vote . He insisted practically on the names of the voters .
 There has been much speculation as to why and how John Kennedy chose Lyndon Johnson . There was much speculation about why he chose to become President of the White House .
 Robert Kennedy read Robert Kennedy's account in the first draft of A Thousand Days . Kennedy had based in part on a memorandum written shortly after the event by Philip L Graham .
 In 1960 Graham, the publisher of the Washington Post, served as an intermediary between Johnson and Kennedy, both of whom he knew intimately . Graham was one of the most brilliant and attractive men of my generation .
 He said what a mistake it was when it was such a . important position that you only had twenty 24 hours to think about it.”
 Presidential candidates always prefer to keep the vice presidential situation fluid until their own nomination is assured . Presidential candidates tend to keep vice presidential status fluid until they are assured of their nomination .
 Key political figures who are led to think they might be under consideration for the Vice Presidency can be helpful in tight spots . Key political leaders who think they're under consideration can be useful in tight situations, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Kennedy unquestionably had given serious, if fragmentary, thought to the second place in the weeks before the convention . Kennedy had considered the possibility of running for the Democratic nomination in the fall .
 He had asked Walter Reuther and Jack Conway to talk to Humphrey about going on the ticket,24 and he told Galbraith and me at Hyannis Port on June 12 that he was for Humphrey .
 Sen. Henry Jackson is a veteran of the Investigations Subcommittee . Sen. John McCain is a former member of the Senate Investigations Committee .
 Jackson would have to convince leaders like Mayor Daley of Chicago, Governor Lawrence of Pennsylvania and John Bailey that he could help the ticket most .
 Humphrey finally eliminated himself on Tuesday when he went back on the understanding that he would endorse Kennedy . Humphrey had been expected to endorse Kennedy, but instead he endorsed Kennedy .
 Graham encouraged the Post to report that Kennedy would probably offer the Vice Presidency to Johnson . Graham in the meantime encouraged the Washington Post to say Kennedy would likely offer the vice presidency .
 Joseph Rauh, who had been laboring prodigiously to keep black delegates in line for Kennedy, went in some agitation to see Robert Kennedy . The Post containing this word was delivered to the District of Columbia delegation .
 Kennedy assured him, as he had before, that it would definitely not be Johnson . Kennedy: "It would definitely be Johnson"
 John Kennedy becomes pale with anger, so evidently wounded that it took a moment before he could collect himself . John Kennedy became pale with . anger, and became pale .
 At eleven o’clock a labor group—Reuther, Arthur Goldberg, Jack Conway, Alex Rose—came to see Kennedy . Kennedy was the president of the United States at the time .
 Robert Kennedy thereupon saw Johnson twice—first to feel him out; then, after further consultation, to ask him to withdraw . Robert Kennedy asked Johnson to withdraw from the White House .
 President didn't think that he wanted to go through that kind of an unpleasant fight . So | said, “There's going to be a lot of opposition’—this was what we worked out, that I'd tell him there was going to have trouble with the liberals .
 Robert Kennedy proposed that Johnson become chairman of the national committee . Instead he was instead chosen to be chairman of national committee instead .
 The President wanted him to play an important role and he could run the party, he could get a lot of his own people in; and then if he wanted to be President after eight years he could have the machinery to run for President or do whatever he wanted . The idea being that
 We didn’t really know whether he’d want to go through with it, and, in any case, the President wanted to get rid of him, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As Kennedy spoke his lines, Johnson, he said, burst into tears . Johnson said: 'It was my feeling, although I’ve seen him afterwards look so sad'
 President Obama spoke to the nation's first lady at the end of his term . She said, "Well, then that’s fine. So it was that kind of a conversation," she said .
 Graham remembered calling John Kennedy, Kennedy’s reassuring Graham, then speaking to his brother . Graham called Kennedy to say he had been out of touch and doesn’t know what was happening . Kennedy: "Bobby’�s been out-of-touch"
 John Kennedy told him, “ ‘I just got a call from Clark Clifford or somebody saying that “this is disastrous. “ This is disastrous," Kennedy said . John Kennedy said, " ‘ ‘This is disastrous”
 Robert Kennedy said to James Rowe, “My God, this wouldn’t have happened except that we were all too tired last night.” Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy told James Rowe that he and James Rowe were “too tired” to take part in the Kennedy
 Robert Kennedy's children were splashing in a fountain in front of Marion Davies’s house . The sun was setting, and Robert Kennedy was splashing with his children . Marion Davies' house was the scene of the Kennedy assassination .
 Mr Kennedy, ina velvet smoking jacket, stood grandly in the doorway, his hands clasped behind his back, as John Kennedy drove up . Mr Kennedy in a velvet smoking . jacket .
 He had nothing to do with the Johnson decision, despite later stories to the contrary . It's easy to imagine why he should have intervened in favor of Johnson on Thursday after being called pro-Nazi by Johnson on Tuesday .
 Theodore White was chatting with a couple of Kennedy aides in the D.C. headquarters . The manager burst into the office in shirtsleeves, tieless and in shirtleeves . White was the president of the Kennedy administration .
 The morning after Kennedy’s nomination, | began urging the importance of bringing the Stevenson people into the campaign . The campaign will focus on the Stevenson campaign .
 Robert Kennedy listened patiently, then put his hand on his knee and said, “Arthur, human nature requires that you allow us forty-eight hours.” Arthur Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 In forty-eight hours | will do anything you want, but right now | don’t want to hear about the Stevensonians. In forty -eight hours, you can do anything, but you don't want to talk about them. That’s not the case,
 Stevenson leaders and even Johnson’s John Connally received jobs in the Kennedy administration . Eventually most of the Stevenson leaders received jobs with Kennedy .
 Where it was weak, he worked through the Citizens for Kennedy Committee, headed by Byron White .
 White was an all-American football player, PT-boat veteran and Rhodes Scholar . White represented a combination of accomplishments irresistible to the Kennedys . White was a Rhodes Scholar, an all American football player and a Rhodes scholar .
 JFK sent William Walton, urbane and shrewd, to pull the Kennedy operation together in the city . Walton sent Walton to pull together the operation . Walton was urbane, shrewd and urbane . Walton pulled together the JFK operation .
 Professor Richard Wade, the Kennedy coordinator in the Rochester area, told Corbin he had to stop promising the embassy in Ecuador . He had already offered it to three people; there were nineteen republics down there, and he could at least spread his offers around .
 Kennedy traveled from state to state lashing local Democrats into activity . Kennedy traveled to state to speak out against Democrats . Kennedy was a crusader for local Democrats .
 Ralph Horton, the Kennedy coordinator in Nebraska, had known Robert Kennedy as a little boy . Ralph Horton had gone to Choate with John Kennedy and had gone there with him .
 Kennedy was “absolutely strong, steel-willed, didn’t mind telling a mayor of a city or governor or anyone else what he thought if he stepped out of line’s . Kennedy, said Tydings, was ‘absolutely strong’ and �
 Tydings said Kennedy only got rough at the top; “he was never unkind or inconsiderate of anybody who was down in the lower echelon” He said he was “fantastic” with volunteers, particularly with women and with the young
 The regulars, organized by Jesse Unruh, and the liberals, led by Thomas Braden, then a newspaper publisher in Oceanside, were more than usually embittered . The fight between the regulars and liberals was more than usual embitters .
 Joan Braden thought Kennedy was “the most terrific man to work for that I’ve ever known’s ever known. Joan said Kennedy was a ‘terrific man’ who she worked for . Kennedy was the ‘most terrific’ man to
 The former President gave the young campaign manager a genial scolding . Former President George W. Bush's campaign manager was given a stern warning .
 Kennedy protested that the stories were exaggerated; he was not such a monster . Kennedy protested . Kennedy was not a monster. He was a hero .
 The brothers had been entirely devoid of racial prejudice but only intermittently sensitive to racial injustice . The brothers were the only two men in the world to be sensitive to injustice .
 The debate over the Civil Rights Act of 1957 had begun John Kennedy’s education . John Kennedy's education had begun with the civil rights debate .
 McClellan, for some reason, got furious with him and threw the various union cards in his face . The union cards were thrown in the face of the man .
 In 1959 John Kennedy was ready to welcome what white southern support he could get . In 1959 he was in the midst of a civil war with the White House .
 At the same time, the Kennedys fully intended to stand for civil rights in the north, and believed they could do so without undue harm to their southern prospects . At the time, they thought they could stand for the north without harming their prospects .
 He had carried the black vote simply because Senator Byrd, an ex-Klansman, had backed Humphrey, he said . He said .
 In May the candidate had asked Sargent Shriver to organize a civil rights section in the campaign . In May he had asked her to organize the section .
 Shriver brought in Harris Wofford, an ardent young law professor, as civil rights coordinator . Harris was recommended by Chester Bowles and Father Theodore Hesburgh, as a civil rights organizer .
 Robert told the Kennedy organizers that this was “the best civil rights plank the Democratic party has ever had” and directed them to carry the word that the Kennedy forces were ‘unequivocally” for it, he said .
 Wofford, astonished, felt like crying out to Kennedy that the plank was beyond where they really wanted to go . They had written it expecting it to be cut down, he said . The plank is beyond what they really want to go, he says .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. was arrested in Atlanta for sitting in in a department store . The Baptist preacher had emerged as the most eloquent southern leader in the battle for racial justice .
 Six months before he had received a suspended sentence and probation for a minor traffic transgression in DeKalb County, Georgia .
 DeKalb County judge sentences him to four months of hard labor for violating probation . The Atlanta authorities released him, but a judge sentenced him to 4 months hard labor . He was released from jail .
 The sentence was frightening to all who knew what hard labor in Georgia might mean, especially for uppity blacks . Hard labor is a crime in Georgia .
 King's wife, who was five months pregnant, was wild with concern . King was brusquely awakened at four-thirty one morning, put in handcuffs and leg chains, removed from the county jail .
 Then Governor Ernest Vandiver of Georgia begged the candidate not to issue it . It would be politically disastrous in the south, and he would get King out himself, Vandiver says .
 Wofford thought it might be a good idea for John Kennedy to speak to her . John Kennedy spoke to her at a memorial service in New York City .
 Louis Martin, the wise black newspaperman from Chicago, agreed . Louis Martin was also working in the civil rights section of Chicago, Chicago .
 King phoned Wofford the next morning to say how wonderful Bowles was to call him . King said Bowles had been a great friend .
 Wofford finally reached Shriver, who tracked down Kennedy in a motel in the Chicago airport . Shriver tracked Kennedy down to a motel room in a Chicago hotel .
 As has often been told, Shriver waited for everyone else to leave the room, fearing that general discussion would kill the idea . She waited until everyone else had left the room .
 Later in the day, as the party was arriving in Detroit, he said casually to Salinger, “By the way, | talked to Mrs. Clinton,” he said .
 Khrushchev or Martin Luther King, it would end Kennedy hopes in the south . Kennedy hopes of winning the South would end in defeat .
 The judge refused to grant bail to Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Dr. Lister was charged with attempted murder in the death of Dr. John Doe .
 Seigenthaler had been hearing all day from southern leaders about John Kennedy’s phone call . He thought it was a poor idea .
 Seigenthaler drove him to the airport, confident that he had been dissuaded from calling the judge . Seigeler: "I don't think he'll call the judge"
 Later in the day the wire services began querying the headquarters about a story that a brother of the senator had called the judge and asked for King’s release . The wire services later queried the headquarters for a story .
 Kennedy said, “Yes, it just burned me all the way up here on the plane.” Kennedy said . Kennedy said he was burned by the experience .
 Kennedy: The conversation was restrained and calm; he had not been angry nor the judge hostile . Kennedy added that the conversation was calm and restrained; the judge was not hostile . The conversation, Kennedy added, was restrained, calm and calm .
 The brothers, in making their phone calls, had acted independently of each other . The brothers acted independently, the brothers said .
 A Southerner is a warm-blooded soul who likes his potlikker and his politics hot . "A good guy" is a good guy who likes potlikkers and politics hot, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 George McGovern, running for the Senate in South Dakota, called to say that he was falling behind; could the national committee send someone out to help? McGovern is running for Senate seat in the state of South Dakota .
 Robert Kennedy knew that McGovern was in trouble because of his staunch support of John Kennedy in an anti-Catholic state . McGovern's support for Kennedy in anti-Catholics state led to his defeat .
 To McGovern’s astonishment, he flew out to South Dakota himself on the Friday before the election .
 After a series of soeeches, they sent him back to Chicago on a bitterly cold, windy night, in a lightweight plane with an inexperienced pilot, a local doctor . The plane was sent back to the U.S. in a small plane with a lightweight, inexperienced pilot
 By October he was thin, weary, deep gray circles under the eyes, his shoulders slumped with fatigue . By October, he had been thin, tired, and deep gray eyes under his eyes .
 If Kennedy debates with Nixon on who can best manage the status quo, he would be lost . Kennedy is lost if he debates Nixon on how best to manage status quo . Nixon is lost.
 By midnight people were wandering restlessly, almost grimly, around the communications center in Robert Kennedy’s house .
 John Kennedy strolled with Cornelius Ryan across the dark lawn between the houses in the compound . John Kennedy was in the middle of the night when he was assassinated .
 Ryan thought he heard Kennedy say, ‘I’m angry,” and supposed that the awful wait had finally Snapped the imperturbable composure . Ryan: "I'm angry.”
 Kennedy told Theodore White, "That isn't what | said in the dark. That isn’t what | White said," Kennedy told White . Later, when Theodore White put the story in the manuscript of his book, Kennedy said, “That isn” what he said
 More than a third of the states were going one way or another by a percent of the vote or less . More than one third of those states are going by a margin of less than one percent .
 He proposed to go forward on the assumption that he had been elected President of the United States . If he won by a single electoral vote, it would be enough, he said .
 Someone at Hyannis Port observed that Nixon might at least have had the decency to appear himself and thank the people who had voted for him .
 Earlier in the autumn Walter Reuther and Jack Conway had come to Hyannis Port . The two had come together in the early autumn .
 It was a crisp fall day, but the sun was warm, and the labor men sat pleasantly on the beach talking with Jacqueline Kennedy . It was the first time they had been together since the Kennedy era .
 Gunmen had tried to kill Walter Reuther and Victor Reuther in 1948 and 1949 . Gunmen also tried to try to kill both men in 1949 .
 Don't let the precautions run your life, Reuther said; you can’t stop living . Reuther: "You can't stop living. You can't be afraid to die"
 He went down for a pass, and someone ran into him, and he fell to the ground . He was hit by a teammate, but it's not known what caused the injury .
 The President-elect had a clear view, derived from the Roosevelt model, about what he sought in the State Department . The State Department has been a model for the Obama administration .
 He was looking for someone who would be wise in counsel, persuasive on the Hill and effective in modernizing what he regarded as an unduly passive and conservative Foreign Service . He wanted to modernize the Foreign Service.
 He had worked with Fulbright, knew him better, says Fulbright . He was impressed with the way he ran the Senate committee . Fulbright: "I'm very impressed with how he ran a Senate committee"
 He thought Fulbright to be rather pompous, opinionated, and didn’t like him too much . Prior to the time he was appointed to the Foreign Relations Committee, he didn't like Fulbright .
 It finally came down, the last week, to David Bruce and Dean Rusk and William Fulbright . David Bruce felt that any time we took a position against any of the nations of Africa, or any time that we would take a position that was unpopular, would be able to say
 All he needed was advice and ideas by an expert but the decisions would be made by him . We’d be burdened by having a man in that job who had this terrible impediment of having signed the Southern Manifesto .
 Charlie Bartlett was there and took the position that Jack could appoint Fulbright . Jack was extremely strong against it and ultimately prevailed . Charlie Bartlet was there . Jack ultimately prevailed.
 On the Friday before the selection, Jack was ready to take David Bruce . Jack was looking forward to taking David Bruce to the national team .
 Maggie Higgins was for him because she said he would be tough with the Russians and would be able to stand up . Maggie Higgins said she was for Obama because he would stand up against the Russians . She said he was tough with Russia and would have been tough with them .
 Dean Rusk called Jack just before he left for Florida and suggested he call Robert Lovett . Lovett was for Rusk so Jack called up Jack to ask if he could get him to talk to him about it .
 Dean Rusk should be selected for the England squad . The former England captain says he spoke to Lovett about his selection . Rusk has been in charge of England's first team since 2006 .
 He came to Florida and the announcement was made the following Sunday afternoon afternoon .
 Rusk had served in Truman’s State Department and was now head of the Rockefeller Foundation . Rusk worked for Truman in the State Department .
 Rusk considered his first meeting with Kennedy a failure —“Kennedy and | could not communicate,” he told Bowles immediately afterward . Kennedy thought him lucid, competent and self-effacing and offered him the job .
 He also mused over the fact that he and his brother had not considered the man who would have made the best Secretary of State of all .
 He was now sixty-nine years old, deaf in one ear, his tall figure a little stooped, his mien, now that he was out of power, tinged with melancholy .
 Even John Kennedy saw him as a figure from the remote Rooseveltian past . He was twice Robert Kennedy’s age, and even John Kennedy thought him a hero .
 Joseph Kennedy thought of Harriman as little of him as he did of him . The younger Kennedy generation the younger Kennedys knew best .
 Max Beaverbrook had had memorable rows with Harriman during their Moscow mission in 1941 . Beaverbrook often made cracks about him in subsequent years .
 Both Kennedys changed their minds rapidly, of course, as the old crocodile got his teeth into things . The nation would have escaped much trouble in the 1960s if John Kennedy had chosen Harriman as Secretary of State .
 We were not sure whether we wanted McNamara in the Treasury Department or going in as Secretary of Defense . McNamara was not sure if he wanted to be Treasury Secretary or Defense Secretary .
 Gates could stay on as Secretary and possibly | would go in as Under-Secretary . Gates could be replaced as Secretary of the Treasury Secretary .
 McNamara knew that he had a choice but he wanted to consider it over the weekend . McNamara: "I'm not sure if I'm going to make a decision"
 He indicated that he wanted to be Secretary of Defense . When he came in the following Monday he indicated he wants to be Defense Secretary .
 David Lawrence of Pennsylvania was concerned that Gates would come and run for Governor in the State of Pennsylvania and so they asked specifically that he not be retained . By that time Jack had made up his mind .
 The first conversation that Jack McNamara had with McNamara, he spoke to him about the possibility of hiring Franklin Roosevelt, Jr. McNamara . Jack spoke to McNamara about the possible hiring of FDR Jr.
 McNamara objected saying that the reports he had received on Franklin Roosevelt, Jr., were not very complimentary . McNamara said that he was concerned about Roosevelt's health .
 McNamara had complete control over the collection of those in the Department of Defense . He had a letter with him which he presented to Jack, which set forth .
 Jack readily agreed as he had agreed verbally before . Franklin Roosevelt Jr. | put in a plug for Franklin Roosevelt, Jr., but it seemed to go on relatively blank ears . Jack readily . agreed as well as the president .
 Robert Kennedy asked them to find a place for John Kennedy’s old PT-boat friend Paul Fay in the Navy Department . Having turned down Roosevelt for the secretaryship, McNamara decided to accept Fay for under secretaryship .
 As far as the Secretary of the Treasury was concerned , everybody was considered . Don't think there is any question that the head of the Morgan bank would have received the job if he hadn't come out as a political supporter of Richard Nixon just after Jack had gone to see him and had
 In view of all the favors that Alsop had done | don’t think there’s any question that this was a factor .
 If Dillon hadn't shaped up and hadn't impressed Jack the decision would have been quite different . However, obviously if Dillon hadn’t shaped up the decision was quite different, it would be quite different if he had shaped up .
 There were rumors around at the time his appointment was being considered that Clinton Anderson, who had been Truman’s Secretary of Agriculture, himself was personally interested .
 Jack called Clinton Anderson after it was virtually agreed that Stewart Udall would be the appointee and Clinton Anderson indicated that he was in fact interested . Jack called Anderson after Clinton Anderson said he was interested .
 "We talked it over and the dangers of Clinton Anderson getting in there and putting in cronies and associates," she says . "A number of whom we had seen during the course of the campaign who were rather unsavory, unquestionably, and certainly"
 Jack called him and told him that he just thought that he had to go with Stewart Udall, that he didn't want to make Clinton Anderson give up his Senate position in seniority—it would be too dangerous, he said .
 Clinton Anderson bought it without any problem or difficulty so Stewart Udall was the first one agreed upon . Clinton Anderson was the candidate for the seat in the Senate . Udall is the first senator to run for the Senate in Colorado .
 Hubert Humphrey and Stuart Symington pushed a Missouri farm leader named Fred V Heinkel . Fred Heinkel was a farm leader who led a farm in Missouri . Heinkel's farm leader died in 1953 .
 Jack asked me to go in and interview him for a few moments to try to size him up . Asked him if he thought there was any solution to the problem in agriculture and he said there was . Then mentioned as one of the major solutions to sell our surpluses abroad .
 We had always considered as the second choice George McGovern but there was a good deal of opposition to him by the members of Congress on the Agricultural Committee .
 They felt he did not have the seniority which would warrant such an appointment . They felt that he did have the . seniority .
 The idea of appointing somebody who had just been defeated as a Congressional candidate was also a problem . This was his biggest problem, he said, before appointing someone who was defeated in a Congressional race .
 "Orville Freeman" came back to the show because of how impressed everybody was with him . Freeman's integrity and vigor was "his integrity and his vigor," the director says .
 As far as George McGovern is concerned he was disappointed but . had told him right at the beginning that if he didn’t get this position he could be head of the Food for Peace [the agency distributing food surpluses abroad under Public Law 480].
 He told me afterwards that it finally ended up that he was happy to be over as head of the Food for Peace . "He told me afterward that it was finally ending up that it ended up being over," he said .
 Health, Education and Welfare went to Abe Ribicoff of Connecticut, to whom John Kennedy had originally offered Justice. Abe Ribioff was the original choice of Justice. Justice.
 Working with Goldberg during the Racket Committee had given both Kennedys confidence in his intelligence, resourcefulness and friendship . Goldberg's friendship with the Kennedy family gave both the former president and vice president confidence .
 Goldberg's name was not on the list of candidates submitted by George Meany on behalf of the AFL-CIO . Goldberg himself had reservations about accepting the job, and had reservations .
 Jack wanted to finish the selection of the Cabinet at an early date because it had been delayed so much . Jack wanted it to be completed at an earlier date because of the delay .
 Jack called Edward Day on the phone and asked him to be Postmaster General and he accepted . "Without a great deal of thought, without really clearing it through any political figures," he said .
 Edward Day was sure, at least based on the first month or so, that Edward Day would turn out well . It probably would have been better politically to have chosen somebody else but he was sure .
 We always thought, looking back on it though, that this was a decision that was made with too much alacrity and that perhaps somebody else would have been more deserving . We always felt that this decision was made too quickly and perhaps someone else would be more deserving, we said .
 Edward Day had not been active in the Campaign and had been difficult to contact when we needed his help . Edward Day was 'difficult to contact' when needed to be contacted by campaigners .
 This was much on his mind when | lunched with him in Washington, D.C. on December 15 . This is much on the mind when we sat down with him for a few minutes .
 President needs some new people around him, says White House spokesman .
 The Sorensen group and the O’Donnell group did not get along too well . The two staffs -- the Sorersen and O”Donnell groups -- didn't get along well .
 Two weeks earlier his brother had asked whether he would be interested in an ambassadorship . He asked me how I proposed to serve my country, he said . He said that two weeks earlier he had asked me whether I was interested in a post .
 He heard nothing more and supposed that this had been a passing courtesy . He turned to other matters .
 On January 9, John Kennedy came to Massachusetts to address the legislature . Kennedy addressed the legislature on January 9 .
 He said he didn't know what he would be doing as President either but guessed there would be enough to keep us both busy . He said that he didn’t know what to do as President .
 Robert Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy whether he had given any thought to working in the White House himself . In 1965, Kennedy was asked if he had thought he would be a candidate for the presidency .
 'We had to have our own areas. | had to be apart from what he was doing so | wasn't working directly for him and getting orders from him as to what | should do that day'
 In June 1960 John Kennedy had said to me, “If I’d been knocked out of the presidential thing, | would have put Bobby into the Massachusetts picture to run for governor,” he said . John Kennedy would have encouraged Bobby to run as governor of Massachusetts .
 "The first choice would be public service," he says . "Second choice as an interim thing, would be a college presidency maybe maybe," he adds .
 CNN.com: "I don't believe that you ought to take this job. But in the same breath, | don’t believe that . You should take the job," she asks .
 Ithought with the name the same, and brothers, | would be creating so many problems in civil rights . I thought it would be the same. I thought they would create many problems. Ithought ... they were the same .
 They were going to keep Gates on... then Gates would retire and | would become Secretary . Gates would then retire and become Secretary of the Treasury .
 At Christmas time in 1959 Eunice Shriver, joking about the future, said, “Bobby we'll make Attorney General so he can throw all the people Dad doesn’t like into jail.”
 Kennedy decided to test the water after being turned down by Ribicoff . Kennedy says he wants the water to be tested in a new way of testing it .
 Homer Cummings, Franklin Roosevelt’s first Attorney General, had once been chairman of the Democratic National Committee . Homer Cummings was once the Democratic Party chairman . He served as the Attorney General of the United States .
 Eisenhower had given the job to Herbert Brownell, his campaign manager . Brownell was Eisenhower's campaign manager. Eisenhower gave the post to Brownell .
 John Kennedy still seems undecided on whether to vote for Orville Freeman . John Kennedy has said he is still undecided about Freeman .
 Stevenson preferred foreign affairs, says Blair . But he says he prefers the job of foreign affairs . Stevenson was the prime minister of Scotland at the time .
 John Kennedy needed someone in the cabinet whom he knew intimately and trusted utterly . John Kennedy's cabinet secretary was John D. Kennedy's secretary of state .
 The reaction to the trial balloon suggested that criticism would be sharp but transient and, if Robert did as well as his brother expected, quickly forgotten . Robert's brother says that criticism of his brother will be sharp and transient .
 James McInerney, his first boss at Justice, said he shouldn't have done it . Justice's first boss said he should not have been allowed to do it .
 Justice Douglas said that Kennedy would serve with distinction and that the voices of his critics would be drowned out by his achievements . Kennedy said that critics would drown out by Kennedy's achievements .
 Robert set out the next morning for his brother’s house in Georgetown . Robert took Seigenthaler with him, taking him to his brother's house .
 John Kennedy replied at length and with emphasis, addressing his remarks as if to Seigenthaler . Kennedy replied, "Yes, yes, yes"
 He pushed back his chair, got up and went into the kitchen, as if for more coffee . With that, he pushed his chair back and went to the kitchen .
 He had tried for a moment to escape his brother and confirm an independent identity . He had been trying to confirm his own identity .
 If his brother wanted him, he would not say no . John and Jacqueline Kennedy responded to his brother's request .
 For Christmas they gave him a copy of The Enemy Within in red leather by a London bookbinder, title and author inscribed in gold . For Christmas he was given a red leather copy of the book by a bookseller in London .
 Vi | lunched with him the day he agreed to become Attorney General . Vi | Lunches with him on the day of his decision to become attorney general .
 He wrote in the 1961 memorandum, “Once | had made up my mind ... | was glad it was all behind.” He wrote that he was “glad” to have left the country behind .
 Arthur Goldberg was a great support as were some of the labor people generally . Arthur Goldberg, who was a labor leader, was also a great supporter .
 Building trades sent emissary to Jack Nixon telling him he shouldn't appoint me as they would consider it with disfavor . On the other hand the building trades met in Washington and sent an emissaries to Jack .
 More than any executive officer, Bickel wrote, the Attorney General is required to regard means as above ends, process above results . The Attorney General's role is important to ensure process is followed by results .
 James O Eastland, the committee chairman, was a combination of Mississippi demagogue and Washington cynic . Eastland was the chairman of the Committee of Representatives .
 Robert Kennedy, with his Irish weakness for rogues, liked Eastland, however, and Eastland evidently liked him too . Robert Kennedy was a good friend of Robert Eastland .
 When Kennedy called on him before the hearings, Eastland leaned back in his chair, his face wreathed in cigar smoke, and ruminated about the Department of Justice . Eastland: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this again."
 There wasn't much tough questions because there wasn’t much was prepared to say . Actually, they would’ve been tough questions, but there was nothing .
 Robert Kennedy entered the marble and walnut-paneled hearing room of the Judiciary Committee on January 13, 1961 . Robert Kennedy sat in the hearing room on the morning of January 13 .
 Eastland read into the record messages of support from Whitney North Seymour, president of the American Bar Association, and J Edgar Hoover .
 Everett Dirksen of Illinois, the Republican leader, began the questioning . Everett Dirken was the Senate's Republican leader in the 1980s .
 He saluted Kennedy’s ‘impeccable character’ but pointed out that the Attorney General-designate had never practiced law in any state or federal court . Kennedy has never been practicing law in a state court .
 Sen. Roman Hruska of Nebraska pursued the inexperience point with dogged fervor . Senator Roman Huska of Nebrigia pursued the issue with dogged vigor .
 Kennedy’s old friends from the Rackets Committee, John McClellan and Sam Ervin, intervened from time to time, defending his experience under them . Kennedy's old friends, John . McClellan and Sam . Ervin intervened from . time to . defend his
 Asked about a national crime commission, he said he had already worked out an arrangement with the FBI, the Bureau of Narcotics and the Internal Revenue Service for pooling of intelligence .
 The Senate confirmed Robert Kennedy as Attorney General of the United States . Only one senator spoke out against Kennedy, Gordon Allott, a conservative Republican from Colorado .
 Robert Kennedy turned thirty-five two months before he was sworn in as Attorney General . Vil Robert Kennedy was born two months after he became Attorney General.
 Only two of his sixty-three predecessors had been younger—Caesar Augustus Rodney, thirty-five by a bare two weeks when Jefferson made him Attorney General in 1807, and Richard Rush, 30-three when appointed by Madison in 1814 .
 In the days of Rodney and Rush, Attorneys General were private lawyers on presidential retainer . In the 1980s, the Attorney General was a private lawyer for President George W. Bush .
 The couple kept up their own law business on the side and did not even live in Washington, D.C. They kept up a law firm on their own side .
 It was not until 1853 that an Attorney General—Caleb Cushing—took up full-time residence in the capital, nor until 1870 that the Department of Justice was established .
 The Attorney General, as the government’s chief legal officer, had a wide mandate throughout the executive branch . The attorney general is responsible for the nation's highest law enforcement branch .
 The Department of Justice was by tradition as well as by function a citadel of the status quo . The Justice Department is by tradition and function was by function of stare decisis . It is now a federal court in Washington .
 Despite the hostile comment, Robert Kennedy was not wholly unqualified . Robert Kennedy is not entirely unqualified for the job .
 In one field of importance to law enforcement, organized crime, he knew considerably more than his critics . He knew a lot more about organized crime than critics .
 John Kennedy thought the argument that he lacked courtroom experience was missing the point . John Kennedy said this quite missed the point. As for the argument, he thought it was a very serious mistake .
 He wanted first-class lawyers who would be strong, nonpolitical and young . He wanted them to be strong and nonpolitical, not political .
 Secretary of Army, Secretary of the Air Force, deputy attorney general among those to be sworn in . The nation's top law enforcement officers are responsible for the nation's national security .
 He was a man of stern and circumspect intelligence, realistic judgment, dry humor and dry humor . He was known for his wit and humor .
 He recruited some of the best lawyers of his generation to Yale Law School . He was well acquainted with the lawyers of the Yale School of Law .
 They were all Democrats who saw themselves as heirs of the great legal generation of the New Deal . They were without partisan inclination. They were heirs to the great New Deal, but they were not partisan .
 Their qualities—integrity, judgment, drive, understatement, personal reserve—commended them to Kennedy . Kennedy's qualities include drive, judgment and personal reserve . Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 Kennedy was temperamentally more attuned to the result-oriented jurisprudence of New Haven than to William O Douglas, say, than to Felix Frankfurter . Kennedy was more temperamentally attuned . to the end-of-the-game juriscipline of Cambridge than
 The appointment of Archibald Cox of the Harvard Law School to the post of solicitor general, the third-ranking job in the Department, broke the Yale monopoly .
 Cox had worked with the President-elect on labor legislation . Cox headed research staff in the 1960 campaign . Cox had previously worked with Obama on labor law .
 He was celebrated for his patrician bearing, direct and lucid mind, crisp style, crew-cut hair and bow ties . He was also celebrated for dressing himself magnificently in swallow-tailed coat to argue .
 Ramsey Clark of Texas, thirty-three years old, will head the Lands Division . William O Douglas and Sam Rayburn urged the appointment of the youngest of the assistant attorneys general, Ramsey Clark .
 Clark’s father had been Attorney General under Truman and was now on the Supreme Court . Clark himself had met Professor Katzenbach at the Chicago Law School .
 Sargent Shriver and Hubert Humphrey recommended Lee Loevinger of Minnesota for Antitrust . Lee is forty-eight years old and is the oldest of the new appointees . Lee's appointment is the third of the three new appointments .
 The head of the Criminal Division, Herbert J Miller, Jr., was a Republican . Kennedy had known Miller as a member of the Board of Monitors appointed by the courts in a vain effort to clean up the Teamsters .
 For his personal staff Kennedy drew on newspaper friends from Racket Committee days . Kennedy's personal staff includes newspaper friends he drew on from Rackets Committee .
 John Seigenthaler became his administrative assistant . Edwin Guthman became his press man . John Segenthaler was his secretary and press secretary. Edwin Guthm was his press secretary .
 Byron White brought from Denver as his deputy Joseph Dolan . Dolan had worked for John Kennedy on Senate committees and had served in the Colorado legislature . Byron White was brought in to replace John Kennedy, who died at age 65 .
 Seigenthaler, Guthman and Dolan helped segregate the rest of the cast from the importunings of politics . The show is set in New York, New York City .
 It was the most brilliantly staffed department we had seen in a long, long time, and that was very impressive . It was 'brilliantly staffed department', says the BBC .
 Over the next years Kennedy filled it with sofas, tables, lamps, lamps and children’s photographs . A varnished sailfish over the mantlepiece, an old blunderbuss on the wall, model of a Chinese junk on a table .
 There were chimneys sticking up at wrong angles and roads that were going everywhere and airplanes that were flying through what they said was the air . Chimneys and roads were flying in the air, according to the report .
 The colors were wild, beautiful colors, the kind of thing that would jump out of a child's imagination and fantasy . But they were wild and beautiful colors .
 Kennedy wandered the corridors, put his head into offices to find out what was going on . He talked to people who had worked in the Department for years without ever speaking to an Attorney General . Kennedy wandered into the corridors to talk to people in offices without speaking to him .
 Patricia Collins, a lawyer who had first come to Justice when Robert Kennedy was nine years old, said, “We never had an Attorney General who had close personal relationship with the staff.” She said .
 He carried the personal touch to the outlying parts of his domain, including federal attorneys, FBI offices, immigration and naturalization offices .
 As an administrator, he matched his taste in selecting associates by his readiness to leave them alone . As a president, he was prepared to leave his associates alone .
 He expected the assistant attorneys general to keep him informed about anything they were doing that might have public implications . He did not interfere unless they requested his counsel or support, he said .
 In that event he supported you and shared the blame even if what you did turned out to be a mistake . He supported you even if it was a mistake, he said .
 He never hesitated to put the heads of the Tax, Lands, Legal Counsel and Civil offices into civil rights, or his civil rights and lands men into antitrust .
 Bar associations and law schools sent word about his virtues to the bar associations and the law schools . They dispatched word about him to bar associations, law schools and bar associations .
 They took care always to call him Bob, rightly supposing that his detractors used the diminutive in order to emphasize youth and imply unfitness for a serious job . Bob was always called Bob, but his detractors always called him Bob . Bob, Bob, is the president of the United
 They saw themselves, in the romantic tide of Edwin Guthman’s memoir of the period, as a band of brothers . The band of the late 1960s and early '60s saw themselves as brothers .
 Below the top staff, he exerted control, according to mood and need, through humor, through brusqueness, through solicitude . He exerted control by mood, mood, need, and humor, he said .
 Attorney General of the U.S. would notify his staff of his whereabouts at all times . Kennedy returned it with handwritten scrawl, “What if I'm lost?” Kennedy wrote .
 He clasps his hands as if in prayer and regards his clenched knuckles with a cataleptic stare . He claspes his hands in prayer as if he were praying .
 His face, when it lacks that boyish, photogenic grin, is not a pleasant sight . The actor's face is often a grim sight when he is not smiling .
 It has a certain bony harshness and those ice-blue eyes are not the smiling ones that Irishmen sing songs about . It's not a smile, it's a harsh harshness, it has a bony, harshness . It has been a tough year for the Irish
 Joseph Dolan, who worked closely with him for eight years, thought him exceptionally self-contained . Dolan: "He was exceptionally well-contained"
 He had a gymnasium built on the roof of the Department . Over the resistance of career officials he had the building built .
 Ethel arranged for a Snack bar with tables and umbrellas in the courtyard . The bar was set up in a courtyard in the garden of Ethel's home .
 Federal Bureau of Investigation was the center of institutional resistance . J Edgar Hoover was the FBI director of the FBI . Hoover was one of the world's most prolific investigators . Hoover's FBI was the subject of numerous scandals .
 The FBI, the largest single unit within Justice, disposed of nearly 50 percent of the Department’s thirty thousand employees and over 40 percent of its budget . The FBI is the largest unit within the Department of Justice .
 Its director, technically a subordinate official, had far more power and fame than his nominal chiefs . The director was technically a sub-officer, but his fame was far more important than those of the real chiefs .
 Rarely had any institution been so totally the lengthened shadow of a single man . Rarely has any institution had been so much larger than the shadow of the man .
 It must not concern itself “with political or other opinions of individuals" but only with conduct forbidden by the laws of the U.S. It must only concern itself with conduct prohibited by the law of the United States .
 The Bureau of Investigation (Hoover added Federal to the title in 1935) soon gained a quiet reputation, largely deserved, as an effective, technologically advanced and lawabiding organization . In 1933, when Stone, now on the Supreme Court, heard that the newly elected Franklin Roosevelt might replace
 The director proved himself adept at modernizing his methods, at dominating his subordinates and at propitiating his superiors . He proved himself .
 To first-class administrative capacity, he joined unexpected talent for showmanship . To first class administrative capacity he joined an unexpected talent .
 Beginning in 1934, articles, books and movies began to pour out celebrating the G-men and their victories over crime .
 Roosevelt charged Hoover with investigations of Nazi and Communist activities in the U.S. Hoover was charged with investigating Nazi, Communist activities . Hoover died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 National security was now propelling Hoover across Stone’s line between conduct and opinion . National security now was propelling him across Stone's line of conduct .
 When war broke out in Europe, Hoover was forty-four years old . Hoover had been director since he was twenty-nine . Hoover was president of the U.S. Treasury Department in 1945 .
 Pearl Harbor increased his conviction that he alone knew how to protect the nation from subversive forces, he said . He added that he believed he alone would be able to keep the nation safe .
 He established a catchall “Security Index’s” list of people the FBI thought should be locked up in time of national emergency . The index is a list of those the FBI considered should be kept in the country .
 In 1943 Attorney General Francis Biddle ordered him to destroy the list . The list was destroyed in 1943 .
 He instructed his agents to change the label on the files, to “continue to prepare and maintain security index cards” and, above all, not to mention it to anyone outside the Bureau .
 His command of Congress, his manipulation of Congress and intimidation of the press, his stature in the country. So did his command of . Congress, he manipulates and intimidates the press . His stature in . the country . He was a powerful figure .
 Edgar will in all probability get this backward looking Congress to give him what he wants . Edgar will be able to get this backwards looking Congress .
 Truman's comment suggested the widening gap between the inside perception of the director and the popular myth . Truman’s comment suggested that the gap was widening . Truman: ‘I’ve got a lot of respect for the director’
 Those who dealt closely with the great patriot came to know his authoritarian instincts . His authoritarian instincts, his profoundly right-wing prejudices, his egomania and his vindictiveness .
 They knew his agitation over “bleeding hearts,” “professional dogooders” and other malefactors . They knew he was agitated over ‘bleeding heart’s, ‘professional dogsooders,’ he said .
 Hoover had too much power and too little accountability, Hoover's critics said . Hoover was the subject of a series of scandals in the 1930s and '60s .
 Its standards compared favorably to those of most police forces at home and abroad . The force's standards are higher than those of many police forces abroad .
 A decade before the Miranda decision, Hoover had instructed FBI agents to advise persons in custody of their rights to silence and a lawyer .
 They were under instructions to fire only in self-defense or the defense of others . There was no shooting down of people in flight, the author says .
 After her death his cherished companion was an FBI associate, Clyde Tolson . He was the FBI associate of the late FBI associate and FBI associate .
 He had a brother and sister, but George Allen could not recollect his ever mentioning them . Allen had no recollection of having a brother or sister .
 He was obsessed by what he saw as a decline in sexual morality . He was exercised even over the personal appearance of FBI agents .
 He feared germs, hated flies and could not abide people, especially agents, stepping on his shadow . "I'm not afraid of germs. I'm afraid of flies," he said .
 Subordinates who displeased him were exiled to remote places like Butte, Montana, Montana . Subordinations were exiled by the king .
 Hoover’s Bureau began to take on the internal lineaments of the Communist party he so fervently hated . Hoover's Bureau began taking on internal linesaments of his hated party . Hoover was a fervent opponent of the Communists .
 Survivors developed great skill in sending Hoover worshipful letters and collecting funds to give him elaborate presents on Christmas and his birthday . Hoover died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 As the director grew older, no flattery became too gross for him to swallow . "No flattery is too gross to swallow," he says .
 "He regularly misused Bureau employees, equipment and funds for entirely personal purposes," he said . The Bureau of Labor Bureau says .
 Subordinates rushed to do whatever he told them, zany as his orders might sometimes sound . "Subordinates were zany and zany," he said. "They were very quick to follow his orders."
 Hoover told the instructor, "One of them is a pinhead" Hoover said, “One of the agents in this class is a Pinhead."
 The instructor dared ask no more but surreptitiously looked at my the class . The instructor looked at the class and said no more .
 For days thereafter special agents patrolled the Canadian and Mexican borders looking for they knew not what . For days afterward special agents searched the border looking for something unknown .
 Since the work was done on government time, Sullivan recommended that the royalties go to charity . Sullivan recommends that the work be donated to a charity .
 Support for the FBI became a patriotic duty, Hoover himself a national idol . Hoover was a national hero, Hoover was an FBI hero .
 The moment he would get something on a Senator, he would ... advise the Senator that “We’re in the course of an investigation and by chance happened to come upon this data on your daughter.” The moment would be the moment he .
 Hoover was nowhere regarded with more veneration, or fear, than in Congress . Hoover was considered with more fear, or respect, than any other member of Congress. Hoover was known for his fear of Hoover .
 The House Appropriations Committee always gave him all the money he requested and, sometimes, more, more . The House of Representatives voted to give him more than he requested .
 The Senate Appropriations Committee hardly ever asked him to appear before the committee . The committee rarely did so often, with little success .
 In Congress criticism of Hoover was a form of lese majesté . Hoover was revered by members of Congress for his role in the FBI . Hoover's legacy was forgotten in later years by congressional committees .
 Roosevelt might have contemplated getting rid of Hoover, but there is no compelling evidence even of that . Hoover was not likely to get rid of the White House, but Hoover was in charge of the Hoover administration . Hoover is the subject of a new book, "Hoover"
 None of his successors seriously considered taking so drastic a step . A step that would have enraged Congress and the country, he says .
 The FBI, as Dean Rusk, a cautious man, said in 1974, had “developed into an extraordinarily independent agency within our Government.” The FBI was “extraordinarily independent”
 Mr Hoover, in effect, took orders only from himself, sometimes from an Attorney General, usually from a President, and that was it . Hoover took orders from himself only from his own office . Hoover was President of the United States in the early 1930s .
 Through the years, the FBI had depended on a variety of investigative methods . The FBI has relied on a number of methods to find out what happened .
 Most important, from the viewpoint of obtaining convictions, were 'informants' - members of or infiltrators into groups under suspicion . Most important to obtaining convictions were 'inspectants' — members of . or infiltrator .
 The advantage of informants was that their testimony could be used in court . The advantage was that they could testify against each other in court.
 Other techniques were employed to gain ‘strategic intelligence’ rather than to build legal cases . Techniques were used to gain 'strategic' intelligence rather than build legal .
 Bugging required ‘trespass’ if a bug was planted inside a person’s room; nontrespassory bugs were also possible . Bugging was required if a person planted a bug in a room, or if it was inside a room .
 ‘surreptitious entry’ or ‘black bag’ jobs, such as ‘breaking into an office or dwelling in order to copy papers or for other purposes . Then there was ‘soliciting entry” or 'black bag jobs’
 There was ‘mail opening’—intercepting and photographing personal letters . There was 'mail open’ --intercepted and photographed personal letters. ‘Mail opening' was a form of 'mail opening' and 'mail reading'
 It was not the habit of Attorneys General to inquire too closely about the actions of the U.S. government . Since some of the things it was doing were patently illegal means to allegedly patriotic ends .
 Of the FBI methods, only one required the Attorney General’s specific authorization . Wiretapping (as distinct from bugging) is not required to be authorized by the attorney general .
 When Harlan Stone reorganized the Bureau of Investigation in 1924, he had banned wiretapping . He had banned the practice .
 A Seattle bootlegger named Olmstead, protested that wiretapping was a form of unreasonable search and therefore forbidden by the Fourth Amendment . The bootleggers protested that the wiretapping is an unreasonable search .
 In 1928 the Supreme Court ruled in the Olmstead case that wiretapping did not breach the Constitution . The case was decided in 1928 in the case of Olmsted, in which wiretapping was illegal .
 Faced with the anomaly, Herbert Hoover’s Attorney General removed the ban on tapping by the Bureau of Investigation . The ban was lifted by the Attorney General of the Department of Justice .
 The Supreme Court soon ruled that wiretap evidence and evidence derived from wiretap leads were inadmissible in federal courts . The high court ruled that evidence derived on wiretap led to wiretap is not in evidence .
 He added that Congress would authorize tapping under safeguards . He said he hopes Congress will authorize the tapping of taps .
 Wiretapping was not the black-and-white issue it became in later years . Wiretap was not always a black and white issue, but it was a thorn in the eye of the eye .
 New Dealers like Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Harold Ickes and Fiorello La Guardia favored tapping for their own presumably benign purposes .
 The rise of Hitler and fears of his Fifth Column argued for vigilance . Moreover, the rise of the . rise of his . Fifth Column argues for vigilance, says historian .
 This strained construction licensed the FBI to tap wires and disseminate the results of the results within the government . The FBI is now able to tap wire taps and share the results with the public .
 Jackson regarded the whole business with distaste . He left the problem to Hoover without himself passing on each case . Hoover left the matter to Hoover .
 Francis Biddle, his successor in 1941, established the practice of case-by-case authorization by the Attorney General, sometimes turning down Hoover’s requests .
 Roosevelt saw wiretapping primarily as a wartime measure of counterespionage . Roosevelt used wiretapping as a measure of counter-espionage .
 In 1946 Attorney General Tom Clark, transmitting a draft prepared in the Bureau, asked Truman to renew Roosevelt’s 1940 authorization .
 Hoover claimed the Roosevelt memorandum authorized the FBI to tap in a wide variety of cases . Hoover claimed that the Roosevelt memo authorized the use of tapping in a number of cases, though still with case-by-case approval by the Attorney General . Thereafter Hoover claimed to have been authorized to
 State and local police were tapping happily in at least half of the states . State and state police were tapped happily in many states .
 In most states wiretap evidence was admissible in state courts . In most of these states wiretapped evidence was allowed to be used in court proceedings .
 The rise of the unwired microphone—the ‘bug’ --gave the FBI a means of electronic surveillance they used without application to the Attorney General . The 'bug' was the first time the FBI had been able to use a wire-based microphone without application .
 In 1952, Attorney General Howard McGrath forbade the Bureau to install bugs involving trespass . Attorney General McGrath banned the Bureau from installing bugs in 1952 .
 Hoover procured a memorandum from Attorney General Herbert Brownell envisaging “the unrestricted use” of bugs “in the national interest” in 1954 . In 1954, the memo was intended to require case-by-case authorization from the Attorney General . But in 1954 Hoover
 Hoover took the Brownell memorandum as a general license for bugging, even with trespass . Hoover used it as a license to bugging even with trespassing . Hoover took that license to use the memo as general license .
 He could now switch back and forth, using bugs when he wanted to minimize an Attorney General’s knowledge . He could use bugs to minimize the Attorney General's knowledge, tapping when he . wanted to maximize an Attorney . General's complicity .
 With so minuscule an advantage in the popular vote, the President-elect was not about to take liberties with a national icon .
 In the 1950s Robert had had more direct dealings than his brother with the director . Robert had more dealings than brother with director with the film .
 His early impulse no doubt had been to place Hoover in the Great American Patriot niche along with Herbert Hoover and Douglas MacArthur . Hoover's early impulse was to place him among the Great Americans .
 Hoover had the idea that he had direct contact with the President, and he used to tell me that every month, | guess, Franklin Roosevelt used to have him over for lunch . Hoover kept Hoover happy for three years because he had .
 Amenities were carefully observed between the Attorney General and the director . Amenities between the attorney general and director of the director were observed .
 Kennedy conspicuously omitted to introduce us, remarking later that he had not wanted to upset Edgar too much . Kennedy said he had "not wanted Edgar to upset too much"
 As 1964 approached, Kennedy told Ben Bradlee of Newsweek that he felt it was wise for him to start doing the same thing with rumors flying and every indication of a dirty campaign coming up .
 The director sent over an FBI report describing a mettlesome American ambassador who, caught in a woman’s bedroom, hastily departed through a window without his trousers .
 O’Donnell, who had had little use for Hoover since Rackets Committee days, said that, yes, the President had seen the report . O'Donnell: "Yes, yes"
 Brothership worked no political magic for Sam Johnson, or Donald Nixon or Billy Carter . Brothership didn't work for many of the presidents of the time .
 Hoover had cordially disliked Roy Cohn ever since the Annie Lee Moss incident, Cohn says . Hoover disliked Cohn since the incident with Moss .
 FBI memos of the period reflect a continuing surveillance by the Bureau of the Attorney General’s movement . He was upset by Kennedy's excursions around the Department, FBI memos show .
 As the three men talked, Kennedy, to Hoover’s repressed rage, idly tossed darts ata board on the wall . Hoover, Kennedy and Hoover were in the middle of the conversation . Kennedy, Hoover and Hoover sat in the Oval Office .
 Hoover became even more upset when Kennedy missed the board, and darts lodged in the paneling . Hoover became more upset after Kennedy missed a dart board . Hoover was upset that Kennedy had missed a board .
 Hoover and Tolson cut their visit short and later agreed, as the director told another subordinate, that it was “the most deplorably undignified conduct they had ever witnessed on the part of a Cabinet member’s .
 Hundley had been reporting on a political case where Hoover had been, as he Saw it, dragging his feet . Hoover was in the midst of a scandal .
 "The old man came in with a red face, and he and Bobby jawed at each other for about ten minutes," he said . "So he hit a goddam buzzer and within sixty seconds, the old man ... came in . He hit a buzzer, and within
 Robert Kennedy’s deference, which he evidently thought abundant, was from Hoover's viewpoint strictly limited . Hoover's view of Robert Kennedy's deference was strictly limited, Hoover said . Hoover: Kennedy's views on deference were strictly limited.
 Attorney General was happy to appease the director with occasional White House luncheons . He insisted (with imperfect success) that FBI communications to White House pass through his own office .
 No Attorney General had tried to do this since Biddle fifteen years before . Biddle was the first Attorney General to try to do it .
 He instructed the Bureau to send its press releases to Guthman’s office instead of putting them out, as it had done for years, on its own letterhead . Guthman instructed the bureau to send out its own press releases .
 Once when Hoover’s secretary answered a Kennedy call, the Attorney General informed her curtly that hereafter he expected the director to pick up the phone himself . The Attorney General told her that hereafter, he expects the director of the agency to pick it up himself .
 Kennedy did not hesitate to call FBI men working on cases without speaking to the director first . Kennedy called FBI agents working cases without asking them to speak to him first .
 Hoover was annoyed by Kennedy's habit of dropping in on regional FBI offices and asking questions about current cases . Hoover was further irritated by Kennedy’s habit of popping in on FBI offices to ask questions about cases .
 The Attorney General persuaded FBI offices to place a photograph of John Kennedy next to the obligatory photograph of Hoover . He affected to believe that it was always the same photograph, circulated by the Bureau ten minutes before his arrival .
 To Kennedy such visits were part of the Attorney General’s responsibility, he said .
 The director had successfully withdrawn the Bureau from the oversight of the Department of Justice . Over the years the director had withdrawn the . .
 The arrival at Justice of a President’s brother, a brash young man determined to annex the Bureau to the Department, radically altered his position . The arrival of a . President's brother radically altered the . position .
 Hoover got it into his head that Adam Yarmolinsky, a blameless lawyer working for McNamara in Defense, was scheming to get his job . Hoover thought he was working on behalf of McNamara, a lawyer for the Defense Department .
 "In his usual manner, he leaked items to the press designed to discredit Yarmolinsky," he said . "In the usual manner," he leaked them to the media, he said. "He leaked them in a way to discredit him," he added .
 Hoover was no more enthusiastic about the idea of a successor from inside the Bureau . Hoover harbored dark suspicions that one or another subordinate was aspiring to the directorship . Hoover had dark suspicions of a subordinate aspiring to be the director .
 From time to time, someone would organize a keep-Hoover Campaign . Attorney General’s office would try to keep him in office .
 On January 1, 1965, the director would have his seventieth birthday . He would have been seventieth .
 Hundley was convinced “that the thing that finally destroyed their relationship was that Bobby mentioned to too many people who complained to him about Hoover that, ‘Look, just wait,’ and we all got the message that they were going to retire him after Jack got re
 "The spirit you demonstrated will, we hope, spread through the entire Department of Justice. The spirit of Valley Forge and Monte Cassino will be spreading through the department ofjustice. We hope to see the spirit of the Valley Forge spirit spread .
 A lot of it was so far fetched that even on the face of it it didn't make any sense. I mean, if you were going to do that kind’ of thing, you wouldn’t go on over to the LaSalle Hotel with the Secret Service
 In public, the Attorney General meticulously defended the director . But now he says the idea was just so that you would know that they were continuously getting into this information .
 If Robert Kennedy generally contained himself, his irrepressible wife could not . His irreprenal wife would not . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The director, who was perennially feuding with city police chiefs, particularly disliked Chief William H Parker of Los Angeles .
 Once at a Department of Justice party Ethel Kennedy had some words with Hoover . Once at the Justice Department party, she had words with him .
 Robert Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy whether he thought Hoover was just a nasty person or truly dangerous . Forty years later, Kennedy asked whether Hoover was truly dangerous or just nasty . Kennedy: "I don't think Hoover is dangerous. He's dangerous"
 The Mob between Robert Kennedy and J Edgar Hoover was, within its peculiar limits, a fascinating case history in the politics of administration . The president versus the supreme bureaucrat versus the national hero .
 The limits were imposed on one side by the fact that even a presidential brother dared not provoke a national hero to resign . On the other, the limits of the President’s brother was imposed on the other side . Even a hero dared not break with the President's brother .
 At stake in this first round was Robert Kennedy’s determination to complete the unfinished business of the Racket Committee . At stake was Kennedy's determination to bring the men who ran the mob and the labor rackets to the bar ofjustice .
 For years he had warned his fellow countrymen against the diabolic machinations of these godless masters of deceit . For years, he had . years . He had warned . fellow . citizens against diabolic . machinations, he said .
 Despite the patriotic endeavor of the FBI, however, the threat, at least as measured by the director’s rhetoric, apparently continued to grow . The threat continues to grow.
 The Rackets Committee had instructed him in the covert realities of power and corruption in American life, he says . The Racket Committee was instructed him by the committee .
 The racketeer was no longer “someone dressed in a black shirt, white tie and diamond stickpin, whose activities affect only a remote underworld circle.” It was ‘someone who was dressed in black shirt and white tie,’s ‘diamond stickpin
 Budd Schulberg is the author of On the Waterfront, a Sam Spiegel-Elia Kazan film of 1954 about labor racketeers . Kennedy chose Budd Schurberg, whom he remembered as an author of the film .
 Kennedy: "I didn't want the book to seem to be aimed against a single man or a single union" Schulberg: Kennedy said, “Good.... | wrote those last pages very carefully”
 Kennedy was determined to stop the drain of power in America to obscure forces beyond moral and legal accountability . The next ten years, he told Schulberg, might mark a turning point in American history .
 In insisting on the spreading threat of organized crime, he offended J Edgar Hoover doubly—by dismissing the cherished Red menace and by raising the question the director had done his best for forty years to ignore .
 In 1934, after Roosevelt’s anticrime legislation established federal jurisdiction over a variety of interstate felonies, the FBI ended the careers of notorious outlaws like Dillinger . Dillinger's career was ended by the FBI .
 Often, like Bonnie and Clyde, they were amateurs engaged in sporadic and desperate acts . The pair were often amateurs, but they were also amateurs .
 Of the hundreds of crooks honored, very few had any connection with organized crime . "Very few of the crooks thus honored" were connected to organized crime, he says .
 While the Bureau chased Bonnie and Clyde, it left Vito Genovese and Meyer Lansky of the syndicates to flourish in peace . The Bureau had chased Bonnie, Clyde and Clyde but left the gangs to flourish .
 Elmer lIrey, chief of the Treasury Department’s Intelligence Unit, quietly brought down Al Capone, Johnny Torrio, Waxie Gordon and Willie Bioff . In the meantime, Elmer LIrey brought down Capone and Torrio .
 Harry Anslinger of the Bureau of Narcotics was spinning tales about the Mafia . Anslinger: The Mafia was a big drug dealer in the '50s .
 Organized crime was not precisely a secret even in the 1930s, except evidently to J Edgar Hoover . Organized crimes were not a secret, except apparently to Hoover . Hoover was the FBI's top law enforcement official .
 None of the mobsters above, save for a passing reference to Capone, was mentioned in Don Whitehead’s authorized history, The FBI Story, written with Hoover's cooperation .
 Robert Kennedy discovered Hoover’s indifference to organized crime when he requested FBI dossiers on the Apalachin conferees in 1957 . Robert Kennedy had discovered Hoover's indifference when he asked FBI . Hoover had found out about organized crime in a letter to the FBI .
 William Sullivan of the Intelligence Division persuaded Hoover to assign the best FBI crime researcher, Charles Peck, to prepare a report on organized crime . Hoover assigned Peck to prepare the report . Peck was the FBI's best crime researcher .
 Hoover read Peck report, denounced it as ‘baloney’ and ordered it suppressed . Hoover ordered the Peck report to be suppressed . The Peck report was published by the U.S. government .
 Attorney General Rogers brought William Hundley over from the Internal Security Division to head up Organized Crime Section of the Criminal Division . Hundleys is a former member of the National Security Division . He was brought over from Internal Security to lead Organized crime Section .
 Eminent gangsters were crossing state lines every day to avoid prosecution or the giving of testimony . Gangsters crossed state lines to escape prosecution or giving testimony .
 When mobs put out contracts on their enemies, they tended as a matter of standard operating procedure to import gunmen from another state . "Mobs" tend to bring in gunmen from other states to fight back .
 Hoover carved out his spacious jurisdiction in internal security with virtually no statutory basis . Hoover had carved out a spacious jurisdiction with virtually little statutory basis at all . Hoover's jurisdiction was carved out with virtually zero statutory basis, he said .
 Former FBI agents laid great stress on Hoover’s infatuation with statistics . Hoover was obsessed with statistics, according to former FBI agents .
 It required a heavy investment of agents in long, tedious investigations that might or might not produce convictions . The investigation was long and tedious . It required heavy investment .
 The statistical preoccupation steered Hoover toward the easy cases, bank robbers, car thieves, kidnappers and other one-shot offenses . The statistics race increased the Bureau’s dependence on local law enforcement .
 FBI often inflated its statistics by claiming credit for work performed by local police, as in the recovery of stolen cars . The FBI often claimed credit for local police work, such as recovering stolen cars, as well .
 For the mobs, mobs often had their own arrangements with local police, politicians and businessmen . For the mobsters, they often had arrangements with politicians and politicians .
 Still there is little chance of their being bribed by the American Communist party . Still, there are little chances of them bribing them with bribes .
 The great proponent of the Mafia thesis was Harry Anslinger, the director’s ancient rival and a leading figure on his hate list . Anslinger was also a major figure on the director's hate list.
 Hoover believed Communists were far more dangerous to the republic than organized criminals . Hoover was a right-wing ideologue, but Hoover believed that Communists were more dangerous than criminals, he says .
 The director of the FBI had stayed out of a battle that the former counsel of the Rackets Committee considered crucial to the national future . For whatever reason, the FBI director stayed out . The former counsel for the Racket Committee considered the battle crucial .
 Robert Kennedy now finds himself unexpectedly embroiled with a third secret organization, almost as impenetrable and self-hallucinated as the others, but this time operating under the color of law . After his experience with the Teamsters and the mobs, Robert Kennedy found himself unexpectedly .
 None knew what the others had discovered about the underworld, and the FBI seemed to know least of all . But none knew what they had discovered .
 Kennedy’s call from the Rackets Committee for the pooling of intelligence through a national crime commission led to the pool of intelligence . This situation had led to Kennedy's call for the Pooling of Intelligence through the National Crime Commission .
 Hoover hated to share FBI intelligence on the pretext that other agencies could not be trusted and that somewhere an informant would be betrayed . Hoover hated sharing intelligence with other agencies . Hoover feared that somewhere in the U.S. would be betraying an informant .
 Luther Huston, the departing information officer for Justice, describes what may have been the climactic moment . Huston: "It was a very difficult moment for Justice" Huston is leaving Justice Department .
 Huston had to wait because the new Attorney General was already in the director’s office . Huston was scheduled to pay his formal farewell to Hoover, but was forced to wait .
 Kennedy wanted to set up some kind of supplementary or overlapping group to take over some of the investigative work that the FBI had been doing . The group would take over the FBI's investigative work, Kennedy said .
 Hoover told Bobby 'If you’re going to do that, | can retire tomorrow,' he said . Hoover told him, ‘If you're going to retire tomorrow,’ he said. ‘I can’t retire tomorrow. My surmise is that
 The Attorney General approached the problem circuitously. Frustrated here, he approached the issue circuitously .
 Two key agencies in the campaign against organized crime were the Internal Revenue Service and the Narcotics Bureau, both in the Treasury .
 Hoover, having prevailed on the national crime commission, had to go along with this modest proposal . Hoover had prevailed on this more modest proposal, Hoover said . Hoover's proposal was approved by the crime commission . Hoover: "It's a good thing for the nation to have a national crime
 For the first time all the federal groups that knew anything about the underworld came together in the same room and exchanged information . The meeting was the first meeting of the underworld's underworld groups .
 Kennedy gave the job of coordination not to the FBI but to the Department’s Organized Crime Section . Kennedy: "The job of coordinating not to FBI is to the Organized crime Section"
 Kennedy quadrupled the Organized Crime Section in size . He encouraged its lawyers to conduct investigations and try cases . At the same time, he quadrupled his section's size .
 After two years he brought back Hundley, who had stayed on as one of his special assistants . He had handled special assignments with dash and discretion . After a two-year stint, he brought him back .
 If lack of jurisdiction was Hoover’s alibi, then Kennedy would make FBI jurisdiction explicit . Kennedy would have weakened the alibi; at least this would weaken this . Hoover's alibi is that he didn't have jurisdiction .
 In September Congress enacted five of his eight proposals, including interstate travel in support of racketeering, gambling equipment and gambling information . The most important of his proposals covered interstate transportation of gambling equipment .
 Even with this enabling legislation, however, it remained a battle to get Hoover to acknowledge the existence of organized crime . Hoover's efforts to get him to acknowledge organized crime were unsuccessful .
 Joseph Valachi mistook another prisoner for a fellow mobster commissioned to kill him . Valachi is a member of the Genovese gang now in the Atlanta penitentiary . In 1962 Valachi killed another prisoner whom he mistook for him .
 Faced with the death penalty, Valachi agreed to talk in exchange for life imprisonment . Valachi was sentenced to life in prison after pleading guilty to the crime .
 He knew a great deal, apparently had total recall and poured out voluble recollections . "He seemed to have total recall," he said of his recollections of life .
 His account of Italian criminal ‘families’ gave the disparate intelligence accumulating in Justice a unifying theory . Justice was born of Italian "families" and "family values"
 In the past we’ve heard that so-and-so was a syndicate man, and that was about all . This is not the case in the U.S. It's the first time we've heard that someone has been involved in the syndicate .
 Hoover had always scoffed at the idea of the Mafia, but the new phrase allowed him to discover organized crime without appearing to admit that the detested Anslinger had been right .
 In early 1963, an article signed by Hoover and intended for the Reader’s Digest reached Edwin Guthman's desk for clearance . The article was intended for a Reader's Digest article .
 Casually imbedded in the middle was a quick reference to the Cosa Nostra . The film was shot in New York City in the 1990s .
 Kennedy, Hundley said, was “really very reluctant” with Hoover . Hoover even more so. Kennedy was ‘very reluctant’ with Hoover, he said .
 Hundley warned that if Justice did not cooperate, the committee would subpoena Valachi . Valachi is accused of lying to the FBI .
 FBI agreed Valachi’s appearance would not compromise other underworld sources . After intricate negotiation, the FBI seemed to agree that Valachi's appearance wouldn’t compromise other sources . Valachi is accused of being a member of the Mafia .
 The committee, without consulting the Department, put the hearings on television . The committee did not consult the Department .
 He got more money as well as more explicit and possibly wider jurisdiction, he says . He preserved the autonomy and secrecy of FBI operations .
 Wiretapping remains the single FBI investigative technique requiring approval, case by case, of the Attorney General . Wiretapped remained the single technique requiring the approval of case-by-case, case-to-face .
 Kennedy believed tapping had a significant if restricted role in law enforcement . Kennedy had watched Jimmy Hoffa wilt before Frank Hogan's wiretaps in 1957 .
 At the same time, there is a great deal of indiscriminate wiretapping that now goes unpunished, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is a very high likelihood that wiretapping will be punished"
 Legalized wiretapping is a two-edged sword that requires the most scrupulous use of wiretapping . Legalizing wiretapping requires careful use of the most sophisticated wiretapping tools .
 | would not be in favor of its use under any circumstances —even with the court’s permission —except in certain capital offenses . For that reason, | would . not . be in . favor of using it under any . circumstances .
 On a cold day in March 1961, he convened his advisers on the stone terrace at Hickory Hill to discuss the wiretap problem .
 Archibald Cox and Burke Marshall thought a reasonable statute could be drafted . Cox and Marshall said a reasonable law could be drawn up .
 Ramsey Clark, Joseph Dolan and William Orrick demurred . Orrick most emphatically said Orrick . Clark, Dolan, Clark, Clark and Dolan all demurred, Orrick said .
 Kennedy: "I can't imagine letting legal niceties halt the search for a kidnapped child" Kennedy: Search for the kidnapped child grew heated. Kennedy: 'I'm not going to let it stop, but I'm going to do it'
 All wiretapping, federal, state or local wiretapping would be made a federal crime, except when specifically authorized by a federal judge . His goal was to create a comprehensive system by which all wiretapping was made a crime .
 In effect, he wished to move toward the British system, where tapping was forbidden without a warrant, though his proposal that the warrant be issued not by the executive (the Home Secretary) but by the judiciary improved on the British model . The proposal was made by the Home Secretary .
 The FBI demanded that the bill skip court orders for national security cases . The FBI insisted that the law skip the court orders, which he reluctantly accepted .
 The Keating bill would have permitted state and local cops to tap wires in any way authorized by state law . The bill, while purporting to limit federal wiretaps, would have allowed police to tap wire taps . It would have limited police to tapping wires authorized by law .
 In 1962 Katzenbach drafted a bill2® designed to clear up what Kennedy described as the “chaotic’s situation . Kennedy described the situation as “chaos”
 The new bill proposed to outlaw warrantless wiretapping, whether conducted federally or locally, publicly or privately, except in cases involving serious threats to national security . The bill proposes to outlaw wiretapping .
 It defined cases where taps might be permitted under judicial supervision . It also limited officials who could apply for court orders . It required that each application state grounds in detail .
 Some observers considered the 1962 bill a responsible effort to strike a balance between the competing claims of privacy and law enforcement . The 1962 bill was passed by the House of Representatives .
 Francis Biddle, who had clerked for Holmes and defended civil liberties for a lifetime, testified for it . Biddle: Holmes' trial was the first of its kind in the nation .
 Critics believed that a wiretap system was inherently uncontrollable and that the dangers to personal freedom far outweighed the gains to law enforcement .
 They denied the possibility of an American compromise along British lines . They denied a British compromise .
 They questioned whether judicial warrants could provide effective control . Recalling the familiar phenomenon of “judge shopping,” they questioned whether warrants could be used to control .
 In any case, where a search warrant authorized only a single search for specified objectives, a wiretap warrant was a dragnet . The warrant was used to search for specific objectives, the author says .
 They did not believe that wiretap evidence made all that much difference . Nor did they think that wiretapping evidence made a difference . They said they did not think the evidence would make a difference.
 The bill failed in Congress in 1962 and, despite expectation in 1963 that Valachi testimony would help, it failed thereafter . Valachi testified in 1963 to Congress .
 Federal wiretaps remained under the control, not of the federal courts, but of the Attorney General . The Attorney General is responsible for the wiretaps .
 In three and a half years as Attorney General, Kennedy authorized taps on about sixteen American citizens involved in eight separate cases . Kennedy authorized tapping on about 16 Americans involved in 8 separate cases.
 Martin Luther King, Jr., and two associates, tapped in order to test Hoover's assertion that King was involved with Communist agents . King was the subject of a series of investigations into King's alleged involvement in the Communist Party . King and associates were tapped to test whether he was involved in
 In some cases, the Bureau tapped first and got Kennedy’s written approval later . In the main, Kennedy consented to the wiretap requests . The Bureau tapped Baldwin and his secretary, Norman, the erring ex-FBl agent .
 He did not do much to tighten the controls he had inherited from his predecessors . Nor did he do much of what he inherited from predecessors .
 President Obama handled wiretap authorizations with surprising casualness and inattention . He handled wiretaps authorizations in a casual manner .
 For all his strong feelings about organized crime and Jimmy Hoffa, he authorized no wiretaps against racketeers or Teamsters . For all the strong feelings, there was no wiretapping against organized crime .
 He wished it, if used at all, to be hedged around by statutory safeguards . But he wished it was not used in any way .
 V. Kennedy evidently supposed that the power to authorize wiretaps was to contain the FBI’s electronic surveillance . Kennedy: "The power to authorizing wiretaps is the power"
 The director was under exasperation pressure from the Attorney General . The director of the National Film and Television Corporation is under fire for his actions .
 At no time did he seek bugging authorization from the Attorney General, he sought it from the U.S. Attorney General . He said he did not seek authorization from that attorney general .
 In later years, he claimed vigorously that Kennedy had known what the FBI was doing . Kennedy with comparable vigor denied the claim, but later said it was true .
 Courtney Evans, who had served as FBI liaison with Kennedy in Racket Committee days, continued to serve in Justice Department role . Evans was the FBI liaison to Kennedy in the Rackets Committee .
 Kennedy no doubt supposed that the meeting had been covered by an informant . Kennedy thought it was a meeting covered up by a spy .
 In 1966 Hoover demanded that the Chicago agents prepare affidavits saying that in the light of the discussion Kennedy would have had to conclude that the Bureau was engaged in bugging . Hoover demanded the affidavits in 1966 .
 Herbert Miller wrote to Senator Ervin in 1961 reporting that the FBI had sixty-seven bugs in operation . Miller: "The FBI was in operation in operation. It was in the midst of an FBI operation in the 1960s." Miller: The bugs were found in the FBI's files
 Miller assumed, he said later, that the bugs had been legally installed with the owner's consent . Miller assumed the bugs were installed legally in restaurants or apartments .
 Kennedy, observing that the request had to do with telephones, evidently thought that he was approving the leasing of a line to be used for wiretaps, and that he would come back to him for authorization in each specific case . Kennedy: "I think that he thought that I was
 The FBI request was disingenuous, since the leasing never took place . The FBI requested the leasing, but it was never completed .
 FBI agent was in FBI for a quarter century and had great loyalty to the organization . He had been in the FBI for more than a quarter decades and was loyal to FBI .
 He saw his task as that of keeping the Attorney General and the director together . He said he wanted to keep the attorney general and director of the state .
 Courtney would explain something to Bobby one way and explain it to Hoover another way . Still, "it worked very well for one basic reason,” observed Katzenbach, “and that’s that is Courtney . Courtney .
 Kennedy told Evans in 1966 that he wanted the FBI to use more “technical equipment” against syndicates . According to Edwyn Silberling in 1966, Kennedy said he wanted more ‘tech equipment’ against the syndicates.
 G Robert Blakey: "Let’s get some of this security equipment on the street" Blakey says Evans told Evans he wanted to get the equipment . Evans was arrested in 1966 .
 The Attorney General stated he recognized the reasons why telephone taps should be restricted to national-defense type cases . He was pleased we had been using microphone Surveillances, where these objections do not apply, wherever possible .
 There is no evidence that White ever saw it, nor did Hoover release it in his 1966 barrage against Kennedy . Hoover released it in 1966, but there's no evidence White saw it .
 Once an FBI report on Las Vegas casinos contained internal evidence of FBI bugging . FBI report found internal evidence that FBI bugged casinos .
 Dolan felt in addition that the electronic world was a mystery to the Attorney General . Dolan said he felt that electronic technology was a big mystery to him .
 Hundley: "I’d rather go down in history as a guy who might have moved around a little than as an idiot" Kennedy: Even if he hadn’t known, it would be better politics to say he had .
 Robert Kennedy, in his judgment, had not understood that the FBI was bugging the mob, certainly not with trespass . This, without malice toward Evans’s “unfortunate human trait of trying to please everybody,” appeared to be Kennedy's own conclusion .
 "Here was a first-class administrator, an indefatigable question-asker, experienced in the war against crime, surrounded by clues," he said .
 In a later time he would readily agree that of course he should have done this, but imagine there were several reasons that he didn’t .
 He was probably the busiest man in Washington, increasingly involved in affairs far outside the Department of Justice . He was also involved in matters beyond the Justice Department .
 His sensitivity to civil liberties in these years was less than his concern about organized crime . And, though he was coming to understand the importance of the Bill of Rights .
 Under Kennedy's pressure, the national government took on organized crime as it had never done before . Vil Vil Vil under pressure from the government, the government took action against organized crime in the wake of Kennedy's assassination . Vil
 The Patriarca gang in Rhode Island and the De Cavalcante gang in New Jersey were smashed . Police say they smashed the Patriarcasas gang in both states .
 Eisenhower's Department of Justice decided in the summer of 1960 to indict Hoffa for mail frauds in connection with Sun Valley, a Florida real estate venture in which he had a personal financial interest . After the Rackets Committee reports, Eisenhower's . Department of . Justice had decided to indict
 At the last minute, James Dowd, the Justice Department lawyer, was making the case for indictment in a Florida grand jury room . The Justice Department changed its mind and summoned Dowd back to Washington . Dowd is a former FBI agent who worked for the Obama administration .
 Herbert Miller served as counsel for anti-Hoffa members of the Teamster Board of Monitors . Miller's criminal law experience was scant, but he was counsel for Teamster members . He may well have been put in charge of the Criminal Division less because of Miller’s
 Kennedy then asked Walter Sheridan to set up a unit on labor rackets in the Organized Crime Section . Kennedy then set up the unit . Sheridan's unit was set up by the Department of Justice in the 1980s .
 He was a superb investigator, patient and careful . He surrounded himself with crack lawyers, like James Neal and Nathan Lewin . But he was not perfect investigator .
 He did not like competing investigative teams and he mistrusted agents who had left the Bureau . He mistrusted agents who'd left the bureau .
 Sheridan had many FBI friends and gained extensive cooperation in the field . Sheridan was out of favor in the Washington headquarters, but had many friends with the FBI . Sheridan, as an ex-agent, had many of the FBI friends .
 Sheridan group became known popularly, though never in the Department, as the Get-Hoffa Squad . The Sheridan group is known as "The Get-Offa Squad"
 By October 1961 he was complaining to the press that twenty-nine grand juries had been convened to get him . Half the lawyers in the Department and half the agents in the Bureau were enlisted in the effort .
 A number of Teamster leaders, including Anthony Provenzano and Barney Baker, were in due course convicted and sent to prison .
 An investigation of the Teamsters’ Central States Pension Fund in Chicago disclosed a larger case . Teamsters' Central States pension fund in Chicago was investigated by the union .
 Hoffa was charged with conspiring to defraud the trustees of the pension fund . A new indictment was in preparation, charging him with defrauding the trustees .
 Kennedy decided to drop the Florida case and concentrate on the Chicago prosecution . Since the new indictment covered Sun Valley, Kennedy dropped the Sun Valley case .
 In the meantime, a grand jury in Nashville indicted Hoffa on the charge of taking illegal payments from an employer in violation of the Taft-Hartley Act . Hoffa was indicted on charges he took illegal payments .
 This, like Sun Valley, was a case Kennedy had opened up in the Racket Committee . This case was one of the cases Kennedy had been looking into .
 In 1948 Hoffa had intervened to settle a damaging strike against a Detroit trucking firm in the company’s favor . In 1948, Hoffa helped settle a strike in the city of Detroit in favor of the company .
 Shortly thereafter the Test Fleet Corporation, a truck-leasing company, was incorporated in Tennessee . The Test Fleet Corp. was incorporated shortly after .
 Through the years this convenient arrangement had provided Hoffa with hundreds of thousands of dollars . Hoffa was given hundreds of millions of dollars by Hoffa .
 He reported that Hoffa had once asked him whether he knew anything about plastic bombs . Hoffa asked him if he had any knowledge of plastic bombs, he said . He also reported that he had been asked about plastic bomb bombs by Hoffa .
 Kennedy had guts, Hoffa says . He drove around by himself in a convertible, swam alone in his Hickory Hill pool and had no guards in the house .
 The judge declared a mistrial and called for a grand jury investigation of jury tampering . The judge called for the grand jury to investigate jury tampering in the case .
 Cox said he would have no difficulty arguing the case before the Supreme Court . Cox: "I'm sure there will be no difficulty" for the case to be argued before the court .
 The relations between the Teamsters and the syndicates continued to grow . The relationship between the unions and syndicates has been growing .
 FBI electronic microphone planted from 1961 to 1964 in office of Anthony Giacalone, a Detroit hood, revealed Hoffa’s deep if wary involvement with the local mob . Hoffa's deep involvement with local mob led to his arrest in 1964 .
 As long as John Kennedy was President, Robert Kennedy would be unassailable, the Kennedys reflected .
 Former Attorney General John McCain spent a conspicuous part of his life as Attorney General doing exactly that . Yet he was spending most of his time doing exactly what he was doing .
 All this engraved more deeply the public face he was trying to escape — the face of the implacable prosecutor . The prosecutor's face was the face he tried to escape, the prosecutor .
 His critics seized on the pursuit of Hoffa as a pretext for new criticism .
 Kennedy was represented as “single-minded” in that pursuit, as if chasing Hoffa consumed all his days and nights . Kennedy represented as a single-minded man who chased Hoffa .
 No one except the President divided his mind among a greater variety of concerns and enterprises, says President Obama . "No one except one ... ... ... partner partnership with the President," he says .
 When he thought about Hoffa, he thought hard about him; but thinking about him occupied a very small part of his time . He saw a great deal of him in these years and can hardly recall his mentioning Hoffa .
 Thinking about Kennedy unquestionably occupied a greater part of Hoffa’s time . The former Air Force Secretary of the Air Force was assassinated in 1968 .
 In 1969, the Justice Department was ordered by the Supreme Court to turn over all electronic overhearings related to the Hoffa cases, whether or not relevant to the indictments . The Justice Department would have been delighted to dig up something on the Kennedys .
 One was authorized by the judge in order to record a Hoffa lawyer conspiring to fix a juror . The judge authorized one of the recordings to be made in the trial of Hoffa lawyers .
 Whether the FBI also opened Hoffa’s mail, burgled his office or rubbed invisible powder on his clothes no one outside the FBI can Say . No one knows whether the FBI opened the mail or burgled Hoffa's office .
 The most dangerous power of the prosecutor: that he will pick people that he thinks he should get, rather than pick cases that need to be prosecuted . The prosecutor's power is to pick people he wants to get, not people who need to get prosecuted .
 It is in this realm—in which the prosecutor picks some person he dislikes or desires to be embarrassed, or selects some group of unpopular persons and then looks for an offense, that the greatest danger of abuse of prosecuting power lies .
 He was deciding that people were guilty and then looking for something they could be found guilty of. He was looking at something he could be guilty of, he said . He said: "He was deciding he was guilty of something he was not guilty of."
 He was convicting them not for their real crimes but for Slips that anyone might have made . Slips were not real crimes, but they were crimes committed by anyone who might make it .
 Beginning with the criminal rather than with the crime led to selective justice, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Hoffa was no doubt a menace to society, and the Get-Hoffa Squad might have a righteous purpose . Hoffa may have been a menace, but he was a menace .
 Get-NAM Squads might beget other Get-ADA Squads, Get-Enemies-List Squads in any form . But the precedents may beget in other hands Get-AD Squads .
 Kennedy and Mortimer Caplin brought the Internal Revenue Service roaring into the battle against organized crime . Kennedy and Caplin had brought the IRS roaring into a battle .
 60 percent of all organized crime cases in these years were tax cases,24 This practice raised questions. In the end of the end, 60 percent was tax cases .
 Some lawyers believed that the purpose of the tax laws was to collect revenue, not criminals . Some lawyers believe that the laws were intended to collect tax revenue . Others believed that criminals were not criminals, but criminals .
 Their tax returns should be subject to the same random review as those of any other citizen, says the author of the book .
 The Criminal Division could make recommendations to the IRS for investigations . The Tax Division would apply the same criteria to racketeers as to all other cases submitted by the IRS .
 Someone committed a murder, a rape, or a robbery, and the job of law enforcement was to find out who did it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Law enforcement was here to help. It's a job of finding out who committed a crime
 ‘enforcers’ and ‘soldiers,’ like Joe Valachi, were for. That was what the 'enforcer' and 'soldiers' were for . ‘Soldiers’ were for, and that’s what the ‘
 Top racketeers were remote from overt acts, but vulnerable only on the margin, as in their tax returns . Because of top racketeers, they were not exposed to overt acts . They were vulnerable only to the margin as in tax returns, the tax returns show .
 The protesters were not outmatched by the massed power of the federal government . Nor were they forlorn individuals, outmatched with the mass-power of the government .
 During the Nashville case Hoffa had six high-priced lawyers sitting in a hotel room to consult with the four other lawyers they had in the courtroom . Hoffa says he had six lawyers on the case .
 In March 1929 a group of Chicago citizens waited on President Herbert Hoover in Chicago . The group waited on Hoover in March 1929 .
 Hoover and a group of cronies used to begin each day by tossing medicine balls at each other in the White House . Hoover and his cronies began each day with medicine balls in the Oval Office . Hoover used to toss medicine balls to each other during the day .
 The conviction of Capone was regarded as one of the few accomplishments of his administration . Capone's conviction of the crime syndler was regarded one of his few accomplishments .
 It was not as if Kennedy had decided to go after the mob and the Teamsters out of abstract prejudice . Kennedy was not going after mob and Teamsters for abstract prejudice, he said .
 The Rackets Committee had dug up a mass of concrete information on lawbreaking . The Racket Committee dug up the information about lawbreaking.
 The targets may have received disproportionate attention in the Department of Justice . The targets of the Justice Department may have gotten disproportionate attention . The department has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Suspects received due process in the courts, says CNN.com . But selectivity is inescapable in any situation of limited resources, he says .
 If there were, remedy lay in the larger constellation of forces outside the courtroom . "If there were any problems, there would be," he says .
 The methods that sent Capone and Hoffa to prison achieved useful social results that might not have been achieved otherwise . Capone's methods helped achieve useful social benefits that might have been avoided otherwise, say experts .
 When those methods are abused by unscrupulous prosecutors, other forces must act . The courts, the legislature, the press, public opinion must act, to restore balance, says Julian Zelizer .
 The criticism of his pursuit of Hoffa baffled and dismayed Robert Kennedy . But it was part of the process that kept that pursuit from creating precedents by which his successors could use less defensible methods against less deserving targets .
 Robert Kennedy said he stayed awake nights worrying about civil rights before he became Attorney General . Robert Kennedy was Attorney General of the late 1960s .
 He had always acted with impetuous decency when racial discrimination forced itself on his attention . He had acted impetuously decency when faced with racial discrimination, he said .
 He did not see racial injustice as the urgent American problem, as the contradiction, now at last intolerable, between the theory and the practice of the republic, he says . He says .
 After the collapse of Reconstruction, ex-slaves and their descendants had been consigned to legal and social inferiority . They were forgotten by the courts, by Congress, by Presidents. The ex-slavers were forgotten .
 In the 1930s Franklin Roosevelt did more for black Americans than any President since Lincoln . Roosevelt switched black political allegiance from the Republican to the Democratic party .
 President Barack Obama's first term in office began with aid to the dispossessed . He did it initially by government appointments, White House hospitality and other symbolic gestures .
 Roosevelt sponsored a direct if limited attack, through the Fair Employment Practices Committee, on the structure of segregation . It was not until A Philip Randolph, the leading black trade unionist, threatened a march on Washington that Roosevelt sponsored the attack .
 With legislative branch hostile, civil rights movement turned to the courts . After 1952, after 1952, the executive was indifferent to the issue .
 The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People challenged the constitutionality of segregation in a series of suits . Many argued by Thurgood Marshall, a leading black lawyer, against segregation .
 Under Chief Justice Earl Warren’s leadership, the Supreme Court began to fill the void in the constitutional process . The Supreme Court is now taking steps to fill it .
 The 1957 Civil Rights Act, strengthened by a second act in 1960, was intended to secure southern blacks the right to vote . It was the first act of its kind since 1964 .
 White Democratic politicians accord racial justice the highest priority . But the laws were weak, and Eisenhower's Department of Justice applied them with deliberate lethargy .
 In the middle fifties Adlai Stevenson contemplated an appeal to black leaders for a year’s ‘moratorium’ on agitation . Stevenson, the liberal hero, had actually contemplated a year-long ban on agitation in the 1950s .
 It took presidential politics to involve them with the movement, says President Obama . But it took a long time to get them to think intensively about the problem .
 Many things can be done by a stroke of the Presidential pen,'’”—an executive order ending discrimination in housing, for example. ‘Many things can’t be done with a stroke,’s President Obama says .
 Wofford doubted that Congress would pass civil rights legislation in the near future . He said he was sure that the legislation already passed had not been fully used .
 John Hannah, chairman of the Civil Rights Commission, gave Kennedy a series of recommendations in February . The recommendations are relying on executive authority .
 They faced each other gloomily and sat through intervals of painful silence . The pair sat in painful silence for the longest time possible .
 Kennedy wondered whether he would ever be able to communicate with Marshall Marshall . Kennedy wondered if he could ever be communicating with Marshall .
 The next problem was getting him through the Senate Judiciary Committee . The next step is getting him to the Senate .
 Kennedy went to Chairman Eastland’s office and said, “I have Mr Marshall outside who is going to be head of our Civil Rights Division. | thought you'd like to meet him.” Kennedy met Marshall outside .
 AS Kennedy recorded the story in his journal, “Eastland snorted and said. Eastland snorting and said, ‘Eastland said. “ Eastland . snorted.” AS Kennedy said .
 Eastland said he wouldn’t hold Marshall’s appointment up but he wanted it understood that he was going to vote against him . Eastland: "I won't hold Marshall's appointment up, but I will vote against it"
 "It was the first time that either one of us had been involved directly ... with the way that the segregation system worked in practice, and how difficult it was going to be," she says . She says it was "the first time" that either she or her husband had been directly
 Kennedy was impressed by Marshall’s precise mind, incorruptible character, dry humor and intense moral conviction . Kennedy was quickly impressed by the self-effacing Marshall's precise mind . Kennedy: "I’m impressed by his precise mind"
 There ‘was no one on whose judgment he relied more during the rest of his life. There ’ was no one . on whose judgement he . relied more than anyone else, he said .
 Robert kennady was not learned in the intricacies of civil rights . His brother, Robert, had debated these questions in the Senate . Robert was less learned in civil rights intricacies .
 Nicholas Katzenbach recalls taking the executive order establishing the President’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity out to Hickory Hill one evening in February 1961 .
 As Katzenbach started to explain, the President cut in with questions that he could not have answered himself had he not been studying the problem for a week .
 Robert said to his brother, “1 don’t Know why the hell | sign this thing and give it to you’s.”
 Kennedy called for “thorough integration” of all Justice’s offices, north and south . At his first staff meeting in February, Kennedy stressed the importance of example .
 In short order, the Department had many more black lawyers than ever in history . The department was flooded with lawyers from African-American backgrounds .
 The same belief in the necessity of example led him to challenge the Metropolitan Club, which refused to admit blacks even as guests for luncheon .
 A major problem in voting rights cases had been the difficulty in finding witnesses willing to testify against the system of exclusion and intimidation . Voting rights cases have been a problem in the past for years .
 FBI has given little or no priority to requests for investigation by the Civil Rights Division . The civil rights division has asked for an investigation into the civil rights abuses .
 The result, he said, was only to enrage ‘vociferous minority groups” when the Bureau failed to produce immediate results . The result was to anger minority groups, the Bureau said .
 In 1948 Joseph Rauh asked Clark to have the FBI look into the attempted murder of Walter Reuther . Reuther was the leader of the U.S. Auto-Industry Workers' Union in Chicago .
 Southerners simply did not accept “mixed education” as the means “whereby the races can best be served.” S.Southerners didn't accept mixed education as a means of serving the races .
 As for the ‘crusade for integration, its leaders were threatening violence,’s leader was threatening violence . Its organizations were major targets for Communist infiltration, and its organizations were targets for infiltration .
 The tradition of cooperation with the local cops further set the Bureau against racial cases in the south .
 Hoover succeeded in withdrawing the FBI almost completely from civil rights investigations . For reasons of policy as well as prejudice, Hoover withdrew the FBI from civil race investigations .
 When Kennedy asked Hoover about black agents, the director replied virtuously that the Bureau did not catalogue its employees by race, creed or color . Hoover: "Bureau did not catalog itself by race or color"
 Kennedy said that Hoover’s answer was most commendable, but he still wanted to know how many black agents there were . Kennedy said he wanted to find out if there were any black agents in the FBI .
 Kennedy’s insistence caused an “uproar” in the Bureau, as William Sullivan remembered it, in the 1930s . Kennedy's insistence on the issue caused an "upsroar" in the bureau, Sullivan said .
 During the war he had made his chauffeur and office boy special agents in order to protect them from the draft . He had made them special agents during the war to protect himself from draft .
 None of the so-called black agents conducted real investigations or received retraining in Washington . Instead, they mostly served as drivers and drivers .
 President Kennedy instructed Hoover to begin hiring more agents . Five black agents out of five thousand were found in the White House .
 Doar began to supply them with elaborate questionnaires so that they would have no excuse for not coming back with the needed data . Doar supplied them with questionnaires to ensure they would come back with data .
 In March 1961 he sent over to Justice Hugo Black at the Supreme Court an editorial torn from an Alabama paper . The editorial was torn from the Alabama paper and published in March 1961 . The Supreme Court heard the editorial on March 4, 1961 .
 Griffin Bell, who had managed the Kennedy campaign in Georgia, accompanied Kennedy from the Atlanta airport to the university at Athens .
 He declared his personal belief in the Supreme Court’s decision on school desegregation . He declared he believes in the decision .
 He was “very sensitive,” Katzenbach remembered, “as to the explosive nature” of the situation . He was also ‘very sensitive” about the situation, she said .
 Kennedy also used his two southern assistant attorneys general . Ramsey Clark of Texas and Louis Oberdorfer of Alabama . John Seigenthaler of Tennessee also used .
 These men traveled about conferring with local educational officials in the fall of 1961 . The men traveled to prepare for the new wave of school desegregation .
 The Supreme Court’s law came on them as a threat to tradition, womanhood and social order . The law was passed by the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Southern blacks, awakening after so many years to their constitutional rights, were growing as militant for federal law as whites were for local custom . Southern blacks awakening to their rights, growing as much militant as whites .
 The negotiating approach underestimated both the intractability of the oldschool whites and the passion of the new-school blacks, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In December 1960 the Supreme Court had outlawed segregation in the terminals as well as in the trains and buses used in interstate transportation . The decision was made in December 1960 .
 James Farmer of the Congress of Racial Equality led a small party, black and white, on a journey to assert constitutional rights in southern bus stations . Gandhi's principles of nonresistance led the party to assert rights in bus stations in southern cities .
 Freedom Riders traveled through Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia with an occasional fracas and arrest but without major trouble . The Freedom Riders were the first Freedom Riders to travel through the U.S. without arrest .
 One Greyhound, one Trailways entered Alabama on a Greyhound tour of Alabama . The two dogs divided into two groups, one Greyhound and one Trailway . The dogs entered the state of Alabama on the tour .
 In Anniston, Alabama, a white mob burned one bus, boarded the second and beat up civil rights workers . The mob burned the bus and beat them up, beating them up and burning the bus .
 In Birmingham, members of the Ku Klux Klan, promised fifteen minutes of immunity by the police, set on the Riders with baseball bats, lead pipes and bicycle chains . Members of the KKK were set on by police in Birmingham .
 Gary Thomas Rowe, Jr., Jr., was an FBI informant in the Klan, had alerted his superiors . Rowe, a member of the KKK, was an informant for the FBI . Rowe was a Klan member . Rowe is a former FBI informant who worked for the Klan .
 In the White House, John Kennedy, preparing for meetings with de Gaulle and Khrushchev in Europe, thought the Riders an unnecessary burden . John Kennedy thought the riders were unnecessary burdens .
 The federal government had an obligation to protect travel in interstate commerce . Plainly, the federal government has a right to protect interstate commerce, the author says .
 Robert Kennedy sent John Seigenthaler to Birmingham, Alabama, to see what could be done . Robert Kennedy was impressed with the city's efforts to save the city from poverty .
 Seigenthaler found the beleaguered group, heads bloody and bandaged, still in the bus terminal in the city . The group was found in a bus terminal still in a bloody bus terminal .
 After long negotiations, Seigenthaler took them on a plane to New Orleans . The airlines had received bomb threats . After long . negotiations, the airlines had gotten bomb threats.
 Robert Kennedy asked for assurances of safe passage across the state . Acting on the principle of initial resort to local authority, Robert Kennedy said . Robert Kennedy was acting on principle of first resort .
 He assured Seigenthaler that Alabama could keep the peace without the Kennedys . He said the state could keep its peace with the Kennedy family .
 Floyd Mann, the state director of public safety and a man of courage, told Seigenthaler his troopers would protect the bus .
 No one could be found to drive the Greyhound bus to Montgomery and on to Mississippi . The bus was headed to Mississippi, but no one could drive it there .
 "Somebody better get in the damn bus and get it going and get these people on their way," the mayor says . "We're going to have to get these things on our way"
 Mr Cruit: 'I think that if some of your people would just sit down and think for a few minutes that somebody would be able to drive a bus 80 or 90 miles. I think that . somebody would ... think that someone would ... drive 80 or more miles. Mr C
 Floyd Mann’s state troopers escorted the group to the outskirts of Montgomery . The group was escorted by the state troopers .
 A menacing crowd, carrying chains and ax handles, surrounded the Montgomery terminal . The crowd was carrying chains, ax handles and chains from the airport .
 In Washington, Peter Maas saw Robert Kennedy immediately after he heard about Seigenthaler . Maas says he saw Kennedy after he learned of the death of the Nazi leader .
 Robert Kennedy sent in five hundred marshals with Byron White in command . Byron White was Byron White's first marshal in the May 21, 1963 . Robert Kennedy was in command of the marshals .
 Governor Patterson informed Kennedy that he and General Henry Graham of the Alabama National Guard could not guarantee King’s safety . Governor Patterson and General Graham told Kennedy that they couldn’t guarantee King's safety .
 White thereupon advised Kennedy to pull out the federal force, Patterson says . Patterson says White advised the president to pull the federal forces out .
 Fifteen hundred blacks gathered on Sunday evening to hear King at the First Baptist Church . King was the keynote speaker at the church .
 An angry white mob burned an automobile in front of the church and evidently meant to burn the church too . The mob was angry and apparently intended to burn an automobile .
 Even when the marshals arrived, it was a serious question whether they could hold the church . The marshals were called to the scene after the shooting .
 Military intervention was the last thing the Kennedys wanted, except that defiance of federal law and racial war were even worse . Military intervention is the first thing they wanted, but defiance of law and war were worse .
 Floyd Mann and a squad of state troopers and finally by the National Guard, the marshals drove the mob back . But, reinforced by the valiant Floyd Mann, the mob was back .
 The enraged whites did not disperse, however, and the blacks in the church dared not leave . "The enraged whites didn't disperse, but the blacks did not leave," the pastor says .
 Through the long night Kennedy was on the phone with Patterson and with King .
 "I’ve been four and a half years in the Army, and | know Gls like the back of my hand. I’m proud to be a soldier," he says . He says he's been in the U.S. Army for more than four years
 Confederate leader agreed to get the people in the church safely home . After an initial refusal, he agreed to take the people home safely . After initially refusing to go, the Confederate leader eventually agreed to help .
 He called Washington and said, “1 don’t know how to be a law enforcement officer.” He called D.C. police and said he didn't know what to do .
 James P Coleman, the former governor of Mississippi, warned Burke Marshall that his successor, Ross Barnett, could not be trusted and that the Riders would be killed before they reached Jackson .
 Eastland added that the Riders would be arrested as soon as they arrived in Jackson, Mississippi .
 "That is not going to have the slightest effect on what the government is going to do in this field or any other," he said . The government is not likely to change the law, he added .
 "The fact that they stay in jail is not going to have the slightest effect on me," she said . The fact that the jailing of them will not affect her life, she added .
 Perhaps it would help if students came down here by the hundreds of thousands, perhaps it would be easier for them to do so .
 You can determine what’s best just as well as | can, but don't make statements that sound like a threat . Don’t make statements like threats. You can decide what you’re doing just as good as you can. Don't make a threat.
 It is not tied to black supremacy or Communism but to the plight of the oppressed . It's not tied with black supremacy, Communism or Communism, it's to the people's plight . It is to help the oppressed, not to be tied to the status quo .
 You must understand that we’ve made no gains without pressure and | hope that pressure will always be moral, legal and peaceful . You must also understand that . pressure must also be moral and legal, peaceful .
 The problem won't be settled in Jackson, Mississippi, but by strong federal action . "Strong federal action" is needed to solve the problem, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The problem is not going to be solved in Jackson"
 Even before the Freedom Ride, he had suggested that the Interstate Commerce Commission act against segregation in terminals .
 Kennedy had responded that the ICC was an independent commission, not subject to presidential order . The ICC is notoriously slow-moving on its own .
 On May 29, nine days after the Montgomery mob tried to burn down the First Baptist Church, Kennedy asked the ICC to issue regulations ending segregation in interstate bus terminals . Kennedy, in a quite novel administrative step, asked that the ICC issue regulations .
 Kennedy’s negotiators set to work again, persuading local officials to take down WHiTE and NEGRO signs . Kennedy's negotiators will work again to convince local authorities to remove the signs .
 Jim Crow was soon banished from bus travel in McComb, Mississippi, and elsewhere .
 Marshall sent his own lawyers into the field and the courtroom . Voting rights cases had ordinarily been argued by local federal attorneys . Marshall's own lawyers were also involved in the case of voting rights cases .
 John Doar, a reticent man of great personal courage, led many of these expeditions into the south . Doar was a lanky, reticent and reticent leader of many of the expeditions .
 Kennedy may have thought that Eastland’s wink licensed this violation of his sanctuary . Kennedy thought that the wink from Eastland's wink would license this violation . Kennedy may not have thought this was a violation of the sanctuary .
 Doar’s lawyers concentrated on blacks, who were generally frightened by FBI agents, and the agents concentrated on whites, often frightened by Justice Department lawyers . In interviews, Doar's lawyers focused on blacks and whites .
 In the end, Kennedy’s Department of Justice brought fifty-seven voting suits, including thirty in Mississippi and one in Sunflower County . The suits were brought by the Justice Department .
 The Civil Rights Commission, though all for black enfranchisement, denied that it was a cure-all . The commission was all for blacks but denied it was an all-American solution .
 Its 1961 report, Burke Marshall complained, “went out of its way” to point to counties in the deep south where blacks registered freely with no discernible effect on the caste system . The report, then published by Burke Marshall, was published in 1961 .
 The administration did not believe such points invalidated the strategy . The administration does not believe the administration's strategy invalidated it .
 In June 1961, Robert Kennedy argued that voter registration would be far more productive than demonstrations . Kennedy met with representatives from King’s Southern Christian Leadership Conference and CORE .
 "The black leaders understood that the administration would provide protection," says President Obama . "They understood that they would be protected," says Obama .
 SNCC decided to join the C.C. campaign after heated debate between “direct action” and “voter registration” wings . SNCC joined the campaign in August after a heated debate .
 John Lewis, the Freedom Rider, is executive director of the Freedom Riders' Motorcycle Club . The Freedom Rider Museum is still going strong fifteen years later with John Lewis as executive director .
 In the rural south, the drive bogged down in white intimidation, black fear and apathy . In rural south the drive is bogged by white intimidation and fear .
 CORE worker: "It was action, as one worker put it, with widespread repercussions. And it was action" CORE workers: "We are not going to let it take a long time to get back on track"
 Lubell asked a Mississippi housewife to name the biggest problem in the country . Lubell asks a housewife what she thinks the country's biggest problem is . The Mississippi woman named the biggest problems in America .
 The civil rights activists had interpreted the administration’s assurance of cooperation as a promise of protection . The administration had said it would work with the Obama administration to protect civil rights .
 They felt betrayed when white sheriffs, policemen and good old boys struck back with apparent impunity . They felt bitterly betrayed when whites struck back on them, they said .
 In Itta Bena, Mississippi, in the summer of 1963, a night march to the house of a deputy sheriff to ask police protection for voter registration . The march took place in a bid to register voters for the first time since 1964 .
 The next day all over fourteen years old were peremptorily tried, convicted, fined and sent to prison for months on charges of disturbing the peace . All over 14-year-olds were sent to jail for months .
 In Clinton, Louisiana, twelve blacks wrote respectful letters to the mayor and district attorney . They asked for the establishment of a biracial committee to combat racial tensions . The committee was formed in response to the letters .
 A black walking down the street in Clarksdale, Mississippi, wearing a T-shirt with core on the front and FREEDOM Now on the back was arrested for parading without a permit . A black man was arrested after he was caught in the act of parading in violation of
 As activists went in increasing numbers into the deep south, as southern blacks asserted their rights with new vigor, local retaliation grew more atrocious .
 The rage of those who believed they were defending the Constitution became harder to contain or to answer . The rage became more intense and more difficult to contain for those who defended the Constitution .
 Under the federal system police power is reserved for local authorities . Police power in the United States is reserved by the federal government .
 The national government could intervene only when, as Robert Kennedy said, there was a specific and clear “federal responsibility”’—as when Alabama failed to protect interstate travel or when local authorities defied federal court orders .
 Existing legislation does not provide sure footing for more general intervention . Nor did existing legislation provide sure grounds for more intervention, experts say .
 Sections 332334 of Title 10 of the United States Code permitted the President to send federal troops in case of a widespread breakdown of law and order . The President can use the power of the U.S. to send troops in the event of a nationwide breakdown .
 It was not a remedy for sporadic incidents of brutality by local police officials, police officials say . The incident is not a solution for the problem of police brutality, police say .
 Sections 241242, Title 18, of the Code had been enacted during Reconstruction to prevent the deprivation of civil rights . The sections were part of a plan to protect civil rights during Reconstruction .
 The first section required proof of conspiracy, the second of specific intent . But the first part required proof that the government intended to harm the nation .
 The Supreme Court had long since narrowed their scope and attenuated their force . The court has long since reduced the scope of the case .
 Burke Marshall sought to make it easier to initiate criminal prosecutions when local cops or mobs interfered with persons exercising constitutional rights in the cause of racial justice . He sought to change the law in order to prevent mobs from interfering with rights .
 He got the FBI to make investigations of alleged police brutality . He encouraged the filing of criminal informations to get around the reluctance of southern grand juries to return indictments .
 The Department of Justice in March 1962 sent up a bill that would have made forms of police brutality a federal crime . No one pressed the bill in Congress, and there were no committee hearings .
 The southern system of justice remains the most formidable obstacle to justice in the U.S. beyond infirmities in the law .
 In civil rights troubles, white police were more likely to arrest the victims than the leaders of mobs . White police were often more likely in the civil rights era to arrest people who were attacked by mobs .
 White juries rarely convicts white men charged with violating the rights of blacks . White men rarely convicted of violating civil rights in the U.S.
 White judges often imposed heavy bail or harsh sentences on civil rights workers while going easy on segregationists . Civil rights workers were subject to harsh sentences while segregationists were given harsh sentences .
 The rules of federal-state comity discouraged federal interference in state criminal proceedings . The rules were meant to discourage federal interference from state prosecutors .
 Marshall felt he could deploy limited manpower more profitably in voting than in protection cases . With only forty attorneys, Marshall decided to use voting as a voting tool .
 The marshals we have used are taken from duty in the service of papers, and the like, in many states . We have used marshals from many states, including the US, in the past .
 There is no substitute under the federal system for the failure of local law enforcement responsibility . The federal system is not a substitute for local authorities' responsibility .
 There is simply a vacuum, which can be filled only rarely, with extraordinary difficulty, at monumental expense, and in a totally unsatisfactory fashion . The vacuum can only be filled with difficulty and at enormous expense, says the author .
 "The law is quite clear that the federal government is not the policing authority," the mayor says . The law is "quite clear" that the government does not have the authority to police, he says .
 Justice Robert H Jackson had warned that “the establishment of the supremacy of the national over the local police authorities” could be a first step toward a totalitarian state . Only a few years before, Justice Jackson had . warned somberly that ‘establishing of the . supremacy
 There is no reason to believe that a national police force could easily overcome massive local opposition . Nor was there reason to think that the government could overcome massive opposition, he said .
 The federal balance had historically been the means by which a far-flung, diverse and turbulent nation had preserved a measure of cohesion . Federal balance was historically a means of preserving a farflung and diverse nation .
 He understood that this could have awful consequences too— above all, in cynicism about the power, or will, of law and government to achieve justice . Yet he understood that it could also have an awful consequences .
 His pessimism was mitigated only by his conviction that new local perceptions and new federal statutes might give the executive branch new opportunities, he said .
 The Department of Justice declined to do things each new year it had declined the year preceding . The Justice Department says it will continue to do the same things each year it declines to do again .
 Marshall’s suggestion that the question was one of political as well as of constitutional possibility . Marshall: "This confirmed Marshall's suggestion that . the question is one of . political and constitutional possibility," he said .
 President Kennedy would have accomplished much more if you had had a dictatorship during the period of time that President Kennedy was President . "You would have gotten ... all kinds of domestic legislation," he says .
 "We could have sent perhaps large numbers of people down to Mississippi and be able then to protect that group down there," says President Obama . "I could have ... protected that group," says Obama .
 Think that these matters should be decided over a long range of history, not on a temporary basis or under the stress of a particular crisis . But think that it comes back to haunt you at a later time .
 A generation rendered sensitive by Watergate to the case for constitutional process finds this view more persuasive than did did the men and women who went south in defense of elemental rights in the early 1960s .
 Robert Kennedy became almost as unpopular among civil rights workers as he was among segregationists . For a time, Kennedy was unpopular among those who opposed him . Kennedy was a hero of the civil rights movement, but he was not as popular as segregationist .
 Nothing lay more clearly within the field of executive initiative than good judicial appointments, says President Obama . Obama's appointment of a judge to the Supreme Court is a good example of judicial initiative .
 Robert Kennedy’s attorney generalship received more valid criticism than his early recommendations for the southern bench . Yet nothing in Robert Kennedy's attorney general's early recommendations received more criticism than he did .
 Every judicial nomination had to have to have the approval of the Senate Judiciary Committee . The committee also had to approve every judicial nomination .
 Chairman Eastland wished Kennedy’s first appointment to come from Mississippi . He wished, in addition, the appointee to be his college roommate, William Harold Cox .
 Administration thought it was essential to keep Eastland reasonably happy . With many more appointments coming up, the administration thought it essential .
 Cox on the bench bodes ill “for any litigation not keyed to the mores of 1861,” he says . Cox on a bench boded ill for any litigation ‘keyed to’s mores,’ he adds . Cox is a former
 He had not been associated with the Klan or the White Citizens Council . He was not associated with any of the Klan, but he was associated with it .
 He was the only judge, I think, that | had that kind of conversation with. He was a judge, | think . He was only judge that had that conversation with .
 Cox was nominated for district judgeships and Thurgood Marshall for the circuit court . Cox says he was "convinced that he was honest with me, and he wasn’'t"
 Up to that point only one Negro, William Hastie, had been appointed to the circuit court . Hastie was the first black man to be appointed to court .
 The famous story of Eastland’s remark to Robert Kennedy, “tell your brother that if he will give me Harold Cox | will give him the nigger”122— perhaps apocryphal, but was true in some vaguer sense .
 When Congress adjourned without acting on Marshall’s nomination, John Kennedy gave him a recess appointment . Marshall was appointed by President Kennedy after the recess appointment was given to him .
 In May 1962, a Judiciary subcommittee brooded over Marshall but rendered no report to the full committee . Marshall was the subject of several hearings before he died .
 Thurgood Marshall will be appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court . The Supreme Court has a history of racial discrimination .
 He denied Justice Department right to inspect public voting records in Mississippi county where no black had registered for 30 years . He also denied the Department of Justice right, granted in the 1960 Civil Rights Act, to inspect voting records .
 The Fifth Circuit covers the deep south from Florida to Texas . Cox was only one of the sour Kennedy appointments to the district courts of the Fifth Circuit .
 Administration senators proposed judges for their own states, especially for the district bench . Administration senators, according to firm tradition, proposed the judges for themselves .
 Southern senators were particularly in need of propitiation in 1961 . They held committee chairmanships vital to Kennedy’s program . Southern senators held committee chairships .
 None of the judges appointed was a segregationist on the public record, except for Elliott . Elliott was endorsed by the courageous liberal judge Elbert H Tuttle as well as black leaders in Georgia .
 A careful analysis of judges named by Eisenhower and Kennedy in the Fifth Circuit showed that each was responsible for five segregationists, Eisenhower for eight moderates and Kennedy for three . Eisenhower for two integrationists, Kennedy for eight integrationists and eight moderates .
 The selection of southern judges was one point at which the practice of the executive-action strategy fell considerably below the theory . Xl .
 The President in 1961 found the problems involved—legal, political, administrative, administrative more complex than he had anticipated in 1960 . The President found the . problems involved . more complex than the campaigner had anticipated .
 He decided to try first for a department of urban affairs . Then, he and Robert Kennedy walked the beach at Hyannis Port over Thanksgiving pondering the question .
 He intended to appoint Robert C Weaver, an eminent black economist, as secretary . He wanted to appoint an eminent economist, but he was not .
 Legislative leaders made it clear that Congress would not create the new department if he issued the housing order .
 The House Rules Committee, hating the idea of the first black cabinet member in history, killed the reorganization bill anyway . House rules committee killed the bill anyway.
 This was the congressional mood—and explains why there appeared no alternative to the executive-action route . This is the Congress mood .
 The President, recalling that the fatal phrase came from Harris Wofford, suggested that they be piled on his desk . The President suggested that the President, . recalling that . the . President, recalled that the . fatal phrase . came from . Harris .
 Civil rights groups wanted to extend order beyond housing affected by federal loans and guarantees . They wanted the order to cover housing financed by savings and loan associations and even banks .
 Democratic congressmen, including northern liberals, were apprehensive about the impact the order might have on the campaign . Northern liberals were also apprehensive .
 It proved neither the calamity predicted by opponents nor the blessing anticipated by advocates . The U.S. Supreme Court is expected to be the first major court to decide whether or not to allow it .
 Housing order raised an interesting question, little discussed at the time . The housing order raised the question, which is little discussed now .
 The civil rights leaders, seeking every road to equality, had no fear of the Presidency . They were no longer afraid of the White House .
 The constitutional objection was generally discounted in those years as a neoConfederate pretext . But the constitutional objections were generally discounted as neo-Confederates pretext .
 Imperial Presidency found it more impressive later . Perceptions sharpened by the Imperial Presidency were sharpened .
 Kennedy executive order forbade discrimination in government contractors . Kennedy also imposed on government contractors the requirement of “affirmative action” to assure equality in employment .
 President Kennedy asked Lyndon Johnson to serve as chairman of the new committee . Kennedy was desperate to find things for his Vice President to do, asked him to do so .
 Johnson, his intimate friend William S White reported, ‘privately flinched” from the assignment . Johnson feared that as a southerner he would be blamed if the committee were a bust .
 Johnson's civil rights record before 1957 had been deplorable but who was himself wholly lacking in racial bigotry and perhaps perceived political advantage in proving himself where he had previously been regarded with suspicion, accepted . Finally, Johnson accepted .
 Robert Troutman Jr. Jr. was a Kennedy lieutenant in 1960 . Troutman, Jr., had known young Joe Kennedy years before and had known him years before .
 Troutman’s contribution was Plans for Progress, a campaign to sign up firms in voluntary agreements to employ blacks . Troutman: "Plans for Progress" is a campaign for firms to agree voluntary agreements with blacks to employ them .
 Johnson resented Troutman’s access to the Kennedys as well as his initiative on a committee of which the Vice President was nominal head .
 Robert Kennedy lacked Troutman’s faith in voluntary action, but respected his organizational drive . Kennedy was impressed that a southerner, who still pronounced the word ‘Nigra, cared about equal rights .
 In 1962, Troutman, discouraged by Johnson’s attitude, retired to Atlanta . Troutman retired from baseball in 1962 . In 1962 he retired from the sport .
 After September 1962 the executive vice-chairman was Hobart Taylor, a black lawyer from Detroit, a Texan by birth and a longtime Johnson man . He was a longtime Texas Texan .
 Johnson and Taylor favored conciliation and cajolery . The executive order empowered the committee to conduct hearings, terminate contracts .
 Since the committee lacked statutory authorization, this caution was understandable . The committee was reluctant to approve the bill .
 Robert Kennedy and the successive Secretaries of Labor, Arthur Goldberg and Willard Wirtz, came to feel that the committee was badly run and that it was Johnson’s fault .
 It was mostly a public relations operation . It accomplished a good deal more than it had accomplished under Nixon . Nixon's administration was mostly public relations .
 The refusal to call for legislation, the failure to protect civil rights workers, the interminable litigation over voting rights, the southern judicial appointments, the prolonged postponement of the stroke of the pen, the delayed postponement . The movement was beginning to convince that good intentions were not solving
 Civil Rights Commission became a strong voice of concern . Within the government itself, the civil rights commission has voiced concern .
 The commission's authority was limited to investigation, including the holding of hearings, and recommendation . The commission’s authority is limited to investigating, and holding hearings .
 Under Eisenhower it had been a cautious and rather technical body, compiling information and proposing modest remedies . Under Eisenhower, it was a cautious body of sorts .
 The commission saw itself increasingly as a source of fresh ideas, moving out ahead and educating a larger public . When the new Department of Justice preempted the practical ground, the commission saw it as an educational resource .
 The commission had questioned the administration’s bet on voting litigation, arguing instead for an across-theboard attack on inequality through legislative as well as executive action .
 It campaigned vigorously for the housing order and for the attempt to broaden its coverage . The housing order was brought in by the Home Office .
 Father Theodore Hesburgh, the president of Notre Dame, was influential member of the group . Father Hesburgh was influential in Notre Dame .
 He wrote an addendum to the 1961 report demanding more protective intervention by the federal government . He therefore wrote a new addendum demanding more federal intervention .
 When the commission met with the President in 1961, an argument arose over the number of southern state universities that admitted blacks . The commission met in 1961 to discuss the issue .
 “They were ... thought that there were ... subjects that they could go into which perhaps would be helpful. Moreover, “they were . thought that they were ... perhaps helpful,” said the author of the book .
 Civil Rights Commission has had a better record of recommendations translated into statutes . The commission's recommendations have been translated into laws .
 The loyal Robert C Weaver sensed an ‘overcautiousness’ in the President . Weaver sensed a ‘trustiness’ with the President. Weaver sensed the President’s overconfidence . Weaver was a loyal supporter of President Obama .
 SNCC regarded John Kennedy as “quick-talking, double-dealing” and his voter registration drive as preparation for his reelection in 1964 . Those who dealt personally with the Kennedys could not share this bitterness .
 Something about them—their openness, interest, the alertness of their sympathy— redeemed the hesitancy of their policy and offered hope for the future . Something about the openness and interest of the people in the U.S. are redeeming their hesititancy .
 Dr. King was sure the nation was eager for bold leadership in civil rights . King's funeral was held in New York City, New York, on July 9, 2013 .
 Knowing they would encounter resistance on Capitol Hill, the Kennedys felt they had to row to their destination with muffled oars . Discerning no such national eagerness, doubting whether presidential exhortations could create an emotional urgency the white majority was resolved not to feel .
 Ross Barnett and George Wallace miscalculated the dynamism of a revolutionary movement . The KENNEDY CIVIL RIGHTS STRATEGY, however appropriate to the congressional mood of 1961, was not appropriate . Wallace and Wallace were both prominent figures in the civil rights movement .
 James Meredith applied on January 21, 1961, for admission to the all-white state university at Oxford, Mississippi . Meredith's spirit quickened by John Kennedy’s inaugural address, he applied .
 Meredith was a lonely, taciturn and quixotic man of courage and purpose . Meredith was lonely and taciturn, but also had purpose and courage . Meredith's funeral was held in New York City, New York .
 Robert Kennedy began a series of phone conversations with Barnett between September 15 and September 28 . Robert Kennedy now began to talk with Barnett .
 Everyone was in shirtsleeves except Nick Katzenbach, who sat saturninely in the background and said softly that he saw no reason to issue a Statement at that time . Everyone in the audience was wearing a shirt .
 Guthman added a quotation from the Mississippi Legislature in 1832 denouncing the interposition doctrine . Guthman had drafted a statement, to which he added a quote from the Legislature . The statement was added to the statement .
 The mixture of shirtsleeved casualism and soft voices was impressive . The mixture was impressive at the start of the campaign .
 In the end, Bob agreed with Nick about the statement, and it was deferred . "In the end of the conversation, Nick agreed with Bob," Bob said .
 Governor Barnett said he had been hit on the head by an airplane propellor last summer and had never been the same since . Barnett said Barnett was "genuinely loony" and that he regarded Barnett as genuinely loony . Barnett was hit by a propellor, Barnett said,
 We have been a part of the United States but | don’t know whether we are or not . We don't know if we are, or not. We've been here for more than a century .
 Must it be over one little boy --backed by communist front? Must be over a little boy—backed by NAACP which is a communist front?" he asks .
 As | told you, you are a citizen not only of the State of Mississippi but also of the United States. You are also a citizen of the state of Mississippi, Mississippi .
 He really did not wish to take on the federal government, and he liked to be liked . Though a doctrinaire segregationist, he really did .
 Barnett read a grandiloquent proclamation rejecting Meredith . Barnett then gave him an embossed document as a souvenir . Barnett read the proclamation to Meredith .
 Barnett proposed a show of force, federal marshals with their guns drawn, as a cover for his own retreat . Barnett: Federal marshals would draw their guns, but he wanted to retreat from the scene . Barnett says he was forced to retreat .
 Even Eastland thought this was ridiculous, but Kennedy was willing to try anything . Kennedy is willing to do anything, even if it's ridiculous .
 In Washington apprehension grew that federal marshals might not be enough . Federal marshals may be needed to protect the nation's capital .
 His consuming fear was a mini-civil war with Gls and Mississippians shooting each other down . His fear was that a civil war would break out between the two statesmen .
 On September 28, Robert Kennedy met with General Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Cyrus Vance, who had become Secretary of the Army two months before .
 Attorney General told me he understood better now how Hitler had taken over in Germany . Later that day, he said he understood now how he had taken control of Germany .
 The time had come to see whether Barnett's intervention could sway Barnett . The time is now when the time comes to see if his personal intervention can sway Barnett. The time has come to decide whether Barnett will be swayed .
 Early Saturday afternoon, September 29, | was summoned to the Oval Office . President Barack Obama was summoned by the White House to meet with the president .
 The Attorney General, Burke Marshall and Kenneth O'Donnell were with the President . The President was accompanied by Attorney General Burke Marshall .
 The President reported that Barnett had said, “Just tell ’em to cool off and you can sneak him in.” Barnett told the President that he could sneak him into the White House .
 At midnight Norbert Schlei of the Office of Legal Counsel came to the White House with a proclamation ordering persons obstructing justice in Mississippi to desist and disperse .
 Kennedy took Schlei into a small study on an upper floor, sat down at a table, turned on a lamp and read the documents . Kennedy sat down in a study on a table and read them in a small room .
 The theory of registration on Sunday was that few students would be around . The theory was that many students would not be around for registration .
 John Doar was with McShane and Meredith at the Millington Naval Air Station near Memphis, Tennessee . Doar says he was with them when they were in the U.S. Navy .
 Louis Oberdorfer and Joseph Dolan rehearsed for the federal marshals . The marshals were also rehearsing .
 On Sunday morning Kennedy asked Katzenbach whether he had any plans for the afternoon . Kennedy had asked him if he had plans for Sunday afternoon . He said he had no plans .
 Kennedy added an old football friend, strong as a bull and faithful in a pinch, Dean Markham . Kennedy added a new friend to his side in a bid to keep his place in the Premier League . Markham has been a key figure in England's most successful Premier League success .
 Harold Reis, an able lawyer in the Office of Legal Counsel, poked his head into the office . Reis was able to get back in touch with the White House with the House of Representatives .
 It was not till they were halfway to the Andrews Air Force Base that Reis learned where he was going . Reis was traveling with the Air Force when he found out he was in danger .
 Meredith arrived on campus flanked by McShane and Doar . Meredith called them "two of the bravest men | have ever known"
 After a time the state police, despite Katzenbach’s protestations, were withdrawn . The state police were withdrawn after a time .
 Katzenbach told the marshals, some hurt and bleeding, to protect themselves by discharging tear gas . Five minutes before the President went on the air in Washington, Katzenberg told the Marshals to use tear gas.
 In a while, the crash of bottles was punctuated by the crackle of bullets . In a bit of silence, bottles crashed into bottles and bullets were heard .
 Cyrus Vance, looking at the military timetable, promised the President quick action . Cyrus Vance: "The President promised to be quick action. Cyrus Vance is looking forward"
 When the summons arrived, the first group, according to the Army theory of riot control, was armed only with nightsticks . The first group was armed with only nightsticks, the theory says .
 John Kennedy, in between conversations with Barnett, called Vance and the Pentagon . John Kennedy called the Pentagon and Vance to discuss the situation .
 Vance, consulting his schedule, assured him that the troops were on their way . Vance: "The troops are on the way. They are on our way" Vance says, "I'm not going to be disappointed"
 "We’d call twenty minutes later, and they hadn’t even arrived to get ready to leave," says the author of the book . "We would call and wait for them to leave, but they would never leave," she says .
 The first helicopter went in the air and then circled and waited for the rest of the helicopters . The helicopter circled the sky and circled the other helicopters .
 They said they’d get there in two hours if | gave them the notice, but they didn’t arrive for five hours . The police say they were going to get there when they gave them notice .
 "It was so frustrating for the Army to continuously give false, wrong, inaccurate information," she said . "It's so frustrating that the Army continues to give false and wrong information"
 Robert recalls "the worst and harshest conversations" with Cy Vance and with the General that I think I’ve ever heard him . John Kennedy called Vance in the Pentagon, General Creighton Abrams in Memphis . As the hours dragged on, he called Vance and Abrams .
 At the airport, half a mile away, the field commander waited for his whole force to disembark and fall in before moving . The field commander, operating by the book, waited until the whole force had disembarked before moving.
 The Army and daybreak brought a melancholy quiet to the embattled campus . The Army was the Army and the Army .
 Meredith doggedly pursued his destiny in the face of harassment by loutish classmates . Meredith was harassed by bullies at her high school in New Jersey . Meredith says she is proud of her efforts to be a successful student .
 Their assumption in 1961 was that unreasonable problems would yield reason and law . Their assumption was that they would yield reasoning and law, they said . They assumed that unreasonable issues would yield the same result .
 Ole Miss showed them how stubborn, Savage, deeply rooted the problems were . Savage: "Ole Miss showed us how stubborn and stubborn Ole Miss is"
 I’m coming to believe that Thaddeus Stevens was right. I had always been taught to regard him as a man of vicious bias. I'm coming to . believe that he was right, and I'm not sure what I thought of him .
 They were men endowed by a bitter ancestral history of their own with a conviction of the precariousness of social forms in face of the bloodiness of human existence .
 "If survival were the issue, far better to use force in support of law than to accept violence in defiance of law," he says .
 This was the way that most Americans, including many white southerners, perceived the battle of Ole Miss . The battle was fought at Ole Miss in 1877 .
 Instead of breaking out into the open plains of progress, the movement remains constricted and confined . Yet the movement, instead of breaking . out, it remains constrict and confined, says the author .
 His message to Congress enumerated in ringing language the costs of racial discrimination . His message was to Congress: "We are not going to tolerate discrimination"
 The proposals gravely disappointed the civil rights leadership, but nothing serious about fair employment, school desegregation, public accommodations or federal protection for civil rights workers . But on the whole the proposals are gravely disappointing, the author says .
 A tacit alliance, they decided, had developed between the administration and the movement . They decided a tacit alliance had developed with the administration .
 If the movement could create a public demand, the administration would respond, the White House would respond . The administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Robert Kennedy urged King not to force the issue while the horrible Connor was still in power . Kennedy: King should not force King to end the war .
 Released on bond after eight days, he led the campaign into a new phase . He was released on bond eight days after being released from jail .
 Connor’s cops retaliated with nightsticks, pressure fire hoses, growling police dogs and growling dogs . Connor's cops also used nightsticks and pressure hoses in the fight .
 On May 4 newspapers across the land ran appalling photographs of the dogs, teeth bared, lunging viciously at the marchers . Newspapers across the country ran appalling photos of the animals .
 Attorney General sent Burke Marshall and Joseph Dolan to Birmingham, Alabama . Attorney General Burke Marshall sent two men to Birmingham .
 King initially feared Marshall had been sent to urge a cooling-off period . King subsequently acknowledged “initial misgivings” fearing Marshall was sending to urge cooling off period .
 Marshall met around the clock with everybody, listening endlessly, talking quietly, forever seeking common ground . Marshall met everyone in the U.S. to find common ground in the United States .
 King tried to show the whites that King was not intending revolution; all he wanted was recognition of “what was right and what was unfair” King wanted recognition of what was wrong and unfair .
 A week of marathon negotiations produced an agreement on a measure of desegregation and black employment . The agreement was reached after a week of negotiations .
 The Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, another black leader, prepared to lead the marchers back into the streets . The Rev. Fred Shutlesworth led the march .
 When they got through talking, things, you Know, were pretty much resolved . But when they were talking, they were pretty sure things were resolved .
 Segregationists bombed the house of King’s brother and the motel where the civil rights leaders had their headquarters . That night segregationists bombed King's brother's house and motel .
 In savage response angry blacks streamed down the streets, throwing rocks, breaking windows, burning shops and attacking police officers . Angry blacks even attacked police officers in savage response .
 Birmingham convinced Kennedy that the next great battlefield for racial justice lay in the cities . Birmingham convinced him that the city was the next battlefield for justice . Kennedy: "The next great battle for racial equality lay in cities. cities"
 Baldwin and Kennedy had met the year before at the White House dinner for Nobel Prize laureates . Baldwin had met Kennedy a year before . Baldwin was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964 . Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 Baldwin was a brilliant, passionate, sensitive, dramatic man . Baldwin was imbued with a conviction of utter hopelessness about the black fate in white society . Baldwin's life was inextricably intertwined with the black, white American society .
 Baldwin proposed that Baldwin assemble a group with thoughts about the northern ghetto . Baldwin suggested that Baldwin assembled a group of thoughts about northern ghetto thoughts . Baldwin said that Baldwin should be invited to discuss northern ghetto ideas .
 Baldwin, acting on short notice, made an effort to enlist experts on the northern city, like Kenneth B Clark, the social psychologist, Edwin C Berry of the Chicago Urban League and Clarence B Jones, an attorney for Martin Luther King .
 Baldwin called “this sociology and economics jazz” was not his métier . Baldwin called it ‘sociology and economics’ and ‘economy and sociology’ was not Baldwin’métier. Baldwin was known for his work in the field
 Jerome Smith "set the tone of the meeting because he stammers when he’s upset and he stammered when he talked to Bobby and said that he was nauseated by the necessity of being in that room," Baldwin says .
 Attorney General says being in the same room with Robert Kennedy made him feel like throwing up . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Attorney General: Being in the room with Kennedy made me feel like I threw up .
 We were the reasonable, responsible, mature representatives of the black community. We were reasonable and responsible representatives of black community, he says . We were, he said, "reasonable, responsible"
 Lorraine Hansberry said: ‘You've got a great many very, very accomplished people in this room, Mr Attorney General.’
 "Bobby got redder and redder, and in a sense accused Jerome of treason, you know, or something of that sort," he said . Bobby got red, red, and accused Jerome, "of treason," he added .
 Jerome says he wants to see his son's reaction to the incident . "Everybody move in to protect Jerome and confirm his feelings. Well, that made everybody move in," he says .
 You could not encompass his anger, his fury, in a set of statistics, nor could Mr Belafonte and Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in a series of statistics . Dr. King's anger could not be summed up in statistics .
 She talked wildly about giving guns to Negroes in the street so they could start killing white people, she said . She also talked about giving blacks guns in the streets to start killing whites .
 Kennedy said his grandparents had encountered discrimination and now, two generations later, his brother was President . Kennedy said, as he had before, that his grandparents encountered discrimination . He said, "A Negro would be President within forty years"
 Baldwin replied furiously, “Your family has been here for three generations.” Baldwin replied . Baldwin replied angrily, ‘Your family is here,’ he said . Baldwin responded angrily, saying: “You have been here three generations."
 Kennedy, who privately agreed, passed the question to Burke Marshall, who said that “special men" from the Civil Rights Division went into areas where the Bureau seemed delinquent . Kennedy privately agreed .
 It went on for three hours, then suddenly stopped, out of sheer exhaustion . "It went on three hours," she said, "then suddenly stopped"
 Clarence Jones, King’s lawyer, drew Kennedy aside and said, “I just want to say that Dr. Dr. King's life is over,” he said . Clarence Jones: “Dr. King is a man of honor and humanity .
 Kennedy said, “You watched these people attack me over Birmingham for forty minutes, and you didn’t say a word.” Kennedy said . Kennedy said he watched the people attack him over Birmingham, and he didn't say anything .
 Harry Belafonte had tried to smooth things over earlier by mentioning to the group the hospitality he had enjoyed at Hickory Hill . After a time, he had fallen into uncomfortable silence .
 You can't talk to them the way you can talk to Martin Luther King or Roy Wilkins . You can’t talk to MLK or Wilkins the same way you would talk to Roy or Martin Wilkins.
 It was all emotion, hysteria—they stood up and orated—they cursed—some of them wept and left the room’s room .
 He was interested in policy, policy, the blacks, Clark and Berry apart, in witness . He was looking at policy and policy, and the blacks .
 What Clark called the “excruciating sense of impasse”82 seemed inevitable . Clark called it an “incident” that seemed inevitable.
 He began, | believe, to grasp as from the inside of the nature of black anguish . He began to grasp, . believe, as from . the inside, he began, . to grasp the . nature of . black anguish, he says .
 To complete the Birmingham settlement, he had to get King’s demonstrators out of jail . King's demonstrators were freed from jail .
 He called on his old UAW friends, Walter Reuther, Jack Conway and Joseph Rauh, and $160,000 in bail money was rapidly on its way . Reuther called on Reuther and Conway to help pay bail money for his arrest .
 For two years he had heard from Lyndon Johnson’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity bland reassurances about the steady increase of blacks in government jobs . He had been told by the committee that black jobs had increased .
 Only 15 of the 2000 federal employees in Birmingham, Alabama, were black . That's less than 1 percent in a city that was 37 percent black . The committee meets for the first time since November .
 At the committee’s next meeting, twenty days later, the Attorney General was on the warpath . The Attorney General is now suing the Department of Justice .
 NASA had contracts of $3. billion and, Kennedy discovered, only one and a half men in Washington working on equal employment . Kennedy discovered that NASA contracts were worth more than $3 billion . Kennedy: Only one and half men were in Washington at equal employment.
 KENNEDY: 'I asked how many people you have got in your program and you said one and a half men. You said that one and half men'
 Wess. | would like to have you take enough time to see precisely what we do. Wess . would like a . have you taken enough time . to see exactly what we . do.
 KENNEDY. ‘I don’t think | am able to get the answers, to tell you the truth,’ he said .
 Johnson, obviously angry, slumped grimly in his chair, his eyes half closed . Johnson was clearly angry and slumped grim in his seat .
 It brought tensions between Johnson and Kennedy right out on the table and very hard . "It brought tensions out of the table," says Kennedy . "Tensions between Kennedy and Johnson were very hard"
 Webb made the Vice President look like a fraud and shut Hobart Taylor up completely . And then finally, after finally humiliating Webb, he got up .
 "One of the great problems has been the fact that this committee has not really accomplished what ... the press releases would indicate that it had," says Burke . Burke, Bill Wirtz and | have had to take with a great deal of care, he says .
 Johnson was furious several weeks ago with Bill Wirtz and fora while it appeared that he would never talk to him . Johnson was so furious that he was never talking to him again . Johnson: "I was so angry that I was able to get back in touch with him"
 This was all because Bill Wirtz had given some statistics on the number of government contractors who had no Negro employees . This was the result of a debate over whether or not the government contractors had no African-Americans .
 An ambitious and cocky politician named George Wallace had been elected governor . Wallace was elected governor of South Carolina in 1953 . Wallace died of a heart attack at the hands of a soldier .
 During his campaign he had promised to place himself in the doorway of any schoolhouse under court order to admit blacks . He also promised to stand in front of the door at any school under court orders to admit black .
 On his inauguration in January 1963 he noted that he was standing where Jefferson Davis had stood when he became president of the Confederate States of America . Now, “from this Cradle of the Confederacy, this very heart of the great Anglo-Saxon Southland.,... | draw the
 On May 21 the federal district court ruled that the university must admit the black applicant to its summer session . The federal court ruled on May 21 that the school must admit a black applicant .
 Attorney General had already begun preparations to prevent Tuscaloosa from becoming another Oxford .
 The university’s president and board of trustees were ready to comply with the court order . The university's president and trustees were prepared to comply, the university says .
 The administration now seeks to rally Alabama business leaders in a campaign to dissuade Wallace from defiance . The administration sought to rally business leaders against Wallace's defiance .
 On April 25, Kennedy, Marshall and Guthman arrived at the state capitol . Kennedy, accompanied by Marshall, Guthman, visited the capitol on April 25 . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to go to the Capitol"
 State troopers, their steel helmets painted with Confederate flags, surrounded the building . State troopers also painted Confederate flags on their helmets .
 "There is no time in my judgment when we would be ready for it in my lifetime," says President Obama . "There would be no time" when the U.S. was ready for such an event, he says .
 Kennedy reiterates duty to uphold the Constitution . Wallace reiterates his determination not to submit to federal tyranny . Wallace hopes as he went to trap Kennedy into damaging admission .
 Wallace said it looked as if the matter would wind up in court . Wallace said the matter was likely to wind up going to court . After a time Wallace said he was unsure whether the case would go to court again .
 Governor: "We have a responsibility to insure that the integrity of the courts is maintained...and all of the force behind the Federal Government will be used to that end"
 "If it is necessary you are going to bring troops into Alabama. That is what you are telling me today," says President Obama .
 Wallace caught the personal thrust of Kennedy’s last remark and fell into a trap himself . Wallace: “I’m not sure what happened to me. I’ve got a lot of respect for the president,” Wallace said .
 Kennedy replied that he expected the court order would be obeyed . Kennedy: "You would not use—” Kennedy said .
 Kennedy objected, rallied, evaded Wallace’s snare and returned the conversation to the question of the supremacy of law . Kennedy objected .
 Kennedy observed that the very people who objected to Negroes working in downtown stores had Negroes serving their tables at home . Kennedy said people objected to black people working at downtown stores .
 Wallace said that the problem in Birmingham was that “faker” Martin Luther King . Wallace said the problem was that King was a ‘faker,’ he said .
 Wallace could face a substantial sentence if he violates the court order in a substantial way . The federal judge warned Wallace’s lawyers that, if Wallace violated the order, he would receive a substantial prison sentence . Wallace's lawyers say he's not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 The Attorney General also contemplated the immediate federalization of the Alabama National Guard .
 In the early morning, Kennedy and Katzenbach worked out a final plan over the phone . Kennedy: "I'm not going to go to jail. I'm going to jail"
 Katzenbach would escort the students to the university, leave them in his car and drive them to dormitories . Doar told them to “dress as if you were going to church,” John Doar said .
 It would also permit the Justice Department to avoid arresting him for contempt because the students would not be physically present . The Justice Department would also be able to avoid arrest he would be arrested for contempt .
 If Wallace persisted in obstruction, then federalize the Guard; but leave the onus for that on Wallace . If Wallace persists in obstruction he should be federalized, he says .
 Katzenbach arrived and began the long walk under the broiling Alabama sun to the registration building . He arrived at the end of the day .
 He sent word to Katzenbach through the National Guard commander that there would be no problem . He just wanted a chance to say something; he just wanted to talk .
 Katzenbach stood incongruously behind a lectern, a microphone draped around his neck . Now, he awaited Katzenach, who was standing behind the podium .
 White semicircles painted in the doorway indicated where Wallace should stand in order to look his best on television . This irritated Katzenbach, who felt the situation was sufficiently theatrical already .
 Katzenbach began by saying he had a presidential proclamation commanding Wallace to cease and desist from unlawful obstructions . Wallace had been ordered to cease, desist, from unlawful obstruction . Wallace was arrested in 1968 .
 Wallace stepped aside when students appeared again for registration in the afternoon . Wallace stepped down when the students showed up for registration . Wallace is the only person to step down from the position .
 The president did not block the enrollment of a third black student at the university’s branch in Huntsville, Alabama . Nor did he block two days later of the enrollment two days after that .
 Wallace had lost because of the appeal to respectable opinion in the state, Kennedy thought later . Wallace lost because he appealed to respectable opinions, Kennedy later said . Wallace's loss was due to the appeal of respectable opinion .
 If he had received great popular support in the state ... standing in the door, continuing to stand in, he would have done . "I think that’s what I would have been," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 At the end of the long day, Robert Kennedy scrawled notes to his children . Robert Kennedy wrote notes to children during the day .
 On the night of Wallace’s capitulation John Kennedy delivered a television address to the nation . Martin Luther King on the night Wallace capitulated: ‘I am a man of God’
 It was a response not alone to Birmingham and Tuscaloosa but to an entire springtime of gathering outrage and atrocity . The white postman from Baltimore murdered on a ‘freedom walk’ in Alabama; black demonstrators in Mississippi slugged, stomped on and then arrested
 The President, deeply disturbed, decided the time had come to assert leadership and appeal to the nation . The President decided to speak to the people in the wake of the crisis .
 For most of the next day he and Robert were on the telephone discussing developments in Tuscaloosa . The next day they discussed developments in the state .
 The Attorney General and Burke Marshall met the President and Sorensen in the cabinet room before the telecast .
 Five minutes before the President went on the air Sorensen returned with most of a draft . No peroration, however, was given .
 Its power came too from its unusual sense of identification with the victims of segregation . Its power also came from its identification of those who suffered from segregation .
 Let the white American contemplate the plight of his black fellow citizen, Kennedy said . Kennedy said, "Let's white American" contemplate his fellow citizen's plight .
 The time had come, he said, “for this Nation to fulfill its promise” of freedom . The time is now come to fulfill the promise of freedom, he added .
 Medgar Evers was shot down in front of his house in Mississippi in 1963 . Medgar was shot by a white man who killed him in Mississippi .
 There was trouble in Cambridge, Maryland, where a black protest movement and the local authorities were in bloody collision . The local authorities and the protesters clashed with each other .
 In Prince Edward County, Virginia, there had been no public education at all since 1959 . The local board of supervisors preferred to close schools rather than integrate them .
 In 1961 the Department of Justice had sought a judicial order requiring the county to reopen the schools; but the case had progressed glacially in the courts . In 1961, Justice sought an order requiring that the schools reopen .
 In February 1963 John Kennedy told his brother that some way must be found in the meantime to educate the black children . John Kennedy said in February 1963 that the government must find a way to educate black children in America .
 Vanden Heuvel worked out a plan for a private operation called the Prince Edward Free School Association . The school will be run by a private organization called the PEDF Association .
 Free Schools even attracted a handful of white children . Highly qualified teachers coming in from outside .
 In May 1964, the Supreme Court ordered Prince Edward County to reopen its public schools . The decision was made in response to a petition filed by the governor of Prince Edward .
 The militants of racial justice continued to condemn the Attorney General for not doing enough . Attorney General's office has not done enough to address the issue .
 Kennedy spoke to an angry demonstration in front of the Department of Justice . A few days after Medgar Evers' murder, Kennedy spoke at a demonstration . Kennedy: "I'm not going to let it go. I'm going to do it"
 Someone shouted that they hadn’t seen many Negroes come out of the building . ‘I’m not surprised,’ the man shouted back .
 With all the smiles and all the graciousness of Dick Russell and Herman Talmadge...none of them really made any effort to counter this . None of the smiles, all the . graciousness, of the graciouss of Dick . Russell and . Herman Taladge and Jim East
 Bull Connor and George Wallace had made civil rights a legislative possibility . Wallace and Connor had made it possible for civil rights to be enacted in the U.S.
 President felt he would lose control over an increasingly dangerous situation unless he exerted leadership . The blacks were in the streets, moreover, and the president felt he'd lose control .
 O'Donnell and O'Brien also opposed civil rights legislation, fearing it would wreck the rest of the administration's program . But they feared civil rights reform would wreck their program .
 The discrimination in department stores and lunch counters, against which Martin Luther King had launched his protest, violated no federal statute . King's protest was against department stores, lunch counters . The discrimination was not a violation of a federal law .
 The moment had arrived, the Kennedys felt, to make equal access to places of public accommodation a matter of law . The moment has arrived to make equality of public places of accommodation a law, they said .
 The drafters considered and ultimately abandoned the idea of total school integration . They settled instead on a provision authorizing the Attorney General to sue for desegregation .
 As for federal funds used in discriminatory state or local activities, they originally supposed that withholding would be too much for Congress . The government originally intended to withhold funds from state and local governments .
 The House of Representatives added it to the bill after finding general support for such a provision . The bill is expected to be voted into law this week .
 Kennedy finally endorsed fair-employmentpractices legislation in his message, but not put it in the bill . Kennedy finally decided to endorse fair employment practices legislation . Kennedy: Fair-employment practices legislation is not in the legislation .
 John Kennedy sent Burke Marshall to see him, unable to decipher his warily delphic utterances in meetings . The Kennedy administration was unable to understand Marshall's words .
 Johnson at first filiobustered, reminiscing at length about the way he had found jobs for Negroes when he worked for the National Youth Administration in Texas during the depression .
 Johnson, a little disgruntled, said he had asked for fifteen minutes alone with the President on the bill . Johnson said he wanted to be alone with Obama .
 He said that so little had been done to prepare the country for civil rights . He said this, not because he opposed civil rights legislation, but because so little was done for it .
 John Kennedy himself somewhat shared this pessimism, but saw no alternative except to go ahead . John Kennedy was disappointed with the outcome of the Vietnam War .
 "There’s obviously a revolution within a revolution in the Negro leadership," he said . "There was a revolution" in the leadership of the Negro, he added .
 We could see the direction of Martin Luther King going away from him to some of these younger people, who had no belief or confidence in the system of government...and thought ... that the way to deal with the problem is to start arming the young Negroes and sending them into the streets
 He and Marshall talked to all the members of Congress they could find . Together he and Marshall called all the congressmen and women in Washington, DC .
 He proposed that the President invite influential groups to the White House—lawyers, educators, clergymen, businessmen, labor leaders, hotel, restaurant and theater owners . He proposed inviting influential groups of influential people to White House .
 Some in the White House continued to think John Kennedy should not get so personally identified with the fight . John Kennedy was killed in the Vietnam War in June 1968 .
 Bayard Rustin, the talented black organizer, had called on A Philip Randolph, the president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters . Randolph was the leader of the Sleeping Car Workers' Brotherhood . Rustin had called for Randolph's resignation .
 Rustin proposed a new march on Washington . Randolph’s 1941 victory in threatening a march on D.C. and getting the wartime FEPC in exchange . Rustin: "The march is not a march to Washington"
 The Kennedys were about as enthusiastic over a march on Washington as Roosevelt had been twenty-two years before . The Kenneseses were enthusiastic about the march on D.C. as Roosevelt was in the 1930s .
 "It seemed to be a great mistake to announce a march on Washington before the bill was even in committee," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says the bill is in committee but the bill has not yet been approved .
 The blacks were already in the streets; better that they march under nonviolent leadership . If the march were called off, they might turn to new and desperate leaders . The march was called off .
 "A good many programs | care about may go down the drain as a result of this," says President Obama . "We are putting a lot on the line," says Obama. "A lot of programs we care about are at risk"
 President Obama says he has his own problems with Congress; you have yours with your own groups . What is important is that we preserve confidence in the good faith of each other, he says .
 John Kennedy talked to Walter Reuther, who shared the concern that an allblack march might lose votes on the Hill . Reuther was concerned that the march would lose votes in the House .
 Reuther brought in white leaders, the churches and the labor movement . Reuther proceeded to bring in leaders from the church and labor movement. Reuther then brought in other leaders .
 Jack Conway, now back with the UAW, served as his representative in the planning sessions . Jack Conway is now back in the U.S. and served as a U.W. representative .
 Robert Kennedy, following his principle that a good man could do anything, gave the charge to John Douglas . Douglas was the newly appointed assistant attorney general for the Civil Division . Douglas is a former Justice Department official .
 The list included route and timetable, sound system and security forces, food, soft drinks (in paper cups) and toilet facilities . Nearly seventy-five items included route, timetable, and sound system .
 Douglas group, meeting twice a day in Justice, kept its hand as invisible as possible . The Douglas group met twice daily in Justice .
 Remembering Birmingham, D.C. police forbade police to include police-dog units in riot-control precautions .
 Jerry Bruno, the king of advance men, worked out the platform arrangements . Jerry Bruno worked with the team to create the platform arrangement .
 If less than 100,000 came out, he told me, it might persuade legislators that the demand for civil rights legislation was exaggerated . He told me it might convince them that the need for legislation was not exaggerated .
 There were tense last-minute negotiations in the small office behind Lincoln’s statue in the Memorial . Burke Marshall spoke to Reuther, and there were tense final negotiations .
 What they did effectuated rather than betrayed the intentions of the planners, of Roy Wilkins and Whitney Young, says Whitney Young . "They did effectuate rather than betray their intentions," she says .
 The revolutionaries of course wanted to go further than the respectables . The revolutionaries were revolutionaries of the day .
 It marked the effective, and no doubt inevitable, end of white and black collaboration in the mass movement for racial justice . Yet, it also marked the end of the white-black collaboration in racial justice.
 Thereafter the movement took its own course under black leadership, assumed new forms and passions, said the author . Thereafter, thereafter, "thereafter, they took their own course," said author .
 Among those who viewed the March on Washington with particular loathing was J Edgar Hoover . Hoover was one of those who saw the march with loathing .
 FBI under Robert Kennedy’s pressure had finally entered the struggle for racial justice . Hoover's personal feelings about blacks had not abated. Hoover's feelings about black had never abated .
 He redoubled his determination to discredit the Kennedy administration if it persisted in its alliance with Martin Luther King . As if in compensation for the ground he had been forced to give on civil rights, he redoupled his determination .
 The Communist party had failed ‘dismally’ in its forty-year effort to influence the American Negro, an FBI official wrote . The march took place in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 A memorandum pointed out that less than two hundred Communists were planning to take part in the march . A subsequent memorandum pointed to the fact that fewer than 200 Communists planned to participate .
 Communists were having an ‘infinitesimal” effect on blacks, he said . They suggested, he noted sarcastically, that they were having a ‘ininiteimal’ effect on the blacks .
 Fidel Castro's Cuba memories are "vividly,” he wrote Sullivan, “of those | received when Castro took over Cuba . They'reminded him ‘vivid .ly’ of those he received when he took over, Sullivan wrote .
 Hoover stopped speaking to Hoover for several weeks . Hoover and Hoover confined themselves to written exchanges for weeks . The two men exchanged written exchanges . Hoover stopped talking to Hoover .
 Sullivan has no doubt he must provide the director the words he wanted to hear . Sullivan had no doubt Sullivan would provide the . words he . needed to hear.
 Sullivan confessed error and affirmed his leader’s infallibility, Sullivan said . Sounding for all the world like a Communist caught in some wretched deviation, Sullivan admitted error . Sullivan said, "I'm not a Communist. I'm a Republican"
 In January 1962 he told the Attorney General that a leading King adviser was a Communist . He told the attorney general that a top King adviser had a Communist background .
 In May he put King on the list of people to be rounded up in event of a national emergency . King was put on the government's list of those rounded up .
 You will recall that | have furnished you during the past few months substantial information concerning the close relationship between King and Levison .
 A confidential source who has furnished reliable information in the past advised on April 16, 1962, that Levison is forming in King’s name an organization to be known as the Ghandi Society for Human Rights .
 Harry Belafonte...and A Philip Randolph are involved in the formation of the organization . The group was formed in the 1960s and '60s .
 A few days later, the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee subpoenaed Levison and interrogated him in executive session . Hoover had been tipped off by Hoover, and the committee subpoenaed him .
 He challenged the committee’s right to inquire into political beliefs and thereafter took the Fifth Amendment . He went on, however, with the leftist attorney William Kunstler at his side, to challenge the committee .
 He did so, he later explained, because he feared the session would turn into an attack on King . He later explained that he did so because he did not want the session to turn into a speech .
 Levison helped supply King’s administrative deficiencies . Tactful and self-effacing, Levison was a key figure in the King administration .
 Soon he was donating much of his time to the SCLC, raising money, trying to straighten out the internal finances, writing King’s formal addresses, contributing legal passages to his articles and books .
 This was one of his executive assistants, a young black named Hunter Pitts O’Dell, whom Hoover also declared to be a member of the national committee . Hoover declared O'Dell as a national committee member, Hoover declared him a member .
 In October 1962 the Bureau leaked incriminating material about O’Dell to southern newspapers . The Bureau leaked the material to newspapers across the country .
 No incriminating material was leaked on Levison, except the general allegations to the Internal Security Subcommittee . Levison was charged with espionage, but was not charged with any wrongdoing .
 They simply took Hoover’s word that Levison was a secret party muckamuck . Levison is a secret muck-amuck, but Hoover's word was that he had a secret affair .
 Internal subversion was the Bureau's undisputed field of expertise . However, the Bureau was hopeless in organized crime and civil rights . Internal subverted was its undisputed expertise .
 Levison's appearance before the Senate committee was hardly reassuring . Levison’s appearance before a Senate committee is hardly reassuring. Levison has been accused of corruption in the past .
 At Hoover's request, Kennedy authorized a national-security wiretap on Levison’s office telephone in March 1962 and on his home telephone in November . Kennedy authorized the wiretap in November 1962 .
 The Bureau also planted a microphone in Levison’s office, though as usual without telling the Attorney General . Levison's office was also planted by the Bureau without telling him .
 The wiretaps on Levison’s phones produced no evidence of Communist deviltry . But this only showed, the Bureau replied, what a truly secret muckamuck he was. Levison was a muck-amuck .
 "They decided that he must be warned for his own protection and for the protection of the movement. Accordingly they decided ... they decided to warn him," he said .
 Nothing would play more effectively into the hands of white supremacists than proof that Martin Luther King was under Communist control . The King was assassinated in 1968 .
 Belafonte, supposing that Levison was under consideration for a government appointment, gave a warm endorsement of Levison's appointment .
 King said he did not like to accuse people who volunteered to help the cause . King said associates could change neither his will nor his movement's policies .
 Once the Kennedys decided to go all-out for civil rights legislation, Levison was no longer just a King problem . Levison died at the age of 92 in 1968, but he was a national hero .
 Kennedy directed Burke Marshall to find out what the hard evidence against Levison was . Kennedy directed Marshall to look at Levison's case .
 He had worked with them in the Henry Wallace and anti-McCarthy campaigns . He had also worked with the Wallace and McCarthy campaigns .
 He was, in fact, a goodhearted and undiscriminating liberal of the type for whom there was no enemy to the left . He was the type of a liberal who had no enemies to him .
 Levison had fallen under the suspicion of the Bureau because he believed a business acquaintance under FBI investigation had tried to ingratiate himself with the Bureau by denouncing Levison . Levison later came to believe that the FBI had been investigating Levison's business dealings with him .
 Levison had criticized the CPUSA on the ground of Communist neglect of civil rights . Early in 1963, it had even reported that Levison criticized the Communist Party .
 The Bureau advised Eastland that Levison was in fact a key figure in the Soviet intelligence apparatus in the U.S. Eastland's questions before the Senate committee were answered .
 It would have been an act of gross bureaucratic imperialism for the FBI to invade CIA territory and run an agent in Moscow . The FBI should not have invaded CIA territory .
 CIA counterintelligence later came to regard Fedora as a double agent under KGB control . Fedora was a member of the KGB-controlled Communist Party in Moscow .
 If this were so, then the KGB may have collaborated with the FBI in setting up Levison . Both agencies may have wanted to discredit King and destroy his alliance with Kennedy .
 Hoover was prepared to say anything to make others accept what he so urgently believed the truth . Or perhaps Hoover had simply got it into his head that Levison was a Communist .
 Hoover’s earlier portrait of Levison as a top party functionary is difficult to reconcile with . Hoover's earlier portrait was difficult to reconcilate .
 Marshall, whose sptecialty was civil rights, not Communist espionage, understandably believed the FBI story . Marshall's civil rights were civil rights .
 Kennedy administration was staking its future on the integrity of the civil rights movement . King adviser Stanley Levison was a top Soviet intelligence operative, King's adviser .
 On June 22, after meeting with the civil rights leaders, John Kennedy invited King to stroll in the Rose Garden outside the Oval Office . King's visit to the White House was the first time he was invited by the president .
 Kennedy began by saying that Eastland and others were denouncing the March on Washington as a Communist trick . King later told Andrew Young that Kennedy began to say that the march on Washington was an anti-Communist trick . Kennedy began (so King later later told Young)
 The fall of the British Secretary of State for War had dominated the spring headlines . It was the first time the British secretary of state for war had resigned .
 Macmillan is likely to lose his government because he has been loyal to a friend . He will lose his job because he is loyal to his friend, writes David Cameron .
 King wrote O’Dell in ten days making his temporary resignation permanent . King wrote the resignation letter in 10 days . O'Dell's resignation was permanent .
 Marshall was discussing a civil rights case at a New Orleans courthouse . They met at the federal courthouse in New Orleans, where Marshall was speaking .
 Marshall walked Young around the corridors and told him that the FBI considered Levison a Soviet spy . Marshall told Young that Levison was considered a spy by the FBI .
 The President said there was “no evidence” to show that any civil rights leaders were Communists or that the demonstrations were Communist inspired . The President in his July 17 press conference said there were “No evidence’ to show’s ‘evidence” that any
 He had directed Sullivan to push Attorney General's office on wiretaps for King . Sullivan had been faithfully pushing for the wiretaps, he says .
 Marshall: "It would not be responsible for ... the Attorney General to refuse a tap” on the American leader . Marshall: If Levison was indeed a top Soviet agent, then it would not have been responsible for the U.S. to refuse to tap .
 Hoover had vast power to do damage to King, to civil rights bill, to the Kennedys . Hoover was still sacrosanct, but Hoover had great power to damage King . Hoover had power to harm King, the civil rights .
 In the short run, Hoover had only to leak to the Hill and the right-wing press . Hoover leaked the details of the White House's investigation into the CIA .
 In the longer run, he could do to John Kennedy what he had done to Truman ten years before over the case of Harry Dexter White . He could tell a congressional committee that a President had deliberately ignored his solemn warnings and had thereby endangered the republic .
 If Robert Kennedy refused a tap on King and anything went wrong, Hoover would have a field day . Hoover would be in charge if he tried to tap on the King .
 Kennedy raised the possibility of “technical coverage” on King . Kennedy also suggested that the King case be covered in "technical coverage" on the radio .
 King decided that his promise to drop Levison had been a mistake, and they resumed telephonic communication . Hoover joyously passed on to Kennedy, who commented acidly that if that report reached the Hill, he would be impeached .
 Kennedy had a natural desire to find out whether this renewal of association would hurt the common cause . Kennedy wanted to know if it would help the cause of the war .
 Kennedy finally consented, stipulating that all the King taps be evaluated “at the end of thirty days” and that the question of continuing the surveillance be decided then . Kennedy: “The King taps” should be evaluated at end of 30 days . The King taps
 FBI maintained taps on King’s home phone till mid-1965, on SCLC phones for even longer, on Levison and at least one other King associate . At least twenty-one microphone installations were installed in King's hotel and motel rooms . The FBI kept taps on
 The Attorney General failed to terminate the taps after November 22, 1963 . What was less excusable, if understandable, was the failure of the Attorney General .
 Neither King nor Levison held the taps against the Kennedys in this particular context . Though outsiders have condemned the taps as indefensible in any context, neither King nor, for a matter, Levison, did .
 John Kennedy had personally warned King about FBI surveillance . Kennedy had warned King that FBI surveillance was being used against him . King was assassinated in 1968 .
 It's hard to remember back then, but when you were anxious about your life, civil liberties seemed a tertiary consideration . Civil liberties seemed to be a secondary consideration in the 1960s .
 King declined to endorse John Kennedy in 1960 and remained opposed in principle to the idea of endorsing presidential candidates . King had declined in principle .
 "They were so committed to our movement, they couldn’t possibly risk what could have been a terrible political scandal," she said . "They couldn't possibly risk a terrible scandal," the woman said .
 Hoover directed that the resulting top-secret “monograph’s” be sent around the government . The Bureau had expanded its dissertation on King, and in October Hoover directed it to be sent .
 "This memorandum may startle the Attorney General, particularly in view of his past association with King," the DOJ says .
 Hoover, sensing Kennedy’s rage, quickly agreed that the document be recalled . Hoover agreed to recall the document . Hoover was the only person in charge of the White House .
 Some white friends explained it in psychological terms as an unconscious attempt to prove himself as virile as his father . White friends said it was a psychological effort to prove he was virile like his father.
 Black friends stressed the importance of machismo, the affirmation of masculinity, among subjugated peoples . They recalled the historic obligations of evangelical preachers in the south to women of the congregations .
 Those who worked with King accepted this as an expression of both a cultural tradition and a demonstrative temperament . King's temperament was accepted as a sign of respect for the country's culture .
 After the March on Washington, King relaxed in his suite at the Willard Hotel with friends of both sexes . After the exertions and triumphs, King had relaxed in the suite .
 The FBI was quite capable of planting the bug itself, but this has not been proved . This is not the case, but the FBI has been accused of planting it .
 The results of the August séance accounted for the zeal with which the Bureau bugged King’s hotel rooms in the future . In any event, the results of it accounted for .
 Robert Kennedy was genuinely shocked by the revelations but did not feel that King’s private life had anything to do with his probity as a public leader . Robert Kennedy felt that King's private life was not a matter of politics .
 Hoover abominated sex in general and regarded interracial sex in particular as evidence of moral degeneracy . Hoover considered interracial sexual relations to be a form of moral degradation .
 King, it appeared, was not only subversive but depraved, a more frightening menace than ever . King appeared to be more frightening and depraved than ever. King was a depraved menace, more frightening than ever, says King .
 Sullivan, still trying to redeem himself, called a meeting on the King problem . Sullivan called the meeting to discuss the King issue .
 The Bureau expended much of its energy, it must be said, on singularly inane objectives . The Bureau is trying to stop King’s honorary degrees, the publication of his articles and meetings with British leaders after he won the Nobel Prize .
 Hoover ordered Sullivan to prepare a composite tape, culling high spots from Washington, San Francisco and Los Angeles . Sullivan had to mail it to Mrs. King, who refused to comply .
 Hoover: If the marriage broke up, this would diminish King’s stature . Hoover reasoned that if it did, it would diminish the stature of King . Hoover: King's marriage would diminish his stature .
 King had asked for tapes of his speeches; and the FBI tape had been added to the pile . King's speeches have been recorded in the past . King asked for the FBI to add the FBI tapes to his speeches .
 Katzenbach and Marshall thereupon flew to President Johnson's Texas ranch on November 28 . President Johnson died at the age of 92 .
 Senator Richard Russell of Georgia asked the Justice Department what the rumors were all about . Senator Russell: The Justice Department is investigating the allegations .
 When Katzenbach briefed him, he “just wasn’t interested; wondered why | was wasting his time.” He said he was “wasting his time” when he briefed him .
 Others felt disclosure would destroy King’s ‘image,’ especially among his white supporters . Others felt that disclosure would also destroy King's "image, especially among white supporters"
 Clark felt the time had come when love and conciliation were not enough . The others laughed, but Clark felt it was not enough. Clark said: "Love and conciliatory is not enough"
 Most of the meeting consisted of a monologue by Hoover on the Bureau’s marvelous record in the south . Hoover's monologue was a speech from the Bureau of Investigation . Hoover: "Most of the time was spent in the South"
 The FBI excised this sentiment before they passed the transcript on to Hoover, fearing his rage . Hoover feared Hoover would be angry at the FBI . Hoover was angry at Hoover, but the FBI was able to pass the transcript away .
 Robert Kennedy told the Senate Commerce Committee on July 1, 1963, “The United States is dominated by white people, politically and economically.” Robert Kennedy said the U.S. is “dominated by white . people’s political and economic .
 The question is whether we, in this position of dominance, are going to have not the charity but the wisdom to stop penalizing our fellow citizens . Our only fault or sin is that they were born .
 The Judiciary Committee added a fair-employment-practices provision and strengthened the bill in other particulars . John McCormack, now Speaker after Rayburn’s death, predicted an FEPC could pass the House .
 John Kennedy doubted whether Republicans would go along with any bill that contained what he wanted . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I want. I'm sure I'm going to get it"
 William McCulloch of Ohio is the ranking Republican on the House Judiciary Committee . McCulloch is a man of principle and a key ally in the fight for the GOP .
 In mid-October the President called the House leaders to the White House . President Obama met with House leaders in October . The White House has been criticized for its handling of the issue .
 The Attorney General thought that the President’s eloquence had swept Halleck along, “that finally he nodded his head in assent,” he said . “He had given his word, so he didn’t want to go back on his word
 The Judiciary Committee’s constitutional sage was the charming and formidable Sam Ervin . Ervin was an authentic expert, save that his Constitution stopped with the ten amendments adopted in 1789 . He appeared to regard the rest, especially the Fourteenth and Fifteenth, as apocrypha
 For nine days between July and September, the Attorney General was the administration witness . The Attorney General testified before the Supreme Court .
 The only thing you have a right to ask of me is that | stand and fight for the Constitution, and that is what | am doing now. The only question is that you have to stand and . fight for your right to vote for your country, he says .
 KENNEDY. | asked you whether, in your judgment, any discrimination existed in the State of Mississippi against Negroes .
 KENNEDY. 'I would say, Senator, | have a lawyer here who could take you down into some of these places and maybe your eyes would be opened,' he said . Senator John McCain: 'I'm not scared. I'm scared'
 For the Attorney General, life had taken racial justice out of the middle distance . For the attorney general, it was life taking racial justice from the distance .
 Civil rights had displaced organized crime as the issue of law enforcement closest to his heart . Civil rights was the issue he was most concerned about .
 The more you learn about how Negroes were treated in the South... the madder you became . The more we learn about the treatment of Negroes the more we learned about how they were treated .
 When Victor Navasky asked Marshall to measure the rise in Kennedy’s civil rights consciousness, Marshall shot his right arm up toward the sky . Marshall: "The rise in civil rights awareness in Kennedy's life was a huge leap"
 Robert Kennedy: "I am getting out of all political activities as fast as | can" Robert Kennedy said in his first interview as Attorney General .
 Robert Kennedy shielded his department from partisan politics . Robert Kennedy himself kept a vigilant eye on party affairs .
 J Edgar Hoover assured the press and the House Un-American Activities Committee that Corbin had been a Communist . Hoover's actions offended Hoover, who assured the media and the U.S. Committee that he was not a Communist.
 Attorney General "seems to have gone completely overboard" in trying to defend Corbin . Attorney General, Courtney Evans, told the Bureau, “se seems to be completely overboard’s .
 John Kennedy could never understand why his brother valued Corbin, and Kenneth O’Donnell detested him . John Kennedy never understood why he valued his brother .
 He sniffed truculently around, smelled graft, some fancied, much real, and eventually uncovered highly dubious goings-on lower down in the national committee itself . Kennedy’s regard for him and producing a schism in the Irish Mafia, he says .
 He telephoned in person or sent word through his staff about certain appointments of postmasters and rural letter carriers . He also sent word to rural postmasters about appointments .
 Adlai Stevenson was not one of his favorites at best at best . Among those whom he nagged relentlessly was the former New York mayor .
 Lawrence O’Brien’s staff called me (I served as liaison between the President and Stevenson) and said the Montero appointment had to be stopped . Stevenson disagreed but consented to look into the matter . O'Brien's staff said the appointment had been stopped .
 Montero was hired by the UN mission on the insistent and repeated request of Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy's repeated request to hire him was denied .
 On another occasion the White House politicos opposed an appointment for James MacGregor Burns, the Williams political scientist, on the ground of his seditious activities as an antiorganization Democrat in Massachusetts .
 The President instantly took the matter up, called in Kenny and said he could see no reason why Burns should not receive an appointment . The President said Burns should be given a permanent appointment .
 The same day | received a memo from Bobby saying that there was no tenable objection to Jim’s appointment . ‘The same day,’ received . a memo saying that . there were no . tenable objections to Jim,” said Bobby .
 Joseph Kennedy is the son of the man who reintroduced Joseph Kennedy to Franklin D Roosevelt thirty years before . He took dynastic satisfaction in appointing him to the post . Joseph Kennedy was reintroduced to FDR thirty years earlier .
 In 1962 he thought Morgenthau, who had rapidly proved himself a first-class public servant, might be a good candidate for governor . In 1962, he thought he might be running for governor in Ohio .
 Kennedy persuaded Buckley to switch from Frank O’Connor to Morgenthau . Buckley was the candidate of the old school, but was the Democratic candidate of old school .
 The major family political enterprise in 1962 was the election of Edward Kennedy to the Senate from Massachusetts . Edward Kennedy was elected to the U.S. Senate .
 If it were left up to he probably would have run for Attorney General,” he said . “If it was left up for him,’s probably would’ve run for an elective office in Massachusetts .
 The two brothers discussed the debate as they tossed a football on the lawn . The debate was first aired on CNN.com Live .
 Robert answered, “If you get that question, tell them about public service," he said . Robert answered the question, "If you want to be a public servant, please do it"
 Ancient resentment of the Kennedys among Irish pols mingled with wrath at Edward’s presumption in the intellectual community . Ancient resentment was mated with anger at Edward's presumption .
 Bobby in Hyannis Port wishes Mark Howe would endorse Mark Howe in similar terms for November . Eddie McCormack’s performance in the primaries was a big plus for Mark Howe .
 Action or success make them suspicious; and they almost lose interest . I think that’s why so many of them think that Adlai Stevenson is the second coming. I’m not sure why they think that .
 George McGovern was thinking of trying again for the Senate . McGovern had been Food for Peace director . He was an effective interlude as Food for peace director .
 When McGovern came down with hepatitis in the midst of his campaign, Robert sent Ethel out to South Dakota . Robert sent her out to help when McGovern got hepatitis .
 We had maximum coverage on television, radio and the press, and she was gay and hopeful.... | never knew until later that she was four or five months pregnant at that time .
 For a year they were sending names to the Hill at the rate of nearly ten a month . For the year, they sent names to Congress at a rate of about 10 a month. For the last year, the number of names they sent to the Senate was nearly ten .
 Robert Kennedy took his responsibility conscientiously, but had one small problem . Robert Kennedy had a small problem: He had to take responsibility for Kennedy's death .
 The ABA had insinuated itself into the appointing process during the Eisenhower administration . It didn't want to risk its position now by giving too much offense . Nor did the ABA, having insinuated themselves into the appointment process during Eisenhower administration, want to .
 In the end, 6. percent of Kennedy’s judges failed the ABA test . In the other case, 5. percent failed the test, compared to 6.1 percent of Eisenhower’ .
 Sometimes senators had interests contrary to the administration’s interests; “and this is where the struggle takes place.” “This is where, in this case, the struggles takes place,” he said . Sometimes senators are trying to influence the administration, he said
 Kerr was essential to the success of the administration’s tax proposals . Since the doughtily reactionary Harry Byrd of Virginia was chairman of the Senate, he was essential . Kerr was a key figure in the tax reform effort .
 He was an imperious figure, generally accounted, after the departure of Lyndon Johnson, the most powerful and ruthless man in the Senate . He was generally accounted for after the . departure of . Lyndon Johnson .
 Luther L Bohanon, an Oklahoma friend, has been named district judge . Now he wants Luther L. Bohananon, a friend of his, to be named a district judge in Oklahoma .
 The President asked the secretary to the Senate, Bobby Baker, to find out from Kerr what the problem was . The president asked Baker to investigate Kerr's actions .
 It sounds terrible... you stand fast on principle, and Kerr doesn't get his judge, and you don't get any tax legislation . Kerr doesn’t get his tax legislation, he says . Kerr says: 'It sounds terrible. It sounds like it sounds terrible'
 So Bohanon became a judge, not too bad, at least on civil rights . He turned out, to general surprise, to be a good judge .
 Kennedy asked Ramsey Clark, another Hughes backer, to explain in three minutes why she should be nominated . Kennedy asked Clark to explain three minutes of his three minutes on the matter .
 She has served twenty-six years on the bench and has been a good judge . She has also been a judge for more than 20 years .
 Women live longer than men, so if you want to be scientific about it, give her the benefit of the doubt . Second, women live longer, so it's OK to say 'yes'
 Reynaldo B Garzaa was given a "qualified" rating by the committee . The committee agreed to give him the rating after a talk with Kennedy .
 The ambassador hated to harass his sons to find out what they were up to . Instead, he had come to rely on reports from Morrissey . Morrissey was the ambassador's son .
 Morrissey was not without his subtleties and decencies, but the sons had come to see him almost as their father’s spy . They did not expect for a moment that his appointment would elevate the federal judiciary .
 McGeorge Bundy, who was present, remarked that this was one more sign Morrissey’s appointment would cause unnecessary trouble . Bundy said it was another sign that Morrissey would cause trouble .
 KennedyKennedy's record in the circuit and district courts was in the main excellent. Except for the disastrous southern judges, the Kennedy Kennedy record was excellent .
 The others he was perfectly satisfied to leave to other people's judgment, and he would ask only occasional questions about them . The others were left to others' judgment, he said .
 Hastie was appointed by Truman in 1949 as the first black circuit court judge . Hastie, a Harvard Law School graduate, had proved himself steady and able .
 The President called in Clark Clifford, who after observing that the judiciary had been Truman’s great failure, exhorted Kennedy to make only distinguished appointments . Clark Clifford: "The judiciary was a great failure. It was the judiciary's great failure"
 Kennedy said Hastie's record was “reasonably good’ but not great” for the sake of having a Negro . Hastie’s record was "reasonably . good" Kennedy said it would be a mistake for him to reach out just to put a Negro
 "If you were going to consider the five or six best judges of the Circuit Court, you’d put him there," he said . "You’re going to be considered among the best judges in the circuit court," he added .
 Katzenbach asked President whether there would be a problem if he named a second Jew with Frankfurter still on the Court . President asked if he could name a Jew in the same way as Frankfurters .
 The President, wishing to forestall the request, now proposed appointing Byron White at once . Byron White was appointed by the President of the United States .
 Attorney General characteristically said that White was no mere professor or scholar but had actually seen ‘life’ in the Navy, in private practice, in politics, even on the football field. Make the point .
 White left Justice, with Katzenbach taking his place as deputy attorney general . White left the Justice Department in January, with his successor taking the post .
 John Kennedy asked if Frankfurter would resign if he and the President could agree on a successor . Kennedy later asked Kennedy what he had replied to the Justice's biographer .
 Archie Cox made the point that Archie Cox had come to work for the Administration and had done a fine job while Paul Freund had refused the position of Solicitor General . We discussed who might replace him and he thought about putting him on .
 Archie Cox thought that Archie Cox deserved the appointment more than Paul Freund . Archie Cox was appointed as the new president of the United States .
 Arthur Goldberg thought if a Jew was placed on the Court it should be Arthur Goldberg . Goldberg thought it was very difficult to part with him. We talked about the necessity of putting a Jew on.
 Arthur Goldberg could handle labor and management in a way that could hardly be equalled by anyone else . Goldberg's only reservation was that he was so valuable to the Administration, he said . Goldberg was a key figure in the Administration .
 A major factor in giving up the services of Arthur Goldberg was the necessity of replacing Frankfurter with a Jew .
 The President said that Mike Feldman (of the White House Staff) indicated clearly that the various Jewish organizations would be upset if this appointment did not go to a person of the Jewish faith . The president said the appointment will be made to a Jewish person .
 Frankfurter must have regretted his refusal of Kennedy’s earlier proposal . Kennedy's proposal would have been the first of his kind .
 Carl McGowan is a judge of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals . He was sworn in as a judge at the swearing-in of the D.C. Supreme Court .
 He sat in his wheelchair and spoke fluently and coherently, though not very relevantly, for about twenty minutes . "He sat in a wheelchair and talked fluently, coherently," he said .
 The Justice did not mention McGowan and showed every sign of being able to go on for hours, a restiveness crept over the courtroom .
 People passed notes, and finally Joe Rauh leaned over and suggested that perhaps he had talked long enough . People passed him notes, but he was eventually asked to leave the stage .
 The Justice said cheerfully — and loudly — “I may be Joe Rauh’s judge, but he is not my lawyer”—and continued. The Justice continued. He said, “He is not a lawyer. He is a judge .
 Something happened to his microphone and though he went on talking, no one could hear him . Finally something happened to him and he could no longer talk .
 Judge Bazelon said, “Mr Justice, Mr Justice, your power has gone'""—a terrifying metaphor, given the occasion . Judge said, "Mr Justice" and "Mr. Justice"
 Tony Lewis considered it a great tragedy for the Justice to expose himself in his rambling and garrulous old age . Tony Lewis said it was a tragedy for Mr Lewis to reveal himself .
 This supposed right, born in response to the irresponsible requisitions of Joe McCarthy, received in 1957 the name of ‘executive privilege’ and thereafter acquired with mysterious rapidity the status of ancient and hallowed constitutional doctrine . The supposed right was born in . response to . the
 Congressman Porter Hardy tried to get records relating to foreign aid program in Peru . Hardy was chairman of a House Subcommittee on Foreign Operations and Monetary Affairs .
 When Kennedy came in, the State Department renewed the Eisenhower directive . The directive was renewed when Kennedy came into office .
 On March 10, 1961, Hardy dropped a letter of complaint at the White House . Hardy dropped it at the President's residence in Washington, D.C.
 Secretary of State Rusk promised delivery of the documents . Three days later Secretary Rusk said the documents would be delivered .
 At the next hearing, State Department witnesses showed up with a letter from Rusk forbidding them to testify . Rusk also forbidding State Department officials to testify at the hearing . The State Department says the letter is a violation of the law .
 The Department’s legal adviser hastily withdrew the Rusk letter, asking Hardy to ""treat it as though it had not been sent,” and transmitted the documents . The legal adviser then withdrew the letter and asked Hardy to treat it as if it had been sent .
 The White House has suggested that the Department of Justice make the information available to Congress . The Justice Department has not responded to any questions raised by the White House .
 The White House says it's important to have a check and balance in the executive branch of government . President Obama says he will continue to use Executive privilege .
 The group that can best check and insure that it is handling its affairs properly is the Congress of the U.S. Congress . Congress is the best check-and-assurance group to check and ensure that it's handling affairs properly .
 "We will lean over backwards to make sure that they get the information they request. So we will lean . over backwards," she says .
 There were cases where withholding had a serious point; but these, Robert Kennedy felt, were the rarest exceptions . Kennedy: "There were cases of withholding that had serious points, but these were the exceptions"
 In February 1962, a Senate committee demanded to know by name which Pentagon officials had deleted warlike passages from speeches by fireeating generals and admirals . The committee was on an expedition of harassment .
 The memorandum acknowledged the “great appeal” of the Eisenhower principle for the executive branch . It is not enough to assert “managerial responsibility” without at the same time weighing the needs of Congress for the information withheld .
 The internal advice rule is designed to protect subordinate officials from Congressional criticism . But it often has the effect of protecting those whom we claim to be responsible .
 Justice recommended an explicit presidential declaration that the use of the privilege in this single case “is not to be regarded as precedent for its invocation in other circumstances where Congressional questioning of subordinate officials has more justification in bringing out relevant information .
 The State Department again withheld documents from Congress about Angola . Porter Hardy says he really believes in executive responsibility to supply information to Congress .
 Within an hour after the question was raised in a press conference, Hardy received the records . Hardy received records within an hour of raising the question .
 Department of Justice lawyers watched to see what the Attorney General would do . Attorney General's office watched as Attorney General decided to make the decision .
 President asked Seigenthaler whether his brother planned to indict Vincent Keogh . President asked his brother whether he would indict Keogh, Seagenthaler said .
 Kennedy put the Eisenhower holdover, William Hundley, in charge . Kennedy put him in charge of the decision . Kennedy's decision was made clear politics would not affect his decision .
 Hundley says government evidence was credible and Keogh took the money . Keogh was found guilty of taking the money from Keogh in 2010 .
 It appeared that Chacharis had received over $200,000 in payoffs and failed to report them in his tax returns . It appeared he had received more than $100,000 .
 There was no evidence that Chacharis had used the money for himself; he had faithfully plowed it back into his political organization . He evidently did not suppose he had done anything wrong .
 Congressman Ray Madden of Gary, a powerful figure in the House, brought Chacharis to see the Attorney General . Congressman Madden is a key member of the House of Representatives .
 Madden reminded Kennedy that Chacharis, a Greek immigrant who had come up the hard way, had been the driving force for John Kennedy in Indiana when Kennedy needed help . Madden: "Chacharis was the driver force for JFK in Indiana"
 As the conversation proceeded, Chacharis, who had actually been proposed as ambassador to Greece, broke down and cried . The emotional man was actually proposing to be the new ambassador .
 The prosecutor was aggressive, theatrical and, in the view of some in Justice, a grabber of headlines . Some in Justice say he was aggressive and theatrical . The prosecution was aggressive .
 McCloskey Construction Company built a Veterans’ Administration hospital in Massachusetts . The hospital was a Veterans' Administration hospital .
 The Civil Division proposed a suit against McCloskey for faulty construction and breach of contract . The firm is accused of failing to provide adequate support for the project . The lawsuit could be filed against the firm .
 Fred Korth, a Johnson protéé, succeeded John Connally as Secretary of the Navy . Korth succeeded Connally in the White House . He was a former President of Texas .
 Korth, it was discovered in 1963, was using department stationery, the Navy yacht Sequo/a and other official facilities on behalf of his bank back in Fort Worth . Korth's bank was in charge of the Navy's Navy yacht .
 The Vice President was sure Robert Kennedy was pursuing Baker in order to force Johnson off the ticket in 1964 . Kennedy was sure he was trying to get Baker to run for president in 1964, according to a report .
 Both Kennedy and Johnson were, in different ways, on the spot . Actually both Kennedy and . Johnson were on the . spot .
 Kennedy was faced with the problem of the relationship between the Boston textile manufacturer Bernard Goldfine and Sherman Adams, a governor of New Hampshire and subsequently President Eisenhower’s chief of staff . Goldfine was a textile manufacturer .
 Adams resigned in 1958 after accepting favors from Goldfine . The disclosure that he had accepted favors forced Adams to resign .
 The favors, it now appeared, went far beyond hotel rooms and the famous vicuna coat . The favors went beyond the hotel rooms, it was revealed .
 Robert Kennedy's lawyer was Robert Kennedy’s one-time friend and later antagonist Edward Bennett Williams . Williams' lawyer for Kennedy's murder trial was his former friend and antagonist .
 Goldfine also implicated a former Democratic governor of Massachusetts and a couple of Republican senators, among them Styles Bridges of New Hampshire .
 Goldfine was so ill with arteriosclerosis that he could not always remember things coherently . One problem was that Goldfine himself was ill with .
 A trail of cashier's checks Adams had given his Washington landlady seemed to corroborate Goldfine’s allegations in general; but Goldfine himself would obviously not be a strong witness . Adams had also given his D.C. Landlady a trail of checks Adams
 Adams admitted receiving money from unremembered donors, but not, he insisted, from Goldfine . Hundley interviewed Adams, who seemed extremely nervous .
 The Kennedys could not afford to bring a case against Adams and lose it . Adams was accused of sexual assault in the 1980s and '80s . Adams is accused of sexually assaulting a woman in the 1990s .
 Louis Oberdorfer, head of the Tax Division, recommended against prosecution . John Kennedy sent the incriminating data on Adams over to Eisenhower at Gettysburg, it is said .
 The new President was keenly aware of his predecessor’s continuing popularity and might have thought it useful to put the old general under obligation . He might have been keen to put his predecessor under obligation.
 On inauguration day, Kennedy asked Eisenhower what he thought of Cornelius Ryan’s vivid account of D-day, The Longest Day . Kennedy had asked what Eisenhower thought of Ryan's account .
 The new President “was rather fascinated,” Robert Kennedy recalled in 1964, that Eisenhower never read the book . Robert Kennedy: Eisenhower "hadn't seemed to have read anything"
 Eisenhower sent back a message to Kennedy expressing fervent hope that Adams be spared further humiliation . According to the story, Eisenhower, after looking at the Adams dossier, sent back the message .
 This was not the reason the Department of Justice failed to indict Adams . Eisenhower presumably did not know this, and the apparent favor may well have restrained his criticism of his successor . The most painful cases of all involved friends of the family .
 Oleg made dresses for Jacqueline Kennedy and attended White House parties . His brother Oleg also attended parties at the White House . Oleg was a fashion stylist for the Kennedy family .
 Igor— Ghighi to his intimates — was an acquaintance of Joseph P Kennedy’s in Florida . And Igor was a friend of Kennedy's in Florida. Igor was also a friend with Kennedy's widow .
 He was also a friend of the Dominican dictator Trujillo, with whose bloody regime the U.S. had recently broken relations . He claimed one night that if Washington did not alter its policy, the Dominican Republic would fall to communism .
 In April 1961 State Department sent veteran diplomat Robert Murphy to take a look at the site . Murphy visited the site in April 1961 . Murphy was the first person to visit the site since 1961 . The site is now a museum in New York .
 After their return Robert Kennedy heard rumors that Cassini’s interest in Trujillo was more than academic . Robert Kennedy later heard rumors about Cassini's interest in the region .
 Cassini, who had not registered as a foreign agent, was taking money from the Dominican tyrant . He thereupon instructed the FBI to investigate reports that Cassini had taken money from dictator .
 Cassini assertedly shared in payments of nearly $200,000 stashed away in a Geneva bank account . Cassini asserts that Cassini shared the money in a bank account in Geneva .
 Anew democratic regime opened the Trujillo files to newspapermen and congressional investigators . New democratic regime opens the files to reporters, congressional investigators. New regime opens up the files .
 Maas remarked to someone in this period how much he liked Robert Kennedy . Maas said he liked Kennedy, who died in 1963 .
 Maas said to himself, “If that’s the way it is and Bobby is going to get me, the hell with it,” he said . Maas: “I’m not scared of it. If Bobby is getting me, I�
 His wife thought that at least he was obligated, as a friend, to tell Kennedy what he had discovered . Kennedy's wife thought he should be obligated to tell him what he discovered .
 "He sat there kind of hunched over in that big chair in that great room with his chin on his fingers," he said . "He was hunched in his arms and legs, sitting in that chair. He sat there hunched ... finished. Finished.
 There were fifteen different ways his people could have fouled up the investigation or done something to have it thrown out of court . There were 15 different ways to have the investigation been botched, he says .
 James M Landis had been a faithful friend of Joseph Kennedy and all his children for nearly thirty years . Landis was a friend of the Kennedy family for nearly 30 years .
 He had performed legal work, written articles, helped the father on his memoirs . He drafted legislation and speeches for the sons .
 He never, despite protestations from Joseph Kennedy and from his own law partners, sent Kennedy bills for his legal services . Kennedy was never charged with legal fees, despite protests from his family and his law partners .
 In 1956, under business pressures, he delayed filing an income tax return, applied for one extension, forgot to apply for another, put the whole thing out of his mind . In 1956 he had delayed filing a tax return under business pressure .
 The next year he filled out his tax form but could not figure out how to answer the question whether he had filed a return the year before . So he deposited the amount owed the government in a separate bank account and put the return in a drawer .
 After the 1960 election, John Kennedy asked Landis to prepare a report on regulatory agencies . Landis was an expert on the administrative process .
 The Internal Revenue Service had no recent tax returns from Landis Landis . This assignment led to a routine security check and the discovery of no recent returns .
 Landis paid $48,000 in 1961 and 1962 in delinquent tax returns . With the help of Joseph Kennedy’s accountant, new tax forms were filled out . Landis had set aside money for taxes and interest but not penalties .
 No one was willing to declare the action voluntary . But, with a friend of the President involved, no one was unwilling to declare it voluntary .
 IRS Commissioner Mortimer Caplin of the IRS passed the buck to the Justice Department . The Justice Department is investigating the case .
 On Katzenbach’s insistence, and for self-evident reasons, Robert Kennedy disqualified himself . Robert Kennedy was disqualified from the White House race .
 Robert Kennedy felt he had to protect his father’s friend . No doubt he felt that otherwise the Republicans would say that Robert Kennedy had fixed the case to protect the friend .
 He was undergoing neurological treatment at the Columbia Presbyterian Hospital . The hospital is treating him with neurological treatment .
 Everyone supposed, in view of the circumstances, that, like the far worse malefactor Igor Cassini, he would receive a fine and a suspended sentence . But he did not get a fine or a suspended jail term . Instead, he received a fine of $1,000 and
 He came, however, before a self-righteous judge who, after a lecture, sentenced him to thirty days in prison . He was sentenced to 30 days in jail .
 This was not a fraud case; a sentence so harsh for a man so ailing made no sense in terms of rehabilitation, deterrence or anything else . The sentence for the ailing man was so harsh that it was no sense of rehabilitation or deterrence . This is not the case of a
 Judge sent Landis to Public Health Service Center on Staten Island, where he was flung into a ward populated by screaming psychotics . Judge rejected pleas of physician that he needed facilities at Columbia's Neurological Institute .
 Robert Kennedy had said he was tired of chasing people . Justice and Poverty is the subject of a new book, "Justice and Poverty"
 The Rackets Committee persuaded him that the American malaise was a problem not just of crooked individuals but of a corrupt system . The Racket Committee had persuaded him . He said the problem was not just crooked individuals, but a problem of corrupt systems .
 He increasingly perceived a nation stained with inequities —in the distribution of power, in the dispensation of justice, in access to opportunity, he said .
 The findings documented the conviction Kennedy had taken from the Rackets Committee that the U.S. had two systems of criminal law . Kennedy had been convicted of taking the case from the committee .
 Most guarantees of due process were effective only for those who could pay for them . The rights to counsel, the rights to present evidence and call witnesses, to trial by jury, indeed to the very presumption of innocence itself, were not available to pay .
 The Allen committee devoted particular attention to bail, the most visible example of the power of money in the system ofjustice .
 Every year thousands of poor people remained behind bars for months after arrest . Thousands of people remain behind bars after arrest, often for months .
 The Criminal Justice Act of 1964 extended guarantees of competent defense to every stage of federal judicial proceedings . Within ten days of the decision the Department of Justice drafted the bill .
 Kennedy established the Office of Criminal Justice to deal with social issues affecting the criminal process from arrest to rehabilitation . Kennedy then established the office of criminal justice to focus on social issues in the criminal system .
 He gave strong support to James V Bennett, the notably humane director of the Bureau of Prisons . Mr Bennett is a former prisoner of the Federal Penitentiary .
 They set up halfway houses to help ease the return of convicts to civilian life . The halfway houses are set up to ease the returns to civilian lives .
 Kennedy worried about youthful offenders, too often incarcerated with, and thereafter indoctrinated by, their hardened seniors . Kennedy worried especially about youth offenders . Kennedy: "Youthful offenders are too often ... indoctrinated" by hardened seniors.
 In 1963 they began planning youth centers for persons under twenty convicted of federal crimes . In 1963, the youth center was set up in honor of those convicted under twenty-years-old .
 The Attorney General had it reduced to 15 years, the more customary sentence for bank robbers .
 Scales had been the only Communist sent to prison under the membership clause of the Smith Act . Scales was the only member of the Communist Party to be sent to jail . He was jailed under the 'membership clause' of Smith Act, which bans memberships .
 He had received a longer sentence than top Communists convicted under other sections of the act . He had been sentenced to life in prison without parole .
 After the Red Army invaded Hungary in 1956, he had broken with the party and was serving his sentence as an ex-Communist . After the invasion, he was sentenced to life in prison .
 In 1962 anti-Communists of the left, led by Norman Thomas and Joseph Rauh, urged his release . In 1962 he was released from prison in prison .
 Scales flatly refused on grounds of principle to identify people he had known in the party . Scales, even as an exCommunist, flatly . refused to identify those he had . known in party .
 The release of Scales, he told the Attorney General, would make it impossible for the FBI to insist that Communists or ex-Communists name names in the future . Scales' release would make the FBI impossible to insist on naming names, he said .
 Byron White and Nicholas Katzenbach recommended against commutation of Scales’s sentence . Scales was sentenced to life in prison in 2007 . Byron White, Nicholas Katzach and Byron White both recommended not commutation .
 President George W. Bush never discussed the commuted sentence with the White House . Bush: "I just thought that... based on the penalties for others, the amount of time of his sentence and... the problems he had at home that... had his sentence commuted"
 John Douglas of the Civil Division believed that Service’s suit had merit and that Justice should settle . But warned the Attorney General there would be objection on the Hill .
 A well-known scholar on Sino-Soviet affairs applied for the validation of his passport to permit travel to mainland China . The scholar on China's relations with the Soviet Union applied for his passport .
 The CIA and the FBI scented espionage, because the scholar had once worked for the research side of CIA, had taken copies of his own studies with him when he moved on to the RAND Corporation . The scholar, who had worked for CIA, was in violation of regulations, had,
 Kennedy told Abba Schwartz, head of the Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs at State, he was sure any violation was technical . But the FBI was pressing for criminal action . Kennedy told Schwartz that any violation of the law was technical; but the FBI wanted criminal action.
 Security agencies persuaded security agencies that the scholar was at most subject to administrative reprimand . Together they persuaded the security agencies . Together, they persuaded them that he was only subject to a reprimand.
 Archibald Cox discharged his duties as solicitors general with style . Cox was the first solicitor general to carry out his duties in charge of the armed forces . Cox died at the age of 92 on December 18, 1941 . Cox had been a solicitor general for more than 30 years .
 He entered so intimately into decisions as to become, at times, a sort of tenth justice . He knew the law, and he knew the Court; and, like all the best solicitors general, he entered so closely into decisions that he became a sort-of-ten justice .
 Their most extended contact had come in 1958-59 when Cox was working with John Kennedy on labor legislation . Robert Kennedy argued for more stringent provisions than Cox, or John Kennedy, thought wise .
 It had become a custom for Attorneys General to argue one case in person at the summit . The case is expected to be argued in person .
 Even had there been no such custom, Kennedy would have wished to appear before the Court . Kennedy would've wished to have appeared before the Supreme Court .
 Mencken had written in 1928, “because old apportionments give them unfair advantages.” “Old apportionment” gives “unfair advantages,” he wrote .
 Malapportionment was held the cause of a host of troubles, especially the neglect by state government of the cities and the urban poor . The consequent encroachment of the national government and the enfeeblement of federalism was held .
 There were "lots of reasons" for Robert Kennedy not to get into it, Marshall says . Still, there were, as Marshall observed later, ‘lots’ of reasons for him to not get involved in it .
 Reform threatened vested political interests, especially in the south, where the Attorney General was sufficiently unpopular anyway anyway . Reform was necessary to protect the public, especially from vested interests . Reform in the South was necessary, but it was not necessary to reform .
 The case he chose at the end of 1962 involved the countyunit system in Georgia . The case was the case of Georgia's county unit system .
 Earlier this year the Court had changed its mind about its power to deal with inequality in voting . Earlier in the year, the Court changed its minds about the issue of inequality .
 In 1946 it had pronounced unequal representation a political question, beyond judicial remedy . In 1946, the Supreme Court ruled that unequal representation was a political issue beyond judicial action .
 With the increase in urban and suburban population in the fifties, protest rose against the impasse created by judicial restraint . Protest rose against judicial restraint in the 1950s .
 A law passed in 1901 still determined the composition of the state assembly . The assembly was still made up of state legislators .
 Legislators showed no inclination to change the law against theif own interest . Legislators have shown no inclination toward changing the law .
 A Tennessee lawsuit is making a slow ascent toward the Supreme Court . Baker Carr was the subject of a Supreme Court lawsuit . The lawsuit was filed in the late 1960s .
 Henry asked the Department of Justice to enter the case as amicus curiae . Henry asked that the department ofjustice enter as amici curiae.
 Bakerv. Court ruled that gross and unreasonable malapportionment was in conflict with the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . The case was decided by the Supreme Court in 2008 .
 Carrin March 1962 said apportionment was a justiciable issue and that courts could provide relief . Carrin: Apportionment is justicable issue and courts can provide relief.
 The Supreme Court reversed its 1946 decision in effect if not in form . Though it declined to reach the question of substantive standards, the court's 1946 decision is still in effect .
 The system heavily weighted the Democratic primaries in favor of low-population rural counties . The system was heavily weighted toward low-populated rural counties, according to CNN.com .
 Cox said it was an “easier’s question than legislative apportionment . This, Cox said in a memorandum to Kennedy, was an "easier" question . Cox: This is an easier question than a matter of state law . Cox said, "This is
 He warned the Attorney General against adopting the position ‘that all votes must be given equal weight’ However, he also warned that all votes should be equally given equal .
 Justices Black and Douglas might buy it, but the argument is unlikely to command the assent of a majority . In my opinion, we should not argue for this dogmatic interpretation even in the case of statewide elections, for .
 Kennedy’s problem of advocacy, Cox said, was to knock down all conceivable justifications for discriminating in favor of the country voter . Cox: Kennedy's problem of . advocacy was to . knock down justifications . for discriminating against the country .
 On January 17, 1963, Kennedy confronted the Supreme Court in the case of Gray Sanders .
 His mother, his wife, two sisters and two sisters, his brother Edward, his sister-in-law Jacqueline and four of his children were in the audience . The audience included his family and friends .
 Ultimately at stake is the capacity of state government to deal with the problems of an increasingly urban and suburban nation, he said .
 Kennedy: "They got a lot of nerve asking the Attorney General of the United States questions like that" Kennedy: Dolan's "look he has" is "with that look he has," Kennedy said .
 Douglas distinguished issue of suffrage from that of legislative representation . Douglas distinguished the issue from the issue of representation from suffrage .
 A strong liberal in objectives, he was conservative about the role courts should play in attaining them . He was a strong liberal with objectives, but conservative on the role of courts to help achieve them .
 The problem of substantive standards, avoided in Baker Carr, could no longer be escaped . Baker Carr could not be escaped. It is not the first time the government has failed to find a solution to the problem .
 Cox recommended that representation on the basis of population be required in one house of every state legislature but that deviations—substantial but not extreme —be permitted in the other house . Cox: Representation should be based on population size . Cox also recommended that deviation in other house be permitted in
 A Colorado case, where malapportionment had been sustained by a popular referendum, gave Cox particular difficulties . The case was brought before the Supreme Court in 2012 .
 In June 1964 Chief Justice Warren, speaking for a nearly unanimous Court, ruled that both houses of a state legislature had to be apportioned on the basis of population .
 The reapportionment revolution did not have the results predicted in the reinvigoration of representative government, the salvation of the cities or the strengthening of federalism . The results were not predicted .
 By outlawing distortions and irrationalities, the reapportionment decisions increased the chance of finding solutions within the political process . Nonetheless, by outlawing manifest distortions, the decision was made to find solutions within political process.
 Loevinger, a fluent Minnesotan, spent too much time for the Attorney General’s comfort making speeches around the country and too little taking hold of his organization .
 In antitrust, as elsewhere in Justice, the Attorney General was determined to keep politics out of the law .
 The title of his soeech was “Vigorous Anti-Trust Enforcement Assists Business” The title was thought up by someone who supposed that businessmen really believed in free competition .
 Kennedy began with a trail of jokes, all of which fell flat, and went downhill from there . Kennedy: "I'm not going to be able to make jokes that fall out of character."
 He had hoped to repeat the success of his Georgia speech where he candidly told a southern audience he intended to enforce civil rights decisions . He was hoping to repeat his success in Georgia .
 The administration had thought its wage-price guideposts secure when it induced the Auto Workers and then the Steelworkers to accept noninflationary contracts . The administration thought it had secured the guideposts .
 A few days after the steel wage agreement, on a Tuesday afternoon in April, Blough made his celebrated call on the President to announce United States Steel’s decision to raise prices six dollars a ton .
 He felt Blough, who had said nothing to him, to Secretary of Labor Goldberg or to David McDonald of the Steelworkers about raising prices, had personally double-crossed them .
 The next day Sorensen read the Attorney General's statement the President planned to make in his press conference . Sorennsen said the next day the President would make the statement .
 It was agreed that Sorensen would write it up and the President will give it along those lines . The President will be writing it up, and it's agreed that he would write up .
 Bethlehem was the second largest steel company; and the press had quoted Edmund F Martin, its president, as saying in a stockholders’ meeting shortly before, “There shouldn’t be any price rise.” Bethlehem was quoted as saying .
 The Attorney General has asked the FBI to check Martin’s exact words with the reporters who wrote the stories . The Attorney general has asked for an investigation into Martin's comments .
 Preliminary investigation in antitrust cases was a routine mission for the Bureau . Preliminary probe was routine in the 1980s, when the Bureau began investigating antitrust cases .
 Katzenbach instructed Courtney Evans to have the agents interview the steel executives at their offices . The interview was conducted at the offices of steel executives .
 FBI agents thereupon visited them at their homes in Philadelphia and Wilmington before dawn the next morning . FBI agents then visited them in the early hours of the morning .
 The Attorney General, as usual, took full responsibility for the Bureau. "The Attorney General is taking full responsibility," he said .
 In actuality, he had nothing to do with the midnight calls . The calls were made to the FBI, but he was not involved in the calls .
 He convened a grand jury to see whether the steel companies had violated criminal law . The steel companies are accused of violating criminal law in the U.S.
 On Monday night, according to Blough, he assured the general counsel of United States Steel that the administration was not vindictive . Blough: There would be no further problems with subpoenas and grand juries . He says the administration has assured the counsel of U.S. Steel
 Attorney General was talking, however, about inquiries related to the recent price rise . He was talking about inquiries relating to the price rise in recent months .
 The Anti-Trust Division had been preparing other indictments against the steel industry before Blough exploded his bomb . The anti-trust Division was preparing to indict the steel company .
 In these matters, steel companies eventually pleaded nolo contendere . Steel companies have pleaded not to contendere.
 The President’s quest for peace was not helped when word got around that, like his father, he thought that all steelmen were sons-of-bitches .
 The steel battle was something of a shock for the President as well as for Blough . Blough: "The steel battle is something of an unexpected shock for both the President and Blough"
 Kennedy did not like to use that much power and realized it could not be easily used again; and he didn't like to excite that much enmity . Kennedy did like to avoid using that power and didn't want it to be used again .
 Archibald Cox suggested in June that the President might be given authority to delay vital price or wage increases until a public commission rendered a report on economic impact . Cox, who had been through earlier struggles as chairman of Truman’s Wage Stabilization Board, suggested that in June
 Kennedy was disturbed, not, as he told me, at the content of Cox’s speech but at the timing . Kennedy said he was disturbed by the timing of Cox's speech, not content content .
 The bottom fell out of the stock market the same day, and the White House hastily disclaimed responsibility for Cox’s ruminations . Cox: “The bottom of the market is the bottom of our stock market. The bottom of this story is the end of Cox�
 Cox: "If anyone is to blame for that speech, it’s me" Cox: Kennedy "thought of power as a bank account" Cox says he called for his car and went over to the White House to set everybody straight .
 Most businessmen, perceiving that the Kennedys did not like them, responded to their attitudes rather than to their actions . They credited them with antibusiness designs they did not have. Most businessmen responded to them with their attitudes .
 The steel crisis had led to a gross misuse of executive authority, especially by Robert Kennedy . Charged then and later, Charged, was Charged . The question remained whether the steel crisis led to an executive mismanagement .
 Kennedy had to choose between stopping Blough or letting him get away with it . Kennedy: "When Blough made clear he wanted to wreck the stabilization effort, Kennedy chose between stopping him or not . Kennedy was forced to choose whether to stop him or stop him .
 American Presidents have tried to defend the general welfare against private corporations since the age of Jackson . Kennedy was in a respectable tradition . American Presidents had tried to protect the public welfare against corporations since Jackson .
 Once he had decided to stop Blough, he could no more risk losing than Andrew Jackson could have risked losing to Nicholas Biddle . Andrew Jackson was no more likely to risk losing to Biddle than he would have been .
 Success did not even embolden them to seek improvements in the stabilization policy beyond the guideposts . Success was not enough to embolden the government to seek further reforms, officials say .
 In view of this aftermath, it was not perhaps such a famous victory as it seemed at the time . The aftermath of this victory was perhaps less famous than it was initially thought, but it was perhaps not such a victory .
 As the circumstances faded from the public mind, what lingered was the fantasy of the Attorney General ordering FBI agents to pound on doors in the dead of night . Business community was stunned by the prospect of the FBI pounding on doors .
 The Kennedys were more resolute in fighting for the poor and dispossessed than they were in fighting against the rich and powerful . Vi The Kenneses were resolute against the powerful and wealthy .
 President Obama named a delegation of jurists to represent the U.S. at the Inter-American Congress of Attorneys General . A majority of those jurists were Spanish-speaking Americans, he says .
 Ramsey Clark’s office in Justice, the Lands Division, disposed of more money than any other in the Department . But the Attorney General was not deeply moved by land titles and condemnations .
 Clark and Kennedy now perceived the opportunity to try the novel policy of settling the claims . Clark, Kennedy and Kennedy saw the chance to settle the claims, which they had been made .
 Professional Indian lawyers and witnesses, who had been living off the litigation, did not like to see the cases resolved . Professional Indian lawyer and witnesses said they were living off litigation .
 Indians themselves, with exalted ideas about the value of their land, were often disappointed by the results . Indians themselves often disappointed with the results of the land .
 Congress, which had to pass appropriations in each case, was especially resistant to big payoffs to Indians . Still Clark, with Kennedy's backing, persisted .
 Clark says political pressure would never come directly to him on Indian issues . But political pressure never came directly to Clark, he says .
 Oklahoma delegation led by Robert Kerr objected to size of proposed settlement with Cherokee Nation . Attorney General intervened personally .
 If evil needed an adversary and people in distress could not help themselves, then government must devise new forms of action . If government belonged to evil, it would have to devise new ways of dealing with it . Government must devise a new form of action to deal with evil .
 Robert Kennedy in his first press conference spoke about the “alarming increase” in juvenile delinquency . It all began mildly enough when Robert Kennedy said the increase in delinquency was alarming .
 "The predicament of the young always concerned him," he says . He says of his own economically secure childhood and the scramble for survival among kids in slums .
 Jack Newfield once asked him what he might have become if he had not been born a Kennedy . He said: "Jack Newfield asked me what I might become if I hadn't been born as a Kennedy"
 He named as his special assistant charged with coordinating the federal effort . David Hackett is his intimate friend of so many years . Hackett was named as the special assistant .
 Some sociologists had long doubted whether case treatment was the answer to delinquency . But some say case treatment is not the answer .
 Hackett encountered the ideas set forth by two professors at the Columbia School of Social Work, Lloyd Ohlin and Richard A Cloward, in their 1960 book Delinquency and Opportunity . Hackett was inspired by the ideas of the two professors .
 Ohlin and Cloward argued that delinquency was more a product of social rather than of individual pathology . Ohlin: "Delinquency is more of an individual problem than a social problem"
 It was what happened when a culture excited middle-class aspirations and then maintained barriers that made these aspirations unattainable for the poor by legitimate means . It's what happened to the poor when they were not able to reach their aspirations, the author says .
 The disparity between ideals and opportunities left the poor with the choice of accepting inferior status, thereby emasculating themselves, or of asserting identity through defiance and lawlessness . The disparity in opportunities left them with the option of accepting .
 Ohlin and Cloward suggested that changing the structure of opportunity was the key to changing the client's client .
 Those who traced delinquency to disturbances of early childhood considered it excessively optimistic in its intimations of rapid social improvement . Others considered it too optimistic to predict rapid social improvements .
 Activists wanted to do something more than simply say they wanted to protest against the government . They say the government is optimistic about the future .
 The Children’s Bureau in the Department of Labor hoped to dominate any federal antidelinquency effort . The Children's Bureau was in charge of the effort .
 Hackett feared that the Children’s Bureau was more interested in treatment than prevention . Hackett, who was greatly impressed by the opportunity theorists, feared that . He said the Children's Bureau was not interested in prevention .
 In May 1961 John Kennedy established the President’s Committee on Juvenile Delinquency and Youth Crime, with Robert Kennedy as chairman and Robert Hackett as executive director . Hackett was executive director of the committee, which was established in May 1961 .
 Hackett and Ohlin, who became head of the Office of Juvenile Delinquency, enlisted a number of ardent spirits . Hackett is now married to the late Mrs. Ohlin .
 Soon they began to see it also as a cover word for racial discrimination, they said . Soon they saw it as an excuse for discrimination, and it became a political issue .
 The attack on delinquency required, they believed, comprehensive planning to coordinate federal effort at the local level, where services were actually delivered .
 Mobilization for Youth experimented with a diversity of new approaches to youth services . Mobilization is based on the idea of decentralization in welfare departments, day care and community service centers .
 In 1962 planning began for Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited . The organization had come into being under the direction of Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The organization was founded in 1962 .
 Harlem residents protested the city’s decision to import an out-of-neighborhood agency to work with black youth . Kenneth Clark was the leader of the Harlem youth agency .
 By the end of 1963, with its initial appropriation coming to an end, the committee had made seventeen grants for demonstration projects in sixteen cities . The committee made 17 grants in 1963 .
 He interrogated the experts, visited projects, chatted with youth gangs in the streets of East Harlem . He also talked up the program in speeches .
 He helped particularly in dealing with Congress, first getting the legislation through and then keeping Edith Green happy thereafter . He helped especially in getting legislation through Congress .
 Green was chairwoman of the House subcommittee handling the program . Green had led the Kennedy forces in Oregon before Los Angeles .
 The Juvenile Delinquency Act meant one thing to Hackett’s guerrillas, something quite different to Edith Green . The act was meant to protect the children from the juvenile delinquency act .
 She had expected a scattering of small pilot projects flung into operation as fast as possible and administered by agencies already in the field .
 Wesley Barthelmes, an administrative assistant, was surprised by Kennedy's readiness to go to the Hill and spend time on what was, compared to civil rights and organized crime, a relatively small program .
 The Attorney General contended quietly that projects like Mobilization for Youth were not inconsistent with the aims of the legislation . The attorney general contended quietly .
 Green, only a bit mollified, did not relent in her determination to keep the guerrillas from running wild . Green: "I'm not going to let them run wild. I'm going to keep them under control"
 Her attitude toward the Attorney General was that “of a sorrowful mother for an errant son,” Barthelmes said .
 Eunice had served in the Department of Justice as executive secretary to the National Conference on Juvenile Delinquency . Fifteen years before, she had been executive secretary of the National Commission on Juveniles Delinquencies .
 After marrying Sargent Shriver, she had worked with teenage delinquents in Chicago . After marrying Shriver she had been working with teen delinquents .
 Her consuming interest now was in a domestic peace corps modeled on Franklin Roosevelt’s Civilian Conservation Corps . Her husband was running with such élan overseas .
 Hackett suggested a cabinet-level committee with the Attorney General as chairman and Richard Boone of the Ford Foundation as staff director . The attorney general would be the chairman .
 Children were inside a room which was bare but for a few benches . The children were inside, standing in a room that was bare .
 The only toilets for the approximately seventy patients in a large ward were located in the middle of the room, permitting no privacy . The only toilet for the patients in the large ward was located in a middle-of-the-room .
 The hospital’s hard-working but inadequate staff could provide at best only custodial care . The hospital could provide only custodian care, the hospital says .
 They had no money and virtually no hope; they did not know where to turn for help . They were overwhelmed by their lack of hope and no money . They had to rely on each other for help.
 Kennedy meanwhile took the District of Columbia as his personal responsibility . Kennedy also took the D.C. as a personal responsibility for his actions .
 In 1962 he began paying visits, without publicity, to Washington public schools without notice .
 He organized an annual benefit to prevent teenage blacks from having to drop out of school for economic reasons . The benefit was organized by Ella Fitzgerald, Sammy Davis Jr., who performed one year, another .
 He arranged playgrounds, recreation centers, sports programs, summer job programs . He also arranged for playgrounds and recreation centers .
 He knew these were no more than palliatives, but they “were at least intended,” as he later explained to his brother’s successor, “to show the children and juveniles that their government cared about their problems” Barrett Prettyman, Jr.,
 Dunbar High swimming pool had been closed for eight years for want of $30,000 to make necessary repairs . Kennedy discovered the pool was closed because of the lack of funds to repair it .
 An official from the city recreation department, perhaps hoping for commendation, approached him . The man was approached by a city recreation official . The incident occurred in the early hours of the day .
 The Attorney General pointed out that the shallow end of the pool was too deep for small children . He asked him what he was going to do about it . The attorney general pointed out curtly that the . shallow end was . too deep .
 Hundreds of black children ran after him, calling his name . Moments later, as he began to leave the area, he was confronted by children .
 Juvenile Delinquency Committee provided a means of getting money to blacks in the inner city without provoking further strife with Confederates on Capitol Hill . Richard Cloward and Frances Fox Pliven suggested that one motive was political .
 This had more to do with preserving urban peace than attracting urban votes . But this had more than do with preserve urban peace .
 By 1963 the civil rights struggle in the south assured the overwhelming popularity of the Kennedys in the ghettos, even if they had done nothing about juvenile delinquency . The civil rights movement in the southern South assured the . popularity .
 Helping the black underclass carried with it the backlash risk of estranging the white working class . Many blacks, in addition, did not vote; and helping the underclass carries with it a backlash risk . Helping blacks carry with it, however, is a risk for the white
 Robert Kennedy was of course determined to secure his brother’s reelection . The Committee on Juvenile Delinquency was not an important factor in his calculations for 1964 .
 Richard Boone attributed it to his compulsive exploration of social reality . Richard Boone said it was due to a compulsive interest in social reality.
 Leonard Duhl of the National Institute of Mental Health, one of Hackett's guerrillas, thought the clue lay in Robert Kennedy’s personal history . He said Kennedy had a “notion of what an extended family is, and how a family works, and
 When Dave Hackett started to take him around... to visit the ghettos,” he responded both because he felt so keenly the misfortune of children denied the nourishment of family and because his extended family embraced all children in distress .
 This was simply the Robert Kennedy who twenty years before at Milton rushed to the side of the underdog and never worried about embarrassing his friends . This was the same thing that he did at Milton twenty years ago .
 Life had only enlarged his knowledge of underdogs, he says . The Racket Committee, the civil rights movement, and the poverty wars helped him learn about underdogs .
 Few Attorneys General had ever been so busy in so many diverse directions . Attorney General George W. Bush had been in charge of the nation's largest office .
 Justice Department occupied only a portion of Robert Kennedy’s days . Yet the Justice Department occupies only a few of Kennedy's days .
 In foreign affairs, his brother was navigating tricky waters with a crew of strangers .
 "When storms blew up, there was all the more reason to summon a shipmate of longer standing"
 A son of the Cold War, John Kennedy saw it not as a religious but as a power conflict . John Kennedy was a son of Cold War . He saw it as not as religious but a power struggle .
 He opposed Dulles’s idea of responding to local aggression by massive nuclear retaliation at times and places of American choosing .
 He opposed Dulles’s excommunication of the neutralist states of the Third World . Dulles' excommunication was the result of his excommunication .
 He opposed Dulles' insistence on regarding the islands of Quemoy and Matsu off the Chinese coast as casus belli .
 He worked for closer economic ties with Poland and Yugoslavia, for increased assistance to India and other underdeveloped countries, for the independence of Algeria and of Indochina .
 Kennedy’s interest in negotiation with the Soviet Union went back at least to 1953 . Kennedy's interest in negotiations with the Soviets went back to 1953, he says .
 In 1959 Kennedy argued against the resumption of nuclear testing (as recommended by Governor Nelson Rockefeller), and called for a test-ban agreement . In 1959 JFK argued against a resumption .
 Ormsby-Gore provided the statistics John Kennedy used so effectively in Campaign speeches describing how few people in the U.S. government were working on disarmament . The statistics were used in Kennedy's speeches to explain the problem .
 He charged in the campaign that the United States was in trouble . He charged that the Soviet Union had been more successful in identifying itself with nationalism in the Third World .
 James M Gavin in War and Peace in the Space Age, Maxwell Taylor in The Uncertain Trumpet, expounded it . Retired generals James Gavin and Maxwell Taylor expound it in their own books .
 Even critics of the hard line perceived ominous changes in the power balance . The U.S. House of Representatives has been accused of corruption in the past .
 He urged Kennedy to avoid commitments about summit meetings . He hoped that some alleviation might come through reciprocal concessions worked out in private discussions with Moscow .
 Eisenhower administration asked the Russians to release two American fliers shot down over the Arctic Circle . Khrushchev put it to the Politburo that this would help Nixon . Nixon administration asked for the release of the fliers .
 It may have meant simply that he supposed Kennedy would be easier to hornswoggle . It may also mean that he meant Kennedy was easier to blow .
 Amiable signals flashed from Moscow after the election to Harriman, Bowles and the President-elect’s brother . In any case amiable signals from Moscow flashed .
 On December 12, 1960, Mikhail Menshikov, the Soviet ambassador, invited Robert Kennedy to luncheon . The Soviet ambassador invited Kennedy to a luncheon in Moscow, Russia .
 The ambassador blamed past trouble on middle-level American officials who had distorted the Soviet position on major issues . The ambassador blames past trouble .
 Kennan, to whom Kennedy showed the paper, found it “considerably stiffer and more offensive” than Menshikov’s own remarks . Kennan believed it had been drafted in the Kremlin, Kennan said .
 In a pugnacious speech on January 6, 1961, the Soviet leader proclaimed the irresistible triumph of communism . In a speech in 1961, he declared the triumph of the Soviet Union .
 This would take place either through world war, or through local war, which could grow into nuclear war . World war would destroy civilization, but local war could also grow into a nuclear war, he said .
 Khrushchev called Asia, Africa and Latin America “the most important centers of revolutionary struggle against imperialism” He pledged full Soviet support to the insurgencies . Citing Vietnam, Algeria and Cuba as promising examples, he called Vietnam and Algeria examples .
 He insisted on positions that Peking found abhorrent . In reaffirming his rejection of nuclear war and his belief in ‘peaceful coexistence,” he insisted .
 Khrushchev may have been trying to prove to the world Communist movement that nuclear coexistence was not incompatible with revolutionary militancy .
 He thought that his bellicosity would bemuse the Chinese while his softer words would gratify the west . Perhaps he thought that he thought he would be bemused the Chinese . But perhaps he thought his softer language would be gratified the west.
 Inevitably Peking and Washington heard only the passages written for the other . "Inevitably the passages were written for each other," says the diplomat .
 No one in Washington then recognized the extent of Russian-Chinese differences . Certainly no one in D.C. recognized the differences .
 Much of the State Department continued for three or four more years to go on about ‘the Sino-Soviet bloc” as if it had been a marriage made in heaven . The State Dept. continued to talk about the bloc as though it was a happy marriage .
 Khrushchev banged his shoe on a U.N. desk a few months before, did many conceive him as notably subtle . Nor, recalling Khrushvic as the man who had banged on a United Nations desk, did .
 Washington missed his subtleties, if indeed they were there, and heard only boasts and threats . So Washington missed the subtleticities, the president's subtletics .
 He responded by devoting his inaugural address almost exclusively to foreign affairs . He responded to his inauguration speech almost entirely to foreign policy .
 He did not intend the inaugural as a trumpet blast summoning Americans to war, nor was it so read in 1961 . The inaugural was not meant to be a call for war .
 He felt previous Presidents, especially Eisenhower through his network of pacts, had overcommitted the United States, as in Southeast Asia . He felt that previous presidents had over-committed themselves .
 The “revolution of national independence,” as he saw it, was the source and guarantee of the world of diversity . He saw it as the source of the ‘revolution’ that was to create diversity .
 He argued diversity was incompatible with Communist dogma that all societies passed through the same stages and all roads had a single destination . But diversity was ultimately incompatible with the Communist dogma, he said .
 President Reagan did not think there could be an American solution to every world problem, he said . But, he did think there was a Soviet solution either, he added .
 Khrushchev’s speech left no doubt in Washington that the Cold War of movement was on full blast . The speech was the first time the U.S. government had acknowledged the existence of the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy considered it imperative to restore the military balance now tilting so alarmingly in the Soviet favor . Lest this drive the world toward the ultimate war, Kennedy said .
 This meant overcoming the gap in nuclear missiles and creating a new capacity to fight nonnuclear war . This meant both overcoming the alleged gap in missile technology and creating new capacity for nonnuclear weapons .
 As a general, he was far less impressed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff than he was by the Secretary of the Treasury, he said . He was more impressed with the Treasury than he knew nothing about his business .
 He discerned a selfserving budgetary design behind the wailing at the Pentagon wall . The wall is a self-serving budget design, he says .
 He believed an increase in defense spending could wreck the sacred free-enterprise system and turn America into a garrison state . He believed that an increase of defense spending .
 Eisenhower was right for the wrong reasons; Kennedy, who did move, was wrong for the right reasons . In a not unusual irony, Eisenhower and Kennedy were both wrong for right reasons, but not for wrong reasons .
 Kennedy moved on two fronts, increasing both nuclear and conventional force . Kennedy increased both nuclear, conventional force in the wake of 9/11 .
 After becoming President, he discovered that the CIA questioned the missile gap . He discovered that he had to confront the CIA question the gap .
 Kennedy was reluctant to get into a fight with the Joint Chiefs at a time when McNamara was struggling to gain control of the military establishment . Kennedy, in addition to being reluctant to engage in a fight, he said .
 By autumn 1961 the new reconnaissance satellite persuaded even the Pentagon that the Russians had produced only a tiny proportion of the missiles claimed by the gap-mongers . Even the Pentagon claimed that the missiles were only a fraction of what they claimed .
 It ended any hope of freezing the rival strategic forces at lower levels . The Russian-Ukrainian alliance has been in touch with the Kremlin since 2003 .
 Khrushchev started worrying about the Soviet missile gap . The gap in missile technology was the reason for Khrushchchev to worry about the gap . It was the first time the Soviet Union had seen a gap in its missile technology .
 Kennedy called for an increase in conventional force . At the same time, he called for increased use of conventional forces . Kennedy calls for the increase of conventional force in Iraq .
 For a dozen years men of good will had sought ways of saving the world from nuclear suicide . For 12 years they had tried to find a way to prevent nuclear suicide. For a decade they had found a way of stopping nuclear suicide in the world .
 The best way to make sure nuclear weapons would never be used, it appeared, was to abandon the Eisenhower-Dulles strategy of predominant reliance on the bomb . It appeared to be that the best way of avoiding nuclear weapons is to abandon nuclear reliance .
 The nuclear arsenal should be only the shield against a Soviet first strike, the U.S. should be the shield from a first strike . The U.N. arsenal should only be used as a shield, the president says .
 Limited-war forces should become the active element of American military strategy . Limited war forces should be an active element in U.S. military strategy, author says .
 The purpose of all this was precisely to insure against nuclear catastrophe . The purpose was to insulate against a nuclear catastrophe, he says .
 Maxwell Taylor urged with persuasive force by Maxwell Taylor in The Uncertain Trumpet . Maxwell Taylor's book is published by the same publisher as The Unwinnable Trumpet. It was published by The Unnertainty Trumpet, published in 2007 .
 It was designed to enable the west to respond to Soviet aggression in Europe without immediate resort to nuclear weapons . The West was able to do so without immediate use of nuclear weapons in Europe .
 A fateful side effect was to create forces that could be thrown into local conflicts in the Third World . But the side effect of the war in Afghanistan was to have a devastating effect on the world .
 The escalation process, imperceptibly raising the level, step by small step, could make commitment irreversible . Not only would the creation of capabilities now make such intervention feasible, but the escalation process could make it irreversible, he says .
 The diversification of the U.S. defense posture, along with new initiatives in foreign aid, seemed the best way to stabilize that changing power equilibrium . Kennedy, through a long campaign, had warned the nation, about the changing power balance .
 The President’s hope was to make a standstill agreement with the Soviet Union . The President hoped to make the deal with the Soviets .
 Each superpower should abstain from doing things that, by upsetting the rough balance into which the world had settled, might invite miscalculation and compel reaction by the other .
 Khrushchev brusquely rejected Kennedy’s general idea and threatened to conclude a treaty with East Germany that would extinguish western rights in West Berlin . As everyone knows, this is not the whole story .
 Kennedy replied that so drastic an alteration in the global balance was unacceptable . Kennedy replied: "It's unacceptable. It's unacceptable" Kennedy replied .
 Khrushchev himself, he observed, would not submit to a similar shift in favor of the west . Khrushiev himself would not agree to a comparable shift in favour of the West .
 Khrushchev rejoined that, if America wanted war over Berlin, there was nothing the Soviet Union could do about it; he was going to sign the treaty by December 31 . Kennedy had asked Dean Acheson to undertake special studies of NATO and Germany .
 Acheson’s view was to make the most conspicuous preparations for a military showdown, including the proclamation of a national emergency . The way to answer Khrushchev was to prepare for a showdown, he says .
 In July the President requested more defense appropriations, called out 150,000 reservists and announced a program, which he soon regretted, of fallout shelters for protection against nuclear attack .
 The ""great battle” for five days before his brother’s speech, he noted, was whether we should ask for a tax increase . He noted that he fought for that policy and was supported by all of the Cabinet .
 They felt it would not do any good financially and, in fact, might harm the economy of the country . They felt first that it would be helpful psychologically, then felt it might be helpful financially .
 It would give everybody a sense of participation which they are lacking at the present time . It would be a good way to get everybody to participate in the political process .
 The day before the speech we heard some rumblings that Congress might cut down on the foreign aid program if we asked for the tax increase . I think it was this more than anything else that finally determined Jack not to go for it .
 Jesuit magazine: Shelter owners have moral right to kill unsheltered neighbors clamoring for admission . Former professor of ethics at Georgetown says shelter owners should kill neighbors . John McHugh, a former professor at Georgetown, argued in America, a Jesuit magazine .
 When | discoursed before assembled potentates on the divisive results of the sauve-qui-peut ethic, the Attorney General interjected sourly, “There’s no problem here.” The Attorney General said sourly: ‘There's no
 Leave it to us, who are specialists in this tricky business, to make foreign policy . But leave it to them, who have foreign policy, to decide foreign policy.
 As we discussed at the time, he must have thought there was something sinister and complicated behind it all or otherwise, we would not have done anything quite as stupid . We would have thought he was trying to find out what was going on, but otherwise we would have been stupid .
 The meeting considered steps to take if the Soviet Union tried to shoot down allied planes flying to West Berlin . The meeting was held in response to the threat of Soviet Union shooting down allied aircraft .
 "General Lem-nitzer and General Taylor felt very strongly that we should fire back," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We should have fired back"
 Russians feel strongly that if they can break our will in Berlin that we will never be good for anything else, they will have won the battle in 1961 . It is my feeling that the Russians feel this, feel strongly strongly .
 "They do not have to worry about opposition or what other countries think," says President Obama . "They speak with one voice," says Obama. "They don't worry about what other people think"
 "Their plan is obviously not to be the most popular but to terrorize the world into submission," he said . "They plan to be ... the most fearsome," he added .
 Chip Bohlen said in the beginning of the year that 1961 was going to be a fatal one on decision . My feeling is they do not want war but they will carry us to the brink . Remember remember when Bohlen predicted 1961 would be fatal .
 This was the year the Russians were going to come the closest to nuclear war. I don’t think there is any question but that that that is true. This year was going to be the year of nuclear war,’s author says. ‘This was the .
 After the meeting Jack asked me what I thought. | said | wanted to get off. Jack asked him what he thought. Jack said he wanted to 'get off' after the meeting .
 Vi “| want to take a stronger lead on Berlin negotiations,” the President informed Rusk on August 21 . ‘AH wars start from stupidity,’ he said to Kenneth O’Donnell .
 He grew increasingly frustrated in his dealings with the State Department . The former Secretary of State John Kerry was frustrated with his efforts to reach the White House .
 Those who supported negotiation, like Harriman, Bohlen and Stevenson, were excluded from Berlin discussions .
 The pronegotiation cables from Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson in Moscow were discounted . They were discounted because of a lack of transparency .
 The head of the Berlin working group, Foy Kohler, was an all-out Achesonian . Kohler was the head of Berlin's working group . The Achesons were in Berlin at the beginning of the 1930s .
 Perhaps, he said, he should offer these points in the speech he was about to give to the UN General Assembly . He said: Perhaps, perhaps, he would offer them in a speech .
 Stevenson said they were all excellent points, except the one about moving the UN to Berlin . Stevenson said the UN should have moved to Berlin rather than Berlin, but that was a mistake .
 If the west were pushed out of Berlin, he believed, it would transform the whole European balance and make peace impossible . The west was pushed out, he said, would transform Europe's balance of power .
 Kennedy’s military preparations, including even the egregious shelter program, made it clear that the Soviet Union could not win Berlin by psychological warfare . The Soviet Union couldn't win Berlin with psychological warfare, Kennedy's military preparations .
 This very likely strengthened Khrushchev against Frol R Kozlov and the hard-liners . This likely strengthened his position against Kozlov . This may have strengthened his grip on the government .
 The erection of the Wall in August meanwhile stopped the flight of refugees, thereby reducing the East German pressure for a separate treaty . The erection in August also reduced the pressure on East German leaders to negotiate a treaty with the West .
 The Berlin crisis subsided, and was rather quickly forgotten . Berlin crisis, fora moment so frightening to the world, subsided .
 The evidence of Kennedy’s patient search for negotiations with the Soviets over Berlin is part of the historical record . The authors in question have managed to construct their image of Kennedy as a Cold Warrior .
 A notable by-product of the Berlin crisis was the extraordinary personal correspondence between the two leaders, initiated by the Russian in order to bypass the foreign office bureaucracies .
 His State Dept. seemed a stuck record, spinning endlessly in the grooves of the past . His State Department seemed to be a bit of a failed record .
 Their own travels in the early 1950s had verified the ambassador's discontents . Their own travel in the 1950s verified the Ambassador's discontent .
 In 1960 John and Robert Kennedy discussed their plans to regenerate the Department of Public Service . The Kennedy brothers planned to rebuild the department .
 Franklin D Roosevelt once told his sons that FDR made much the same kind of talk that you’re making now . Finally he said, "Sons, | want to tell you that | once went to see Franklin D . Roosevelt, who made much of the same kinds of talk
 "The first problem was to gain control of the national security machinery," says President Obama . "We need to get control of our national security," he says .
 The President and | discussed on a number of occasions after the election of moving Rusk out perhaps to the UN and appointing Bob McNamara Secretary of State . The President .
 He liked Ed Murrow very, very much . He really felt at the end that the ten or twelve people in the White House who worked under his direction with Mac Bundy ... performed all the functions of the State Department .
 Kennedy to an exceptional degree became his own Secretary of State, thought Harriman, who had served both FDR and JFK . Kennedy to be his own secretary of state .
 Still, even if the President might try to know everything, he could not do everything . Still, the President may try to do everything.
 After the Bay of Pigs, Robert became his brother’s eyes and ears around the national security establishment . Robert became Robert's brother's eyes, ears around national security forces .
 Kennedy ambassadors, frustrated by State Department orthodoxies, made the Attorney General’s office a port of call on home leave .
 The national security community soon recognized him as a major counter-vailing force on international decisions . He was a major force in international decisionmaking .
 He nagged the Secretary of the Department about the Department’s dilatoriness in hiring blacks . He said the Department was dilatory in hiring black workers .
 The Kennedys were exasperated by State’s philosophic attitude toward travel restrictions . State mocked America's pretense of being a truly open society, they said .
 The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 excluded from the U.S. past and present members of proscribed organizations, such as the Communist party and Communist-front organizations .
 It also empowered the Attorney General, when State so recommended, to grant waivers for reasons of compassion or of the national interest .
 Eisenhower administration administered the proscriptive sections of the act with enthusiasm . The Eisenhower administration was enthusiastic .
 Dulles selected Scott McLeod, a Joe McCarthy protégé, as head of the Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs . McLeod was a McCarthy pro-McCarthy protéé, who later became a CIA director .
 In the Dulles atmosphere, consuls abroad automatically denied visas to all remotely suspicious persons . The Dulles-style visa ban was imposed by the U.S. State Department of Immigration .
 Exchange agreements with Communist countries permitted the entry of party members from behind the Iron Curtain . But artists, writers and scientists from western Europe or Latin America were regularly turned away .
 President and Attorney General believed admission was unlikely to destroy the Republic . Their admission, the President and the Attorney General . believed, they believed, was unlikely .
 President Kennedy appointed Abba Schwartz administrator of the bureau in 1962 . President Kennedy also appointed Aba Schwartz as administrator of bureau .
 Schwartz, a liberal, was a law partner of James Landis’s, a close friend of Eleanor Roosevelt . He had long experience in refugee and immigration problems .
 You will be my personal appointee. I expect you to assert your authority and act for me. I also expect you will be your personal appointees. I will be in charge of the entire staff. You will have to assert authority, act for yourself .
 You know what | want—an Open Society—with the freest possible movement in and out of the country . You know . What | want? An Open Society, with the freeest possible movements in and around the country.
 Don't know what you'll find in State Department but you'll just have to work that out . Keep in touch with the Attorney General.
 Kennedy had never mentioned Rusk in his talks with Schwartz, Schwartz . The Secretary appeared indifferent; indeed Kennedy had . The secretary appeared indifferent .
 Justice’s waiver authority was used to reopen the United States to those formerly excluded . Together they vigorously used Justice's waiver authority to re-open the U.S.
 Professor Kaoru Yasui, a Japanese winner of the Lenin Peace Prize, was invited to the U.S. in the autumn of 1963, his visa application was at first turned down . Professor Yasui's visa application to the United States was initially turned down.
 Yasui visited the Kennedys, discussed the case, discussed it with the Kennedy family . Schwartz got on the case and the Attorney General issued the waiver and Yasui made his visit .
 Schwartz had to justify the action before seven closed sessions of the House Un-American Activities Committee . The republic survived, though in a few months Schwartz would have to justify action .
 Carlos Fuentes, the Mexican novelist, had been refused a visa in 1962 before Schwartz came to the Department . Schwartz was denied a visa to visit the Department in 1962 .
 Finally George Ball, Acting Secretary on a day when Rusk was out of town, sent the request over to Justice. Justice. The request was finally sent over to the Justice.
 He favored admitting foreigners to the U.S. and allowing them to stay when it was dangerous for them to return home . He favored allowing foreigners to stay in the United States .
 Once the Shah wanted twenty Iranian students in American colleges sent back to Iran, Rusk says . Rusk: The Shah wanted 20 students in U.S. colleges sent to Iran .
 The Secretary explained to the Attorney General that they were Communists, and the U.S. had better get rid of them . The Secretary of State said that the Communists were Communists and the United States had better .
 Kennedy consulted William O Douglas in the justice’s capacity as an expert on Iran . Kennedy consulted his old friend William O . Douglas in his capacity as a lawyer .
 In the forties and fifties, the Department grew accustomed to refusing passports to politically suspect citizens . The Department of Justice refused passports to political suspects .
 In 1958 the Supreme Court outlawed this practice in the absence of statutory authority . The practice was outlawed in 1958 . In 1958 it was outlawed by the court .
 In 1961, the Court brought into play provisions in that law forbidding passports to members of organizations required to register under the act . The court upheld the constitutionality of the Internal Security Act of 1950 .
 Robert Kennedy initiated a test case, which resulted in a Supreme Court decision in 1964 to invalidate the passport provision in the Internal Security Act . The passport provision was invalidated in 1964 .
 The most irksome constraint on travel came from the practice of placing the presumably more offensive Communist countries off limits . China, North Vietnam, North Korea, Albania, Cuba, Cuba were among the countries banned .
 JFK's problem with State was how to annex the Department to the New Frontier . JFK's State Department was the answer to the Kennedy problem: annexing it to the new frontier .
 It was difficult to do anything about Rusk; so the presidential eye moved on to the under secretary . Rusk was the president's deputy secretary of state .
 Chester Bowles was the most devoted New Frontiersman in the Department . Ironically, he was also devoted to the Department of Engineers .
 But, save for his first-class ambassadorial selections, Bowles had had small impact on the entrenched bureaucracy . Bowles has had little impact on bureaucracy .
 A disturbed Bowles called the President, who promptly invited him to luncheon . Bowles was invited by the President to the White House for lunch .
 He said precisely the things you and | have been advocating for years, and he said them well . He said the things he said were exactly what he said, and they were well .
 He then expressed his disappointment at the failure of the State Department to translate his views into action .
 He went on to say that changes must be made, and since it was assumed that the Under Secretary was in charge of administration, | was the logical one to change .
 An affectionate Bowles lobby swung into action and saved him a moment . Bowles was saved by an affectionate lobby lobby .
 Robert Kennedy sent his brother a glowing account by Ambassador Philip Kaiser of Bowles’s performance at a conference of American diplomats in Lagos, Lagos . Three weeks later, Robert Kennedy wrote a glowing report by Ambassador Kaiser to his brother .
 Rusk is no detail man and with both of them in those top jobs things are going to get steadily worse . Rusk will not be a detail man, but with both he and his boss being in charge, things will get worse .
 George Ball succeeded Bowles in November 1961 . Ball brought a refreshing crispness to the job . Ball replaced Bowles as England's first coach . Ball was appointed in November 1963 .
 Rusk’s best friend in the Department was George McGhee, the under secretary for political affairs . The administrative responsibility fell to McGhee . Rusk was Rusk's best friend .
 McGhee was soon shipped off as ambassador to Bonn, and the seventy-year-old Harriman took his place .
 Harriman had the signal advantages of wisdom, confidence and the knowledge of how to deal with Presidents . He had the signals of wisdom .
 Presidents always look around the room to see who agrees with a proposed decision . Presidents, Harriman said, always look at each other to see if they agree .
 He also had a singular capacity to get things done within the Department of Justice . He was also a singular .
 Robert Kennedy sent William Orrick over from Justice in late 1962 to become deputy under secretary for administration . Orrick became Orrick's first under secretary under secretary of administration .
 He wanted me, if | could, to interpret...the Foreign Service to him by whatever means | could . He wanted to interpret the Foreign Service by whatever way he could .
 Orrick overcame that, he discovered that the problems were deep and that the Kennedys to some extent misconceived them . Orrick: "The problems are deep and ... misconceived"
 With relief he seized the chance to come back to Justice in 1963 as chief of antitrust . He seized the opportunity to return to the Justice Department in 1963 .
 He'd be pretty outrageous sometimes in some of the things he’d talk about or get excited about . He’s "outrageous sometimes," he says .
 You weren’t ever sure whether he was just speaking for himself or for the President. You weren't ever sure if he was talking for himself .
 'I think in most cases he was speaking for himself, and if he thought what he elicited...was of significance, he would pass it on to the President. Actually, | think most of most cases ...he was speaking .
 Foreign policy is no longer a matter of transactions among chancelleries, says Attorney General . Foreign policy, he says, is now a matter not only of transactions but also of transactions between chancellersies .
 “Great attention has to be given than has been true in the past to these new and sometimes revolutionary elements”—labor leaders, intellectuals, students, students. Therefore, greater attention must be given to these elements, he says . ‘Greater attention has been given
 For those discussions our Foreign Service must know what we are doing here in this country, understand internal problems that we are facing, and know also what remedial steps we are taking . For that discussion, the Foreign Service should know what it is doing .
 They must understand what this government has accomplished for its people in a social way such as social security, minimum wage, housing, and what we are trying to do in the future . They must also understand social security and minimum wage .
 They must know our history and our culture so that they can discuss these matters freely and with candor . They must also know our culture and our history so that we can discuss matters freely .
 They wanted to replace protocol-minded, striped officials by reform-minded missionaries of democracy . The missionaries mixed with the people, spoke the native dialects, ate the food, and involved themselves in local struggles against ignorance .
 This view had its most genial expression in the Peace Corps, its most corrupt in the mystique of counterinsurgency . The Peace Corps is the most corrupt and corrupt in its mystique, writes John Sutter .
 The gospel of activism became the New Frontier’s challenge to the cautious, painstaking, spectatorial methods of the old diplomacy . The New Frontier is challenging the cautious and painstaking methods of diplomacy .
 Of all the New Frontiersmen, no one was a greater enthusiast for action diplomacy than Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was a New Frontier, a great advocate of action diplomacy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 What was sometimes later described as Kennedy activism was actually its opposite . Kennedy's activism was in fact its opposite. What was described as activism was the opposite.
 Eisenhower administration had to remove a veto imposed by the Eisenhower administration on a center-left government in Rome . White House forced to remove the veto after a long and painful argument .
 The withdrawal of American intervention in Italian politics was criticized by State Department people as itself an act of intervention . This withdrawal of U.S. intervention in Italy was criticized as itself itself as itself a . intervention, the State Department said .
 In special circumstances activism was useful in places where the U.S. in the preceding decade had intervened against social change . And in special circumstances activists were useful, especially in the United States . Activism was useful, but it was not necessary, says CNN.com's John Sutter
 In India, Africa and Latin America activist ambassadors gave valuable counsel to governments struggling against massive difficulties . Activists gave valuable advice on how to deal with problems .
 John Paton Davies, Jr., Jr., the old China hand, inspects the scene with dismay . John Pat on Davies was dismayed by the sight of the scene .
 Davies was not surprised that the Foreign Service did not win the confidence of the New Frontier . Davies said he was surprised that he had not won the support of the new Frontier .
 A constant participation of the American Ambassador in the domestic affairs of the country cannot produce constructive results . A process involving the U.S. Ambassador, no matter how high his motives or how great his political skill, can't be constructive results, he says .
 Robert Kennedy realized there was more to be said for the old diplomacy than he realized in 1961 . Robert Kennedy, at the time, was in the midst of the Cold War .
 President spoke to him late in 1962 about superseding Rusk by McNamara . Philip Graham of the Washington Post made the case .
 It encouraged the illusion that an internal crisis in a remote land might affect the peace of the world, it said .
 It led U.S. diplomats to try to do things in foreign countries that the people of the country ought to have done for themselves . It led American diplomats to . try to . do things . that people . ought to do for themselves, the country should .
 It nourished the faith that American ‘know-how’ could master anything; the ‘when in doubt, do something’ approach to an intractable world; . The officious solicitude that degenerated into cynical manipulation and finally into bloody slaughter .
 The professionals were right to question New Frontier activism in the execution of policy . New Frontier activists have been critical of the government's actions .
 Acheson and Dulles were wrong to resist, aS SO many did, all departures in the substance of policy from the hallowed doctrine . They were equally wrong not to resist . The U.S. has been in violation of the doctrine .
 Dulles purged the Department of independent-minded Foreign Service officers and converted it into a mighty temple of Cold War orthodoxy . Dulles had purged . Department of State officers .
 The failure of State to contribute to the President’s drive for Berlin negotiations showed the grip of Cold War dogmas .
 In subsequent years critics sought to portray the President himself as a rigid and zealous Cold Warrior .
 The CIA and Counterinsurgency remained the citadel of caution, professionalism and entrenched Cold War ways . The State Department was the Cold War State of the Art .
 Pentagon and CIA had grown far more than State at the pap of the Cold War . The Pentagon and the CIA grew far more in the 1950s than the State Department did .
 Almost at once the Kennedys were forced to confront the power of the military-intelligence complex . "Almost at once they were forced, almost at once, confronted the power"
 The so-called Cuban Brigade was a band of twelve hundred anti-Castro exiles, trained and launched by the CIA on a plan approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The occasion was the invasion of Cuba in April 1961 by the Cuban Brigade .
 Dick Bissell [CIA's deputy director of plans] at Jack's instructions came over to the Department of Justice and briefed me . Jack's orders were followed by the CIA, the director of intelligence, the CIA's director of operations .
 He told me at that time that the chances of success were about two out of three and that failure was almost impossible . Even if the force was not successful in its initial objective of establishing a beachhead, the men could become guerrillas, he says .
 President might not have approved of the operation if he had known that the chances of these men becoming guerrillas was practically nil . This, as it later turned out, was completely incorrect . The President might very well not have . approved of . the operation .
 Dick Bissell: "There really wasn't any alternative to accepting it" Jack: "I thought that ... based on the information that had been given to him by ... Allen Dulles" The president: "Based on ... the information ... that had ... been given ... by Dick Bis
 These men had to be gotten out of Guatemala and Nicaragua; . If we brought them back to the United States and turned them loose, it could be a tremendous problem both here and abroad, says President Obama .
 CIA: Chances of success as outlined by the CIA and outlined by Joint Chiefs of Staff were extremely good . CIA: "The chances of success are extremely good. The chance of success is extremely good"
 President Kennedy also had to reckon the political repercussions if he were to disband his predecessor’s Cuban liberation corps in the face of expert assurance that the project would prevail . President Kennedy faced the political risks of disbanding the Cuban liberation .
 "He called me down in Williamsburg where | was speaking and said we had run into some trouble," he said . He called me to tell me that he was in trouble .
 When | arrived there there was a meeting going on and the situation already looked dark . When . arrived there was there there there were meetings going on .
 He agreed to permit the Navy to come in closer to shore and ended the meeting by saying he wanted to be kept closely advised . He said he'd rather be called an aggressor than a bum .
 "We didn’t want to have this thing planned and the United States support and have it go wrong," says President Obama .
 That afternoon Dick Bissell called me at the Department of Justice and said that troops had been able to capture the air fields and the situation looked better . That afternoon, Bissell said that the situation had improved .
 It then turned out that the ship the CIA had in mind was the ship that was supposed to arrive there two or three days later and they couldn't get it there any earlier . The CIA took no cognizance of the ammunition ships that had run out on the action .
 He said that we had made a commitment that no American forces would be used and that the President shouldn't appear in the light of being a liar . The President said that he should not appear to be a liar.
 'We took the position that we didn’t really have enough information to know whether the air cover would make any difference or not. It was pointed out of course that the alternative was possibly destruction. We took the . position that . we didn't really have . enough information,
 If air cover should save the operation, perhaps we should take that step, perhaps . If the air cover is needed, perhaps it should be used to save the mission, perhaps, perhaps not .
 If it just meant the delay of a few hours before absolute and ultimate collapse, there wasn't any sense in it . On the other hand, if it just means the delay, there isn’t any sense of it .
 It was decided that the Navy would make a reconnaissance over the beach and try to determine where the fighting was taking place and whether there was any possibility or chance of holding out .
 He explained that it would take six or seven hours to get a reply and that meant that there couldn’t be any air cover that day . The request was put in place at about noon or one o’clock, he said .
 It would appear that the beach was extended to about ten miles. Anyway, we went ahead with that and they came back about seven o’clock that night and said they couldn’t see any fighting going on .
 The President for the previous three hours was battling hard to make arrangements to evacuate . The President had been trying to evacuate the country for three hours before the incident .
 By the time we received this information, however, the men were in the water . The incident occurred in the early hours of Monday morning .
 It was too late to send the destroyers in because they could be destroyed by artillery fire . The destroyers could not be sent in because of the danger of being hit by fire .
 He ordered them, however, to run up and down the beaches as close as they could and try to pick up any Survivors . He also ordered them to run around the beach as close to them as possible to find survivors .
 Over a period of the next six or seven days they picked up 25 or 30 men . Over the same period of time, the men were picked up by the police, police say .
 The CIA should have known that this was in bad shape and that we should take action to evacuate these men at a much earlier time than we did . Think it was incompetency .
 Dick Bissell always twists his hands and he was twisting them even more by the time this was over and for the following week . Bissell: "Dick Bissell was twisting his hands even more than he was before this week."
 He had the gout and had trouble walking and he was always putting his head in his hands . He had to put his hands in the hands .
 Jack kept shaking his head, rubbing his hands over his eyes during a meeting . It even had a great physical effect on Jack, who shook his head during the meeting .
 He said he felt that he had been badly undermined and that he felt it was very difficult to re-establishing a position . He said that his wife had been in a relationship with him for years and that she had been hurt .
 He summoned General Maxwell Taylor out of retirement to perform an autopsy . General Taylor performed an autopsy on the president's body .
 Robert Kennedy, Allen Dulles and Admiral Arleigh Burke joined Taylor on a board of inquiry . Kennedy, Dulles, Burke, Kennedy and Dulles were also on the board . The inquiry was launched in 1964 and Taylor was the subject of an inquiry .
 The Cuba Study Group met for six weeks in April and May and interrogated some fifty witnesses . The group interrogated some 50 witnesses in Cuba .
 After spending the day on the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy generally worked in his office on racial justice and other matters till late at night . Kennedy generally spent the day working on racial issues .
 The transcript shows that the Attorney General took the lead in examining the witnesses . The transcript was taken into account that the attorney general was taking the lead .
 His unsparing questions disclosed how pathetically ill considered the adventure was . He asked: "What do you think of the adventure? What do you have to do?"
 A good deal of thought has to go into whether you accept the ideas, advice and even the facts that are presented by your subordinates . What comes out of this whole Cuban matter is that a good deal must go into accepting the advice and facts presented by subordinates .
 If you work with a person for a long period of time, you take that into consideration when you are considering his ideas . If you have a long-term relationship with someone, you consider his ideas in consideration .
 He was taking them at face value when they told him that this was guerrilla country, that chances of success were good, that there would be uprisings, that the people would support this project, he accepted it .
 The President's experience in Cuba has made him a different man regarding his advisers, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are well aware of this, he says .
 "They realize far better now what their responsibilities and obligations are in this field. They realize now what they have to do now," she says .
 The President was looking to them for their military evaluation and they really didn't give it the attention that was necessary and study that was essential and didn't analyze the facts . The president was looking for a military evaluation .
 For instance they didn't make any study whether this country was proper guerrilla country. For instance, they didn’t make any studies whether this . country was properly guerrilla country, the government says .
 It was guerrilla country between 1890 and 1900, but it wasn't guerrilla country until 1890 .
 "Now, with helicopters, it is no longer guerrilla country," says commander . "There was no way these men fighting in here in this swampy area could possibly supply themselves," he says .
 Robert Kennedy scribbled in private notes on the Study Group meetings . The Joint Chiefs of Staff did “really bad work’s Joint Chiefs did on this whole matter,” he wrote . Robert Kennedy: “What really bad work [the Joint Chiefs] did ... is
 Their real function was to preserve the CIA and JCS from feelings of persecution . They were meant to protect the CIA from feeling persecution . The real function of the CIA was to protect them from persecution .
 Taylor, as chairman and draftsman, concentrated on securing a unanimous report . Taylor was chairman of the committee that secured the unanimous approval .
 Castro had dispersed his planes and, he told John Nolan of the Justice Department in 1963, had moved fifty antiaircraft guns to the area shortly after the invasion .
 Even if, against these precautions, the strike had been tactically successful, it would still have left 1200 CIA Cubans on the beachhead, surrounded by an avid enemy force .
 Maxwell Taylor was fifty-nine years old, articulate, dashing, urbane, both a consummate Army politician and an authentic war hero . He was both an articulate, articulate and dashing politician .
 He was impressed too by Kennedy’s attitude toward his brother—“a reversal of the normal fraternal relationship of a big brother looking after a younger one," he said .
 Robert Kennedy's friendship was solidified on the tennis court, survived subsequent policy disagreements and lasted to the end of his life . Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 The collapse of the ‘missile gap’ had given the Kennedys an early skepticism about the Joint Chiefs . ‘Missile gap' had given them skepticism about Joint Chiefs.
 The new President was not one for men in uniform with pointers reading aloud sentences off flip charts he could read much faster for himself . He said he was not going to rely on the advice of the military .
 In the spring of 1961 Kennedy received the Net Evaluation, an annual doomsday briefing analyzing the chances of nuclear war . The Net Evaluation is a doomsday test for the president of the U.S.
 Kennedy got up and walked right out in the middle of it, and that was the end of it . Kennedy walked out of the fight, leaving the scene .
 They had sedulously cultivated relations with powerful conservative legislators . Stennis, Mendel Rivers, Strom Thurmond, Barry Goldwater . They were sedulously cultivating relations with . powerful conservatives .
 They hunted and fished with right-wing politicians, supplied them aircraft for trips home and showed up at their receptions . They hunted, fished and visited politicians' receptions .
 The alliance between the military and the right disturbed the Kennedys . The alliance was formed in the 1960s and '60s .
 This was why the President backed McNamara so vigorously in the effort to stop warmongering speeches by generals and admirals . This was backed by McNamara .
 Radicals of the right were conducting an impassioned crusade not only against negotiation with the Soviet Union but also against social measures at home . The fluoridation of water was deemed a particular threat .
 Major General Edwin A Walker was in a sense the heir of Major General George Van Horn Moseley, who had gone, in the thirties, from high Army commands to the domestic fascist movement . Walker had made a menacing appearance at Ole Miss during the Meredith affair .
 Seven Days in May depicted a Pentagon attempt to take over the government . The President remarked, “It’s possible,” when asked if it was possible .
 If there were a second Bay of Pigs, the military would begin to feel it their patriotic obligation to preserve the nation . The military would feel patriotic duty to protect the nation from a second invasion .
 Kennedy asked Reuther what he thought the federal government could do, within the First Amendment, to curb right-wing extremism . Kennedy: Reuther said the government can do more to curb extremism in the U.S.
 Reuther, who never liked to be at a loss for a program, said he would make some recommendations . Reuther: "I would like to see some recommendations" Reuther says he will make recommendations .
 In December 1961 they gave the Attorney General a memorandum addressed particularly to the problem of the radical right and the armed services . They recommended withdrawal of tax exemptions from right-wing foundations and re-examination of free radio and television time .
 The memorandum received fairly wide distribution around the government, soon leaked, producing an aggrieved counterattack on the Attorney General . The memorandum, which received wide distribution, was soon leaked .
 The administration moved cautiously on the Reuther recommendations . For this and other reasons, it moved cautiously, the administration says .
 President tried to interest Senator John Pastore of Rhode Island, chairman of the Senate Communications Subcommittee, in doing something about right-wing harangues .
 Phillips encouraged persons and organizations attacked on the air to demand reply time . Phillips moved to the Democratic National Committee and encouraged people and organizations to attack on air .
 The effort resulted in over five hundred replies in the next few months . It doubtless had an inhibiting effect on right-wing broadcasts .
 Robert Kennedy shared his brother’s admiration of and affection for the Secretary of Defense . Robert Kennedy: "I am very proud of my brother's work in the military"
 The Kennedys also thought highly of Gilpatric, Cyrus Vance and the other civilian officials . The Kenneseses were also highly of the civilian officials involved in the administration .
 Kennedy kept Taylor on as military representative in the White House . A year later, when Lyman Lemnitzer’s term expired, he made him chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 With Taylor reinforcing McNamara, Kennedy believed that the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in the absence of further Bays of Pigs, were under control .
 The Bay of Pigs raised acute questions about the Agency’s responsiveness to higher authority . The agency was criticized for its lack of responsiveness to authority .
 Haynes Johnson's excellent book The Bay of Pigs reported CIA operatives told the Cuban Brigade that, if the President tried to call off the invasion, they should ‘arrest’ the operatives and go ahead anyway —“virtually treason,” Robert Kennedy thought .
 Dulles and Bissell misled the White House about vital features of the plan, it was evident . The uprising behind the lines would follow the landings, they had given them to understand, would follow .
 CIA had given a false impression about the ease with which the invaders could slip away from the beachhead to become guerrillas in the back country . And the CIA gave a totally false impression that the invasion could easily slip away .
 One surmises that there were equally vital thoughts withheld . In addition to misinformation, one surmishes that there was equally vital thought withheld .
 It is hard to believe that Dulles and Bissell assumed the operation would succeed within the limits imposed . The operation would have to be limited to the limits of the limited powers of the CIA .
 They may well have assumed that, if it faltered, the President would have no choice but to follow the road to the end and send in U.S. troops .
 CIA operatives assured Brigade leaders American military assistance would be there if they needed it . CIA operatives actually assured the Brigade leaders that U.S. military assistance was there if necessary .
 Howard Hunt, the original chief of political action for the project, had no doubt about this . Howard Hunt was Howard Hunt's chief of campaign action . Hunt said: "Howard Hunt, Howard Hunt is the man behind the project. Howard Hunt has no doubt"
 When Kennedy publicly excluded the use of American troops before the invasion, “I did not take him seriously,” he says . “When Kennedy excluded use of U.S. troops, I didn't think him seriously," he adds .
 CIA planners did not reckon with his inherent prudence and his ability to refuse escalation . CIA planners didn't reckon with him, he says, and he refused escalation .
 Kennedy: "We're not going to plunge into an irresponsible action just because a fanatical fringe ... puts so-called national pride above national reason" Kennedy: “We’re not going . to plunge ... into an . irresponsible action"
 In order to get him to go along, Dulles had to suggest repeatedly, without ever saying so explicitly, that, if Kennedy canceled the project, he would appear less zealous than Eisenhower against communism .
 The elimination of Castro in a vacuum would only have led to a more violent Cuban regime under Fidel’s radical younger brother Raul or under the Argentine revolutionist Che Guevara .
 The murder of Castro might produce enough shock and disorganization to put the regime in jeopardy . In the context of invasion, however, the murder could put the Castro regime in danger .
 CIA chief suggests elimination of Fidel Castro in order to “accelerate the fall’s fall” of his government . CIA's Western Hemisphere Division chief recommends elimination of Castro . CIA chief: "thorough consideration be given to the elimination"
 Intelligence agencies, sealed off by walls of secrecy from the rest of the community, tend to form societies of their own . V.I.V. V. V . Intelligence agencies tend to be secretive and secretive .
 Prolonged immersion in the self-contained, self-justifying, ultimately hallucinatory world of clandestestinity and deception erodes the reality principle .
 Intelligence operatives, in the CIA and FBI, had begun to see themselves as the appointed guardians of the Republic . They were morally authorized to do on their own whatever they believed the nation's security demanded .
 CIA director and Secretary of State were brothers . CIA Director of State and Director of Central Intelligence was brothers . Agency had unusual freedom in 1950s .
 Covertaction operators, working on relatively small budgets, helped overthrow governments deemed pro-Communist in lran and Guatemala . helped install supposedly pro-western governments in Egypt and Laos and planned the overthrow and murder of Castro in 1960 .
 Congress and press looked on these activities, insofar as they knew about them, with complacency . Congress and the press were complacent, they looked on the activities, but with complacent .
 Only one group had grave misgivings and informed criticism; expressed, however, in the deepest secrecy . "Only one group of people had grave concerns," the author says .
 The President’s Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities was created by Eisenhower in 1956 and composed of unimpeachably respectable private citizens . This, improbably, was the President's Board .
 Board appoints panel to look at CIA’s covert operations . Panel led by Robert Lovett and David Bruce to look into CIA's covert ops .
 CIA covert action was exerting “significant, almost unilateral influences ... on the actual formulation of our foreign policies ... sometimes completely unknown” to the local American ambassador . CIA representatives were “a horde of CIA representatives” swarming around the planet, the report says .
 All too often the State Department knew “little or nothing” of what the CIA was doing . State Department often knew ‘little or . nothing’ of what it was doing. State Department officials often knew little or nothing about CIA operations .
 In 1957 the CIA station in Indonesia decided that the United States should back a military revolt against Sukarno . The CIA station decided to back the U.S. in 1957 .
 The spooks moved on many fronts, even fabricating a Sukarno mask for an actor to wear in a pornographic film to be ground out in the blue movie mills of Los Angeles and used thereafter .
 John Allison, the ambassador in Djakarta, opposed the idea of overthrowing the regime . John Allison is the ambassador to the country's capital .
 Allen Dulles promised to keep the new ambassador, Howard P Jones, apprised of CIA activity in Indonesia . Jones was not informed that CIA was giving military assistance to the rebels .
 As the rebellion collapsed in May, a CIA pilot, Allen L Pope, was shot down and captured . Allen Pope was captured by the rebels .
 The chief result, the board said, had been to strengthen the Communists in Indonesia . The board said the chief result of the result was to strengthen Indonesia's Communist Party .
 In 1959 the 5412 Special Group began to meet regularly . In 1959 they began meeting regularly for the first time .
 Esterline briefed the board late in 1960 on the Cuban project, its members, Lovett particularly, registered dismay, especially over the manner in which the planning was being administered .
 CIA’s concentration on political, psychological and related covert action activities have tended to detract substantially frorti the execution of its primary intelligence-gathering mission, the authors say . In addition, we believe that CIA's concentration .
 The testimony demolishes the myth that the CIA was a punctilious and docile organization . The CIA acted only in response to express instruction from higher authority, the report says .
 Like the FBI, it was a runaway agency, the agency was equipped with a wide choice of weapons, reckless purposes, a global charter, maximum funds and minimum accountability . It was also equipped with men trained in deception, weapons, weapons and reckless purposes .
 Lovett told him CIA was badly organized, dangerously amateurish and excessively costly . Lovett said CIA was dangerously organized and expensive . CIA was "dangerously amateurish," he said .
 This, he said, had not been possible with Dulles as director and Eisenhower as President . This had been possible in the 1950s and '60s .
 James R Killian, Jr., of MIT, of MIT as chairman and Clark Clifford as a member . Clark Clifford was also a member of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board .
 The board enjoyed greater presidential support under Kennedy than before . Most of its recommendations were adopted by Kennedy .
 It was not organized to find out things an agency adept at concealment wished to conceal . "It's not easy to say things," the agency said .
 Bissell replaced as chief of the clandestine services by Richard Helms . Bissell was replaced by Helms, an OSS-CIA veteran whose background lay in secret intelligence rather than dirty tricks .
 The 5412 Special Group was reconstituted with new authority over CIA covert action and with Maxwell Taylor as chairman . Maxwell Taylor was chairman of the 5412 special group . The group is now known as 5412 .
 The President quietly gave Robert Kennedy an informal watching brief over the intelligence community . To complete the chain, he quietly gave the President an informal brief over intelligence .
 His Cuba report concluded with a proposal for an extraordinary reorganization of the entire government in order to fight the Cold War . The report concluded that the Cuban government should be restructured .
 Cold War strategy should be decided by an interdepartmental strategic resources group in charge of all situations around the planet certified as "critical" by a Cold War indications center . Taylor recommended that the strategy was decided by a group of experts .
 Rusk understandably saw the scheme as Taylor's takeover bid for control of foreign policy . Rusk saw it as a bid to take control of the country's foreign policy.
 Robert Kennedy, filled with inchoate urgencies after the Bay of Pigs, had endorsed the grandiose plan but does not appear to have objected to its disregard thereafter . Robert Kennedy was also beguiled by Taylor, and also .
 The President did, however, pluck from the exercise not only Taylor himself, but also fragments of Taylor’s bureaucratic dream . The President saw Taylor as a handy instrument for managing a benighted JCS .
 President believed in 1951 that the characteristic mode of Communist military pressure was not direct confrontation but indirect aggression and especially guerrilla warfare . President believed ever since his visit to Vietnam in 1951 he had believed ever . since that visit to . Vietnam, he said .
 Khrushchev's speech was the background from which the famous speech derived its plausibility and menace . Subsequent guerrilla successes in Cuba and Laos, accompanied now by rising guerrilla threats in Latin America and Africa, provided the background .
 With nuclear war inconceivable and limited war improbable, guerrilla war had evidently become the chosen Soviet weapon . guerrilla war was the chosen weapon for the Soviet Union . With limited war impossible, guerrilla warfare had evidently been chosen weapon .
 If Kennedy was deceived about the efficacy of this threat, so no doubt was Khrushchev . If Kennedy had been deceived about this threat he was also deceived, so was the Soviet leader .
 Kennedy in 1961 saw counterguerrilla action as the way to plug the great gaping hole in the fabric of peace . In any event Kennedy in any event JFK in 1961 wanted to plug a hole in peace .
 Taylor had advocated conventional force for limited war, not special forces for guerrilla war . He was delighted to add counterinsurgency to the menu of 'options' available in the name of flexible response .
 The theorists did not see counterinsurgency as any permanent solution to the turmoil of the Third World . Counterinsurgencies were not a permanent solution, the theorists said . The theorists were concerned about the turmoil in the Middle East .
 Guerrilla warfare was the means by which “scavengers of the modernization process” sought to exploit emergent revolutionary aspirations, says the author . Guerrilla Warfare is a form of guerrilla warfare, the author says .
 Counterguerrilla action was the Shield that would protect the development process from Communist disruption until the nation gained the social strength to control the situation itself . The nation's social strength would be able to control its situation .
 If counterinsurgency persuaded Moscow to drop the weapon of national-liberation wars, the world could look forward to an era of tranquility . Counterinsurgentency could also persuade Moscow to stop using the weapon .
 President directed McNamara to instruct the Pentagon to place more emphasis on counterinsurgency . At his first National Security Council meeting, on February 1, 1961, McNamara directed the Pentagon .
 Special Group was supposed to coordinate overt American efforts to help foreign governments threatened by guerrilla insurrection . The group was intended to control CIA covert action .
 The model of successful counterinsurgency lay at hand in Ramon Magsaysay’s victory over the Hukbalahaps in the Philippines in the early 1950s .
 After working with Magsaysay, Lansdale had moved on to Saigon as CIA station chief . Lansdale was CIA's station chief in Saigon .
 Pyle's dream was to establish a Third Force in Vietnam, opposed equally to the colonialist French and the Communist Viet Minh . Pyle’s dream of establishing a Third force in Vietnam was to oppose equally to French and Communist forces .
 Greene: The result, as rendered by Greene, showed the horrible consequences of ignorant good intentions . Greene: "The result is the result of ignorance and ignorance."
 He combined confident ideological naiveté and a disregard of consequences with genuine affection for alien lands and a certain political realism . He combined ideological naivety with a disregard for consequences .
 Kennedy's emphasis on the political character of people’s war was at the heart of the Kennedy theory of counterinsurgency . Still, his emphasis on preempting the revolution and thereby taking the human base away from the guerrillas was still at heart .
 The mission of Special Group was less the waging of guerrilla war than its prevention, Vill Vill Vill says . Vill Vill: "The mission was less than the waging a guerrilla war but its prevention" Vill: The mission was "to prevent the spread of guerrilla warfare"
 It was essentially an ad hoc, trouble-shooting, expediting body, established not to create policy, but to make a slow-moving bureaucracy act quickly . It soent the most time on Latin America, then on Southeast Asia—Cambodia, Laos, Siam
 The use of force to overthrow certain types of government is not always contrary to U.S. interests, says President Obama . Use of force is not necessarily contrary to United States interests, he says .
 Counterinsurgency might best be described as social reform under pressure . The country's social reform is under pressure from the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 "Any effort that disregards the base of social reform, and becomes preoccupied with gadgets and techniques and force, is doomed to failure," the author says . "It should not be supported by the United States," he says .
 The Special Forces were instructed in harvesting crops, digging wells, curing diseases, delivering babies and other benign undertakings .
 The Cl Group was more effective in training Latin Americans to cope with insurgencies . The group was also effective in other areas, however, in training them to deal with insurgents .
 Academies in Washington and Panama instructed police officers in riot control, a practice much criticized later . Academies were criticized for instructing police officers .
 The police, trained under Trujillo, knew nothing but to shoot to kill . But, as John Bartlow Martin observed in the Dominican Republic, “the police knew nothing . but to kill.” Martin .
 Castro had begun his covert action program against Latin America in the spring and summer of 1959, some months before the U.S. went into the business against him . The United States had begun its covert action against Castro in 1959 .
 By 1963 the progressive democratic regime led by the dauntless Romulo Betancourt in Venezuela was Castro’s main target . Castro's main target was the government of Venezuela, which led to the death of Castro's son .
 Castro plainly saw Betancourt as a greater threat than, say, Perez Jimenez, the Venezuelan dictator in the fifties, would ever have been . Castro was not a dictator, but he was a dictator of the 1950s and '60s .
 Latin America, we thought in the early sixties, might be facing an ultimate choice between the Castro way and the Betancourt way . The Castro way was the way of the Betanourt way, and Betancourt way . Latin America was facing a choice between Castro and Bet
 Kennedy: Betancourt's fight for democracy made him a symbol of what we wish for our own country and for our sister republics . Kennedy: "We wish for us to see democracy in our own countries"
 The Cuban government staged a “Week of Solidarity with the Venezuelan Revolution” to cheer on the disruption of the presidential election scheduled for December . In November 1963, the Cuban government held a week of solidarity with Venezuela's revolution .
 Castro’s campaign was a flop. Later in the month the Venezuelans discovered four tons of arms shipped by Castro to a cache on their northwest coast .
 90 percent of voters went to the polls, despite the threat of snipers . Despite the threat that voters would be picked off by revolutionary snipers, 90 percent went to polls .
 United States technical assistance to the Venezuelan police unquestionably helped the Betancourt government to put down the guerrillas . No amount of police efficiency would have availed had not the social policy won hearts and minds of the guerillas .
 For the first time in Venezuelan history one elected president peacefully succeeded another . The first time a Venezuelan president has succeeded another president has been elected president .
 There is no evidence that the American schools ever offered courses in torture . The American schools did not offer torture courses .
 Too many of the students added torture when they got home. Still the instruction was much concerned with the psychology of interrogation. Still . Still .
 Costa-Gavras film State of Siege was much exaggerated but had its point . Costa Gavras had a point, but the film was much more than a satire .
 There was also the danger that police training might be used for the repression of progressive democrats seeking constitutional change as well as terrorists sent in from abroad .
 President took a highly publicized personal interest in enlarging the Special Forces . The President sent to Fort Bragg for literature on guerrilla war, putting them in green berets .
 Counterinsurgency training had been given to 114,000 American officers and nearly 7000 from foreign countries . Nearly 7000 foreign countries had received training from U.S. forces in Afghanistan .
 Foreign Service officers, even ambassadors, had to attend counterinsurgency seminars before assignment to the Third World . Foreign Service officials, including ambassadors, were required to attend the seminars .
 After the Bay of Pigs and the Berlin Wall, he did not feel his brother could afford another setback . He did not want his brother to be allowed to continue fighting for his country .
 The Attorney General cross-examined those called before the Cl Group as caustically as, in the same period—before the Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity—cross-examined officials whose agencies had not hired enough blacks .
 A State Department official told a reporter, “If one more time about his looking like a choirboy, I'll kill you.” After a notably harsh session, a man from the State Department said, ‘If one of you guys writes one more . again about his
 Take a look at that bony little face, those hard opaque eyes, and then listen to him bawl somebody out . Listen to the full interview here: "Take a listen to the whole thing."
 Despite the President’s benediction, counterinsurgency retained strong opponents within the government . Counterinsurgentency retains strong opponents in the government, says the President .
 The Army was institutionally hostile to freewheeling officers like Lansdale and irregular formations like the Green Berets . Lansdale was the Army's most senior officer in the early years of his career . He died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 Guerrilla action was beyond the conception of an opulent military establishment dedicated to high-tech war . Guerrilla activity was simply beyond the . conception of the opulent . establishment dedicated . to high . technology war .
 The State Department, except for Harriman, thought counterinsurgency had its uses in Latin America, was even less enthusiastic . State Department was also less enthusiastic about counterinsergency .
 The theory the Kennedys had taken from Lansdale had a superficial plausibility . The theory was won by “social reform under pressure” under pressure, but it was superficial .
 Few governments under guerrilla attack cared much about their own dispossessed . Very few governments under . control cared much more about the . own dispossession of the . population .
 The regimes most severely challenged were those most suicidally determined to hold on to despotic power and privilege . The regimes were those who had to be killed to keep on to their status .
 Modernization and reform might well undermine stability the regime had without eliciting the active loyalty of a long-suffering populace . Modernization may well undermine whatever stability the government had without winning back the loyalty of the people .
 The American ambassador was by definition debarred from using the ultimate sanction—withdrawal of American support . He lacked leverage to force apprehensive oligarchs to take measures they believed threatening to their own Survival . Survival. Survival.
 The professional military, American and native, lacked ability or desire to make social revolutions . The pro-American military, U.S. and native lacked ability, desire to change social revolution .
 The Special Forces themselves tended by a self-selecting process to attract, with notable exceptions, men whose taste was less for good works than for violence .
 As a weapon, counterinsurgency was turning cruelly in the hand of the user, the author says . Counterinsurgentency was becoming a weapon of war, he says .
 Its primary consequence was to keep alive the American belief in the capacity and right to intervene in foreign lands . The U.S. should have been able to intervene on foreign lands, he says .
 The failure of counterinsurgency was another phase in the education of Robert Kennedy, the author says . Kennedy: "The failure of anti-war efforts is another phase of his education"
 The night the Bay of Pigs collapsed, Maxwell Taylor was struck by John Kennedy's already ""deep remorse"" about the Cubans captured by Castro . Maxwell Taylor: John Kennedy was struck with "deep remorse" about captured Cubans .
 He had had trouble sleeping, he told O'Donnell one morning; "I was thinking about those poor guys in prison down in Cuba" He said he was thinking of the prisoners in Cuba .
 'We felt strongly about it. So we wanted to do whatever was necessary, whatever we could, to get them out' 'I'm not scared. So I'm scared,' she says. 'We're not scared'
 From start to finish Castro spoke with rare consistency of an ‘indemnity’ of five hundred bulldozers . Castro spoke from start to end of his speech . Castro: "From start-to-finish it was an “indemnation” of a �
 D-8 Super Caterpillar bulldozers are better suited for the construction of airfields and missile bases than for agricultural work, Castro says .
 Castro finally said he would settle for the dollar value of the bulldozers, which he estimated at $28 million . Castro: "The bulldozers are worth more than $30 million"
 The committee expired at the end of June 1961 in a burst of recriminatory statements to and from Castro . The committee was disbanded in the wake of the Cuban assassination attempt .
 Exiles formed the Cuban Families Committee for the Liberation of the Prisoners of War . In Key West, exiles formed a group for the liberation of the prisoners .
 At the end of March 1962, the prisoners were brought to trial . Nine months later, they were brought back to trial for their crimes .
 Roberto San Roman, whose brother Pepe was in the dock but who had himself escaped from the beachhead, flew from Florida to Washington . He was able to fly to Washington to meet his brother Pepe .
 President Joao Goulart of Brazil asked President Castro to spare the prisoners . He invited San Roman to telephone “ten times a day” and sent him to see Richard Goodwin at the White House .
 Robert Kennedy proposed an exchange of $28 million worth of agricultural products for prisoners . Robert Kennedy now proposes an exchange for agricultural products in exchange for the prisoners .
 President called me at 7 o’clock to find out what the Food-for-Prisoners deal is all about . The President called the White House at 7 p.m. April 5 .
 We had all assumed that the President knew about it, but apparently no one had told him . "Apparently no one has told him. No one had been told him," says President Obama .
 This morning Adlai Stevenson had mentioned it to him, and JFK had not known what he had been talking about . JFK had known nothing about it, and had been unaware of it .
 The President asked me to check into the matter and let him know how far things had gone . Bobby called Bobby, who seemed to be surprised and chagrined that his brother did not know about it, and agreed to call him and bring him up to date .
 Representatives of the Cuban Families Committee arrived in Havana with pledges of $28 million in agricultural products . Two days later, representatives of the committee arrived in Cuba with pledges .
 To prove good faith, he said he would release sixty sick and wounded prisoners to the U.S. to the United States . He said they would release sick and . wounded prisoners .
 For this first installment he expected an interim payment of $2.2 million . For the first installment, he expected $2 million. million. For the interim payment, he said, "I'm not sure how much I'll get"
 The sixty men arrived in Miami exactly one year after they had left Nicaragua for the Bay of Pigs . The men were sent to Miami in 1961 .
 The government could not pay the ransom, he advised the exiles to form a fundraising committee . Explaining that the government cannot afford the ransom he advised them to form the committee .
 Public relations sages advised the Cubans to sign up an eminent chairman for a sponsoring committee . The Cubans should sign up a chairman for the sponsoring committee.
 Donovan took the case without knowledge of the Attorney General’s interest22 and without fee . Donovan took his case without knowing of Attorney General's interest22 . Donovan said he did not take the case for fee .
 Reports from the prisons gave an alarming picture of hunger, sickness and degradation . Reports from prisons gave a disturbing picture of the prison conditions .
 Castro asked about the $2.2. million due for the prisoners released in April . Castro: "I'm not sure what happened to the prisoners," he said .
 Castro could call the ransom indemnification and in return would take it in medicine and food . Castro agreed, in effect, that he could call it an indemnification . After discussion they agreed, it was agreed that Castro would take the ransom in medicine .
 In September, Robert Kennedy noted that it seemed “virtually impossible for us to send $60 million worth of equipment to Cuba with part of our population and a number of political leaders calling for an invasion of Cuba"""; $25 million perhaps, perhaps, but not $60
 Donovan flew again to see Castro in early October, though suffering from acute bursitis . Donovan flew to Castro's home in October to see him again, though he was still in pain . Donovan is still in the hospital with a severe infection in his abdomen .
 Two days later John Kennedy announced the discovery of nuclear missile bases in Cuba . John Kennedy said the bases had been discovered in Cuba, Cuba, in 1962 .
 Castro was only part of the unfinished business with Castro . Redeeming the prisoners was part of Castro's unfinished business . Castro's legacy is still to be seen .
 Castro's regime is now a Marxist-Leninist outpost in the western hemisphere . Castro’s own statement: “There was also the regime itself, now by Castro”
 Lemnitzer, Burke, . Rusk, . Bissell, Bissell and . Dulles, several others present . Lemnitz, . Burke, Burke and . Bisnell .
 Jack and | then left the meeting and took a walk and they worked for another three or four hours . Jack and . | came back and visited them around three o’clock. Jack and. | then went on a walk .
 There was discussion about whether we should send American troops into Cuba . There was also discussion about sending American troops there .
 Some of the people at the meeting were very outspoken and took an attitude of ‘He can’t do this to us.’ The meeting took place in a bid to prevent the death penalty being reinstated .
 He started complaining after one of the meetings on D plus two that he was against Cuba . He told him that he might have been against it before but now he was for it from then on .
 The other great question is getting an Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America . John Connally would do the job, he says .
 Lyndon Johnson had a slight flare-up with Lyndon Johnson at one of these meetings . Not an expert in the field but at least he is a man of action .
 At D plus two we started to go around the table to try to find out who was in favor of the project . At D+ two, we tried to go round the table and find out .
 McNamara had a talk with Dean Rusk after D plus two . Rusk wanted to make sure that everybody in their Departments understood that the important matter was to stand firm and not try and pass the blame off to somebody else .
 We had very little difficulty along those lines. We had gone to Europe shortly after the Bay of Pigs. They all accepted that and | think we had very . little difficulty . The situation in Europe was very different .
 When | returned early in May, | attended meetings of the Cuban task force on postdebacle policy . He returned early this month to attend meetings of a task force that aims to improve relations with Cuba .
 At the National Security Council meeting, McNamara expressed Department of Defense opposition to this idea too . McNamara also expressed his opposition to the idea at the next day .
 Not many are really prepared to send American troops in there at the present time but maybe that is the answer . Maybe that's the answer to the problem .
 Mansfield sensibly recommended “gradual disengagement of the United States government from anti-Castro revolutionary groups” and full steam ahead on the Alliance for Progress . Without economic progress “Castroism is likely to soread elsewhere in Latin America whether or not Castro remains
 Robert Kennedy was determined to find quicker ways of striking back . With his brother under Communist harassment in Berlin and Southeast Asia and under Republican harassment in the U.S. Robert Kennedy wanted to strike back .
 In the interstices of his other battles of 1962, with the segregationists and with the mob, with Jimmy Hoffa and with Edgar Hoover, he now began to expend much time and concern on the overthrow of Castro .
 McCone proved, as expected, an able executive and, as not expected by some of us, a detached analyst of intelligence . Even when the intelligence might clash with his own robustly conservative views, McCone was a detached intelligence analyst . McCone is a conservative executive and a detached
 Robert Kennedy used to kid him about his conservatism and try to nudge the Agency to the left . Robert Kennedy was a conservative, but he was a liberal, he says .
 The Agency seized on the Cuban problem as the way of making its comeback from the Bay of Pigs . With sure bureaucratic instinct, the Agency seized upon the issue . The agency seized on it as a way to make its comeback .
 The CIA wished to organize Castro’s overthrow itself from outside Cuba, as against those in the White House, the Attorney General’‘s office and State who wished to support an anti-Castro movement /nside Cuba .
 The CIA’s idea was to fight a war; the others hoped to promote a revolution . The CIA was fighting a war, but the others wanted a revolution, the author says .
 Any successful anti-Castro movement inside Cuba would have to draw on disenchanted Castroites . Castroites would aim to rescue the revolution from the Communists .
 This approach, stigmatized as Fidelismo sin Fidel, was opposed by businessmen, both Cuban and American, who dreamed of the restoration of nationalized properties . This approach was opposed to the idea of nationalizing properties, both in Cuba .
 The CIA has a reputation for its inability to keep anything secret . But the Agency's preference for operations is likely to be dictated less by business interests .
 The CIA specifications favored those Cubans “most willing to accept CIA identification and control” and discriminated against Cubans who insisted on running their own show . The specifications had in mind the anti-Castro radical Manuel Ray, who was believed to have the most effective network .
 Robert Kennedy thought that the savior of Magsaysay might have the answer to Castro . Robert Kennedy was aware of Lansdale’s doctrine of preempting the revolution .
 I assigned him to make survey of situation in Cuba—the problems & our assets. McN said he would make latter available for me . McN said to make it available for him. He said he was assigned to survey of Cuban situation . McN: "I assigned him an assessment of situation
 My idea is to stir things up on island with espionage, sabotage, general disorder, run by Cubans themselves with every group but Batistaites & Communists .
 "Do not know if we will be successful in overthrowing Castro but we have nothing to lose in my estimate," says President Obama . "We have nothing in our estimate. Do not know what we will do in the hope of overthaining Castro"
 He recommended “a very different course” from the CIA “harassment” operations of the summer, he said . He recommended a “very different course,” he said.
 Lansdale argued that the U.S. should seek out Cubans who had opposed Batista and then had become disillusioned with Castro . Lansdale: Instead, the United States should seek people who oppose Castro and disillusioned .
 IV Mongoose, like the baby in the old story, was attended at the cradle by good fairies with divergent wishes . Mongoose was attended by a good fairie with a different wish for him .
 Mongoose had to be kept small, functioning at what was known in intelligence circles as a low noise level . Since “anything big was going to be charged to the U.S.,” “Mongoose’s” had to operate at a low level
 The President did not want undue activity to jeopardize the lives of the Bay of Pigs prisoners, he says . Nor did the President wish undue activity . The President wished undue activity was not jeopardized .
 Lansdale’s wish was activity, a lot of it, leading to internal revolution, he says . Lansdale: “I’m not going to be afraid of it. I’ll be surprised by it,” he writes .
 Task Force W, the CIA unit for Mongoose, soon had four hundred American employees in Washington and Miami, over fifty proprietary fronts, its own navy of fast boats, a rudimentary air force and two thousand Cuban agents . Task force W was created by the CIA in 1961 .
 Miami headquarters became for a season the largest CIA station in the world . Miami headquarters was for a year-long run of the CIA's largest headquarters .
 The Agency, in short, was more bent than ever on fighting a war . The objective was the creation of “internal dissension and resistance leading to eventual U.S. intervention” (October 1962)
 William King Harvey had begun as an FBI counterespionage agent . He was renowned for turning Nazi spy William Sebold into a double agent during World War II .
 Hoover was fired by Hoover for drunkenness in 1947 . He caught on to the CIA and became one of its celebrated operators .
 The 'Berlin tunnel' enabled the CIA for many months in 1955 56 to intercept communications between East Berlin and Moscow . His great coup, the ‘Berlin . tunnel, had enabled the . CIA to intercept . communications between . East Berlin, Moscow .
 He was a histrionic fellow who always packed a gun, even in CIA headquarters in Langley, Langley . He was always packing a gun .
 The momentum of the overblown Miami establishment generated its own excesses . But the momentum of Miami's overblown establishment generated his own excesss, he says .
 Lansdale would ask what they expected random hit-and-run raids to accomplish . Lansdale: "I don't know what they expect to accomplish. It's not surprising that random raids aren't successful"
 Lansdale made his directives increasingly precise in the hope of stopping aimless sabotage and saving courageous Cubans from pointless death .
 Harvey protested to McCone about the “tight controls exercised by the Special Group” and the ‘excruciating detail” he was expected to provide . Harvey protested .
 Harvey’s people included soldiers of fortune like William Robertson, who landed on the beach at the Bay of Pigs . Robertson was a flamboyant figure who, in defiance of presidential orders, had landed .
 It was the ‘dirty dozen’ spirit, action for action’s sake, without concern for the safety of the Cubans involved or for the reprisal effect or for political follow-up . The 'dirty dozen' spirit was not concerned for safety of Cubans or
 We have a tendency as a people to want to see things done right—and, if thpy aren’t, we step in and try to do them ourselves . We step in to do things ourselves. We want to know if things are going to be done right .
 Robert Kennedy found Harvey and his meaningless melodrama detestable . As for Robert Kennedy, he found Harvey's melodramasasas "detestable" Robert Kennedy .
 He wanted it to do more, the terrors of the earth, but what they were he knew not . What they were they were, he said .
 He was wildly busy in 1962 — a trip around the world in February, the steel fight in April, civil rights always, Ole Miss in September, organized crime in September . He was fighting with Lyndon Johnson about minority employment, fighting with Edgar Hoover about everything .
 Castro was high on his list of emotions, much lower than his concerns . Castro was not high on the list of concerns, but he was much lower on his informed concerns. Castro was a high-profile figure in the Obama administration .
 When he was able to come to meetings of Special Group , as he did his best to do, he made up in pressure for what he lacked in knowledge .
 The Mongoose group meditated a ‘stepped up Course B Plus’ intended to inspire open revolt . The intelligence-collection phase ended in August 1962, the group said .
 Kennedy, who was away on the west coast, endorsed B Plus in a message to Taylor . Kennedy was away in California when he endorsed the campaign .
 CIA experts were poring over photographs just taken by a U-2 plane over western Cuba . CIA experts also pored over photographs taken by the U.2 plane on the same day .
 The CIA had yet another program against Castro, the one initiated in 1960 and dedicated to his death . V. Castro's death was dedicated to the CIA's efforts .
 The Agency had considered assassination within its purview since the early Eisenhower years when it gave a special unit responsibility for, among other things, kidnapping and murder . The Agency has considered assassinations since Eisenhower .
 The Church committee found no evidence that this special unit tried to kill any foreign leaders . Church committee finds no evidence of any attempt by the unit to kill anyone .
 CIA delivered a bag of poison to kill the pro-Soviet Premier of the newly independent Congo . The CIA decided to kill Patrice Lumumba in August 1960 .
 One idea was to dust Castro’s shoes, if he chanced to leave them outside his hotel room, with thallium Salts in the expectation that this would cause his beard to fall out and destroy his charisma .
 Since Castro’s speeches often gave an impression of disorientation anyway, it is not clear how much difference the toxic cigar would have made .
 By August 1960 the Agency had progressed to the project of impregnating cigars with botulinum . The poison was so deadly that a man would die after putting one in his mouth .
 The cigars were ready in October and delivered to an unidentified person in February . They were delivered to the unidentified person the following February .
 She fell in with Frank Fiorini, an adventurer who had fought beside Castro, but turned against him and went to work for CIA . Fiorini figured in the Bay of Pigs and later in Watergate . She worked for CIA under the name of Frank Sturgis .
 Lorenz claimed in 1976 that the CIA asked her to kill Castro . Lorenz said the CIA appealed to her patriotism, promised her money for her old age and asked her for help killing Castro .
 Sturgis gave her two poison capsules, which she secreted in a jar of cold cream . She secreted the capsules in a cold cream jar .
 When she arrived in Havana, Castro greeted her warmly, took his phone off the hook, ordered food and coffee . He then fell asleep on the bed with a cigar, evidently not a CIA model, in his mouth .
 Lorenz went to the bathroom and opened the cold cream . “| couldn’t find the capsules,” she said in 1976 . Lorenz opened the ice cream .
 When Castro’s revolution swept into Havana at the end of 1958, it swept out not only Batista but his partners in the North American mob . The revolution swept out Batista's partners in Havana .
 Batista and the criminal entrepreneur Meyer Lansky fled on the same day . Batista fled the country with the help of Lansky .
 The closing of the casinos, the bordellos and the drug traffic cost the mob perhaps $100 million a year, the mob says . The closing the casinos and the bordsellos cost the mafia $100million a year .
 Lansky was reputed to have persuaded associates to join in a pledge of a million dollars for Castro’s head . Lansky's associates were said to have agreed to pledge $1 million for Castro's head .
 Frank Sturgis claimed in 1975 that the mob had offered him $100,000 in 1959 to kill Castro . Frank Stargis said in 1975 he had been offered $100K to kill the Castro .
 The masterminds of CIA now decided the syndicate possessed uniquely both the motives and skills required to rid the world of the Cuban revolutionary . The syndicate was determined to kill Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 Since the mob had its own grudge against Castro, a gangland hit would be less likely to lead back to the U.S. government . The mob would have a bigger grudge than the American government .
 The CIA commissioned Robert Maheu, a former FBI agent, to put out the contract . He was a private eye involved for a time with Hoffa’s friend Eddie Cheyfitz .
 Rosselli had no illusions about his middling rank in the underworld . He brought in Chicago big shot Sam Giancana who was a don and could make the right connections .
 Giancana’s vital connection for this purpose was Santos Trafficante, Jr., the boss of organized crime in Florida; not so long before, in Havana . Not so long ago, in Cuba, Trafficante was a leader in organized crime; in Havana, he was a
 CIA case officers made contact with underworld notables before they informed their own chief, Allen Dulles . CIA officers made their contact before they told Dulles of their contact .
 That this was not the case suggests the liberties taken even by lesser CIA officials in the Agency’s golden age . The liberties were casually taken in the CIA's golden era .
 CIA installed Giancana and Rosselli in the fall of 1960, CIA installed them in a Miami Beach hotel . CIA was in Miami Beach, Florida, to install them there .
 Giancana asked the CIA to arrange an illegal wiretap in the room of his putative rival, Dan Rowan . Rowan was the comedian who had been accused of plotting against his rival, the singer Phyllis McGuire .
 When the tap was discovered, the Agency did its best to stop prosecution . The Agency did not want prosecution .
 He had been a prime suspect in the barbershop murder of Albert Anastasia in 1957 . He was also a suspect of the murder of an associate in the same barber .
 Havana was his base, and he was the only syndicate boss to stay on after the revolution . Havana was Havana's base . He was one of the last syndicate bosses to stay in Havana .
 Trafficante lived behind bars behind bars in surprising comfort . Trafficante was an enemy of the people, but he lived with surprising comfort in prison .
 Chums from the mainland visited him, among them Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby visited him from Dallas, Texas .
 Trafficante had both motives and men for the CIA job . Trafficante's Cuban business presumably destroyed, but with part of the gang still in Havana, Trafficante has both motives .
 A Federal Narcotics Bureau document in July 1961 reported rumors in the exile community that Castro had “kept Santo Trafficante, Jr., in jail to make it appear that he had a personal dislike for Trafficante . Trafficante is an agent of Castro, according to the document .
 Giancana shot seven times in the throat and mouth as he was frying sausages in his Chicago kitchen in June 1975 . Rosselli hacked up, stuffed into an oil drum and dumped into the sea near Miami in July 1976 .
 Rosselli, according to some accounts, was in his way a patriot, persuaded he was serving his nation . He was convinced he was doing his country's service .
 The cynical Giancana, a draft dodger during the Second World War, very likely entered his country’s service now exclusively in the expectation that he would thereafter be immune to prosecution . He entered the service in the hope that he could thereafter be exempt from prosecution .
 Their first idea was to slip some pills into Castro's drink shortly before the Bay of Pigs .
 After one batch of CIA pills failed to dissolve, a more soluble batch killed some innocent monkeys and was deemed suitable . A more soluble version of the pills were deemed suitable by the CIA .
 Trafficante produced a Cuban who, he said, had access to one of Castro’s favorite restaurants . The obliging Trafficante asked Trafficante to produce a Cuban .
 No one has been able to discover that the executive-action crowd did much apart from Cuba . "Executive-action" crowd did little, except Cuba .
 Harvey found the six-link operation "intolerably loose" He found the CIA to Maheu to Rosselli to Giancana to a Cuban exile to an assassin .
 Castro's scuba diving suit was contaminated by a tubercle bacillus and dusted inside with a fungus designed to produce skin disease . Donovan proposed to give Castro a scuba suit contaminated with the fungus . Donovan used the suit during his negotiations for the Bay of Pigs prisoners .
 Donovan, who knew nothing of this, innocently foiled the Agency by giving Castro a clean diving suit on his own . Donovan knew nothing about this, and gave Castro the suit a clean suit . Donovan did not know anything about this .
 Desmond FitzGerald, who replaced Harvey as head of Task Force W in January 1963, suggested depositing a rare seashell, rigged to explode, in a place where Castro might skin-dive and pick it up . The seashell was then detonated in place of Castro, who
 In the Lumumba case, Eisenhower said something in a meeting of the National Security Council that at least one person present understood as an assassination order . Eisenhower said that in an earlier version of this article, the assassination order was meant to be a threat to the U.S. President
 A week later Gordon Gray, Eisenhower’s special assistant for national security affairs, passed on to the Special Group . He was not intending, however, to imply assassination, but not intending to imply .
 The next day Allen Dulles sent the assassination order to the CIA station in Leopoldville . The assassination order was sent by Dulles the next day . The CIA station was in the midst of the assassination .
 Intelligence people fear to say too much on the ground that Presidents do not, or should not, want to know too much . Intelligence people might fear to talk too much, or not, on the grounds that Presidents .
 Words like “removal” and “elimination” caused trouble, then and later . Certainly words like ‘removal,’ and ‘eliminated’ caused trouble .
 To most people around a table, they meant removal from political office . But to most people, it meant removal of political office.
 The Special Group approved the plan to train Cuban exiles for an invasion of their homeland . But it never approved— and probably, though, though the evidence is murky, never considered— any plot to kill Castro .
 It is hard to suppose that even the runaway agency mordandy portrayed in the reports of the President’s Board of Consultants would have decided entirely on its own to kill a neighboring state chief .
 Gordon Gray told the Church committee that such descriptions greatly exaggerated Nixon’s role . On the other hand, Gordon Gray said such descriptions of Nixon's role were exaggerated .
 Nixon's apprehensive allusions to the Bay of Pigs in the privacy of his own Presidency remain enigmatic . Nixon’s allusions remain enigmatic.
 It is likely to blow the whole Bay of Pigs thing, which we think would be very unfortunate— both for the CIA, and for the country, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The CIA in the Eisenhower years had confidently taken unto itself the authority to kill foreign leaders . The leads run out to people who had no involvement in this, except by contracts and connection .
 The assassination plan was confided to Robert Maheu, though it became a staple of table talk and a joke among the mob . There is no evidence that any Agency official ever mentioned it to any President— Eisenhower in 1960 .
 Nor was it disclosed after the Bay of Pigs to Maxwell Taylor and his review board . Nor was disclosed after it was disclosed to the public .
 CIA officials studiously refrained from saying a word about the Bay of Pigs meetings, the Taylor board, the missile crisis . On every occasion in the Kennedy years when CIA officials might naturally have brought it up, they studiously avoided mentioning it .
 The argument that the Kennedys knew and approved of the assassination plan comes down to the argument that they must have known . The argument applies with equal force to Eisenhower and Johnson, as well .
 The CIA, it is said, would never have undertaken so fearful a task without presidential authorization . The CIA would not have undertaken the task without the president's approval, it was said .
 Bissell and Helms offered contradictory theories about the nature of John Kennedy's authorization . Bissell: In John Kennedy’s case, Bissell, Helms offer contradictory theories .
 Bissell assumed the project had been cleared with Kennedy, as with Eisenhower, in ways that were tacit, “circumlocutious,” camouflaged, leaving no record . Bissell assumes Kennedy cleared the project with Kennedy and Eisenhower .
 Helms thought CIA’s authority was derived, not from supposed “circumlocutious” talks, but from the “intense” pressure the Kennedys radiated against Castro . Helms: CIA's authority came from ‘intense pressure
 The CIA operators were undoubtedly misled by the urgency with which the Kennedys, especially Robert, pursued Mongoose, especially . The CIA operator was undoubtedly misled .
 No member of the administration told Helms to kill Castro, but no one had ever specifically ruled it out . Helms believed the Agency could work for Castro’s overthrow as it deemed best . The Agency, he believed, could work in favor of Castro's overthrow .
 In this context the murder of Castro had an arguably rational, if wholly repellent, function . Castro's murder was arguably rational and had a rational function, the author says .
 After the Bay of Pigs and the abandonment of invasion fantasies, the radical change in context ought surely to have compelled reconsideration both of the project itself and of the alleged authorization .
 The Mongoose committee was demanding that all “sensitive” operations be presented in “excruciating” detail, case by case . Mongoose Committee: All ‘sensitive’ operations must be shown in ‘excrucise’ detail .
 The murder of Castro is now becoming, without the invasion, an end in itself . The CIA’s Intelligence Branch, without consulting superior authority, resuscitated the assassination project on its own, the author says .
 In October 1961 the Special Group asked for a contingency plan in the event Castro died from whatever cause . The Special Group wanted to prepare for the death of Castro .
 Cuba's main effect would probably be to strengthen the Communist position in Cuba . The main effect of the Cuban government would be to its Communist position .
 The Intelligence Branch and the Clandestine Services were hardly on speaking terms . Unfortunately, the Intelligence Branch was hardly speaking terms with the CIA . The CIA and NSC were not at odds with each other .
 CIA regarded whatever authorization it thought it had acquired in 1960 as permanent, not requiring review and reconfirmation by new Presidents or, even more astonishingly, by new CIA directors . It appears that the CIA regarded . whatever authorization they thought it . acquired in . 1960 as . permanent,
 For neither Bissell nor Helms even told John McCone what his own Agency was up to . Neither Bissell or Helms knew what they were up to do .
 Harvey also knew that McCone, a devout Catholic, would fiercely disapprove . Harvey knew McCone would disapprove of his actions .
 Helms gave him a memorandum that described the operation as having been closed out before McCone took over . Helms told him that McCone had closed out the operation .
 Nasser of Egypt wrote the new President soon afterward reproaching the U.S. government for the part he was sure it had had in Lumumba’s murder . Nasser was not killed during his tenure .
 Eisenhower administration had established contact with anti-Trujillo Dominicans . In December 1960 the Special Group approved a program of covert support for the dissidents .
 Henry Dearborn, the able American consul in the Dominican Republic, was in charge of the operation . HenryDearborn, an able American, is in charge .
 The dissidents believed —and Dearborn agreed —that successful action against the regime required the assassination of Trujillo . The dissidents believe —and . Dearborn . believed . that successful action . against the . regime needed the assassination, he said .
 On January 12, 1961, eight days before Kennedy took over, the Special Group approved the transfer of three revolvers and three carbines to the conspirators . The transfer of the weapons was approved eight days prior to Kennedy's inauguration .
 The point was evidently to obtain symbolic support from the United States. Since the leading conspirators were generals, they had sufficient access to arms of their own .
 The Kennedy White House knew in a general way about the contacts, and approved . The Kennedy administration approved the contacts . The White House was in a "general way" of knowing .
 He had known nothing about it and it was decided at that time that we'd put a task force on the problem . It was decided to work out some kind of an alternative course of action in case this event did occur .
 When he read that the dissidents had received weapons “attendant to their project efforts to neutralize TRUJILLO,” he circled the paragraph, underlined “neutralize” and took the document in to Kennedy .
 In fact, Kennedy did not want Trujillo’s overthrow until he knew what would come thereafter . Kennedy did want to know what would happen to him before his overthrow, he says .
 He detested Trujillo and favored the OAS Sanctions against him . But for international reasons, he preferred the Trujillillo regime to a Communist takeover .
 He told Goodwin to advise Dearborn that the U.S. was not going to get involved in assassination . Goodwin told Goodwin that the United States would not give any more weapons to anyone . Goodwin advised Dearborn not to give weapons .
 Goodwin drafted a rejoinder intended to preserve friendly relations with the rebels . Goodwin wanted to avoid American implication in their plot . Goodwin drafted the rejoinder to avoid U.S. implication in the rebels' plot .
 The Dominicans who killed Trujillo the next day did so for Dominican reasons and with Dominican weapons . The next day, the Dominicans killed the president in the Dominican Republic . The Dominican Republic is now the country's largest state of origin .
 Neither Eisenhower nor the Kennedys nor the CIA ordered Trujillo’s assassination . The CIA was involved in the assassination of the Mexican president .
 At most, they were sympathetic to Dominicans who saw no other way to liberate their country . At most of them were sympathetic .
 When Trujillo was killed, the President was in Paris, where Pierre Salinger, running ahead of hard information, told reporters that he was dead . Some thought that Salinger's statement indicated that some thought it indicated American foreknowledge .
 We had been in contact with some of the generals who were anti-Trujillo. We had contact with them, and some of them were in touch with them .
 They had been asking for some arms and it had been decided in the last week or so that we wouldn't furnish them . 'I was quite surprised that the extent of their requests were for sub-machine guns'
 We still don’t know how much popular support this anti-Trujillo group has . It's unclear how much support the group has in the country .
 The great problem now is that we don't know what to do because we don’t know what the situation is, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The great problem is that ... we have no idea what is happening now," he says .
 Szulc said the murder of Castro would not necessarily change things and it was not anything the U.S. should be doing . He said it would not change things in the United States and it is not something that the country should do .
 Goodwin, out of curiosity, raised the question with Kennedy, observing that it sounded like a crazy idea to him . Goodwin: "A day or two later,  Kennedy, said it was a crazy thing to him. A day later, Goodwin asked Kennedy what he thought of the idea
 Kennedy’s old friend Senator George Smathers of Florida used to press him in those days to take a tougher stand against Castro . Kennedy's old friend used to ask him to take tougher stand .
 Kennedy, Smathers recalled, was certain it could be done but doubted whether it would accomplish what he wanted . Kennedy was certain he could do the job, but doubted it would achieve what he hoped . Kennedy died at the age of 92 in June 1963 .
 At last, one summer evening in the White House, “I remember that he took his fork and just hit his plate and it cracked and he said, ‘Now, dammit, | wish you wouldn’t do that.” White House says .
 CIA officials wanted to protect Sam Giancana from the legal consequences of the wiretap he had demanded on Dan Rowan’s Las Vegas telephone . CIA officials brought insistent pressure on the Justice Department to refrain from prosecution .
 This meant, they explained, that CIA was utilizing underworld sources in Havana for intelligence purposes . CIA was using underworld sources to get intelligence from Havana .
 On May 7, 1962, Lawrence Houston, the CIA’s general counsel, explained why the case was so momentous . Lawrence Houston: The case was a momentous moment for the CIA .
 Robert Kennedy told Robert Kennedy that the CIA recruited Giancana to murder Castro . The prosecution involved national security, Kennedy told Kennedy . The CIA, he told Kennedy, had recruited him to kill Castro .
 It was Houston’s understanding, as he later testified, that “the assassination plan aimed at Castro had been terminated completely,” he so informed the Attorney General . It was understood that ‘The assassination plan’ was terminated completely .
 Harvey had already passed on a new vial of CIA poison pills to Rosselli . He did not know that it had been resurrected and that it was resurrected . Harvey passed on the vial with a new batch of CIA pills .
 Houston did not recall that Kennedy expressed himself on the principle of assassinating Castro . Houston said Kennedy expressed his desire to kill Castro in Cuba .
 The gangster no doubt thought he had another, and equally esoteric, hold on the Kennedys .
 Frank Sinatra introduced John Kennedy to John Kennedy in March 1960 . Sinatra had met John Kennedy's girlfriend, Judith Campbell, a pretty girl named Judith Campbell . John Kennedy met Judith Campbell through his friend, Frank Giancana .
 If Campbell can be believed, she devotedly cultivated her relations with both men, the don and the President, over the next two years . Campbell says she cultivated relations between the two men over the years .
 White House logs show that Campbell telephoned some seventy times after January 1961 in pursuit of her friendship with John Kennedy . Campbell called the White House more than 70 times between 1961 and 1961 .
 On March 28, Hoover brought a memorandum about her to one of his luncheons with the President . Hoover brought the memorandum about the woman to a luncheon with him . Hoover: "She was a wonderful woman. She was a great woman."
 Giancana expected immunity from prosecution from federal prosecution . Between CIA protection and the blackmail potentiality, he is expected to be protected from prosecution .
 The Attorney General remembered him well as the powerful Chicago racketeer who had giggled before the Rackets Committee . Attorney General said he remembered him as a powerful Chicago .
 FBI agents followed him everywhere, including the Armory Lounge, his favorite bar . Four agents played the hole behind him at the golf course, where four agents were on the hole .
 The intermediary explained how close Giancana was to Sinatra . Lest this allusion be unclear, the intermediary explained that Sinatra had a close relationship with the Italian .
 The judge instructed the FBI agents to play golf at least two foursomes back . The judge also instructed them to play two four-omes back in the event .
 The federal attorney declined cross-examination . For unknown reasons, perhaps the CIA again, the attorney declined .
 Later Giancana, given immunity from prosecution by a grand jury, refused to testify . He was held in contempt and went to prison for the first time since 1942 . On his release, after a year, he went into gilded exile in Cuernavaca .
 Sinatra was an enthusiastic Kennedy fund raiser in the campaign . Sinatra had been an 'enthusiastic' supporter of the Kennedy campaign .
 A report of August 13, 1962, prepared by the Organized Crime Section at Robert Kennedy’s request, set forth in detail Sinatra's associations with the mob . The report was prepared at the request of Robert Kennedy .
 Sinatra was expecting to entertain Kennedy in Palm Springs house . Sinatra had put in a helicopter pad and made other preparations .
 Kennedy called Lawford shortly before a California trip in the spring of 1962, Kennedy called Peter Lawford . Lawford was the president of the United States' first state of the union .
 The lovely actress Angie Dickinson told me that she had heard Sinatra say, “If he would only pick up the telephone and call me and say that it was politically difficult to have me around, | would understand,” she said .
 John Kennedy appreciated Sinatra’s services in 1960 and liked him personally . No one, when the mood was on him, could be more charming than Sinatra, she said .
 Sinatra was on the guest list for a White House state dinner in late 1963 . At the last minute, on a pretext, the invitation was withdrawn . The invitation was pulled by the White House .
 Robert Kennedy ignored recommendations from the Organized Crime Section for an investigation of Sinatra . It was subsequently said that Robert Kennedy shared this regret and ignored recommendations .
 Hundley: Sinatra's people investigated Sinatra with care and found nothing incriminating beyond associations . Sinatra was found to be a minor figure in the late singer's career .
 Helms testified that he never told Robert Kennedy about any assassination activity and never received any assassination order from him . Helms said he never received an order from Kennedy .
 Harvey testified he never informed the Special Group or any of its members of the ongoing plots . Harvey testified that he never told any of the plotters that he knew of the plots .
 Lansdale testified that Harvey had never told him about any such activities . He testified that he had never discussed assassination with Robert Kennedy . Lansdale said he never discussed the assassination with Kennedy .
 The subject of assassination came up at one of the Augmented Group’s meetings, on August io, 1962 . The subject was discussed at the group's first meeting .
 McNamara raised the question, either in an academic survey of options or in a moment of acute frustration . McNamara dismissed the idea a few days later, either by academic survey or by frustrated frustration .
 On reading the memorandum, McCone blew up, called McNamara and demanded that it be withdrawn . On reading it, he said, "It was a mistake"
 McCone’s stern disapproval of assassination was later communicated to Helms and Harvey, but neither thought it necessary to tell their boss about Rosselli .
 He took care to send CIA his statement of May 29, 1961, that the U.S. could not as a matter of general policy condone assassination .
 CIA people took it as another of those superb efforts in misdirection to which they were addicted in their own daily work . No doubt the CIA people were addicted to misdirection in their daily work. No doubt .
 The failure of the Kennedys, McCone and others at the top specifically to forbid the assassination of Castro may have reinforced the CIA’s delusion that killing foreign leaders was permissible .
 None of them, including McCone, knew that Castro's assassination remained so heavily on CIA’s mind, they would probably have regarded such an order as superfluous . On the other hand, since none of them knew that .
 Several circumstantial points strengthen the conclusion that the Kennedys knew nothing about the continuing assassination policy . Several circumstantsial points point to the conclusion of the conclusion .
 If the Kennedys had been informed, the informer would have had to stipulate that they not mention the plots to McCone . McCone was deliberately not informed .
 Given John Kennedy’s reliance on McCone to bring the Agency under control, it strains credulity to suppose that either would have accepted such a stipulation from some subordinate CIA official . Robert Kennedy's close personal friendship with McCone led to his close friendship with Robert Kennedy .
 Bissell and Helms denied ever talking about assassinations with either Kennedy or Kennedy . Helms and Bissell denied ever discussing assassinations in any way .
 If the Kennedys had any obsessive feeling about Cuba, it was to save the lives of the prisoners . The Kennedy family had no obsession with Cuba, but the prisoners' lives were saved .
 Some have written that the Kennedys had got their Irish up and were determined to get even with Castro at any cost . Some have said that the Kennedy family had got the Irish up .
 The Kennedys no doubt felt a personal animus toward Castro . But if they were consumed by a vendetta, they would have had the perfect pretext when the Soviet Union sent nuclear missiles to Cuba in 1962 .
 Many advisers urged them then to seize the opportunity, invade Cuba and smash Castro forever . Many of them urged them to take advantage of the opportunity and smash Cuba forever .
 Allen Dulles withheld from the Warren Commission all information regarding the assassination plots . Dulles also withheld all information from the CIA about the plot to kill JFK .
 Robert Kennedy feared that if he learned about the extent of the plots, he might hold the CIA responsible for his brother’s death . One obvious reason might have been his fear that, if Robert Kennedy now learns about the plot, the CIA might be responsible .
 The Kennedys did not know about the Castro assassination plots before the Bay of Pigs or about the pursuit of those plots by the CIA after the CIA . The available evidence clearly leads to the conclusion that the Kennedy didn't know .
 No one who knew John and Robert Kennedy well believed they would conceivably countenance a program of assassination . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 McNamara said it would have been “totally inconsistent with everything | knew about the two men’s lives”
 In 1961 Robert Kennedy had become acquainted with a Soviet official named Georgi Bolshakov . Robert Kennedy and the Missile Crisis Eary in 1961 . In 1961, Robert Kennedy became acquainted with the Soviet official .
 Bolshakov conveyed the impression that he was Khrushchev’s personal representative in Washington . Nominally the embassy press attache, he was in fact the ambassador to the U.S.
 In November 1961 Kennedy noted, “Russian told me K is Kennedyizing USSR Gov. Gov.— bringing in young people with new vitality, new ideas—bringing in young . ideas—I told this to Jack who laughed & said we should be Khrushchevizing the Am.
 Most of the major matters dealing with the Soviet Union and the U.S. discussed were discussed . The Soviets and the United States also discussed .
 He said he’d speak to Khrushchev, and they took their tanks out in twenty-four hours, he said . He said, “He said he'd speak to him, and the tanks took out in 24 hours.” He said .
 This, the Attorney General emphasized, was a personal message to Khrushchev . The Attorney General said the message was personal to him .
 Georgi came back to see me the following day and | told him that the President was pleased with the message . Khrushchev also had to work on his people on the other side, writes .
 Khrushchev was “very pleased with the settlement in Laos,” Bolshakov soon reported, but worried about U.S. troops in Thailand . “Very pleased” with Laos settlement, but “worried” about American forces in Thailand,
 Bolshakov delivered to Pierre Salinger the first in the extraordinary exchange of letters initiated by Khrushchev as the Berlin crisis was subsiding . Bolshakakov delivered the first letter to Salinger in September 1961 .
 Salinger met Bolshakov at Washington street corners or bars, receiving documents enclosed in folded newspapers or placed surreptitiously in the pocket of his trench coat . Thereafter the letters were passed along in cloakand-dagger fashion, Salinger .
 Za Rubezhom, the weekly political journal, described him in June 1962 as an enemy of the working class, defender of monopolies, organizer of guerrilla warfare against Cuba, champion of preventive war . He was described as an opponent of working class and defender of monopoly .
 Bolshakov, on behalf of the Kremlin, invited him to visit the Soviet Union . Bolshakakov invited the Russian president to visit Russia, but he declined .
 In the first place | couldn’t possibly learn Russian. | spent ten years learning French. In the second place . In the third place . couldn't possibly learn . Russian .
 Behind the obligatory Cold War rhetoric, the two leaders were trying to forestall conflict and to seek accommodation . The two leaders tried to forestan conflict and sought accommodation .
 All this built in the course of 1962 a measure of mutual understanding, even of mutual confidence . All this led to an understanding of each other, the author of the book .
 Having established a measure of confidence, Khrushchev proceeded to abuse it, writes David Gergen . Gergen: 'Krushchev used it to gain confidence'
 It would have been far more disturbed had it known that Khrushchev was sending nuclear missiles too . The world would be more disturbed if it had known that he was sending missiles too.
 Bolshakov returned from Moscow with further reassurance . Bolshkov returned to the country to find out what had happened .
 He had met with Khrushchev and Anastas Mikoyan, the first deputy chairman of the Soviet Union . He had also met with the Soviet leader .
 This was the time to lower tensions, Khrushchev had said; Castro was getting only defensive weapons . Khrushvic had said that Castro was only getting defensive weapons. This is the time for lower tensions to lower tension .
 The Mongoose campaign left little doubt that the U.S. government was trying to overthrow him . Even if double agents had not told him the CIA was behind the campaign, the CIA had little doubt .
 It would hardly have been unreasonable for him to request Soviet protection from the Soviet Union .
 Castro’s aim was to deter American aggression by convincing Washington that an attack on Cuba would be the same as a strike on the Soviet Union . Castro's aim to deter U.S. aggression was to convince Washington that a Cuban strike would be similar to a Soviet strike .
 No doubt he worried that the Soviet missile bases in Cuba would be an intolerable provocation to Washington . Washington worried that it would be intolerable provocation .
 In his memoirs he alleged the protection of Cuba as his primary motive . In memoirs, he alleged that he was trying to protect the country from persecution .
 The thought, he wrote, was “hammering away at my brain; what will happen if we lose Cuba?”— much as in American brains the thought was starting to hammer away about the dire consequences if Washington ‘lost’ Vietnam .
 Khrushchev believed Cuba would be a ‘terrible” blow, gravely diminishing Soviet influence throughout the Third World, especially in Latin America . The domino theory, | expect. expect.
 Khrushchev did not say this, but it would expose the Soviet Union to devastating ideological attack by Peking . It would also, though, expose the . Soviet . Union to . devastating ideological . attack by . Peking. would also exposed the Soviet .
 If the protection of Cuba had been the only point, this could have been done far more simply, as Castro had proposed . Castro proposed, through a proclamation or an alliance or the stationing of Soviet troops on the island . Still, it was not enough to be done with a proclamation
 If nuclear weapons were to be used, tactical weapons would have been easier to install, harder to detect and less likely to provoke . Tactical weapons would've been harder to install and more likely to be less provocative .
 By 1962 Khrushchev was in a state of acute frustration— blocked in Berlin, at odds with Peking, stalled in the Third World, left badly behind by the inordinate American missile build-up . By 1962 he was in an acute frustration .
 Inside the Soviet Union industrial growth was slowing down; agriculture was in its usual trouble . General generals were demanding a larger share of limited resources for the military budget . Old-line Stalinists were grumbling against internal liberalization .
 The emplacement of nuclear missiles in Cuba would prove the Soviet ability to act with impunity in the very heart of the American zone of vital interest . It would be a victory of high significance for the Kremlin, which saw the world in terms of spheres of influence and always .
 It would go far to close the Soviet Union’s own missile gap, increasing by half again Soviet first-strike Capacity against American targets . It would do so without the long wait and awful budgetary strain attendant on an intensified missile production program .
 Once they were operational, Kennedy would not go to nuclear war in order to expel them . Kennedy, as a rational man, would not be willing to go to war against them, he says .
 If they were discovered prematurely, the congressional elections, not to speak of Kennedy’s past irresolution on Cuban matters, would delay the U.S. response .
 With one roll of the nuclear dice, Khrushchev might redress the strategic imbalance, humiliate the Americans, rescue the Cubans, silence the Stalinists and the generals, confound the Chinese and acquire a potent bargaining counter when he chose Berlin .
 He sent 42 medium-range (1100mile) nuclear missiles, 24 intermediate-range missiles, 42 IL-28 nuclear bombers, 24 antiaircraft missile sites and 22,000 Soviet troops and technicians .
 This was something, he bragged to Castro, Stalin would never have done. Stalin would not have done such a thing . Stalin bragged about the situation to Castro Castro, Castro . This was not the first thing Stalin would have done .
 Robert Kennedy had seized the lead in Cuban policy . But Cuba remained a problem; for a diversity of reasons .
 U.S. overflights identified surface-to-air missiles identified by American overflights, he feared, were only the first step . He feared it was only the beginning step of the attack .
 Schlei produced a brief that justified intervention on the principle of self-defense, ideally with the sanction of the Organization of American States . The brief says intervention should have been sanctioned by the OAS .
 Attorney General urgently recommended a presidential statement warning the Russians that long-range missiles would raise the gravest issues . The Attorney General also recommended a statement warning Russia of the dangers .
 Rusk demurred, saying that the problem with the Soviet Union was worldwide, not just in Cuba . Rusk said the problem was not just Cuba, but it was worldwide .
 With Katzenbach and Schlei, Robert Kennedy drafted a statement issued, with modifications, the same day . Kennedy drafted the statement with modifications to it .
 Almost no one in the administration believed Khrushchev mad enough to do what he was doing . Despite such precautions, however, almost no one believed him mad enough .
 Attorney General had apprehensions, but his attention was soon diverted by James Meredith and the Battle of Ole Miss . The Attorney General was soon distracted by the battle of the Ole Miss.
 Though John McCone had presentiments, he never communicated them to the Kennedys . McCone went off to Europe on a honeymoon .
 At the end of of of September, a House Republican caucus called Cuba “the biggest Republican asset” in the approaching election . A House GOP caucus has called Cuba the biggest GOP asset .
 Robert Kennedy, as he wrote in his posthumous book Thirteen Days, saw only what seemed the clearing of a field, as for a farm or the basement of a house . Studying the blown-up photographs, Robert Kennedy said, "What seemed to be clearing was only
 Kennedy had counseled Khrushchev against in Vienna . It was, Kennedy said, “an effort to materially change the balance of power” “a deliberately provocative and unjustified change in the status quo”
 The consequences of so swift an alteration in the power equilibrium might be incalculable, the consequences of such a change in the balance of power are incalculated .
 If you bomb the missile sites and the airports, “you are covering most of Cuba,” he said . If you bombed the missile and airports, he said on the first day, you would cover most of the island, he added .
 Dean Acheson was the most formidable of the hawks, backed by Maxwell Taylor and Maxwell Taylor . The Joint Chiefs (save for Shoup), McCloy, Nitze, and, initially, Dillon and McCone, were also involved in the war .
 During the week of secrecy an unknowing Joseph Dolan brought the Attorney General a paper to sign . The Attorney General signed the document during a week-long secrecy period .
 On Thursday, October 18, the imperious old man had a private talk with the President . President Obama and President Obama met for the first time .
 There seemed to be three main possibilities ... one was do nothing, and that was unthinkable; another was an air strike; the third was a blockade . One of the main possibilities was to 'do nothing' and 'that was unthinkable'
 Joint Chiefs of Staff: Eight hundred sorties planned to take place . Air strike planned by Joint chiefs of Staff, he said, would involve 8,000 sorties . Joint Chiefs' spokesman: Air strike would involve eight hundred sortie .
 McNamara doubted that Moscow would take it “without resorting to a very major response’s McNamara . McNamara said he doubted that Russia would take a similar action .
 Maxwell Taylor made the opposing case, Acheson having disgustedly retired to his country seat . Maxwell Taylor also made the case for the British government .
 Taylor scouted McNamara’s “fear that if we used nuclear weapons in Cuba, nuclear weapons would be used against us”—a mysterious remark . There is no other reference to an American nuclear attack on Cuba .
 Probably Taylor was seeking to counter McNamara’s point about the risk of escalation to general war, and the rapporteur became confused . The rapporteur may have been trying to counter the point .
 If the Russians did not stop work on the missile bases, it would always be possible to move on to the strike . Russia's work on missile bases would always prevent a strike, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 He gave orders to begin with the blockade; also to make contingent preparations for an air strike and invasion . He also gave orders also to prepare for air strike, invasion .
 The head of the Tactical Air Command told him that even a very considerable strike might leave missiles capable of being fired back at the U.S. He said even a large strike could leave missiles that could be fired at the United States .
 The president's advisers had all advocated quarantine since at least Wednesday . The advisers he trusted most— his brother, Sorensen, McNamara— had all called for quarantine .
 President’s insistence on further military consultation expressed, not indecision, but a desire to establish a record, he says . One imagines that the President's insistence on . further consultation expressed a desire for a record .
 He may well have concluded he had better make a show of canvassing the military alternative to the end of the war .
 Gilpatric saw Kennedy after LeMay had boomed forth on the beauties of an air attack . GilPatric: "It was the most beautiful thing I'd ever seen"
 Kennedy exaggerated the danger, rejected a diplomatic resolution and instead insisted on a public showdown . Driven by ‘the machismo quality’ in his character,©2 by rage over deception, by egotistical concern over personal prestige, by fear .
 His purpose was the conspicuous humiliation of Knrushchev—eyeball to eyeball . "His purpose was to humiliate him," he said. "He was humiliated by his humiliation"
 "He risked the incineration of the world in order to satisfy his own psychic and political needs," he wrote . "He was so insensate a course, he risked the ... incineration of the world," he said .
 Instead of making a big issue of Soviet military aid to Castro during the summer of 1962, he minimized and, in the increasingly agitated Republican view, excused this aid . The aid was not an issue, but a matter of concern for the Cuban people .
 Bundy said on national television that there was “no present evidence” of a “major offensive capability” in Cuba . Bundy said the day before the missiles were discovered, Bundy said there was no present evidence . Bundy: There was ‘no present likelihood’ of
 Most critics have left the impression that once the nuclear missiles were in Cuba, Kennedy should have done nothing at all . Most critics say that Kennedy should not have done anything after the missile crisis .
 Khrushchev by his own statement had sent the missiles in order to alter the balance of the world power . The missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 In a secret message via Bolshakov in June, Khrushchev had already warned the Kennedys of his intention to begin again in Berlin . In June, he had already told them of his plans to begin anew in Berlin.
 U.S. acquiescence would have produced a shattering reaction in the United States. It would have led to a 'shattering reaction' in the U.K. And acquiescence .
 He should have discussed the missiles when Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet foreign minister, called on him at the White House three days after their discovery .
 Charles Bohlen, that brilliant aficionado of Soviet policy, attended the meetings on the first two days of the Soviet Union conference . Bohlen was a member of the Council of Soviet Union in the 1930s .
 Kennedy left Kennedy a valedictory memorandum to take up new duties as ambassador to France . Departing on the third day, he left Kennedy's last note on his way home .
 For two days, at his direction, Sorensen and others worked on letters to the Kremlin . The letters were sent to Russia by the U.S. Embassy in Moscow .
 The not unreasonable decision was therefore to announce the quarantine before beginning talks with the Russians . The quarantine was announced before talks with Russia began to begin .
 After the announcement, the President began to lay the foundation for a peaceful resolution . President Obama announced the announcement .
 On Tuesday, October 23, he sent his brother to make clear to Dobrynin the implications of Knrushchev’s course . On October 25, he said: “I’m not going to be surprised. I’ll be surprised if you’
 Robert Kennedy’s memorandum of the meeting contains details omitted from Thirteen Days . Robert Kennedy: Robert Kennedy's memorandum of meeting contained details omitted by Thirteen days .
 The Attorney General reminded the ambassador that his brother, on the basis of Soviet assurances, had taken a “far less belligerent position [on the arms shipments] than people like Senators Keating and Capehart,” he said .
 Attorney General noted that the American President had met Khrushchev’s request for the withdrawal of American troops from Thailand . The Attorney General said that the U.S. President had agreed to the withdrawal .
 Dobrynin stoutly replied, there were no nuclear missiles in Cuba . So far, he knew, there was no nuclear missile in Cuba, he said . Dobrynins: "So far as he knew"
 Plans circulated for evacuation of top officials to underground installations outside Washington . Plans were circulated for the evacuation of the city of Washington .
 We had come to the edge of final decision --& the President agreed . felt we were on edge of a precipice and it was as if there were no way off . President agreed with President Obama's decision .
 Robert thought inexplicably of Joe's death, of Jack's brushes with death . Robert thought suddenly of Joe’s death .
 It could neither remove those already there nor prevent the completion of the bases . It could not be removed from the bases already there or prevent the construction of new ones .
 From the start, the Kennedys and their chief advisers had known that this was the task of negotiation, and they were prepared to negotiate . From the . start, they knew that this is the . task of . negotiation, they had known it would be a negotiation .
 McNamara: "We would have to accept withdrawal of United States strategic missiles from Turkey and Italy" The next day McNamara again said he would be prepared to accept the withdrawal of U.S. strategic missiles .
 Most present felt that to begin with concessions would legitimize Khrushchev’s action and give him an easy triumph . Most present thought that to . begin with . concessions would . legitimize his action and gave him easy triumph.
 It was Stevenson's timing and his Guantanamo proposal, Robert Kennedy said later, that created his reputation as the supreme dove . Kennedy: "It's not his Turkish thoughts, it's his timing and Guantanamo proposal"
 The President disagreed that the initial presentation to the UN should include our notion of an eventual political settlement . The President emphatically disagreed that .
 Stevenson has since been criticized publicly for the position he took . I think it should be emphasized that he was presenting a different perspective .
 'I disagreed strongly with his recommendations, but thought he was courageous to make them, and | might add they made as much sense as some others considered during that period'
 The disagreement, it should be emphasized, was not over the necessity for but the timing of negotiations . And the disagreement was over the need to negotiate, not the timing, but the need for negotiations .
 Advocates of quarantine assumed from the start that their course implied diplomacy somewhere down the road . In short, they assumed that quarantine implied diplomacy .
 The questions were when the trading should begin, how long it should take and what was to be put on the block . It is not known when the deal will be completed and how long the process will take .
 Critics later accused Kennedy of waiting too long, imposing too peremptory a deadline and refusing the most obvious deal—Cuban missiles for Turkish missiles . Critics later said Kennedy was wrong to wait too long .
 Repudiation of a dovish President by a hawkish electorate would have doomed any hope of a peaceful resolution . President Obama would have been more cautious in dealing with Syria .
 In the meantime some of the nuclear bases would have become operational . And in the meantime, some of them would have been operational . The U.S. would have had to wait to see if the bases were operational .
 If negotiations were protracted, it required a strong Kennedy showing in the election . Kennedy is expected to win the White House in 2016 .
 Republicans and Democrats were opposed by Democrats on the Executive Committee . This suggests how little party politics mattered during the 13-day debate .
 The problem remains of the validity of the administration’s claim that the bases were about to become operational . The problem is not clear whether the bases are operational .
 Ronald Steel has contended, correctly, that the long-range missile sites would not have been operational until mid-November . Ronald Steel says Kennedy had plenty of time for negotiation, and the deadline must have derived from the election .
 Four out of six medium-range missile sites, Barton J Bernstein has argued, were already operational by Tuesday, October 23 . Steel, however, overlooked the medium range missile sites .
 Bernstein: Kennedy must have had some base motive for pretending otherwise . Therefore, according to Bernstein, the deadline had already passed . Bernstein: "Kennedy had a motive"
 The presence of nuclear warheads, not the technical operability of the sites, determined the deadline . The deadline was determined by the presence of nukes, the author says .
 McCone thought that the missiles would be operational by the end of the week . McCone said the missiles could be operational within the next few days .
 Khrushchev’s famous reply, arriving Friday evening, arrived Friday evening . It was a rather marvelous letter in the annals of correspondence among statesmen . Khrushov's famous reply arrived in the evening .
 Executive Committee went to bed happy for the first time in eleven days . Executive Committee had been on the job for 11 days before Friday night .
 Khrushchev added the Turkish missiles to the list of Soviet conditions . A second letter signed by the Presidium, signed by Khrushche, added the missiles . The letter has the ring of a declaration by Presidium .
 Khrushchev well understood that the Turkish missiles—Jupiters of an ancient vintage— were obsolete . Khrushchev well understood the Turkish missile was obsolete .
 His renunciation, he later claimed and may have thought at the time, would have ‘symbolic’ value . Nonetheless their renunciation was later claimed to have “symbolism” value .
 Khrushchev may have temporarily lost control of the Presidium . On the other hand, he may have briefly lost control . The Presidium may have been temporarily lost .
 The President had ordered the State Department to get them out of Turkey months before and was incensed to find them still there . The President ordered the forever dilatory State Department out of the country months before .
 When McNamara and Stevenson had argued in the first week that Turkish missiles were a reasonable trade for Cuban missiles, Kennedy had agreed . Kennedy agreed to the deal .
 Harold Macmillan never wavered in his resistance to the bargaining away of NATO assets .
 Llewellyn Thompson warned that a Turkish deal would be seen in Moscow as “proof of weakness” in Washington . Thompson's opinion carried particular weight because of his knowledge of the Soviet leadership . Thompson: A Turkish deal with Turkey could be seen as proof of weakness in Washington
 A U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba, its pilot killed . The pilot of the plane was killed in the attack .
 President Obama ordered the defusing of the Turkish missiles . He increased the dismay of the hawks by ordering them to defuse of the missiles .
 President Nixon suggested that the President forget the second Khrushchev letter and answer the first . Everyone remembers his own inspired suggestion that he should forget the letter and instead answer it .
 The hawks, dreaming of a Monday morning war, rallied behind the hard line . "The hawks are dreaming of war," the hawks said .
 The Attorney General persisted in his criticism of the State Department letter . Attorney General continued to criticise the letter .
 In forty-five minutes Robert Kennedy and Sorensen produced a new letter offering a no-invasion guarantee . In exchange for the removal of all offensive weapons systems from Cuba, all this to be accompanied by termination of quarantine and UN inspection .
 The President instructed his brother to talk once more to Dobrynin, the President said .
 If Cubans were shooting down American planes, he said, Americans were going to shoot back . He said if Cubans shot down U.S. planes, Americans would go back .
 Kennedy said that, “should war break out, millions of Americans would die,” according to the Gromyko account . Kennedy: “Should war break-out, millions would die. Millions would die” Kennedy said .
 Later he gave his opinion that he was sure that the Soviet Union adhered to the same view . Later he said he was certain that he believed in the view of Russia .
 According to the Soviet version, Kennedy went on to say “the Pentagon was exerting strong pressure on his brother” in connection with the shooting down of the U-2 . Kennedy said the Pentagon was “exercising strong pressure” on him, according to the
 These remarks reflected the Attorney General’s opinion, but did not appear in his own memorandum of the conversation . The Attorney General's opinion was reflected in his memorandum of conversation .
 The Kennedys did not altogether dismiss Seven Days in May . Robert Kennedy would not have confided such forebodings to the Soviet ambassador . Dobrynin then asked what the Americans proposed .
 Both accounts say that Dobrynin was the first to mention the Turkish missiles . Both accounts have been published in the past .
 It was impossible for NATO to take such a step under the present threatening position of the Soviet Union . It was up to NATO to make the decision, he said .
 This understanding would be canceled at once if the Soviet government tried to claim public credit for it, Attorney General says . This understanding, the Attorney General added .
 So concluded a singular exercise in secret diplomacy— secret not only in process, as most diplomacy must be, but in result, which is generally inadmissible . So concluded in process of diplomacy, which must be secret in process .
 Macmillan and NATO were told nothing, nor was the American Congress, nor even the Executive Committee . The U.S. was told nothing by the British Prime Minister .
 Harold Macmillan believed to the end of the day that no such bargain was ever struck . Critics continued to portray John Kennedy as recklessly preferring confrontation to negotiation . Robert Kennedy himself described the meeting in Thirteen Days, a half dozen years later .
 Two days later, Dobrynin brought Robert Kennedy an unsigned letter from Khrushchev to the President spelling out everything . Two days after their decisive conversation, Dobynin brought the letter to Robert Kennedy .
 After brooding over the letter, the Attorney General called the Soviet ambassador to his office . The attorney general called the embassy's office .
 President Obama said he would be out of Turkey's missile bases in 4-5 months . He said he told the U.S. government that it would be "out of them" within 4 months . Obama said the bases will be removed from Turkey in the coming months .
 Dobrynin withdrew the letter . Also if you should publish any document indicating a deal then it is off & also if done afterward will further affect the relationship . Dobrynins withdraws the letter and withdraws .
 In short, the Kennedys made a personal, but not official, pledge that the Turkish missiles would go . In short of a personal pledge, they said they would go to Turkey .
 It is extremely doubtful that any Turkish agreement could have been made publicly in the forty-eight hours before the bases acquired nuclear warheads .
 If the deal appalled Harold Macmillan, it would have been even more appalling to NATO governments less determined to get along with Washington . The deal would have appalled the British government .
 Perhaps there may be a place for secret diplomacy, at least when nuclear war is involved, when no vital interests of a nation or ally are bartered away . Perhaps, perhaps, perhaps it may be for a place where nuclear war involved .
 Khrushchev announced his nuclear retreat from Cuba the day after Kennedy and Dobrynin had their chat about the Turkish missiles . The day after the Kennedy-Dobrynin talks, Khrushche announced his withdrawal from Cuba . The Soviet Union withdrew from Cuba that day .
 In Havana, Castro kicked the wall in a rage and broke a mirror . Castro, who had not been consulted, kicked a mirror and kicked a wall . Castro was not consulted .
 It was too bad, he said to me, that this had happened in the midst of the campaign . "It's too bad," he said of the incident .
 Frequently, after the meetings, he would circulate and whine and complain about our being weak but he never made... any suggestions or recommendations . "He never made ... any suggestions," he said .
 On Saturday night he started to move around saying he heard he heard that the people felt we were backing down . "He heard that he was backing down," he said. "I'm not backing down. I'm backing down."
 Robert Kennedy: "He was against our policy on Cuba,” Robert Kennedy said the next year . When asked him for specifics he had none . Kennedy: “He was ... against our policies on Cuba .”
 Castro refused to permit UN verification of the missile removal . Castro in his rage refused to allow the UN to verify the removal .
 These, unlike the missiles, could be reasonably claimed as Cuban property . The missiles, however, could not be claimed as Cuba's property .
 Castro kept him waiting so long that Adlai Stevenson said it might be necessary to send James Donovan down to get him out . Castro kept James Donovan waiting too long to be released from prison .
 Llewellyn Thompson advised Kennedy to insist on the IL-28S . Khrushchev, having swallowed a camel, would not strain at a gnat, he said .
 He was prepared to lift the quarantine at once if the Russians would withdraw the bombers in thirty days . The quarantine was lifted if Russia withdraws bombers in 30 days . He said he was prepared for the quarantine to be lifted at once .
 Dobrynin introduced the President’s brother to the dancers . After the two men talked in private, Dobrynins introduced them to each other .
 Robert Kennedy held “the most unpleasant conversation | have had with Dobrynin.” Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy: ‘Most unpleasant conversation’ was ‘unpleasant’ and ‘most unpleasant’
 Kennedy: He needed an answer, before the President’s press conference the next day . Kennedy: ‘He needs an answer. He needed it. He needs it. The President needed it, Kennedy said, before a press conference .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the IL-28S in thirty days . The plane would be removed from the Soviet Union in a matter of days .
 The State Department had never liked his special relationship with the Attorney General . Dobrynin had by now established a special relationship of his own with his own .
 The Kremlin decided that Bolshakov’s usefulness in Washington was over and recalled him . After Joseph Alsop exposed his role in a column, the Kremlin decided to recall him .
 There is still peace even though you have been gone from the U.S. for more than two months . 'I would not have thought that possible. I would not think that possible'
 The real reason Khrushchev pulled out was his hopeless military situation, says historian . "The real reason is that the real reason was that he pulled out of the war," he says .
 In his explanation to the Supreme Soviet in December 1962, he emphasized that Cuba was to be attacked in two or three days . In December 1962 he said that Cuba would be attacked within hours of attack .
 An American invasion of Cuba would have been a disaster for Khrushchev personally and for the Soviet claim to world revolutionary leadership . The Soviet leader’s own recklessness had handed America the pretext .
 If Kennedy were serious about invasion, Khrushchev could do nothing about it, short of nuclear war against a stronger nuclear power . And, if Kennedy was serious, he couldn't do anything about it .
 Khrushchev could not safely retaliate elsewhere in the world . Lacking strategic superiority, he could not . retaliate elsewhere . Lack of strategic superiority was not enough .
 The missile crisis was a triumph, perhaps the only triumph, of flexible response . The U.S. responded to the crisis with a flexible response to the threat of nuclear weapons .
 A year's secret correspondence had enlarged each one’s sense of the other . The pair had been friends for more than a decade .
 Kennedy's grim odds were based on fear, not of Khrushchev’s intention, but of human error, of something going terribly wrong down the line . Kennedy was fearful of the possibility of a nuclear war in the future .
 This is why he took such care to maintain tight control over U.S. reactions . This was why he kept tight control of American reactions .
 In retrospect, the risk of war in October 1962 seems to have been exaggerated, he says . The risk was exaggerated at the time and less pardonably in historical recapitulation .
 Khrushchev, no less than Kennedy, might have been betrayed down the line . Perhaps he was more at the mercy of his military than Kennedy was of the Pentagon . Still, perhaps he may have been more at mercy of the military .
 Had the Americans been looking for an excuse to smash Castro or the Soviet Union, they could hardly have found a better one than the Soviet attempt to make Cuba a nuclear outpost . The Americans, as Soviet theology supposed, were supposed to be looking for a reason to smash .
 Kennedy’s restraint now persuaded Khrushchev of the point the Soviet leader had rejected in Vienna —that neither side dare tamper carelessly with the explosive international equilibrium . Neither side would tamper with the unstable international equilibrium, says Kennedy .
 The Kremlin fell silent about Berlin and for some years thereafter showed a certain respect for existing world frontiers . The Kremlin has remained silent since Berlin fell silent .
 Russia stepped up production of missiles to avoid being caught again in a position of gross nuclear inferiority . On the other hand, the Russians, determined never to be caught again, stepped up their production of missile missiles .
 Khrushchev meanwhile disappeared from the scene, in part a casualty of Cuba . The former Soviet Union leader was a major figure in the Soviet Union .
 It ended the de-Stalinization campaign, the loosening in the joints of a despotic society, the gusts of fresh air that this rollicking, erratic, passionate, indelibly human, human, curiously attractive figure brought to the nation he loved so much .
 Once Khrushchev accepted the Vienna principle, it was possible to move toward détente, says historian . "Détente was possible in the 1950s and '60s," he says .
 After Cuba, relief was not only thought to be possible but felt to be imperative . After that, relief thought was thought to have been possible . Now, relief is possible .
 A world in which there are large quantities of nuclear weapons is an impossible world to handle, says John Defterios . A world that has nuclear arms is impossible to handle is impossible, he says .
 Kennedy in fact took the diplomatic path after arranging the military setting that would make diplomacy effective . Far from rejecting diplomacy in favor of confrontation, Kennedy took the diplomacy path . Kennedy's military setting set the stage for diplomacy .
 This was not the view of those in the best position to judge—neither of Khrushchev nor, in the end, of Castro himself . Castro himself, Castro Castro, was not a good judge, but a good leader .
 Khrushchev was older and wiser . He reached the proper settlement with Kennedy . He was older, wiser and wiser at the time .
 Without him, John Kennedy would have found it far more difficult to overcome the demand for military action . Without Kennedy, it would have been more difficult for John Kennedy to overcome military action, says historian .
 Even Senator Fulbright, in Kennedy’s meeting with congressional leaders before his television soeech, had advocated the invasion of Cuba as a ‘wiser course” than the quarantine . Robert Kennedy oversaw the Executive Committee, stopped the air-strike madness in its tracks .
 The missiles of October were an interruption, framed between Ole Miss in September and the housing order in November . The housing order was in November, the preparation for the Georgia county-unit case in December .
 One of them sent word to the Attorney General that they did not mind going but wanted to make sure he thought it worthwhile . The Attorney General's office is in Washington, D.C., for the first time since 2008 .
 The ineffable William K Harvey, it developed, had conceived on his own the project of dispatching ten commando teams to Cuba . Harvey, who died at the age of 50, was the only person to have been involved in the project .
 The CIA made Harvey station chief in Rome, where he was soon sodden with drink . The CIA, taking care of its own, made him a CIA station chief .
 Lansdale moved on to other matters, then retired in the autumn of 1963 . Lansdale had a successful career in broadcasting .
 CIA’s mindless hit-and-run tactics, he said, far from creating a political movement against the regime, stiffened the “national resolve” behind Castro .
 The result could have been only to increase Cuba’s economic dependence on the Soviet Union . Had sabotage been more successful, the result would have been worse for Cuba . Cuba's economy is now dependent on Russia .
 The secret war, not unreasonably seen by Castro as preparation for a new and better invasion, intensified the Cuban desire for Soviet protection . Castro saw the secret war as preparation to prepare for a better invasion .
 The program Robert Kennedy and Lansdale had intended was different from the program CIA carried out . The program was intended to be different from that of the CIA's .
 The political base for the anti-Castro uprising simply did not exist inside Cuba, nor did the CIA wish to create such a base . But the CIA did not want such a political base in Cuba, and the CIA wanted to create it .
 The Bay of Pigs ought to have made it clear how covert action degenerated as directives passed from CIA headquarters to officers in the field and from there to war lovers behind lines .
 Lansdale tried to control Harvey, but a Lansdale in Washington implied a Harvey in Miami implied a Rip Robertson in Miami . A Rip Robertson implied a Ramon Orozco, grinning as he brought his two severed ears back from Cuba .
 The answer perhaps was a driven sense in the administration that someone ought to be doing something to make life difficult for Castro . The answer is that someone should be making life difficult .
 Castro had given his list of drugs and medicines to Donovan in mid-October, two days before the world knew of the Soviet missiles . Castro gave the unflagging Donovan a list of 10,000 drugs and medicine .
 The crisis behind him, Castro was almost madder at the Russians than at the Americans, Castro says . Castro was also mad at the U.S. for its actions in the 1980s and '90s .
 He was looking for a way to reestablish himself as an independent actor on the world scene . The actor wanted to be a 'independent actor' in the world .
 "If you want to get rid of them, if you’re going to sell them, you've got to sell it to me," he says . "I’m not going to buy them, I’ll sell them to me. If you're going to
 Nicholas Katzenbach, who had spent two years himself in a prisoner-of-war camp, became coordinator . Louis Oberdorfer of the Tax Division, field commander, was field commander . Nicholas Katzenbach was also a prisoner of war .
 John Nolan to work with Donovan; Barrett Pretty man to solve transportation problems . John Douglas as a general trouble-shooter; John Nolan as a work force for Donovan . Barrett Pretty to solve the transportation problems; John Douglas to work as a trouble-maker .
 Mitchell Rogovin of the Internal Revenue Service handed down quick rulings on the tax deductibility of corporate contributions .
 Dolan, tying up loose ends at Ole Miss, was summoned back to Washington by Oberdorfer . Dolan was in charge of the Ole Miss program at the time .
 The first problem was the drug industry, filled with self-pity over what it regarded as bureaucratic persecution, distrusting of the Kennedy administration . Castro was even less fond of Castro and not disposed to do favors for either by donating drugs to ransom prisoners .
 Attorney General argued the American responsibility for brave men who, at American instigation, had risked their lives for freedom and now, unless freed themselves, would die miserably in Castro’s jails .
 Oberdorfer: His presentation “had a tremendous impact on those businessmen’s businesses”
 Many of the sixty-three companies that made donations were under antitrust or Federal Trade Commission investigation . The donations were made by companies under investigation .
 Tax rulings based on wholesale prices produced windfall profits for some companies because of the high markups . Some companies profit from the markups resulting in huge profits for them .
 Both antitrust and criminal prosecutions have been just as vigorous, and their legislative attitude is essentially the same and not entirely what we ourselves would think was the correct government policy . The government has not been able to find a solution to the problem .
 The Pentagon worried about items of alleged military value on Castro’s list, such as retractable steel rulers, the Pentagon says . The Pentagon says the list includes retractable rulers .
 Castro "leaped at the chance to take a group of us to Hemingway’s home," Castro says . The wild ride was a wild ride with two cars abreast along narrow country roads . Castro: "I’m not sure what I’ve
 The Cubans made it clear that this was it until they received the $2.2. million . After half the remaining prisoners had been loaded into planes, the Cubans said they would not release them again .
 Robert Kennedy turned to Cardinal Cushing of Boston, a sponsor for the Cuban Families Committee . Kennedy was a member of the committee . Cushing was a sponsor of the Committee .
 In Washington the Executive Committee, now diminished in size and rebaptized the Standing Group, wrestled with Cuba policy . The Standing Group is a group of members of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 The administration was no closer to an answer to Castro than in earlier years . The administration is no longer close to a solution to Castro .
 Bundy proposed on January 4, 1963, an exploration of the possibility of communicating with Castro . Bundy: "On one extreme was Bundy, who proposed on one end was Bundy . On one extreme, Bundy said he wanted to communicate with Castro, but Bundy said it was possible .
 Bundy called for “some form of accommodation with Castro” became a standard item in lists of policy alternatives . Bundy called in April for the “gradual development of some form of . accommodation” with Castro . Bundy: “Some form of accommodation
 Robert Kennedy was particularly worried by Castro’s own secret war against Latin America, especially when the Cubans organized a guerrilla front against Betancourt in Venezuela .
 On March 14, following what he evidently found a most unsatisfactory NSC meeting, he sent his brother a testy memorandum . He urged new efforts to counter Cuban-trained operatives in South America .
 John McCone spoke at the meeting today about revolt amongst the military . As for Cuba itself, Cuba is facing a revolt amongst its military .
 Anti-Castro zealots were now determined to force the administration into action against its will . They were determined to use rumors and raids and exile manipulation of U.S. politics .
 On January 31, 1963, the indefatigable Kenneth Keating declared that the Soviet Union had cunningly filled Cuban caves with nuclear missiles . Keating: The Soviet Union filled the caves with missiles .
 Richard Nixon denounced Kennedy’s Cuban policy and demanded a “command decision” to get the Russians out . Richard Nixon: “We have goofed an invasion, paid tribute to Castro for the prisoners, then given the Soviets squatters’ rights”
 By the time Reston wrote, by the time he wrote, the secret war was almost at an end .
 McCone presentation—Gave facts & then said felt less criticism by newspapers & Congress if we do not stand down the raids. McCone presented a presentation to Congress . McCone said he felt 'less criticism' by newspapers if we don't stand down .
 The next day the administration announced it would “take every step necessary” to stop raids from the U.S. The administration said it would take "every step necessary" necessary .
 Kennedy terminated CIA financial support for Miro Cardona and the Cuban Revolutionar)’ Council in April .
 On April 3, Bundy informed a Cuba meeting that no further sabotage operations were under way . Bundy informed the meeting that there were no more sabotage operations . Bundy: "No further sabotage efforts are under way"
 Castro took them to the Bay of Pigs and delivered an amiable battlefield lecture . Castro took the group to the bay of Pigs to give a speech at the end of the war .
 To demonstrate the impassability of the area beyond the beachhead, he strode into the salt marsh until mud oozed to the top of his boots .
 They lunched on a boat in the bay and spent a sundrenched afternoon fishing and skin-diving . They were guided by a Russian PT boat .
 Donovan's mission now was to secure the release of a number of Americans, including CIA men, from Cuban prisons . Donovan: "The mission now is to ... secure the ... release of ... CIA men from ... Cuban prisons"
 Donovan thought there must be assurances that Cuba would leave other Latin countries alone . Donovan: "At a minimum, Cuba must be assured that it will not leave other countries alone" Donovan said .
 Castro gave Lisa Howard of the American Broadcasting Company ten hours of interview in late April . Castro gave Howard ten hours to speak to her .
 Castro is "looking for a way to reach a rapprochement" probably for economic reasons, she says . She concludes that Castro was probably looking to reach an economic agreement . Castro is looking for an economic deal, she adds .
 Che Guevara and Raul Castro opposed accommodation . Vallejo and Roa, the foreign minister, favored it, Howard thought .
 He did his best to dispel the anti-Soviet doubts he had himself fostered after the missile crisis .
 The collapse of the 1963 sugar crop made him more dependent on Soviet aid . He was dependent on the Soviet Union for the first time .
 Khrushchev may have also come back impressed by Khrushvich’s postcrisis desire for détente .
 When the Standing Group met in Washington at the end of May, bafflement prevailed . The Standing Group meets in Washington, D.C.
 McNamara questioned the utility of Sabotage and preferred overt economic pressures . McNamara: "Sabotage is a waste of time and time"
 The American government appeared, like Castro, to be facing in two directions . The U.S. government appeared to be looking at Castro in the opposite direction .
 On June 19, the Special Group suddenly approved a new sabotage program directed at major segments of the Cuban economy . The new program was approved on June 19 .
 The June 19 decision meant the resurrection, in a highly qualified way, of the secret war . Vi The decision means the resurrection of the Secret War . Vi
 The imperfect record also makes it hard to discover what had actually been going on since Mongoose . Mongoose.com was founded in 2007 and is now owned by a company that runs Mongoose, which is based in San Francisco .
 The phrase “exile raids” implied that the Agency had been doing nothing itself . The phrase 'exile raid’ implied that . the Agency was doing . nothing itself itself .
 The FBI continued raiding exile camps after June 19,42 but perhaps these were camps not under CIA control . The camps were raided by the FBI but perhaps not by CIA .
 Kennedy replied, a little inconsistently, “Well, just going in blowing up amine... a bridge” Kennedy replied .
 People were captured, tried and confessed. Some of them ended in disaster, people were captured and tried . Some of these ended in disasters, including the deaths of some of them .
 Other efforts were mounted against the Castro regime from Central America . The Castro regime was overthrown in Cuba .
 Luis Somoza, son of the thieving Nicaraguan dictator and a former president of Nicaragua himself, asked to see the Attorney General . The son of a former dictator asked for the attorney general's help .
 The State Department advised Kennedy that Somoza wanted to know the American attitude toward an anti-Castro base . The base would be set up in Nicaragua by Manuel Artime, the Bay of Pigs leader .
 There was, indeed, an Artime operation and Hal Hendrix of the Miami News supposed it managed either by CIA or, “on a hip pocket basis,” by the Attorney General himself .
 Somoza was soon telling Caribbean notables that he had received a “green light” from Robert Kennedy to mount antiCastro raids from Nicaraguan bases . The raids would be carried out from bases in Nicaragua .
 Robert Kennedy understood the enormity of a Pearl Harbor air strike on a small country . Kennedy understood so lucidly that he understood the magnitude of the attack on Japan . Kennedy was assassinated in December 1945 .
 It is odd that he did not see that the same principle applied to the secret war . It was odd to see that he didn't see that same principle apply to secret war, he said .
 Cuba was not a subject to which the Attorney General devoted sustained attention to . Still, in the May of Birmingham and Bull Connor, in . the June when George Wallace stood in the schoolhouse door, . Medgar Evers died and Medgar . died and Martin Luther King dreamed,
 The White House saw the resumed secret war as a way of keeping Castro off balance and neutralizing bureaucratic discontent while deciding whether it would be possible to risk a try at accommodation .
 The CIA saw it as a license to renew its attempts to kill the Maximum Leader . But the CIA, under its distended theory of authorization, didn't see it as authorized .
 In 1961 and 1962, CIA might still have regarded assassination as the ultimate logic of a frenetic overthrow-Castro policy . The notion of invading Cuba had been dead for years .
 In 1963, with invasion excluded, with the anti-Castro policy drastically modified and with the White House drifting toward accommodation, assassination had no logic at all . But in 1963, invasion was absolutely excluded . In 1964, assassination was ruled out of the equation .
 The Standing Group had asked the CIA’s Intelligence Branch to assess possible developments in the event of Castro's death . In the spring of 1963, the Standing Group asked the intelligence branch to assess potential developments . The CIA's Intelligence Branch responded to the request .
 This had nothing to do with assassination plots; estimating the consequences of the death of a national leader was a favorite intelligence exercise, applied indifferently to de Gaulle, Khrushchev, Salazar or Castro .
 The June 19 decision to revive the secret war now rekindles that old feeling . The decision was made in June 19 to revive secret war .
 The Agency recruited him in 1961 and gave him the code name of Am/Lash . He was recruited by the Agency in 1961 .
 A heavy drinker and a psychiatric patient, Cubela was not the ideal operative, the CIA says . "Better, however, in the CIA view, than no man in Havana was in Havana"
 The Agency dropped contact with Cubela after the missile crisis . The Agency had dropped contact after the crisis, got in touch again .
 In early September he met a CIA man in Sao Paulo, Brazil, and said he was prepared to attempt an ‘inside job’ against Castro’s life . He met the man in early September, and told him he would attempt an "inside job"
 On September 7, the very day that CIA/Washington received the report on the Brazil meeting, Castro attended a party at the Brazilian embassy in Havana . Castro attended the party on September 7 .
 Cubela requested murder weapons and a meeting with Robert Kennedy, investigators say . Their suspicions increased when Cubela asked to meet with Kennedy . Cubela was accused of murdering Kennedy .
 His subordinates, on the principle of admitting only defunct operations, explained Giancana away as a historical incident . His subordinates also explained the incident as an historical incident.
 White House, State, Defense or Justice didn't know about Am/Lash . Nor, so far, did anyone outside ClA—in the White House or State -- tell about it, the record shows .
 Cubela asked anxiously for some means of killing Castro without being killed himself . Cubela was worried about how to kill Castro without killing himself .
 The case officer, who served as interpreter, did not remember any such disclaimer . The interpreter did not .
 FitzGerald presented Cubela with a ball-point pen containing a hypodermic needle so fine that the victim would not notice its insertion . Cubela was allegedly given the needle to insert into Cubela's mouth .
 No one remembers whether he took the poison pen with him or threw it away . The poison pen was found in the body of a man who died in 2009 .
 The Agency plied Cubela with weapons and encouragement for another year and a half . The meeting took place on November 22, 1963 .
 In the spring of 1965, it brought him together with Manuel Artime in Central America . It was the first time he had been to Central America with Artime .
 Castro, Castro, as the CIA belatedly recognized, had penetrated the operation . Castro, who had been a CIA operative, was killed in the fall of 1961 . Castro's assassination was a major CIA operation .
 In 1966 he confessed plotting with Artime and begged for the firing squad . He begged for a firing squad after confessing to the plot to kill Artime .
 In 1975 Castro gave George McGovern a list of 24 supposed CIA attempts over the same period . Some of the alleged attempts were against himself, some against other Cuban leaders . Castro gave McGovern the list .
 In other nine it admitted relationships with people mentioned but not for the purpose of assassination . In the other nine, it said relationships with those mentioned were not intended for assassination .
 In the course of his talks with Donovan and Nolan in April 1963, Castro had got on the subject of assassination . Castro had talked about the assassination of JFK JFK .
 Cubela met with what he believed to be Robert Kennedy’s “personal representative” Castro may have had for the first time what seemed conclusive evidence tying the Kennedys directly to the plots against him .
 In 1967 John Rosselli, now fighting deportation as well as charges of gambling fraud, disclosed to his lawyer, Edward Morgan of Washington, his role in the CIA assassination plots . In 1967 he disclosed his role to Edward Morgan, who later died in prison .
 Rosselli dined together at Fort Lauderdale twelve days before he was hacked up and stuffed into the oil drum . Rossella and his wife were both in Fort Lauderdale at the time of the attack .
 No Attorney General in history had pursued the syndicates so relentlessly . No attorney general in history has pursued syndicates more aggressively than he did .
 There was every indication, after the Valachi testimony in the autumn of 1963, that the worst was yet to come . The worst was still to come, after Valachi's testimony in autumn 1963 .
 A year before, he had discussed the President with an acquaintance with a Cuban acquaintance . A year earlier, he'd discussed the president with a friend .
 After Khrushchev's willfulness during the crisis, he no doubt Saw a need to assert Cuban sovereignty against the Soviet Union as well as against the United States .
 This argued for placing his country in the position where it could play one superpower off against the other . This is where it would be able to play one superpowers off against each other .
 On Kennedy's side, his objection had never been to the Cuban revolution per se. On Kennedy’s side, he never thought of the revolution . Kennedy's objection was not to the revolution, but to the Castro revolution .
 It was to a Soviet-aligned Cuba, a repository for Soviet missiles, a base for the subversion of the Allianc e for Progress . It was also to a repository of Soviet missile missiles .
 Cuba retains its revolution and sovereignty but no longer a satellite ora subverter . Cuba retaining its revolution, sovereignty and sovereignty . Cuba is not a satellite of Cuba or a subverator .
 Each leader, however, surrounded by Cold War doctrinaires in his own camp, had to proceed in stealth . Each leader had to deal with the Cold War in stealth.
 His campaign to lift the travel restrictions on U.S. passports now focused on Cuba . His efforts to lift restrictions on travel to Cuba are focused on the island .
 He thought it was preposterous to prosecute American students who wanted to inspect the Castro revolution . He said he thought it would be 'preposterous' to prosecute students .
 Katzenbach, on Kennedy’s behalf, resoonded that their travel controls were for their own self-protection . She said their security problems should not govern the rights of United States citizens to wander as they chose .
 Travel restrictions are contrary to American tradition and put U.S. in unfavorable light around the world . On the other hand, there was general agreement that travel restrictions put United States in an unfavorable light .
 Travel restrictions should be abolished in Cuba except Cuba, U.S. State Dept. recommends .
 Even this, however, went too far for a cautious Secretary of State confronted by a Cold War Congress .
 The summer of 1963 saw the negotiation of the limited test ban treaty in Moscow, followed by John Kennedy’s unexpectedly successful western swing in defense of the treaty . The treaty was ratified by the Senate on September 24 .
 The people, it appeared, were considerably ahead of politicians on Cold War issues . The people were ahead of the politicians on the Cold War issue .
 Attwood was American ambassador to Guinea, on home leave to convalesce from an attack of polio . Attwood, formerly editor of Look, was on leave from home leave from convalescing from polio attack .
 While recovering, he had been seconded to work with Adlai Stevenson at the United Nations . He had been working at the UN with Stevenson .
 The Guinean ambassador to Cuba had told him that Castro disliked Cuba’s satellite status and was looking for a way of escape . Castro, unlike the Communists around him, disliked Cuba's satellite status .
 The Cuban leader seemed, like Sekou Touré of Guinea, sufficiently naive to be swayed by Communist advisers but too idiosyncratic to endure Communist discipline . He had seemed to be too naive to have been swayed by the Communist advisers .
 In early September, Carlos Lechuga, the Cuban ambassador to the UN, raised with Attwood the possibility of exploratory talks . Attwood: "I'm looking forward to a long-term relationship with Cuba"
 There is reason to believe that Castro is unhappy about his present dependence on the Soviet bloc . He would like to establish official contact with the United States and go to some length to obtain normalization of relations with us .
 "We have something to gain and nothing to lose by finding out whether in fact Castro does want to talk and what concessions he would be prepared to make," says David Cameron .
 The time and place for the inquiry, Attwood suggested, were the current session of the UN General Assembly .
 As a journalist who had interviewed Castro, he could plausibly meet Lechuga and chat about old times . As a reporter, he would plausibly talk about old relations with the former president .
 For the moment, all | would like is the authority to make contact with Lechuga . For the . moment, the . authorities would like to have the authority made contact with the . authority .
 With a presidential election coming up the next year, it was a course filled with extraordinary risk . With a president coming to power in 2016, the course was filled with risk, CNN says .
 If Keating or Goldwater (or Nixon or Rockefeller), if the Cuban exiles, caught a whiff of it, there would be hell to pay . Keating, Goldwater, Nixon and Rockefeller would be at risk .
 Averell Harriman, now under secretary of state for political affairs, was the first man in Washington to receive the memorandum . Harrimans is now the first person in Washington receiving the memo .
 Dr. Lisa Howard, brought in because of her Cuban friendships, talks to Dr. Howard . Howard: "I'm not afraid to go to the U.S. because of my Cuban friends"
 On October 31, Vallejo told Howard that Castro was ready for a meeting and that he would send a plane to fly a designated American official to a private airport near Havana . President Kennedy was pressing the matter on an entirely separate channel .
 Attwood and Bradlee, both old friends of Daniel’s, urged the President to see him .
 In the matter of the Batista regime, | am in agreement with the first Cuban revolutionaries. In the case of Batista, | I am in . agreement with Cuban revolutionaries, he says .
 Kennedy: Unfortunately, Kennedy continued, it had ceased to be a purely Cuban problem . Kennedy continued: "Unfortunately, unfortunately, it's not a purelyCuban problem. It's a problem that has never been solved by Cuba"
 Bundy told Attwood that the President was more interested than the State Department, in exploring the Cuban overtures . Bundy said that the Obama administration is more interested in Cuba than the U.S. State Department .
 A State Department memorandum of November 7 took a much harder line than the White House . The State Department took a harder line on the issue . The White House took a tougher stance than the State Department .
 This insistence on repealing most of the revolution was not part of Kennedy’s thinking, nor did it appear in a Bundy memorandum of November 12 . Bundy memorandum was prepared as guidance for Attwood . Bundy memo was written by Attwood and Kennedy, but Kennedy was not in it .
 Bundy: Cuba’s submission to external Communist influence and subversion directed at the rest of the hemisphere is unacceptable . Bundy: Only ‘flatly unacceptable’ points in Castro’�s policy were submission to outside Communist influence . Bundy says only ‘unacceptable�
 Vallejo kept calling Lisa Howard to promise that Attwood would be brought to Cuba secretly, that only he and Castro would meet him and that Che Guevara specifically would not be present . Valleko kept calling Vallevo, the stout proponent of accommodation, kept calling
 The Alliance for Progress did “not dictate to any nation how to organize its economic life’s economic life,” he said .
 A “small band of conspirators” had made Cuba a weapon in an effort dictated by external powers to subvert the other U.S. republics, he said . Cuba was a weapon for external powers, the president said .
 Bundy told Attwood that the President wanted to see him as soon as he had spoken to Lechuga . Bundy said that once Cuban sovereignty has been restored we will extend the hand of friendship and assistance to a Cuba whose political and economic institutions have been shaped by the will of the Cuban
 Bundy says the President will not be leaving Washington again, except for a brief trip to Dallas . Bundy says he will not leave Washington again . Bundy: The President would not be going to Dallas, Dallas, Texas, again .
 In the meantime, Jean Daniel had been spending three fruitless weeks in Havana . Jean Daniel spent the time in the Cuban capital .
 Castro declined to see him, perhaps estopped by his own hard-liners . More likely wishing to postpone bargaining until he knew outcome of Venezuela’s December presidential election .
 Castro, with great fanfare, was staging his Week of Solidarity with the Venezuelan revolution . This was the month when Castro staged his week of solidarity with Venezuela's revolution . Castro was in Venezuela at the time .
 At ten o’clock on the evening of the nineteenth, Castro, accompanied by Vallejo, unexpectedly came to his hotel room . Castro was in his room at the time of the incident .
 He made Daniel repeat three times Kennedy’s indictment of Batista . Three times also Kennedy said Castro himself, in defiance of the superpowers, had almost brought the world to nuclear war .
 Daniel felt that Castro saw Kennedy as an “intimate enemy” “| believe Kennedy is sincere,” Castro finally said . Daniel felt the Castro felt Kennedy was an ‘intimate friend’
 Castro rambled on about the iniquities of American policy . But, instead of addressing himself to the particularities of negotiation, he rambles on . Castro said, "I'm not going to negotiate with the U.S. But I'm going to talk about the
 He blandly denied to Daniel the Cuban revolutionary role in Latin America of which he had bragged earlier that month to Herbert Matthews .
 As for relations with Washington, “We have forgotten the U.S.” President Obama, Obama said .
 Cuba's president says he doesn't understand why Washington would not accept Cuba as it was . Still he could not understand why U.S. refused to accept it as Cuba was, he said .
 CNN's John Sutter says he hopes to see someone capable of understanding the explosive reality of Latin America . Sutter: Someday, he thought, there would appear in the U.S. a man able to understand Latin America's explosive reality .
 Two days later, lunching in his villa at the beach with Daniel, he heard the news from Dallas . The news came from Dallas, Texas .
 Attwood believed Castro might be trying to get out of under Guevara and the Communists and strike a deal with the U.S. Attwood told me that his secret explorations were, he believed, reaching a climax . On December 4, Attwood said he believed that
 Castro was possibly prepared to move a Tito stride away from the Soviet Union in exchange for the resumption of trade with the U.S. Castro was perhaps pleased to move Tito away from Soviet Union .
 He was not yet prepared in November 1963 to throw in his revolutionary hand in Latin America . But he was not ready to throw his hand in the revolutionary hand .
 The State Department, apart from Harriman, was not happy with Kennedy’s willingness to accept the social changes wrought by the revolution . The speech of November 18 did not delight former owners of plantations, mines and mills .
 It seems inconceivable that the CIA knew nothing about Attwood's plan . Attwood plan was closely held, but it's inconceivable they knew nothing .
 American intelligence had Cuban UN diplomats under incessant surveillance . Cuban diplomats were under constant surveillance by American intelligence .
 It followed their movements, tapped their telephone calls, read their letters, intercepted their cables . It followed them movements, followed their phone calls and read them letters . It also intercepted their cable cables .
 CIA must be convicted either of abysmal incompetence, or of a studied attempt to wreck Kennedy’s search for normalization . The CIA must suspect that Attwood and Lechuga were doing something more than exchanging daiquiri recipes .
 Anti-Castro fanaticos in the Cuban exile community were angry at Kennedy . Kennedy was among those who opposed him to the Cuban leader .
 In their obsessed view normalization would complete the perfidious course begun at the Bay of Pigs and carried farther during the missile crisis . In their obsession with normalization, they say normalization will complete the course begun in the Bay .
 No one had a greater interest in putting the Kennedy-Castro explorations on ice than those Cubans who had committed their lives to the destruction of the Castro regime . Cubans had committed lives to destroying the regime .
 Administration made no effort to keep the Brigade alive as an entity or make it a political or military force .
 Miro Cardona resigned as chairman of the Cuban Revolutionary Council in an outburst of wild accusations against the Kennedy administration . Cardona's outburst came in a speech in which Cardona accused the administration of using Cuban spies .
 Orlando Bosch denounced in an angry letter to the President as their betrayal by the Kennedys . The letter was sent to the White House . Orlando's letter was written by the President of the United States .
 CIA case officers go down the trail of espionage, deception and dirty tricks that ended in Watergate . Martinez, huddled around case officers, went down the path that led to Watergate .
 In 1977 he was in a Venezuelan prison charged with organizing the bombing of an Air Cubana plane and killing all seventy-three aboard . Paroled in 1972, he went underground, resumed murderous activities of diverse sorts .
 Other CIA Cubans were implicated in a wave of bombings and killings in Miami . Other Cubans implicated in the bombings were also implicated in killings .
 John and Robert Kennedy had believed that nationalism was the most vital political emotion in the developing world .
 They instinctively sympathized with new nations struggling for survival . After Khrushchev’s prediction of Communist world victory through national liberation wars, they saw the Third World as the crucial battleground between communism and democracy .
 As President, John Kennedy cultivated the new leaders, welcomed them to Washington . He also confided the Peace Corps to his brother-in-law and dispatched his brother on Third World missions .
 State Department had traditionally regarded Africa as a European preserve . The State Department has traditionally regarded the continent as an African preserve .
 John Kennedy himself had been accused of doing this when he gave his notorious speech in 1957 on Algeria . John Kennedy was accused of using this in a speech on Algeria in the same speech .
 In the White House he proposed to deal with African questions on African merits . In the U.S. he proposes to deal on African issues with African merits.
 Ivory Coast celebrated its first anniversary of independence in August 1961 . Ivory Coast became the first African nation to become independent in 1961 .
 State Department officer Brandon Grove returned from three years in Ivory Coast . He chafed under the official briefings until the State Department produced a young officer named Brandon Grove .
 Kennedy added Grove to the delegation . Grove's intelligence and candor helped Kennedy add him to his delegation .
 Kennedy bridled at the embassy schedule of official receptions and demanded to talk to students and labor leaders . Once in the Ivory Coast, Kennedy bridged at the Embassy schedule of events .
 Robert Kennedy asked whether the U.S. should help Ghana build the Volta Dam . Kennedy asked if the United States should help build the dam in Ghana . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Volta Dam propelled Robert Kennedy into one of his few sharp disagreements with his brother . Robert Kennedy and Robert Kennedy had a disagreement over the dam .
 Clark Mollenhoff, an old friend from Rackets Committee days, returned from a year’s fellowship in Africa . His suspicions were emphatically reinforced when his old friend returned from Racket Committee days . He said: “His suspicions were confirmed when he returned from his year
 Mollenhoff denounced the dam as a capitalist plot pushed by American business interests and as a project whose main beneficiary would be the Communists . Muckraking as usual, he denounced the project as capitalist and Communist .
 Robert Kennedy, an NSC regular after the Bay of Pigs, used to sit modestly along the wall with staff people rather than at the cabinet table with the statutory members .
 His grounds were that commitments had been made, that the dam was of long-run benefit for the people of Ghana and Africa, that it made economic sense and that, presumably, Nkrumah would not be there forever . He argued that commitments were made and that it was of
 Another strong reason ... is the effect it will have on the other African states, he says . "Another strong reason" is that it will affect other African nations, he adds .
 Ivory Coast, Togo, Upper Volta have received anywhere from one to five or six million dollars in aid . Friends of ours such as Togo and Ivory Coast have received around $6 million .
 Ghana which is bitterly opposed to us and playing ‘footsies’ with the Soviet Union is receiving this amount of money with no strings attached. Ghana is receiving the amount of funds with nostrings attached.
 If we give this money without any strings attached it will encourage Nkrumah to be more stringent with his repressive measures . Think also, think also, if we give . this money . it will . encourage N.Krumah . to be stricter with his . repressive measures.
 He has already placed several hundred of his opposition in jail without trial . Within the last month, he has passed some measures which will give him dictatorial control over life and liberty .
 Robert Kennedy saw his opposition to Nkrumah as in the interests of true African nationalism . Robert Kennedy's opposition to the regime was in the interest of African nationalism, Kennedy said .
 The African Bureau found him its strongest ally in its perennial argument with the Pentagon and with the State Department’s Europeanists .
 A dispute erupted over impending UN votes on African issues in 1963 . Thus in the summer of 1963 a dispute erupted in the United States .
 The Pentagon wanted to support Portugal and South Africa against black Africa . The Pentagon argued the alleged military indispensability of naval bases in the Azores and in South Africa .
 This was the bitter summer of the civil rights war, and the Attorney General had more urgent matters on his mind and desk . The Attorney General was in the midst of a civil rights crisis .
 Robert Kennedy thought that their independence was both right and inevitable . He thought that it was foolish for the United States to identify itself with Portuguese suzerainty . The American interest lay in winning the confidence of the anticolonial leaders .
 Rusk considered it improper, as by the book it doubtless was, for men engaged in rebellion against NATO allies to be received officially in Washington . Rusk: "It was improper to be ... for ... men engaged [rewarded] in Washington, Washington"
 Fredericks suggested, perhaps, the Attorney General might care to meet Mondlane in a neutral spot .
 Kennedy: "I will see him in the office of the Attorney General of the United States" Kennedy said he will see Kennedy in the attorney general's office . Kennedy said, “I will . see him .
 At that point he was exercised over Zanzibar, where a ‘people’s republic’ of obscure but impassioned views had recently been established .
 Averell Harriman wrote a memorandum and George Ball wrote back and said it was foolish to waste our time, it was such a small country . Ball said God could take care of the swallows in the skies .
 Edwin Reischauer, the leading American historian of Japan and newly appointed ambassador to Tokyo, had urged the Attorney General to accept an invitation to Japan . Anti-American violence had forced Eisenhower to cancel a visit in 1960, when he was in Japan .
 The uninhibited and sometimes unruly company tried Brandon Grove’s Foreign Service sense of propriety .
 We do not condemn others for differences in economic and political structures. We are not condemning others for their differences, political structures . We are proud of our differences, we say, but we are not condemned for our differences .
 We call to young men and women of all nations of the world to join with us in a concerted attack on the evils which have so long beset mankind—poverty, illness, illiteracy, intolerance, oppression, war, war .
 Edwin Reischauer had begun at Nihon with a few sentences in what he hoped, after laborious rehearsal, might resemble the native tongue . He had hoped to use the language of his native Japan .
 Several hundred people had come to revile the brother of the American President . Several hundred had come from all over the world to protest against him .
 When the critic, exhausted, came to an end, Kennedy, enlightened by instant translation, commenced a reply . Kennedy: "When the critic came to a end, he began a reply. Kennedy was exhausted, and he replied."
 At this point the public address system, and every light in the house, went dead . At the time, the house was full of people .
 Someone from the embassy, anticipating the worst, had brought a batteryoperated bullhorn to the embassy .
 Although now President, he is still young, all those who held key positions in his campaign are young . All those who hold key positions for him are young, and all of his key positions are young. Although now .
 The interpreter explains that this was the school cheerleader, desiring to make apology . The interpreter explained that this is the school . The translator said that the cheerleader was not a student .
 In a moment, the cheerleader was on the platform gesticulating wildly (inadvertently punching Ethel Kennedy in the pit of the stomach) She doubled up, stood up immediately, smiled and went on, observed Seigenthaler .
 The audience responded, as if at a football rally before the homecoming game . "The audience responded," the audience responded .
 The Kennedy party, alas, learned the song --“Miyako no seihoku’ — and later inflicted it mercilessly on parties at Hickory Hill . ‘The Kennedy party was alas,’ said the author .
 They slept on floors, ate snails and seaweed for breakfast and whale meat for lunch . They also visited ancient temples and modern plants .
 They finally reserved fifteen minutes before the group departed for Indonesia . The group left for Indonesia on Monday morning .
 In Eisenhower years the State Department had looked on him as a sort of communist . In the Eisenhower years, he was looked on as a kind of communist. In the 1960s he was viewed as a communist by the State Dept.
 John Kennedy thought it easy to understand why Sukarno might be anti-American after what the CIA had done to him in 1958 . Kennedy had him pegged as a clever nationalist politician and charmed him with notable success .
 While the Robert Kennedy party was still in Tokyo, Communists had stoned the American embassy in Djakarta and painted the city with KENNEDY GO HOME signs . The party was in Tokyo when Robert Kennedy was assassinated .
 Sukarno installed them in the presidential palace and surrounded them by soldiers wherever they went . Ethel plunged into darkness one evening by plugging in her hair dryer and blowing fuses .
 The only time he took a backward step was when it hit him; it knocked him back just a step . "The only time I took a step back was when the only time it hit me," he said. "I was knocked back just one step"
 Police twisted both arms behind him, turned him upside down and rushed him out to a car . The police grabbed the thrower and twisted his arms around him . The thrower was then taken to a nearby hospital .
 Kennedy replied that his country had “vigorously supported Indonesia’s struggle for independence” and declared his hope that these “two close friends of the U.S.” would be able to work out West New Guinea . Kennedy: Indonesia and New Guinea are
 We are going to disagree with Indonesia, and you will disagree with us, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com . We are not going to agree with Indonesia .
 A student who had done his homework in American history brought up the Mexican War . The Mexican War was the first Mexican War fought in the U.S.
 Attorney General told the press that he had been instructed to clear any future Texas speeches with the Vice President .
 Like Khrushchev, he was offended by Sukarno’s satyriasis and by the gallery of nudes that adorned the presidential palace . ‘I don’t have respect for him. I think that he’m bright. | think he�
 Robert Kennedy’s specific mission in Djakarta was to head off war between Indonesia and the Netherlands over West New Guinea, a territory whose status was left unresolved when Indonesia became independent .
 Jones had long advocated a forthcoming policy on West Irian, as the Indonesians called it . Jones had previously advocated a policy on the island nation .
 He saw no future in the U.S. taking the losing side in a colonial war, he said . He said there was no future for the United States to take part in the war .
 The Indonesians had everything to gain and nothing to lose from negotiation . The Indonesian government is negotiating a deal with the U.S. government .
 In 1963 Sir Robert Menzies complained bitterly to the wife of the American ambassador about Robert Kennedy’s role . In 1963 he complained bitterly about the role of Robert Kennedy, the Australian Prime Minister .
 Moscow sent Mikoyan to Djakarta in July 1962 in a last-minute effort to block the settlement . Moscow tried to block it in an effort to stop the settlement in 1962 .
 We felt it was wrong of him not to inform us of his intentions in advance . We felt he should have told us what he wanted to do with the project .
 U.S. continues to put pressure on the Dutch government behind the scenes . In any event, while continuing to support the Dutch publicly, the Americans obviously put pressure .
 Since armed conflict had been avoided, our advisors who had been training the Indonesians were no longer needed, so they came home . They came home after the conflict was avoided .
 When Sukarno visited Washington in 1961, John Kennedy had asked for Pope’s release . John Kennedy asked for the release of the Pope during his visit to Washington .
 When it comes to women | am weak. | cannot stand even a strange woman ‘s tears. When I come to women, I am weak . I cannot stand . even a stranger woman ’s tears,’s . tears .
 Kennedy concluded he was trying to use Pope as a bargaining counter over West New Guinea . Kennedy concluded that he was using Pope to try to use as bargaining counter . Pope was Pope of Papacy .
 Kennedy said he wanted “to make sure that when | leave here he knows how strongly we feel about this’s this. Kennedy: “I wanted to make sure . that when . I wanted ‘to make . sure that . when . leave here, he knows
 Kennedy went at once to Sukarno and apologized for his bluntness . Kennedy: "If | have offended you by my bluntness ... | certainly apologize for that"
 Sukarno, the old fox, saw what the young fox was up to, and evidently admired his technique . Sukarni saw what he was doing and apparently admired it . The old fox saw it and said: 'Sukarno'
 Jones reflected on Kennedy's abrasive legacy: "He was a very positive guy" Jones says Kennedy had been abrasive, but he was a "very positive guy."
 "There were one or two points where ... the discussions became very, very heated," he says . "But then they both calmed down, and their personal relations were cordial and friendly," he adds .
 Sukarno welcomed Bobby back two years later” ;2> but that is another story. Evidence of that was . that was that Sukarna welcomed Bobby’s . back .
 Robert “looked very tired,” but “Ethel seemed unchanged by the round-the-world campaigning.” Galbraith, back from Hawaii, wrote .
 Arthur had written a speech for Bob to give in Berlin . Arthur had thought it all right. Bob thought it was a good idea to give .
 On second thought,| was forced to conclude, as did Arthur, that the criticism was sound . Arthur was forced, as well, to conclude that he was right .
 Kennedy was evidently less of a Cold War rhetorician in 1962 than Schlesinger or even Galbraith . Kennedy was clearly less of an effective Cold War rhetoricalist in 1962 . Kennedy has a long way to go, but it's not clear if he would have been able to
 On the plane to Europe Bobby was filled with reflections about his trip to Europe . Bobby says he is looking forward to spending the rest of his life in Europe .
 In countries like Japan and Indonesia, America could make contact with the youth and intellectuals on/yasa progressive nation, he says . What was clearest of all, he told me, was that, in countries like Indonesia, he said .
 The press party sent over champagne from their neighboring table, procured an accordionist and started an impromptu dance that went on till four-thirty in the afternoon . Somehow remember through vinous mists the newspapermen bringing in a motor scooter and Ethel driving it prec
 The next day the Kennedys concentrated on matters spiritual, such as an audience with the Pope, while | stuck to the temporal side, meeting with Nenni, La Malfa and other political leaders and clearing the Attorney General’s German speeches .
 Willy Brandt, General Clay and Al Lightner (head of the U.S. Mission in West Berlin) met us at the airport . General Clay: "Willy Brandt and General Clay" met with General Clay .
 After a brief airport ceremony and a few tries at German by Bobby and Ethel, we set forth on a motorcade to the Rathaus . The Rathaus is the largest museum in Germany .
 The streets were lined with cheering people, who had waited for hours in the bitter cold . The streets of New York City were lined by cheering crowds .
 It was all deeply moving until one remembered that a good many of them were cheering just as hard for Hitler twenty years ago .
 February 22 was his thirtieth birthday; also George Washington’s two hundredth birthday . February 22 is also Washington's birthday; February 22 also is George Washington's two hundred . Washington was born on February 22, 1917 .
 Both events received due recognition at Mayor Brandt’s dinner that evening .
 Anthony Lewis concluded that Robert Kennedy was “a very unusual person, a person who in a kind of tormented way was struggling to do everything on the merits, which was, | thought, all one could ask . The wary Anthony Lewis now concluded .
 Even the Foreign Service conceded that, for all his strange hobbies, the Attorney General had peculiar skills as a propounder of home truths to world leaders . The Attorney General's skills include youth and counterinsurgency, like youth .
 In December 1962 he was prevailed upon to undertake a mission to Brazil . So in December 1962, he embarked on a mission in the country .
 After the Battle of Ole Miss in September, he was now preparing for his Supreme Court debut in January . He was now in December in December liberating Bay of Pigs prisoners .
 Brazil was the largest country in Latin America, and the Alliance for Progress needed its full collaboration . But Brazil was Brazil's largest country, and Brazil was needed to be joined in the alliance .
 Kennedy administration gave ideas long proposed by progressive Latin American economists and political leaders comprehensive form, collective endorsement and public dollars . Kennedy administration's contribution was to give ideas in Latin America comprehensive form and funding .
 The Kennedy plan had been to integrate the southern hemisphere more firmly than ever in the American corporate economy . But presidential soeeches stimulating and legitimizing social change in Latin America were odd way of going about it .
 It did not even occur to us to invite U.S. businessmen to the founding meeting at Punta del Este, Uruguay, in August 1961, till the week before . We were invited to the meeting by the United States .
 We did not follow up on their recommendation that a permanent committee be established to promote foreign private investment . Nor did we follow up with their recommendations that the committee should be established .
 Historically the United States had been committed to the Latin oligarchs. Historically the U.S. had to be committed to Latin American oligarchs .
 Kennedy overestimated the possibilities of peaceful revolution in Latin America . Castro overestimated possibilities of violent revolution, as did Kennedy in fact .
 Both Washington and Havana underestimated the rigidity of the old structures, the inertia of the masses and especially the tenacity of the oligarchs . The oligarchs simply denied that those who made peaceful revolution impossible made violent revolution inevitable .
 The Alliance for Progress required a continent of Betancourts for success . The Alliance For Progress needed to succeed in order to succeed .
 One terrible disadvantage of political parties of the Democratic Left all over Latin America is that they are poor, while their enemies are well-heeled . The parties are poor in Latin America, while the enemies are wealthy, he says .
 In many a country where the Alliance may be pouring in tens of millions, the ultimate political battle may be lost because the parties of the Democratic Left lack a few thousands of dollars for desperately needed action .
 It seemed useful at the time, but it established bad habits and contained an awful potentiality for abuse . It was useful to help the friends of peaceful revolution as much as the Russians and Cubans . But it was also dangerous and dangerous to abuse .
 The deeper trouble was the ultimate artificiality of the conditions CIA intervention sought to create, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The progressive democratic leaders, while the finest people in Latin America, were falling out of touch with fresh currents in politics and with the militants of the younger generation . The best of Latin America's finest people, the best of the continent, was in touch with new currents of politics .
 If they could not sustain themselves, it was vain to try to sustain them from without . If they couldn't sustain themselves they would not be able to do so again .
 He ended in 1963, as he had begun in 1961, by saying that this was no miracle to be passed in Washington . It depended in the end on the people of Latin America, he said .
 Janio Quadros had resigned after a few months as President in August 1961 . Quadros was a mysterious but mysterious figure in the White House .
 Joao Goulart succeeded to the office at the price, exacted by the army and other conservative interests, of having to accept a prime minister and a quasiparliamentary regime . The Vice President succeeded in the election at the cost of the army .
 Goulart was an inept pupil of the renowned Getulio Vargas . He was a wealthy landowner of ostentatious populist sentiment . The landowner was a former pupil of Vargas, a wealthy man .
 He was rather a left-wing political boss who made deals with Communists or anyone else . He was not a Communist Party boss, but a left wing political boss .
 Lincoln Gordon, now the American ambassador to Brazil, recalls his own experiences on the Senate Labor Committee . Kennedy recalls his experiences with Communist infiltration into the Brazilian labor movement .
 Congress huffing and puffing over expropriation of International Telephone and Telegraph properties by Goulart’s radical brother-in-law, Leonel Brizola, governor of the state of Rio Grande do Sul .
 ITT's Harold Geneen was urging what soon became the Hickenlooper Amendment . It would cut off foreign aid to any country nationalizing U.S. property without compensation .
 Brazil must recognize expropriation without compensation would only drive Congress to restrictive legislation . Brazil must also recognize that expropriating without compensation will only lead to restrictive laws . Brazil has a history of over-propriations, but expropriations without compensation is unacceptable .
 Kennedy emphasized that his interest was in getting some procedure that would enable us to engage in frictionless nationalization’®2—a striking change from previous American Presidents whose interest was not nationalization per se .
 Campos thought Goulart “struck by Kennedy’s personality and liberal posture” Campos said he was “pleasantly surprised” by the warmth of his reception . Campos: “I’m not surprised’ by the warm
 On his return, Goulart plunged into a campaign for the restoration of full presidential powers . He has since returned to the country and campaigned for full presidential power .
 He forced the parliament to agree to a plebiscite on the question in January 1963 . Soon he forced the government to agree on the issue .
 Gordon recommended that Kennedy postpone his visit . Gordon: In view of political uncertainty, Kennedy should not visit the U.S.
 Goulart did little about the Alliance, named a Brizola man as prime minister and watched economic confusion grow . He did little to help the Alliance and named the man as PM .
 The gaucho in him responded to Kennedy’s handling of the missile crisis . Still, he responded to the crisis with a measured response to the Kennedy administration .
 When the missiles were withdrawn, he poured out two huge whiskeys and proposed to Gordon that they drink a toast . When the missile was withdrawn, Gordon proposed to drink a whiskey .
 As the American ambassador formulated an innocuous speech to world peace, Goulart said, “To hell with that.” The U.S. ambassador looked at him and smiled—“he has a very charming smile”
 With political turmoil increasing, the ambassador considered a visit by President Kennedy more untimely than ever . President Kennedy's visit was considered a time to visit by the ambassador .
 Still he felt that something ought to be done to strengthen the personal relationship established in the spring . Still, he said that something should be done .
 In late November 1962 Gordon proposed that Robert Kennedy come to Brazil and express the President’s concerns . Robert Kennedy traveled to Brazil in November 1962 to express his concerns .
 If Brazilians felt that Washington was allied with the elites, anti-Americanism was inevitable . Anti-U.S. sentiment was inevitable, according to the president of Brazil .
 Some in the government, he conceded, had “fixed hostility to the United States—although not toward President Kennedy” But that was a consequence of the continuing political crisis and would change after the plebiscite .
 Kennedy wondered whether Goulart really understood President Kennedy’s concern . Kennedy, when he got the floor after more than an hour, wondered whether he really understood his concern .
 The Kennedys, after all, had their own problems with American business . They had a lot of problems to deal with .
 Lincoln Gordon identified government agencies where he thought there had been serious left-wing penetration . Lincoln Gordon said government agencies were at risk of being infiltrated by the left . Gordon: Government agencies where government agencies are at risk to be exposed .
 Washington could be sure, Goulart said, that he would not play the Communist game . Washington could not play a Communist game, he said, but he would play it .
 Goulart, he thought, resented Kennedy’s emphasis on Communist infiltration in his government and on the treatment of American corporations . He thought that Kennedy had focused on the Communist infiltration of his government .
 He looks and acts a good deal ... like a Brazilian Jimmy Hoffa, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Dantas failed to get the United States assistance he hoped for . Goulart was unpopular in Congress, and failed to receive the help .
 Later in the year Goulart fired his moderate ministers and headed down the VargasPerén road of demagogic populist nationalism . The president of Peru is now the president of the Peruvian Republic . He has been in power for 18 months .
 The mission to Brazil lasted only twenty-four hours and therefore gave Kennedy no opportunity for his usual sessions with students and labor . Kennedy's trip to Brazil gave him no opportunity to speak to students or labor workers .
 Neither Sukarno nor Goulart could be ‘saved’—either for the democratic or the Marxist worlds . Both succumbed to fantasy and were overthrown by their own armies .
 Over the past twenty years we have paid dearly because of support given to colonial rulers, cruel dictators or ruling cliques void of social purpose . We have paid a lot to support colonial rulers and cruel dictators .
 For perhaps the last time in their history it was possible for Americans to feel as if all the world were young and all dreams within grasp . But exaggerate of course. | exaggerate .
 Many of us who came to Washington with the Kennedys did suppose that reason could serve as an instrument for social change and that we were moving in the grain of history . But many of us thought reason was an instrument to social change, he says .
 It proved more difficult to change the world than to desegregate the Coast Guard . The Coast Guard was desegregated for the first time .
 The center of Ethel's life remained Hickory Hill, the center of his life . Ethel presided with inexhaustible high spirits, the author says .
 It was hard to resist the raffish, unpredictable, sometimes uncontrollable Kennedy parties . The Kennedy parties were hard-to-resist .
 There was a bigger table, in time a new wing, and the parties expanded accordingly . Soon there was a larger table, a bigger room, and a bigger wing . The parties have expanded accordingly.
 When weather permitted, they were held on the terrace, with small children “standing around peeping over the hedge, barefooted, in those little nightgowns” or watching “owl-like, with grave, proprietary eyes” from a tree house in
 Lee Udall, the wife of the Secretary of the Interior, pushed me fully clothed into the Swimming pool as | stood on the edge, contemplating whether | should not jump in anyway to help Ethel . She had been tumbled in a few seconds before when her chair slipped from
 Children dissolved his reticences, released his humor and his affection, brought him, one felt, more fully out of himself and therefore perhaps more fully into himself . Children dissolved reticities, released humor and the affection .
 Children in neglect, privation, distress wounded him, like an arrow into the heart, he says . "Children in neglect and privation wounded him," he says. "It was like a wound to the heart"
 Photographs of the period show him playing with his own children on the beach in summer or in the snow in winter, walking with them hand in hand, carrying them on his shoulders .
 He was a natural instructor, patient in answering their questions and in teaching them to throw and catch and swim . He was also patient in explaining questions and teaching them how to play .
 Whenever he could, he swam, played tennis, sailed, skated, skied, and skied . He pressed more or less unwilling friends into touch football .
 Theodore Roosevelt said Marines should be able to hike fifty miles in twenty hours . Theodore Roosevelt wrote a 1908 letter to the president urging the Marines to hike 50 miles in a twenty-hour hike .
 The President sent the letter over to General Shoup, asking whether present-day Marines were as fit as their predecessors . Shoup: "The President sent a letter to Shoup asking if the Marines were fit as they were in their predecessors"
 Someone from the White House must march the fifty miles with the Marines, he says . Salinger says someone from the administration must march with him .
 The portly Salinger had studiously avoided all forms of exercise except cigar-smoking for twenty years . Salinger finally resortes to the desperate expedient of insisting on step-by-step coverage by the Whitt House press corps .
 Around the country athletic citizens started off on fifty-mile walks of their own . Around the U.S. citizens walked around the country .
 Salinger extracted a statement from the President’s Council on Physical Fitness saying that only persons in appropriate physical condition should attempt the hike . Salinger pointed out that the standard, he pointed out, that clearly disqualified him .
 Robert Kennedy, who always had to test himself against everything, decided that he too would make the hike . On a Friday afternoon at the Department of Justice, Robert Kennedy decided to take a hike .
 At five o’clock on Saturday morning the four, joined by David Hackett, the best athlete at Milton, met by the old Chesapeake & Ohio Canal . The four were joined by the former Milton High School student David Hacket .
 On December 19, 1961, while playing golf in Palm Beach, Joseph P Kennedy, now seventy-three years old, fell suddenly sick . Kennedy was a member of the Kennedy family .
 It was an intracranial thrombosis, paralyzing his right leg, arm and face . The hemisphere of his brain that governed his ability to speak was paralyzed by the throms .
 He had stayed resolutely in the background from the moment his son became a presidential candidate . He has stayed a quiet distance from his son's presidency .
 "The proud old man practiced self-abnegation with sensitivity and grace," he said . "He was a proud, humble man," he added. "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to him."
 Smith reported the conversation to Robert Kennedy, who listened carefully and thanked him . Smith reported it to Kennedy . Kennedy thanked Smith for his service .
 Their father developed pneumonia, pulled through, then began a long invalidism . Their father died of a long, long illness .
 He could not control his speech but did not know it and, since he continued to understand what was said to him, continued to speak . He continued to be able to speak even though he was unable to control it .
 Ann Gargan became his eternal companion with the professional nurse, Rita Dallas, over the best mode of treatment . Rita Dallas was a professional nurse who helped him cope with his illness . Ann Gargans and Rita Dallas were in constant contention over treatment .
 'I would see them stand outside his door and actually seem to screw up courage from deep inside before entering the sickroom. Time and again | would see . see them standing outside his . door . 'Time and again' would see people stand outside their door and seem to . screw
 Mr Kennedy took on a new vigor when his children were around, Kennedy said . Each one radiated confidence to him, and always, when his . children were . around, he said. "Always, when . his children are around, Mr Kennedy said."
 The evening was movingly gay, because the old man’s gallantry shows in his eyes and his crooked smile and the steel of his left hand . But the evening was movedly gay because of his gallantry, says the author .
 His children involve him in their every thought and action, he says . And because he's involved in his every thought, he's always involved them .
 The Kennedys are at their best ... when they are family, and forthright and demonstrative, and they were at their . best tonight . The Kennedy family is at its best when it comes to family and family .
 Robert Kennedy took the brunt of it, as he had when he was a small boy so many years before . Robert Kennedy: "Robert Kennedy's life is in a very special place in the world"
 The President and the Attorney General were in attendance at the hospital when ambassador was able to walk without a brace . Ambassador's wheelchair was wheelchair bound, but he was allowed to walk again without brace .
 In summers at Hyannis Port, Rita Dallas wrote, “it hurt me whenever Mr Kennedy treated him roughly.”
 Robert understood, never complained, cherished his father, cherished him . Robert exercised every day with him in the swimming pool . Robert understood and never complained .
 Among strangers the Attorney General was still diffident and often uneasy . Among strangers, he was diffident, often uneasy.
 On occasion people saw a veil fall over his eyes; they did not know where they stood with him or whether they were getting through or not . People saw him fall through his eyes, he said. He said: "On occasion people see a veil falling over their eyes"
 On occasion he seemed imperious, too ready to override people in the determination to get things done, expecting too much too easily in the way of loyalty or service .
 He now radiated a sense of power, derived from his own gifts and intensities as well as from his relationship to the President . Marie Harriman's birthday party in April 1963 .
 Randolph Churchill, Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr., and Robert Kennedy, Jr. were also there . Randolph Churchill came to Washington to accept his father’s honorary American citizenship . Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr. was there to accept father's honorary citizenship .
 Bobby, with his innocent audacity, asked Marlene who was the most attractive man she had ever met . Marlene said he was most attractive person she had met . Bobby was the man Marlene had met that night . Bobby, who was in a relationship with Marlene, was
 She sang “Happy Birthday, Mr President” at a Madison Square Garden celebration of John Kennedy’s forty-fifth birthday . We both met her the same night after she had sung ‘Happy Birthday’
 It was May 19, 1962, at a small party given by that loyal Democrat Arthur Krim of United Artists . Krim was a loyal Democrat and a loyal Republican .
 One felt a terrible unreality about her—as if talking to someone under water . But one felt like she was speaking to someone underwater .
 Bobby and | engaged in mock competition for her; she was most agreeable to him and pleasant to me—but then she receded into her own glittering mist . Bobby and Bobby engaged in . mock competition .
 Robert Kennedy, with his curiosity, his sympathy, his absolute directness of response to distress, got through the glittering mist as few did . Robert Kennedy's curiosity and sympathy, he said, "got through the glitzy mist" in some way .
 One feels that Robert Kennedy came to inhabit the fantasies of her last summer . One of her fantasies was that she was obsessed with the Kennedy family .
 She told a reporter that she might get married again; someone in politics, no name vouchsafed . She said she might marry someone in Washington .
 Robert Slatzer claims she said Robert Kennedy had promised to marry her . Another friend claims she told him Robert Kennedy promised her he would marry .
 She killed herself through an overdose of sleeping pills, probably by accident, perhaps by intent, on the night of August 4 . She was found dead at her home in New York City .
 This was less than three months after they met, the couple had seen each other more than half a dozen times . They doubt whether they had met each other over half an hour long .
 At last he was fulfilling his mother’s dream of selfimprovement—and perhaps exciting new maternal dreams . "At last, I was fulfilling my mother's dream," he said .
 Robert and Ethel asked me to organize a series of evening meetings in Washington at which heavy thinkers might remind leading members of the administration that a world of ideas existed beyond government . The meetings stalled for a time, trusting they would forget, but they didn't .
 The first Hickory Hill seminar convened on November 27, 1961 . Not a chance; and the first was held in 1961 .
 The lecturers ranged from Isaiah Berlin to Al Capp . The audience ranged from McNamara and Dillon to Alice Roosevelt Longworth .
 The Attorney General’s gentle pressure forced a meeting every month or so . Except for the summers, we managed, under the Attorney General, we met every month .
 Longworth, her cynicism well honed by sixty years of life in Washington, became a devotee of Longworth . Longworth's cynicism was her cynicism, but she became a devoted member of the Washington Post .
 If you were shabby on any important point you could pretty well count on Bobby to come in and press you on it . But he was a very rapt and eager prosecutor of the positions .
 This was matched in some degree by the eagerness of the questioning that Ethel put . Ethel's eagerness to question her was matched by her eagerness .
 When he recruited me for the White House in 1960, we had little more than an amiable acquaintance . We had little to say, but he recruited him for the job in 1960 .
 A liberal, intellectual, professor, writer, agnostic; a non-hiker, nonskier, non-touch football player, nonmountain climber, whose only athletic pleasure was indifferent tennis — would not have seemed especially his type .
 Former President Barack Obama served some purpose in the White House in his considerably more synoptic view of the administration . He says he got along with Obama, but he says he didn't get along with the president .
 "No special pattern emerged. He called me from time to time to ask me to look into this or that problem," he says . "He called me often, asking me to investigate problems," he adds .
 Sometimes he asked me to bring up things with his brother, but rarely questioned and supposed to have some minor role in a larger stratagem . Sometimes wondered why he did not call his brother directly but rarely . questioned and . rarely questioned . and supposed . that he . had some minor
 He was very funny in a sardonic throwaway style, and keenly appreciative of humor in others . He was a keen observer of others' sense of humor .
 When a remark entertained him, he had the most engaging habit of clapping two or three times . He had a habit of 'clapping' when a remark was made, he said .
 Once Senator Hugh Scott of Pennsylvania attacked me; | replied suitably . Once . Senator Hugh . Scott attacked me. I replied, 'Yes' Senator Scott .
 In connection with your letter to Senator Scott Scott, Senator Scott says, "I don’t know whether you’re a communist or something.”
 Underneath the teasing, one felt that he was deeply protective of friends . Underneath his teasing, he said: 'Underneath was that he had always been very protective'
 The impressions of the fifties —his father, McCarthy committee, the Racket Committee, the pursuit of Hoffa—had not died . The impressions had not died. The impressions were still alive, he says .
 Gore Vidal has restatised the history of the book's origins . The book was published in 1998 in New York, New York and London . Vidal said the book was "a very important part of history"
 Vidal was a talented man, a writer of lucid and graceful prose, an authentic wit, an excellent historical novelist, adept playwright, brilliant essayist, litigious citizen, always filled with charm and malice .
 Jacqueline Kennedy both had had, in successive periods, Hugh D Auchincloss as a stepfather . He and Jacqueline had both had, respectively, a stepdad . Jacqueline and Hugh had a close relationship .
 Robert Kennedy came into Dutchess County to speak on behalf of his son . Robert Kennedy failed to recognize him when he met him in New York City .
 As the evening passed, he gave the impression of having drunk far too much . He gave the strong impression that he had drunk too much at the event .
 Jacqueline Kennedy asked me whether I would get him out of there, I said . I enlisted Kenneth Galbraith and George Plimpton to help . Someone, perhaps Kennedy, asked me if I would, perhaps . I said, 'Yes'
 Gore Vidal got into violent fights with Lem Billings, then with Bobby Bobby Bobby . Vidal fought Lem Billing, then Bobby Bobby. Vidal had a violent fight with Billing .
 Gore found Bobby crouching by Jackie and steadying himself by putting his arm on her shoulder . Gore: Bobby found him crouching and steadling himself by standing by Jackie's shoulder . Bobby found Bobby in the arms of Jackie and put his arm around her shoulder.
 Jacqueline Kennedy was irritated by his behavior and resolved not to have him in the White House again . She was annoyed by the behavior of her husband .
 Vidal genuinely admired the President—“an ironist in a profession where the prize usually goes to the apparent cornball,” he wrote as late as 1967 .
 Robert Kennedy, for his part, regarded bisexuality with disapproval . Robert Kennedy became more understanding of the varieties of human experience in later years .
 As civil rights increasingly absorbed his time, he withdrew from foreign affairs . His focus was on civil rights, but he also focused on foreign affairs.
 Early in October, Kennedy authorized the sale of wheat to the Soviet Union . The sale was authorized in October .
 The KGB arrested Professor Frederick Barghoorn of Yale as a spy in October . While he was away from Moscow on a hunting trip in late October, he was arrested by the KGB .
 They should be available in times other than deep crisis and emergencies, as is now the case . They should not be available to the public during deep crisis or emergencies .
 You talk to McNamara but mostly on Defense matters, you talk to Dillon but primarily on financial questions, Dave Bell on AID matters, etc. etc. You talk about military matters .
 Think you could get a good deal more out of what is available in Government than you ate at the present time . Think of some of the problems facing us in a broader context .
 They talked kiddingly even about matters on matters on which they felt seriously . They talked in the cryptic half sentences that bespoke perfect understanding . They always talked in half sentences .
 In 1963 Ben Bradlee asked John Kennedy why—“never mind the brother bit”—he thought Robert was so great . In 1963 he asked him why he thought Robert would be so great.
 At the same time, the Attorney General was John Kennedy’s Harry Hopkins, Lord Root of the Matter, the man on whom the President relied for penetrating questions .
 Robert Kennedy, McNamara said, “recognized that his greatest contribution to the President would be to speak candidly, to contradict him if he felt he was wrong and to move him to the right course” Robert Kennedy. McNamara: “His greatest contribution would be
 The President never hesitated to turn down Bobby’s advice, but many, many times he took it when, initially, he, the President, was in favor of an opposite course .
 Jacqueline Kennedy once told me that he preferred not to see at night people who insisted on the problems of the day . Kennedy once said he preferred to see people who wanted to solve problems of day .
 Bobby was his conscience, reminding him of perplexities he wished for a moment to put aside . Bobby was Bobby's conscience . Bobby is Bobby's most important friend .
 Robert and Ethel were not often often at the White House on purely informal occasions . So Robert, Ethel and Robert would not often attend purely informal events .
 Alike in so many ways, united by so many indestructible bonds, the two brothers were still different men . The brothers were united by their bonds, but still very different men. The two brothers are still very much different men today .
 John Kennedy remained, as Paul Dever had said, the Brahmin; Robert, the Puritan . John Kennedy remains, as Dever said, a Brahmin . Robert, a Puritan.
 John Kennedy was urbane, objective, analytical, controlled, contained, masterful, a man of perspective; Robert, while very bright and reflective, was more open, exposed, emotional, subjective, intense . Robert Kennedy was more emotionally exposed and a man
 One was a man for whom everything seemed easy; the other a man had been difficult . The two men met in the early days of their lives . Both men had lived in difficult circumstances .
 His presence was exhilarating—more so than anyone | have ever known. His very presence, he said, "was exhilarating" His presence is exhilarating .
 Robert himself was variable, moody; “the pendulum just swings wider for him than it does for most people,” as Lawrence O’Brien said . Robert himself himself was moody and moody, as O'Brien said.
 Underneath the action and jokes there was a streak of brooding melancholy . The film is set to be released on Friday .
 Friends wanted to protect the younger brother; they never thought the older brother required protection . Friends were worried about the safety of the brother's older brother . Friends wanted the brother to protect his younger brother, but not the brother .
 The sight of people living in squalor appalled John Kennedy but, like FDR before him, he saw it from without . John Kennedy was appalled by the sight of living squalid conditions in America .
 Robert had a growing intensity of personal identification with the victims of the social order . Robert had been growing an intensity of . identification with . the victims .
 Had he been President in the later 1960s, he might well have been as radical as his brother, though with the composure of FDR rather than with Robert's rushing passion, and likely more effective .
 Robert Kennedy, in a more turbulent time, rebelled against institutional restraints . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 at age of 50 .
 Roy Wilkins of the NAACP felt that the President “invited you to commune with him’s . Never got the impression you’re communing with Robert Kennedy,’ says Wilkins .
 Lord Longford, an English Catholic, once remarked to Eunice Shriver that a book should be written about President Kennedy and his faith . Shriver: "A book is needed to be written"
 He took his definition of happiness from Aristotle, "the full use of your powers along lines of excellence," he says . He says .
 He seemed to imply that man achieved salvation by meeting his own best standards rather than by receiving the grace of God . He said man achieved his salvation by . meeting his best standards .
 The first two are beyond our comprehension. So we must do what we can with the third. So far, we have not been able to solve the first two . We must try and solve the third .
 Ted Clifton, Kennedy’s military aide, recalls him writing down those words one spring morning, quickly and without reference to any book . Kennedy's military aide says he wrote down the words without referencing any book.
 He acquired his perceptions of the complexity of things partly because his beloved older brother led him to broader views of society and life . Partially because he himself possessed to an exceptional degree an experiencing nature .
 John Kennedy was a realist brilliantly disguised as a romantic; Robert Kennedy, a romantic stubbornly disguised as realist . Robert Kennedy was the realist and a romantic . John Kennedy's father was the father of the Kennedy family .
 1961 and 1962, opponents of the administration tended to separate the Kennedy brothers . Opponents of the Kennedy administration tend to separate them .
 Robert was the villain who persecuted steel barons and enforced racial integration . Robert was also a villain who enforced racial segregation .
 Robert feared the lowering atmosphere, Robert feared, foretold a mean contest for reelection . Robert feared it would be a mean reelection contest .
 The man they yearned for was their old friend from the Racket Committee, Barry Goldwater . The man Goldwater had been a friend of the Rackets Committee .
 He did not mention Romney as a possible opponent lest this build him up . Romney is a possible challenger .
 The Attorney General was dissatisfied with the Democratic National Committee . Attorney General said he was unhappy with the DNC .
 John Bailey thought John Bailey, the chairman, had become “almost a figurehead,”““ He feared, from evidence adduced by Paul Corbin, that other committee officials were misusing their party positions .
 Starting in the spring, Stephen Smith came to Washington several days each week to set up the campaign . Stephen Smith: "Stephen Smith is a great guy, a great person, a good guy, great guy"
 On November 13 the campaign group met with the President . The group was led by the Attorney General .
 President said if he and the Attorney General got into a public fight, it would make things more lively . President said he and Attorney General would be more lively if they got together .
 The absence of the Vice President or any representative, the activity of the Department of Justice in the Bobby Baker case, the desire for a good story in a dull week and, perhaps, the morbid suspicions of Vice President himself led to a burst of talk that the Kennedys were planning
 O’Donnell protested incredulously that, if Eunice had said anything at all, it was obviously a joke . O'Donnell protested .
 The President suggested that his sisters reserve their jokes for less sensitive matters . The President later suggested that he would like his sisters to keep their jokes quiet .
 He told Kennedy the time had come for a book like his own They Hate Roosevelt of 1936 . Kennedy told Kennedy it was time for the book to be published .
 On November 20, 1963, Robert Kennedy had his thirtyeighth birthday . This was October 31, 1963 . Robert Kennedy's birthday was November 20 .
 Ramsey Clark and John Douglas walked out together wondering about the Attorney General’s melancholy . Ramsey Clark walked out with John Douglas .
 These parties were attended traditionally by judges and the top people at Justice. These parties are attended by the top judges and top people in the justice system .
 The Attorney General had begun inviting long-time Justice employees—clerks, telephone operators, elevator operators—to the Justice Department . The attorney general invited them to the Justice Center .
 The political problems in Texas were the result of an angry feud between the populist Democrats led by Senator Ralph Yarborough and the oil Democrats . The oil Democrats were led by the Vice President’s protégé Governor John Connally .
 The President, his brother thought, “liked John Connally and liked Yarborough and he’s so used to people fighting and not liking each other in politics, it didn’t surprise him.” The President is so used in politics that he didn�
 Ethel bounded up from the reception and reminded her husband that he had a birthday party of his own at Hickory Hill .
 It was a characteristic Hickory Hill party—large, loud, happy, with satiric toasts and heckling guests . The party was large, loud and happy, but it was also a party in the style .
 Instead of making her usual chaffing toast about her husband, she gravely asked the party to drink to the President of the United States . She gravely made the comment .
 Robert Kennedy sat up talking with Gene Kelly, the actor, in the library till two-thirty in the morning . Robert Kennedy and Gene Kelly met at the library in the early hours of the day .
 Ethel forgot to tell him about her birthday present — a sauna in the basement — till it was three and they were in bed . The sauna was Ethel's birthday present to him .
 Federal attorneys came from across the country to consider the next, phase in the campaign against the syndicates . The syndicates are believed to be the largest in the country .
 Robert Morgenthau and the chief of the criminal division, Silvio Mollo, went for a swim and luncheon at Hickory Hill .
 The three men sat with Ethel Kennedy around a table by the swimming pool, eating clam chowder and tuna fish sandwiches . The men sat around the pool at the Kennedy's home in New York City .
 Shortly before quarter to two, the Attorney General said they had better get back . Shortly before . two, they were forced to leave .
 Morgenthau abstractedly noticed one of them, a painter’s hat jammed over his ears, a transistor radio in his hand, run abruptly toward the pool . Morgenthalau abstracted that one of the men was a painter's hat jammed .
 He said, “I’ll call you back ... when | find out more."" | don’t remember anything more of that conversation . Don’s not sure what happened next .
 Morgenthau saw Robert Kennedy turn away and clap his hand to his mouth . Robert Kennedy turned away and turned his hand away from the scene . Robert was killed in the shooting .
 Ethel led Morgenthau and Mollo to a television set in the living room, then accompanied Robert upstairs . Ethel then led the men to a TV set, then led them to the upstairs .
 A Secret Service man with the party, Clint Hill, says he talked to Clint Hill about the attack . The Secret Service said the attack was 'very serious' and that it was a 'serious' attack .
 Jackie Kennedy's mother decided to stay with Jackie in Washington . Jackie's funeral arrangements were organized by Sarge, Teddy and Eunice . Teddy asked Teddy to go up to tell his father and mother, not telling them until the next morning .
 Jean was closest to Jackie so that made sense . Teddy went up to tell my father that Jean was going to stay with her family . Teddy told his father: 'Teddy went up and told Teddy that Jean would stay'
 He said a lot of people down here think | should be sworn in right away . Then he said ... this might be part of a worldwide plot, which | didn’t understand, he said . Then, he added, ‘a lot of ... people ... should be ...
 President Barack Obama was shot in the early hours of Saturday morning . Obama was taken aback by the rush to rush to the White House after the shooting .
 He called Katzenbach, who said anyone could do it, including a district court judge, to ask him to do it . He said anyone can do it even a district judge .
 David Hackett was soon there, and Byron White, and Edwin Guthman, and others . Byron White was also on the scene, but was soon gone .
 Robert walked back and forth between the tennis court and the swimming pool . Robert walked around the pool at the time .
 The children came, and he embraced them, comforting them as he had tried to comfort his friends . He embraced the children, and they comforted him as he did with friends .
 Ethel, noticing his eyes rimmed with red, handed him a pair of dark glasses and joined him on his restless walk .
 He would go by helicopter to Andrews Field and meet his brother’s body . From there he would go to meet the body of his brother .
 On elevator to McNamara’s office he said to Guthman, “People just don’t realize how conservative Lyndon really is.” People just don't realize that, he said .
 Arthur Goldberg got on the phone and said that this was something more than personal, this is the President of the United States, and | think we should all go . Arthur Goldberg: "This is the president of the U.S. and this is a personal matter, and we should
 "If you want to go, go. | wasn’t going to get into an argument about it," she said . "I said, if you want, go," she added .
 He arrived at Andrews half an hour before the plane was due from Dallas . The plane was scheduled to arrive at the airport in Andrews, Texas .
 CNN's John Sutter says he made arrangements to get on the plane without cameras . Then he makes arrangements to leave without running the gantlet of television cameras .
 He boarded the plane by himself, hurried past the Johnson party and hugged Jackie . He boarded it by himself and hugged her .
 Jessica Mitford’s sister, in the circularity of life and death, was the sister-in-law of Kathleen Kennedy's husband Billy Hartington . Kathleen Kennedy was Jessica's sister and Kathleen's husband .
 The casket arrived at the White House early in the morning of the twenty-third . It was the first time the casket had been delivered to the president .
 Jacqueline was sitting on her bed in a dressing gown, talking to the children . He walked down the hall and came in on Jacqueline, sitting in her bed . Jacqueline sat in her dressing gown and talked to her children .
 His older sister, Caroline, said that Daddy was too big for his coffin . Caroline said he was too much of a man to carry out .
 They looked first at a site toward the bottom of the hill, next to Oliver Wendell Holmes . The site was located next to Holmes' home .
 He put his PT-boat tie clip, a silver rosary Ethel had given him and a cutting of his hair into the coffin . The ceremony at Arlington, against a background of wildly twittering birds, was solemn and heartrending, he wrote .
 On the day of the burial of your Godfather John Fitzgerald Kennedy, you are the oldest of all the male grandchildren . The White House wrote to Joe Kennedy on the day he was buried .
 "You have a special and particular responsibility now which | know you will fulfill," she said .
 Remember all the things that Jack started—be kind to others that are less fortunate than we—and love our country . Remember Jack started . Be kind of people that you love .
 He had put “his brother’s career absolutely first; and not anything about his own career whatsoever.” He said. “Not anything about my own career ... I put his brother first,” he said .
 Douglas Dillon offered him his house in Hobe Sound, Florida, where Robert and Ethel went with a few friends at the end of the month . Douglas Dillon offers him his home in Florida . Ethel and Robert went with friends at end of month .
 John Bartlow Martin, retiring as ambassador to the Dominican Republic, went to say goodbye . Martin is retiring from his post in the country's capital .
 The little boy knew he had done something wrong, but he didn't know what, so he started to cry . He started to think he was doing something wrong . The boy started crying when he realized he had been wrong .
 Bobby stepped forward and picked him up, in kind of one motion, and held him very close for a moment, and he said, “That’s all right.” "That's all right."
 The children received presents, then trooped downstairs to the auditorium for a show . The children were given presents and then sat down for a performance .
 Someone thought the clowns should go down too to entertain them as they waited . Someone thought it was a good idea .
 The chief clown told Patrick Anderson of the Juvenile Delinquency Committee that they weren’t going anywhere until they had a smoke . He told Anderson that they were going anywhere to smoke .
 Our eyes met for a long moment and it seemed, incredibly, as if he wanted my agreement . Our eyes meet again and he seemed to want my agreement, he said .
 "Then you figure, if it doesn’t hurt I'll be further away from what I’ve lost. Then you figure it doesn't hurt," he said .
 Nicholas Katzenbach "never really wanted any investigation,” he thought . He said he never really wanted an investigation into his son's death .
 Robert Kennedy seemed at times to feel, to close the book. Almost better, Robert Kennedy seems to feel . Robert Kennedy was almost better, almost better .
 The Warren Commission was appointed by the new President on November 29 to ascertain the truth about Dallas . He left to Katzenbach all dealings with the Warren Commission, appointed by President Obama .
 Chief Justice and his colleagues had perforce to depend greatly on the intelligence agencies . The Chief Justice had to rely on intelligence agencies to get his approval .
 They did not know that the agencies had their own secret reasons to fear a thorough inquiry . The agencies feared a thorough investigation into the deaths of those who died in 2011 .
 If it came out that the putative killer might have had intelligence connections, domestic or foreign, that FBI agents should have had him under close surveillance, that CIA assassins might have provoked him to the deed .
 If Lee Harvey Oswald could be portrayed as a crazed loner acting on some solitary impulse of his own, they would be in the clear . But if they were portrayed as crazed, they could be in clear of Oswald .
 James J Angleton compiled a dragnet of names and called for information from all branches of the Agency . Angleton was the counterespionage chief and CIA liaison with the Warren Commission with the CIA .
 Desmond FitzGerald withheld from Angleton the story of CIA’s role in the plot to murder Castro . The CIA had been involved in Cubela's plot to kill Castro .
 Allen Dulles ordered any mention of the poison pen deleted from the report of the November 22 meeting . Dulles, a member of the Warren Commission, did not repair the ignorance of his colleagues .
 Oswald believed he had met with a Soviet intelligence officer in Mexico City two months before Dallas . The Bureau might well have suspected that Oswald had been involved with the KGB, Epstein argues .
 Speculation about Oswald’s motivation ought to be cut off . We should have some basis for rebutting thought that this was a Communist conspiracy or a right-wing conspiracy to blame it on the Communists .
 Robert Kennedy, Katzenbach said later, knew nothing about this memorandum . Robert Kennedy knew nothing of this memorandum, he said later .
 For reasons of bureaucratic self-preservation, the CIA and FBI denied any possibility of Cuban or Soviet implication . The CIA and the FBI thus found themselves in the ironic position of denying any possibility .
 The new administration did not want to think about the unthinkable problems that would arise if there were indications of international conspiracy .
 All the pressures in Washington were toward a quick and uncomplicated verdict . All the pressure in Washington was toward an easy verdict . The verdict is expected to be quick .
 He said there could be no serious doubt that Oswald was guilty, but there was still argument if he had done it by himself or as part of a larger plot, whether organized by Castro or by gangsters . He said that there could still be debate over whether Oswald was involved in a
 A Teamster leader in Puerto Rico wrote Robert Kennedy that he planned to solicit donations from union brothers . He planned to “clean, beautify and supply with flowers the grave of Lee Harvey Oswald’s grave”
 Walter Sheridan sent Walter Sheridan to New Orleans to find out what Garrison had . He thought Garrison might be onto something; NBC sent Sheridan to investigate .
 He came to believe the Warren Commission had done an inadequate job . But he had no conviction—though his mind was not sealed against the idea of conspiracy—that an adequate inquiry would necessarily have reached a different conclusion .
 At times his view was, | believe, close to that expressed by his friend Anthony Lewis in 1975 . At times he was close to the views of his friend, Anthony Lewis .
 For an agnostic the murder of John Kennedy seemed one more expression of the ultimate fortuity of things . The murder of JFK was one of the greatest fortuity in American history .
 Dallas brought on a philosophical as well as an emotional crisis for those who believed in a universe infused by the Almighty with pattern and purpose . The Kennedys did .
 Robert Kennedy in particular had to come to terms with his brother’s death before he could truly resume his own existence . Robert Kennedy's brother died in 1968 .
 The innocent suffer—how can that be possible and God be just. and All things are to be examined & called into question . There are no limits set to thought. The innocent are innocent suffer. How can that .
 Over Easter 1964 he went with Jacqueline, her sister and brother-in-law, the Radziwills, and Charles Spalding to Paul Mellon’s house in Antigua .
 Jacqueline showed him Edith Hamilton’s The Greek Way . Jacqueline, who had been seeking her own consolation, showed him the book .
 Robert Kennedy’s underlinings suggest themes that spoke to his anguish . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was assassinated by a single gunshot to the head .
 He understood with Aeschylus “the antagonism at the heart of the world,” mankind fast bound to calamity, life a perilous adventure . But then “men are not made for safe havens.” he said .
 This was not swashbuckling defiance, rather it was the perception that the mystery of suffering underlay the knowledge of life . The mystery of life underlay life, rather than the knowledge that life is a mystery .
 Euripides wrote of “the giant agony of the world”—a world made up of a myriad of individuals, each endowed with a terrible power to suffer . No individual could be indifferent save at the price of his humanity, he writes .
 As John Kennedy’s sense of the Greeks was colored by his own innate joy in existence, Robert's was directed by an abiding melancholy . Robert's sense of Greek culture was colored in his own life, as was John Kennedy's .
 Three Greek Plays is a well-thumbed volume, with pages loose and falling out . It is a copy of 'The Trojan Women' and is a collection of three Greek Plays . One of the plays describes the horrors of war and the importance of friendship and loyalty .
 At the time of truth, Catholic writers did not give him precisely what he needed . Still, at the . time of the truth, at . truth, Catholics did not . give him exactly what he . needed .
 Next to the Greeks, he read Albert Camus most intently— The Notebooks; Resistance, Rebellion and Death; The Myth of Sisyphus; The Plague . He read Camus's "The Notebooks" and "Resolution of the Depression"
 Camus' commonplace book of these years is filled with Camus; But sometimes in the middle of the night their wound would open afresh . Camus: "Sometimes in the . middle of . the night, their wound . would open again afresh"
 "They would finger its painful edges, they would recover their suffering anew and with it the stricken face of their love," the author says .
 No solution, but constantly exercising authority over myself that | know is useless is useless, says author .
 "The essential thing is not to lose oneself, and not to . lose that part of oneself that lies sleeping in the world," he says .
 Perhaps we cannot prevent this world from being a world in which children are tortured . Perhaps we can't prevent this . Perhaps this world is a world of torture, perhaps we cannot stop it .
 At the same time he knew he was a child of fortune as well as of fatality, he knew that he had enjoyed far more freedom and happiness than most people .
 This made his obligation to help all who had been wronged the more acute and poignant . This made him feel more acutely and poignant, he said . He said: 'This made him have a duty to help'
 Robert Kennedy at last traveled in that speculative area where doubt lived . Robert Kennedy traveled to Washington, D.C. for the first time in his life .
 He returned from the dangerous journey, his faith intact, but deepened, enriched, enriched . He returned with a new life-saving mission to help others .
 He supplemented the Greek image of man against fate with the existentialist proposition that man, defining himself by his choices, remakes himself each day and therefore can never rest .
 He made his way through the haze of pain—and in doing so brought other sufferers insight and relief . He made it his way into the world of pain .
 With his father stricken, his older brothers dead, he was accountable to himself . He was accountable for his actions, he said .
 The qualities he had so long subordinated in the interest of others, could rise freely to the surface . The idealism, at once wistful and passionate, under the toughness, was at once passionate and passionate . The qualities that had been subordinated to others were able to rise
 John Kennedy always had a fondness for Lyndon Johnson . JFK was assassinated by LBJ in 1968 .
 He saw his Vice President as an American original, a figure out of Mark Twain, not as a threat but as a character . He saw Vice President, with perhaps the merest touch of condescension, as a American original .
 With the best will in the world, the relationship between President and Vice President is doomed . President and VP are doomed, a generalization almost without historical exception . The relationship between the two is doomed, but it's not always the best .
 For the Vice President has no serious duty save to wait around for the President to die, he says . For the vice president, it is no longer a serious duty to wait for him to die .
 President Kennedy was rather generous to Vice-President Johnson, according to Reedy . Reedy said Kennedy was generous to the vice-presidential president .
 Lincoln nagged Evelyn Lincoln to make sure he would be invited to all White House meetings . Lincoln was invited to meet with President Obama at the White House . Lincoln died in 1918 .
 Failing to find his name on the list for a private White House dinner, he even asked Mrs. Obamas to find out his name .
 In the Senate he had been accustomed to the exercise of personality and power . But he was accustomed to being in the Senate to exercise his personality .
 His role was suddenly one of selfabnegation, and he played it with impeccable public loyalty . "He played it very carefully, carefully, very carefully," he said .
 He had disagreements with Kennedy, but there was never a whiff of discord, complaint or self-pity to newspapermen or old friends on the Hill . He had his disagreements with JFK, but never any of his disagreements, he said .
 Evelyn Lincoln calculated that in 1961 he had spent ten hours and nineteen minutes in private conferences with the President . In 1963 he spent one hour and fifty-three minutes with President Nixon .
 Johnson was seventeen years older, six inches taller, expansive in manner, coarse in language . Johnson was sixteen years older than Johnson . Johnson's manner was expansive and coarse in manner .
 It was southwestern exaggeration against Yankee understatement; frontier tall tales, marvels but lengthly told, against laconic irony . The story was a frontier tall tale, marveling but lengthily told, but lengthy but not long-lived .
 Robert Kennedy, in the New England manner, liked people to keep their physical distance from him . Robert Kennedy was known for his physical distance with the late senator . Kennedy died in 1968 .
 Johnson, in the Texas manner, was all over everybody . Always the grip on the shoulder, tug at the lapel, nudge in the ribs, squeeze of the knee. Johnson was always in touch with everybody .
 He was a crowder, who set his great face within a few inches of the object of his attention . As the more diffident retreated, he backed them across the room in the course of monologue .
 One night, after a White House dance for General Gavin, they scrambled eggs in an upstairs kitchen . "They scrambled eggs after a night of White House dancing," she says .
 Those reports were all false... | never did attack your father and | wouldn’t and . wouldn‘t and | always liked you and admired you. Always liked you, admired you,’ says Donald Trump .
 The next morning Kennedy repeated the conversation to John Seigenthaler . Kennedy repeated it the next morning . Kennedy: "It's a good thing that you can talk to me about it"
 The younger brother had begun by trying to deny him the vice presidential nomination . He had been denied the nomination by the Republican Party .
 In Doris Kearns’s view, he had been torn in childhood between competing self-images . He was torn between masculinity demanded by his father and intellectuality dreamed of by his mother .
 He told himself intellectuals were destined to impotence; a man had to be virile to be effective . Despairing of satisfying both ideals, he chose masculinity . He chose masculinity and told himself that intellectuals had impotency .
 Robert Kennedy combined the qualities that Johnson had convinced himself were incompatible . Robert Kennedy, the son of LBJ, was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 Johnson, Kearns noted, liked to impose tests of manhood, such as bringing politicians to his ranch and insisting that they kill deer . The most notorious test was to kill deer, he said .
 John Kennedy, filled with deep distaste, had killed his deer after the 1960 election . Robert Kennedy had never heard that Robert Kennedy killed deer at the LBJ ranch .
 Robert Kennedy became the outlet for the unconscious resentment Johnson felt toward the President . Johnson really liked John Kennedy, but could not altogether repress his resentment .
 A Johnson aide set up a recording machine in the corner of the room . The recording machine was set up by a Johnson aide .
 Johnson said the situation was much like that in Washington —a President with a “very strong” brother . Johnson, explaining the degeneration of the Diem regime, said that the situation in Washington was like that .
 For all his towering ego, his devastating instinct for the weaknesses of others, his unlimited capacity for self pity, he was at the same time a man of brilliant intelligence, authentic social passion and deep seriousness about his new responsibilities .
 He was filled with apprehension about the nation, grief for the Kennedys and a consuming determination to restore confidence in the U.S. government in the shortest possible time . He was now filled with anxiety about the country and a desire to restore it .
 His insistence on presidential prerogative during that ghastly flight from Dallas came not from unseemly haste to grab the perquisite of office, but from compelling desire to calm a frantic people and reassure the world .
 For the stricken Kennedys, however, and for Robert, it was too much too soon . For Robert, the tragedy was not as much as possible .
 The living President had all the future in which to establish himself. Stunned and despairing, they thought only of the dead President . The dead President's family was "stunned"
 Johnson comprehended, even to a degree shared, their misery and sought in his sometimes awkward way to alleviate it . Johnson's inordinate sensitivity compounded misunderstandings .
 Johnson would have sympathized with the urgency carrying him to his murdered brother’s wife . But a man more secure than Johnson would likely sympathize with the terrible urgency of finding his brother .
 Godfrey McHugh, President Kennedy’s loyal and emotional Air Force aide, described to the Attorney General the inexplicable delay before the plane took off from Dallas and the sad confusion once they were airborne . McHugh described the delay to the attorney general as "incomprehensible
 Dean Rusk was the only one who spoke up at the cabinet meeting . He was impressed with LBJ's admiration for Rusk, who was impressed by Rusk's performance . Rusk is now a national leader .
 President Obama wanted "declaration of loyalty, fidelity from all of us," he said . "So | thought ... wnat he wanted is declarations of loyalty ... from all the us," Obama said .
 A few moments later, Johnson told a cabinet member with “real bitterness” in his voice that Kennedy had deliberately arrived late in order to spoil the meeting’s effect . Kennedy later said he arrived late to spoil meeting's effect . A few minutes later, he told a
 Kennedy expressed amazement first, then amusement . Manchester later passed on this story . Kennedy expresses amazement, amusement .
 Bundy reiterated that Johnson wanted Tuesday, “I said, well, the hell with it.” Bundy said . Bundy: "I said well, well with it." Bundy: “Well, well-with-it, I said well-to-the-hell with
 Don’t ask me about what you want done, you’ll tell me what it’s going to be anyway, says President Obama . "You’re going to get it done anyway," says Obama .
 It was an excellent address, delivered with dignity and force, watched from Mrs. Jacqueline Smith .
 No one acted more expeditiously to emphasize Robert Kennedy’s change of fortune than J Edgar Hoover . Hoover acted more quickly to emphasize Kennedy's change of fortunes than Hoover .
 Hoover and Johnson had been Washington neighbors and friends for many years . Hoover, Johnson were Washington neighbors, friends for decades .
 Shortly after the assassination, the direct line from the Attorney General that Kennedy in another age had instructed Hoover to answer personally rang on the director’s desk . Hoover was the director of the Department of National Security .
 Walter Jenkins, a Johnson special assistant, replaced O'Donnell as FBI contact . Walter Jenkins replaced O’Donnell as the FBI contact. Jenkins is a special assistant to Johnson .
 JFK never forgot the coldness with which Hoover broke the news from Dallas . Kennedy never forgot that Hoover broke news of the assassination .
 Kennedy had warned that the FBI was operating once again as an independent agency . In his talk with Johnson after the address to Congress, Kennedy had said the FBI would be operating as independent .
 "It would be considered that | was getting out for a different reason. However, if . he did, he would be able to get out for different reason," he says .
 Johnson repeated that “that wasn’t really the situation that existed, that J Edgar Hoover never came to him directly,” he said . Johnson: “That wasn't really the . situation that . existed"
 McNamara used to tell me that Hoover used to send over all this material on me and that Lyndon Johnson would read it to him . McNamara said he was told Hoover would send over material on him and that he would be read it .
 Lyndon Johnson told me that he never received an adverse report from J Edgar Hoover on me . Lyndon Johnson said he had never received a negative report from Hoover on him .
 Hoover sent a report in to Lyndon Johnson that a meeting was supposed to have been there, Hoover said . Hoover said the meeting was meant to take the nomination from Johnson . Hoover: "We were discussing the overthrow of Johnson, to take him from him"
 Averell Harriman was reportedly upset over the rumored decision to place Thomas Mann in charge of western hemisphere affairs . Earlier in the day | had found a state of considerable distress and wrath .
 Mann was able, hard-boiled, opinionated and opinionated, colonialist by mentality and a free enterprise zealot . Mann was assistant secretary when Kennedy took over and ambassador .
 He was also a Texan, though not a particular friend of Johnson’s . Johnson was a friend of the Texan .
 Both presidents had Tex-Mex attitude toward Latin America, well delineated by Johnson himself soon after assuming office .
 The next day they’Il be right on your porch, barefoot and weighing one hundred and thirty pounds and they'll take that too too . And the next day, they'll be right . on your doorstep, bare foot and weighing a hundred and . thirty pounds . The next
 If you say to ’em right at the start, “hold on, just wait a minute,” they’ll know they're dealing with somebody who'll stand up, he says . But if you say ‘just wait’t a minute’
 "There are a hundred men scattered through the government who are devoted to the purposes for which we came to Washington," says President Obama .
 'The fundamental principle now is collective action. We must all stay in close touch and not let them pick us off one by one'
 We worked hard to get where we are, and we can’t let it all go to waste. We can't let it go waste. It’s time to get back to the top of the world. We’ve got to work hard, we’
 "There is sO much now to be done" for the Negroes and the unemployed, he says . "My brother barely had a chance to get started"
 'He knows all about politics and nothing about human beings,' she says . 'I haven’t talked to him yet. He knows all . about politics, nothing about humans,' she adds .
 Kennedy: "They didn’t come here just to work for John Kennedy, an individual, but for ideas, things we wanted to do" "They came here just for ideas," Kennedy says .
 It’s one thing if you’ve got personal reasons for leaving, like you may want to leave, Arthur. Arthur. It's one thing for you to say goodbye to your job, Arthur says . Arthur: "I'm not sure if I'm going to leave
 LBJ understood that only sanctions we have are resignation and/or revolt— and that both sanctions are meaningless, and will seem sour grapes, unless they are provoked by a really understandable issue—and this LBJ will do his best to deny us .
 Johnson would have to consult the Kennedy people about the Vice Presidency, he said, and would exert some influence on the choice of Secretary of State in the next Cabinet .
 He said, “There is a considerable difference between a nominal role and a real role.”
 Lyndon Johnson unquestionably surmised, if he did not know, that such discussions were going on . Lyndon Johnson undoubtedly surmished if he knew that such talks were taking place .
 President Johnson received the Johnson treatment (“I need you more than President Kennedy needed you”’s) resignation . As for myself, believing the new President had the right to his own men in the White House, | had submitted my resignation the day after Dallas .
 For Robert his brother’s brother, Washington evoked Periclean Athens and high ideals of civic commitment . Robert feared he feared that his brother's Washington might fall before a rabble of wheeler-dealers .
 Indonesia's Sukarno provided a new crisis in Southeast Asia . The country's economy has been hit by a series of crises in recent years . Indonesia's economy was hit hard by the rise of communism .
 The formation under British sponsorship of the Federation of Malaysia in September 1963 had given deep offense to the Indonesian leader . The formation of the Malaysian Federation in 1963 gave deep offense .
 If the British Commonwealth went to war, the U.S. might be dragged in as a result of obligations under the ANZUS treaty of 1951 . The treaty was signed by the United States in 1951 .
 When Jones returned to see President Kennedy in mid-November 1963, he had requested authorization to say that, if Sukarno settled the Malaysian dispute, the United States would resume economic aid, now somewhat cut back . President Kennedy himself would visit Indonesia the next spring, and that President Kennedy
 Harriman, Roger Hilsman and Michael Forrestal backed this recommendation . Harrimans, Hilsmen, Forrestal and others backed the recommendation .
 Indonesia, it thereafter developed, had been one more point of foreign policy disagreement between Kennedy and Johnson . Indonesia was one of the most important foreign policy disagreements between the two presidents .
 Indonesia's new President refused to sign a determination that aid to Indonesia was in the national interest . The new President refuses to sign an agreement to provide aid to the country .
 Talks between Sukarno and Tunku Abdul Rahman, the Malaysian Prime Minister, are still under way . He agreed, however, to one more try at getting negotiations under way with Sukarna . Sukarni agreed to give talks to Malaysia's prime minister .
 Harriman proposed Robert Kennedy as a presidential emissary on the merits and in the hope that the mission might rouse him from his depression . The mission may rouse Kennedy from depression, he says .
 Sukarno’s own policy is producing the British reactions to which he is objecting, he says . Thus it is his own policy which is producing British reactions, he writes .
 The atmosphere on the plane across the Pacific, with Robert and Ethel answering letters of condolence, was melancholy . The atmosphere was melancholy as Robert answered letters from Ethel and Robert from the plane .
 Thousands more stood outside in soft rain, listening over loudspeakers . Thousands more were standing outside in a soft rain .
 Sukarno said he would agree to a ceasefire if the Malaysians agreed also . Sukarnos said he'd agree to the ceasefire if Malaysia agreed also to do so .
 The Tunku protested that Sukarno would use a cease-fire to build up his guerrilla forces but eventually yielded to the Attorney General’s persuasion .
 On January 22 Kennedy arrived in Indonesia, where the Communists had unleashed a clamor against a cease-fire . Kennedy arrived on January 22 in Indonesia . Kennedy was in Indonesia when he arrived .
 That afternoon, looking “utterly beat,"" he unburdered himself to his American biographer, Cindy Adams . "I'm not going to be surprised," he said to Adams .
 Kennedy found himself at a mass meeting with Johnson and ranking members of the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committee . Kennedy reported to Johnson in private .
 The President displayed little interest then and none thereafter in Kennedy’s trip . Kennedy's trip was the first time the President had visited the U.S.
 The parties failed to agree on the terms in which the cease-fire should continue . Kennedy had set up conferences with the Indonesians and Malaysians .
 His feeling grew that the President did not, and the State Department dared not, give a damn about his effort . He felt that the Obama administration did not . He said that the State Dept. dared not give a little about his efforts .
 Guthman's mek episode left him with “a bitter taste. Still, it restored him to activity.” Guthman said .
 It was almost his last involvement as Attorney General in world affairs . It was, however, almost his final involvement .
 Johnson's first foreign crisis had erupted before the trip— over the Panama Canal Zone . Johnson was traveling to Panama for the first time since his visit .
 He could hardly be kept out of the next crisis, however, for it involved Cuba . The next crisis involved a crisis involving the Cuban government .
 The Cuban crisis of February arose when the Coast Guard seized four Cuban fishing boats two miles off the Florida Keys . The Coast Guard says it seized the boats in February .
 Thomas Mann encouraged Johnson to view the incident as a critical Soviet “test” of the new American President . Thomas Mann said the incident was a “critical Soviet ‘test’ of President Johnson .
 Attorney General had what he described as a “rather violent” argument with Mann at a National Security Council meeting . Mann had an argument with the Attorney General at a meeting with the White House .
 Kennedy’s demand for information to substantiate the Mann-Johnson thesis caused an adjournment of the hearing . Kennedy's demand for additional information was adjourned .
 When the NSC reassembled that afternoon, McCone conceded that “maybe the fishing vessels just arrived there.” The NSC says it's not clear what happened .
 The fishing vessel was a fishing vessel, according to CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's foolish ... like a speeding, parking ticket. It's foolish," he said .
 Castro, protesting the seizure of the fishing boats, had turned off the water supply to the U.S. base at Guantanamo . Castro: "I'm not going to let them go, I'm going to stop them"
 Mann now proposed to discharge two thousand Cubans who worked on the base . Mann now proposes to discharge 2,000 Cubans working there . Mann: "It's not a good idea"
 This was, Kennedy said later, “the last meeting on any substantive matter” of foreign affairs to which he was invited . Kennedy: This was ‘last meeting’ on any ‘substantive’ matter’ to which I was invited. This was
 Muste, the aged pacifist, began a peace march from Quebec to Guantanamo . Muste began the peace march to Guantanamo in Guantanamo Bay .
 The White House sought an injunction to prevent Mus’te from getting on a boat in Florida . Mus'te was arrested on suspicion of marijuana possession .
 The letter of authorization required the signature of the Attorney General . The letter was signed by the attorney general .
 Jimmy Hoffa went on trial in Chattanooga in January 1964 on the charge of conspiring to fix the jury in the Test Fleet case . Hoffa was found guilty of conspiracy to fix a jury in 1964 .
 In April he went on trial again, this time in Chicago on charges of diverting a million dollars from the Teamster pension funds for his own use . The trial is expected to last for months .
 He now unexpectedly finds himself in a position to help carry forward that wish . He now has a chance to carry forward his wish .
 David Hackett proposes community-action approach . Local institutions would coordinate federal programs within the community . Federal programs would be accountable to a single responsive instrument in Washington .
 Community-action approach acknowledges that no one knows how to cure poverty and guaranteed adaptability to local circumstance . By establishing a method rather than imposing substantive solutions, the approach is more flexible .
 The community-action approach won the initial sympathy of the new President. Strongly backed by the Bureau of the Budget and the Council of Economic Advisers, the approach won him sympathy .
 Johnson wanted visible results well before the 1964 election . Johnson, moreover, wanted to see visible results before the election .
 Hackett, Cannon and Boone inserted the mystic words “maximum feasible participation of the residents of the areas” into the law . The law was passed by a committee of three men and women .
 Their belief was that “poor people themselves could render most effective help to the poor” The hope is that in the process communities could develop their own competencies .
 When the bill came before Congress in the spring of 1964, the single administration witness to speak about community action was Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was the president of the United States .
 His testimony Summed up the lessons he had drawn from the Juvenile Delinquency Committee . The institutions which affect the poor are huge, complex structures, operating far outside their control .
 The community action programs must change these organizations by building into the program real representation for the poor . The poor must have a real voice in their institutions, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Beck and Hoffa taught him long before how essential it was for union members to have the power to challenge hierarchies, he says . Beck and Hoffmana had taught him how important it was to unions to challenge hierarchy .
 Community action will give the poor a way of exerting leverage on the structures that ruled their lives, he says . Community action, he hopes, will give them a way to exert leverage .
 "The ideal of participation remained close to his heart for the rest of his days," he said . He said .
 The racial question was more than ever Robert Kennedy’s primary concern . Kennedy was concerned about race in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 In the spring of 1964 the Attorney General carried the campaign to Georgia .
 Kennedy told them at West Georgia College, if his widow wanted to travel north to visit his grave at Arlington Cemetery, “she doesn’t know what hotel she can stay at”
 Mississippi and Alabama had not dealt justly on racial matters, Kennedy said . Kennedy replied: "Mississippi and Alabama have not dealt wellly with racial matters"
 The question John Lewis had tried to ask during the March on Washington: “Which side is the federal government on?"” still echoed .
 Young people, black and white, were flocking south to work for racial justice over Freedom Summer . Freedom Summer was the summer of racial justice in the South .
 The Klan organized klaverns in twenty-nine Mississippi counties between February and June . The Klan has been active in Mississippi since February .
 There is a need to know what is going on in conspiratorial racist circles, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: 'There's a need for information'
 They have used against us.... brought home against any organization against which we were targeted. They have been used against them. It has been brought home to any organization ... against which they were targeted .
 In January 1961 Hoover informed Robert Kennedy about a “program of counterattack against the CPUSA which keeps it off balance’s balance,” he said . Hoover informed the Kennedy administration about a program of counterattacks against the U.S.
 Only techniques mentioned were the use of informants and the exposure of Communist infiltration of other organizations . The only techniques mentioned in the book was the use .
 When the Kennedy White House requested a formal report on “Internal Security Programs,” Hoover mentioned the Bureau’s “investigative programs” and said nothing at all of disruptive activities . Hoover said nothing about disruptive activities in the report .
 The Bureau was able to initiate an extensive, risky, and highly questionable operation without consulting the Attorney General . The operation was a "highly questionable operation," the Bureau said .
 Sullivan had seen fiery crosses burning on the hills of central Massachusetts as a boy . Sullivan saw the crosses burning in the area as a child .
 Rowe’s FBI case officers told him, “The bureau is declaring war on the Klan.” Rowe says he was told by case officers that the FBI was “decldeclining war on Klan” in 1964 . Rowe says the FBI's COINTELPRO
 Their first inspiration was that he sleep with the wives of fellow Klansmen . The first inspiration for the first Klansman was that they wanted to sleep with each other's wives .
 He stirred up personal trouble inside the Klan, spread rumors of other infidelities, for example . Their second was that he stir up personal problems inside the Ku Klux Klan .
 As for strong-arm activities, “Well, you'll have to do what you have to,” he says .
 In another state the FBI subsidized a runaway Klan klavern critical of the regular Klan . The FBI subsidised the Klan in another state . In that state, the FBI also subsidized the Klan's activities .
 At one point the Bureau even considered installing an informer as the Klan’s imperial wizard . The Bureau considered installing a Klan member as an imperial wizard.
 In the first year of the Klan COINTELPRO, informers accounted for 70 percent of the new membership . At the end of the year, one sixth of the total—2000 out of 12,000-13,000 members—were informers . The Klan was formed in
 Gary Rowe ended his long masquerade by testifying against the murderers of Viola Liuzzo . Rowe testified against the murder of another civil rights worker, Viola . Rowe was a civil rights activist in the 1960s .
 Flagrant excesses led some civil libertarians to attack counterespionage per se as a violation of the Bill of Rights . Some civil libertarians have attacked count erespionage as an act of espionage .
 When Klan bombed a school bus in Michigan, the testimony of an FBI informer convicted the bombers . The testimony led to the conviction of the Klan members in Michigan .
 Critics say informers are agents of despotism . Critics say the moral corruption of informing is moral and unethical .
 He admired the courage of rank-and-file trade unionists who, at enormous risk and small benefit, ‘informed’ against corruption and tyranny . Men like Terry Malloy as written by Budd Schulberg and played by Marlon Brando .
 Veteran labor organizer Sam Baron started out with the International Ladies’ Garment Workers . Baron fought with the Loyalists in Spain . Baron organized Sears, Roebuck and Montgomery Ward for the Teamsters .
 Baron, who detested the labor racketeers, provided evidence against Hoffa . Baron was a labor racketeer who provided evidence for Hoffa's conviction . Baron: "I'm not a fan of Hoffa, but I'm a supporter of his cause"
 The court decisions assumed that the work of informers was informing . The court decided that informers should be informing .
 Informers in organizations engaged in criminal activity, like the Klan or mob, often behaved criminally themselves in order to maintain cover . Informers often behave criminally themselves to keep cover, but informers often acted criminally .
 Dr. King and other black leaders advocated FBI penetration of the Klan for urgent reasons . King and others black leaders called for FBI penetration . King: "It's urgent" for the FBI to infiltrate the Klan .
 The Kennedy and Johnson administrations turned to counterespionage as the best means of federal protection at their command . The Kennedy, Johnson and Kennedy administrations used it as a way to protect themselves .
 Refusal of FBI infiltration would have left civil rights workers in the deep south at the mercy of hooded terrorists . Refusal to FBI infiltration in the Deep South would have been a mistake, FBI says .
 It was done... by bribery, by payments to informers, by sowing suspicion among Klan members so that none knew who was an informer and who not, by infiltration and deception, and in at least one incident by a bureau informer in the planning and attempted execution of a
 It did not appear to those involved at the time, and it does appear to me now, that the criminal conspiracy of violence that existed in the State of Mississippi then could have been handled by less drastic measures . "It did not seem to appear to be the case that it did not
 Kennedy says he does not see how the bill could pass the Senate . Johnson, Kennedy replied, "I don't see how it could pass"
 Kennedy: Johnson did not want sole responsibility if the bill failed . Kennedy: "If the bill fails, Johnson, Kennedy thought, did . Johnson wanted sole responsibility, not sole responsibility"
 By late April the minority leader, no one quite knew why, appeared ready to accept the bill with minor modifications . The bill was approved by the House of Representatives in late April .
 On July 2, 1964, Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, outlawing discrimination in voting, employment, public education and public accommodations and facilities .
 The Kennedy administration had given Congress a stronger and better bill a year earlier . Kennedy administration gave Congress a bill that was stronger than the one they'd given Congress . The bill was passed by Congress .
 The Reuther brothers noticed Robert Kennedy in the rear of the room, staring at the floor . Robert Kennedy was the son of U.S. Supreme Court Justice Justice Edward Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Vice Presidency was one more grim moment in a grim spring . do not think that either man can be held responsible for the failure .
 The record of JohnsonKennedy meetings shows only two meetings in January, one before Kennedy left for the Far East and the other on his return . If the compilation is complete, there will be no further meetings until April 22 .
 Johnson, haunted by the circumstances that brought him to power, was both sorrowing and vulnerable . Johnson was haunted by circumstances that had brought him into power .
 He felt an immense need, psychological as well as political, for the Kennedys . He said he felt an enormous need for the family .
 He could not control his diverse resentments — over popular comparisons with his predecessor, over glib journalistic comment about his alleged lack of culture and polish, over the failure of the Kennedys to fall in with his plans . At bottom, he was angered by their reluctance to love him
 He was “bitter,’ recalled Pierre Salinger, who stayed on for a few distracted months as Johnson’s press secretary . “He was ‘bitter’ about his inability to get Mrs. Johnson,” Salinger said .
 Kennedy was the custodian of his will when he was killed . Then Kennedy was killed and became the Custodian of the will . Then he became the President .
 He saw himself as yoked with Johnson in the execution of a legacy and the preservation of a party . Yet he saw himself . as . yoked to Johnson .
 Robert Kennedy was preternaturally sensitive to comparisons with his predecessor, Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy, enveloped in grief, was also sensitive to slights to his brother . If the new President was insecure, he was more sensitive to the comparisons .
 The net fiscal stimulus to the economy would be the greatest in peacetime history . Walter Heller sent him a copy of a memorandum to Johnson . Heller: Under your budget and tax program’s tax program, the net economic stimulus would be greatest ever .
 Johnson retained Bundy, O’Donnell, O.Brien, Dungan and Goodwin . Goodwin brought Goodwin back to the White House .
 Johnson’s top assistants called Kennedy “the perfect model of the liberal fascist” and the like, but my own clear impression is that Johnson's top assistants liked Robert Kennedy .
 Lyndon. Valenti . Valenti’s a nice fellow. They’re all scared, of course, of Lyndon. They're all scared of him, of Valenti.
 Johnson had charged Rose with a message for me to pass on to Kennedy, she said . But the meeting had been instigated by Johnson, she added . The meeting was in fact a secret meeting between Kennedy and Rose .
 Neither wanted to see the other, neither wanted the responsibility for a break . But, though neither did they want to see each other, they wanted to be together again .
 What made the gulf ultimately impassable was a remark Johnson made that spring to Salinger . The remark was so guileful a man could hardly have made without intending it to get back to Kennedy .
 To O’Donnell, who never heard him express the slightest doubt about running, he candidly defined his intention on the Vice Presidency three weeks after John Kennedy’s death . O'Donnell: "I never heard [Kennedy] express any doubt that he would run for
 Sam Houston Johnson thought that the President never “for a single moment” considered Kennedy as his running mate . His brother Sam Houston said that he never considered Kennedy for a presidential nomination .
 As early as December 3, 1963, Joseph Dolan told him that Democratic National Committeewoman from Michigan and, oddly, Senator Thomas J Dodd of Connecticut favored him for Vice President . Dolan said he was favored by Dolan and Dodd .
 Dunfey chased him out of the state after ascertaining that Kennedy had not sent him to the state . He said that Kennedy did not send him, and that he had been sent out of state .
 Lyndon Johnson's rage was nothing more than his annoyance at Dunfey’s annoyance .
 Lyndon Johnson told Kennedy he wanted Corbin out of both New Hampshire and the national committee . Lyndon Johnson himself told Kennedy after a cabinet meeting that he wanted him removed .
 Johnson told Kennedy, “If he is such a good fellow, you pay him. You pay him," he said, according to O’Donnell . Kennedy died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 "He’s around town knocking my head off ... and has been for three years, and ... never met the bum in my life," he says . He says he's never met a bum in his life .
 Kennedy said he did not know Corbin was in New Hampshire, adding, “He was loyal to President Kennedy’s . Kennedy: ‘I didn’t know that he was there, but he was loyal.”
 He had sent Kennedy to Indonesia, he explained, only because he "had to keep things equal" among those under consideration for second place .
 A few days before the primary the Attorney General put out a disclaimer . The Attorney General issued a statement about the primary primary .
 Early drafts contained statements that he was not seeking the vice presidential nomination . Early drafts of this article said he would not be seeking the VP nomination .
 Kennedy wanted to discourage efforts on his own behalf . The final version said simply that the President “should be free to select his own running mate” and therefore Kennedy .
 Walter Reuther told me, as | noted, that he was ‘waiting for Bobby to say the word—that he would not move until he knew what Bobby wanted’ Walter said he was waiting for Bobby Reuther to say . Hubert’s claims were later
 No one could quite tell how much, or even if, he wanted the nomination . Or whether he was simply demonstrating popularity and keeping options open .
 The argument for was that, as Vice President, he might assure the Kennedy outlook and constituency a role in national policy . In any event, the Vice Presidency had the political advantage, not to be prudently relinquished to someone else, of establishing its occupant as a quasiheir apparent
 As historian in his circle, | should have warned far more stringently than | did that the idea was hopeless . But | had not yet studied the Vice Presidency as carefully as | would later .
 Kennedy, having observed Lyndon Johnson, well understood the impotence of the Vice President . Nonetheless, Kennedy understood Lyndon Johnson's impotility .
 Johnson redivivus was bound to make on its holder . And on top of the incurable deficiencies of the office, there were the extraordinary demands .
 Robert Kennedy wanted to be nominated for the presidency in 1960s . Many of the people who wanted the nomination have been involved in the nomination process .
 Kenneth O'Donnell, Charles Spalding and Charles Bartlett thought he did not . Kenneth O’Donnell thought he didn’t know whether or not he did . Charles Bartlet was never sure either way. Kenneth O.Donnell was never certain either way .
 The most extended statement we have found by Kennedy himself came in an oral history interview with John Bartlow Martin in mid-May . The most extensive statement was made by Kennedy in an interview with Martin in May .
 Johnson’s explained quite clearly that it's not the Democratic party any more, it's an all-American party, and the businessmen like it . Johnson: ‘It's not Democrats anymore, it’�
 Martin suggested that Kennedy, with his powerful constituency, would be in a different position from other Vice Presidents . Martin said Kennedy's powerful constituency would be different from others .
 Martin said Johnson would have to pay attention; he could not afford to break with the Kennedys . Martin said he would pay attention .
 Martin thought he could do it quietly, short of a speech. But he's not going to pay any attention to me. Can't go out and speak against... what he’s doing in South America, what he's doing in Southeast Asia, as Vice President....
 'He’s mean, bitter, vicious— animal in many ways,' he says . 'I think his reactions on a lot of things are correct... but ... but ... think he's got this other side of him and his relationship with human beings which makes it difficult unless you
 That night Edward Kennedy crashed in thunderstorms over the Connecticut Valley . Kennedy was flying to a political dinner in Springfield, Massachusetts, when he crashed in a storm .
 Edward Kennedy suffered horribly—damaged vertebrae in his lower back, a punctured lung, broken ribs, broken bones, uncontrollable internal hemorrhaging . Edward Kennedy died in June 1963 . Kennedy suffered from a broken lung, punctured lungs, a broken ribs and internal bleeding .
 The Polish government had declined to invite Kennedy, consenting only to a ‘nonofficial’ visit . Kennedy had been invited by the Polish government only for a “nonofficial visit”
 When the Kennedys went to mass the day after their arrival, a crowd surged around the Cabot limousine .
 Kennedy lifted Ethel to the car’s roof, climbed up himself and began waving . After a moment, Kennedy lifted her to the roof and waved her goodbye .
 Robert and Ethel discovered that the children had been spirited away from their home . The couple were visiting an orphanage when the children were spirited away .
 That evening Kennedy lectured Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki about the incident . Kennedy later lectured the foreign minister .
 The next day they went to Cracow, where another throng besieged their car in the Cloth Market Square . The next morning, they were besieged by a throng of people in the city's Cloth market Square .
 An hour late in getting back for an embassy dinner, Kennedy climbed on the cartop and spoke to still another crowd in front of Cabot’s residence .
 Kennedy pretended to consult with Cabot over the wall and then said, “The ambassador says you can’t come’— a lighthearted moment that amused Kennedy more than it did Cabot . When they shouted yes, Kennedy said yes .
 Jozef Winiewicz, the deputy foreign minister and ranking guest, was furious . Jozaf Winiewicz was furious at the comments . Winiewicz: "I'm not sure what happened to me, I'm sure I'm not OK"
 Wysznski told Kennedy that “the best thing that had happened to the Catholic Church in Poland was that it had been deprived of its wealth.”
 Kennedy was followed by huge crowds wherever he went, but he got the Polish government practically livid with some of the things he did . The Polish government was furious with his actions .
 Kennedy people wanted it now. But he and the Kennedy people . simply couldn’t let it happen. He and the . Kennedy people. wanted it . Now, he and . the Kennedy . people want it now .
 President explored diversionary action to mollify the Kennedys and Catholic vote . Sargent Shriver on the ticket, for example, was put on the Democratic ticket .
 Moyers reported to the President that Shriver was willing and that Bobby would not complain if his brother-in-law were Johnson’s running mate . Moyers said Shriver would be willing to be Johnson's running mate if he ran for president .
 In due course, Shriver gave way to Eugene McCarthy in Johnson’s shell game . Shriver was replaced by McCarthy .
 The Kennedy people believed that if it was not to be Bobby, the nomination should go to Hubert Humphrey . The Kennedy family believed that, if it wasn't Bobby, it would go to Humphrey. Hubert was not Bobby .
 Kennedy rubbed her hand, talked softly to her dying woman . Kennedy went over to a dying woman, rubbed her hands and talked to her . Kennedy rubbed the dying woman's hand and talked softly .
 In mid-July he was still talking to O'Donnell and O’Brien about putting a Catholic on the ticket . O'Brien and O'Neill were still talking about putting him on the Democratic ticket .
 The prospective nomination of the conservative hero gave Johnson a free ride in the north . It created difficulties in the south and southwest, where Kennedy would be a handicap .
 By June his polls showed that no running mate, Kennedy included, would make more than 2 percent difference to his presidential vote . By June, polls showed no candidate for president would make a difference to voters .
 O’Donnell begged him to wait . Once Kennedy was out of the running, liberal Democrats would lose their power to force Johnson to accept Humphrey . O‘Donnell begged .
 O'Donnell set to work with Reuther and others to build support for Humphrey . Humphrey won't be re-elected to Congress in 1964, but he won't seek re-election .
 President Johnson sat formally at the presidential desk . Instead of taking his visitor in the usual manner, he sat formally on the sofa by the fireplace .
 The memorandum went on to mention Kennedy’s “unique and promising future,” to solicit his aid in the campaign . The memorandum also raised the possibility of his succeeding Adlai Stevenson at the United Nations .
 If | was interested in another Cabinet position or in going to Paris, London or Moscow, he would be glad to help . He would be happy to help.
 He could not give me a job that someone else held right now but he was sure something could be arranged . He said that he wasn't interested in any other position. He said he was not looking for a new job .
 He said that if he were me he would stay over in the Department of Justice . He said he would have stayed in the Justice Department .
 He said the staff he had at the White House were unusually competent . He said in comparison to his White House staff at the time, the group was more competent .
 The people that contributed in the White House, he said, were the group that was selected by President Kennedy . President Kennedy selected the group of people he said were selected by Kennedy .
 He said he really could not count on his own people—j.Jenkins, Valenti, Reedy. He said, "I can't count on my own people" Reedy .
 He said Bill Moyers was good but his most useful function was rewriting what other people did . He said he was shocked to hear him being so critical to me of people who had been so loyal to him .
 'I thought, coming just out of the campaign, | would be doing nothing else once | got started. Number 1, because | felt an Attorney General should be above active political life, and 2nd, because I felt an attorney general should not be a politician . Number 1:
 Bobby Baker was reluctant to take on both jobs . He said he felt he should be advised and would like to have someone’s outside judgment .
 He countered that with Abe Fortas and Clark Clifford . He said he didn’t think Abe . Fortas would be proper because he had been Bobby Baker’s lawyer . Baker said Fortas was not a proper candidate for the Senate seat .
 He said these are the two people in his judgment on whom he really relied on . He said they are two people he said were the two most important people to rely on .
 President Kennedy said he was against President Kennedy’s action in dismissing Fred Korth . He said he knew that because he was on the other side .
 Clark Clifford was also for retaining Korth, but after reviewing the material, he came to the conclusion that Korth should be relieved .
 He said God must have been watching over him because he did not have financial dealings with Bobby . Bobby's father says God must be watching over his son's death .
 He said the only business deal he had had with Bobby Baker was in connection with the purchase of some insurance .
 Insurance company placed $1500 worth of advertising with his television station . Insurance company then placed $1,500 worth of adverts with his TV station .
 He said this really didn’t mean anything because the competitor company was willing to place twice as much . He said it really didn't mean anything .
 He said Bobby Baker went with power and when he left the Senate he latched on to other people . Baker said he was trying to take advantage of Baker's position in the Senate .
 In any case, he said, if there was any corruption in this case it was the Republicans . He said if there were any corruption, it would be Republicans .
 Johnson saw the buttons on while he was sitting talking to him and later on in a conversation with Kenny and Larry he inadvertently and virtually admitted as much . Incidentally, the whole conversation with Johnson was recorded .
 Both principals were calm when they parted;Z® both, | suspect, relieved . Z® both were relieved .
 O’Donnell says Kennedy told him Kennedy had told him just the opposite . O'Donnell had lunched with Kennedy directly after the meeting, he says .
 Kennedy suggested Johnson forgo Vice Presidency and become chairman of the national committee . Kennedy's suggestion in the heat of Los Angeles four years before that Johnson .
 His solution was to direct Bundy to get Kennedy to announce he had withdrawn on his own . Bundy was able to get Bundy to announce that Kennedy had withdrawn from the race .
 The President used Bundy partly because Bundy had served from time to time as a liaison with Kennedy, partly as a brutal and characteristic Johnson loyalty test . Bundy was the subject of a brutal loyalty test for the President .
 Kennedy vigorously rejected the proposal, telling Bundy “first, it wasn’t true; secondly ... a large part of the reason that | was at all interested in the Vice Presidency was because of the interest of others,” he said . Bundy: “A large part
 'If | suddenly withdraw my name without discussing it with them it would be impossible for them to understand,' she said . 'I would not be surprised if I withdrew my name,' she added. 'It would be difficult to understand'
 Bundy honestly believed this; Kennedy as honestly believed that Bundy’s intervention was an act of inexplicable disloyalty . Bundy honestly . Kennedy honestly believed Bundy”s intervention . Bundy himself believed this, Kennedy as well .
 Within forty-eight hours, word of Johnson's table talk was all over Washington . Johnson's "table talk" had been all over D.C.
 Johnson denied he had discussed their meeting with anyone . Kennedy protested, but Johnson said he had not discussed it .
 Johnson said he would check his schedule to see if there might have been some conversation he had forgotten . Johnson: "I would check my schedule, see whether there might be some conversation I forgot"
 84.84 | spent that weekend at Hyannis Port. He just doesn’t recognize truth or falsehood.
 Kennedy was, | thought, ‘very matter-of-fact” about the Johnson meeting . Kennedy was ‘quite funny’ about the subsequent stages of the meeting, he said .
 Johnson had it moved back to Thursday, by which time nominations would be completed . Johnson had hoped nominations would have been completed .
 FBI sent team of 30 snoops and wiretappers to Atlantic City . FBI sent Cartha DeLoach and FBI team of snoops, wiretappers . FBI team was sent to the city to prevent further damage .
 Atlantic City lay outside his division, but he went nevertheless . Barry went to Atlantic City, but it was not his division .
 Johnson ordered Jenkins to tell Hoover that “the job the Bureau had done in Atlantic City was one of the finest the President had ever seen,” Johnson said . This unprecedented effort—no previous chief executive had ever used the FBI at a party convention—was hardly necessary .
 It is true that his appearance excited the emotions of delegates and the dreams of friends . It was true that he excited the emotion of delegates . But it was true to his appearance that excited delegates and friends .
 He was there to thank Democrats for supporting his brother, not to win them for himself, not for himself . He was not there to win Democrats for himself but to thank them for their support .
 With no signs of a Kennedy insurrection, Johnson sustained his vice presidential tease to the end . With no sign of an uprising, he sustained his Vice Presidential tease .
 On the second day of the convention, he summoned Humphrey —along, improbably, with Thomas J Dodd—to Washington . Humphrey, along with Thomas Dodd, was invited to Washington .
 Johnson kept Humphrey waiting in a limousine outside the south entrance to the White House . Johnson finally relented and had him in . After keeping poor Humphrey .
 They were led through the darkness into a small dressing room under the platform . They were taken to the dressing room in a dark room under a platform .
 Yndon may just have put us back here with orders to forget us. We can’t hear anything back here... | think . think | think | yndon . may just . just have ordered us back to the base . We can't hear anything . back here
 Jackie had given him a quote from Romeo and Juliet, Seigenthaler said . Jackie had been in a relationship with him for 20 years, he said . He said he was proud of his friendship with Jackie, who he said was a good man .
 Soon they were taken to a runway behind the platform where other dignitaries had already assembled . Soon they had already been taken to the runway behind a runway .
 Kennedy looked through his manuscript again, took out a pencil, made small changes . Kennedy looked at the manuscript again and made a few small changes to it .
 Senator Henry Jackson, who was presiding, motioned him to the rostrum . Senator Jackson was presiding .
 22.22 | stood on the floor in the midst of the thunderous ovation . had never seen anything like it.”
 Ordinarily an organ in the background controls the pandemonium of a convention . The organ organ is used to control the chaos of the chaos at a convention. It was used to play the sound of music at the convention.
 The demonstration roared on, reaching a new intensity every time Robert Kennedy tried to bring it to an end . Robert Kennedy, standing with a wistful half-smile on his face, tried to end the demonstration .
 Robert briefly considered leaving politics altogether after Edward Kennedy’s plane crash in June . Then, he briefly considered quitting politics altogether . Robert is married to the late Senator Robert Kennedy Jr.
 His reception later that month in Europe persuaded him he could not thus abandon John Kennedy’s legacy . He said: “His reception in Europe convinced him that he couldn’t thus abandon his legacy .
 At the end of July Averell Harriman, David Hackett and | were at Hyannis Port for the weekend . The group enjoyed a weekend away from the island .
 He thinks that he might be able to organize a bloc of New Frontier senators . Joe Tydings, George McGovern, Birch Bayh, Pierre Salinger and others could influence the administration .
 We had breakfast at his usual table in the old Astor Hotel on Times Square .
 So long as Stevenson was in the picture, Rose added, he could not commit himself to Kennedy . Rose added: "So long as that Stevenson was there, he couldn't commit himself"
 Harriman, Stephen Smith and Jack English, the Democratic leader in Nassau County, were also taking on the regulars .
 The newcomer had to appear to be responding to an invitation, not conducting an invasion . The newcomer must appear to have been responding to the invitation .
 Kenneth Keating was a silver-haired, pink-faced gentleman of sixty-four . He was a 'pink-faced' gentleman of four years old .
 As senator after 1958, he gained a vaguely liberal reputation, enhanced now by his refusal to back Barry Goldwater . A rather conservative congressman from Rochester in the 1950s, he had as Senator after 1958 gained as senator . He refused to back Goldwater.
 His benign appearance, ingratiating personality and passable record made him a tough opponent, especially for a contender vulnerable on carpetbagging .
 Robert Kennedy was less a carpetbagger than his older brother had been in Massachusetts in 1946 . In fact, Robert Kennedy had been there in 1946, when he was in Massachusetts .
 Except for schools and summers, he had really never lived in Massachusetts . Except for school and summer breaks, he'd never been in the state .
 He had always voted in Hyannis Port and was indelibly identified with his brother’s state . But he had always always voted for his brother .
 Rufus King, Massachusetts's first senator, had begun by representing Massachusetts in the Continental Congress . King was the first senator to represent Massachusetts in Congress .
 Of the two senators succeeding to Robert Kennedy’s seat, the first lived in Connecticut, the second in Massachusetts . The two senators succeed to Kennedy's seat .
 Gore Vidal and Lisa Howard organized a Democrats for Keating Committee . Vidal was a Democratic presidential candidate . Howard was a Democrat in New York City .
 Adam Walinsky and Peter Edelman resigned from the Justice Department and inserted themselves into the campaign . Two eager young lawyers, Adam Walinksi and Peter E. Edelman, are now running for president in the fall .
 Bill Barry spent his vacation from the FBI traveling with the candidate in the last fortnight . Bill Barry has been on a two-week vacation with Hillary Clinton .
 Paul Corbin installed himself in a hotel across the river in New Jersey until he demanded so many telephones that they ejected him . They suspect he was a bookie . Corbin was arrested after demanding so many phones he was ejected .
 At the start, enthusiasm, especially among the young, was unrestrained . At the beginning, enthusiasm for the project was unrestrained .
 The week after Labor Day he concluded his upstate tour by flying to the placid little town of Glens Falls, New York .
 To his astonishment, a band struck up, and a thousand people surged around the plane . To his surprise, the crowd surged around him and his plane .
 As they drove into town, men, women and children in pajamas and bathrobes waved along the road .
 Four thousand people, a quarter of the population, were patiently waiting in the town square . The town square was filled with thousands of people waiting for the vote .
 "You are cutting your own throat. Every time you make a statement like that you are cutting yourself throat," he said .
 On October 5, Richard M Nixon forecast a big Keating victory . Nixon denounced what he called “a cloud of corruption” over the Johnson White House . Richard M. Nixon, righteously denounced ‘a cloud’ of corruption .
 His chief political adviser was Herbert Brownell, a veteran of political wars . Herbert Brownell was an aggressive veteran of politics wars .
 As Kennedy fell in the polls, Brownell smelled an opportunity to administer the coup de grace . Brownell is a former Cabinet member who helped bring down Kennedy .
 Keating had an excellent civil rights record and solid relations with black leadership . Keating was a prominent leader in the 1960s and '60s .
 Charles Evers, who had taken his brother Medgar’s place as head of the NAACP in Mississippi, addressed the convention the same day . Medgar Evers' brother, Charles, was assassinated in 1963 .
 Mario Biaggi, a police lieutenant and president of the Grand Council of Columbia Associations, denounced the Valachi hearing as a “one-man show produced, staged and directed” by Kennedy .
 'If this kind of charge were true, | wouldn’t deserve to be elected to any public office,' says Hillary Clinton . Clinton: 'I'm not a perfect candidate for public office'
 The charge isn’t true... | lost my brother and brother-in-law to the Germans. The charge is not true .
 The dead President had been ‘the existential hero’; “Bobby!—the Irish equivalent of Roy Cohn on the good old McCarthy team; Bobby!—” etc., etc. etc. ‘Bobby’ was “The Irish equivalent to Roy
 Keating, with his face “like the plastic dough children play with,” seemed even worse . Keating's face was ‘like a plastic dough child play with’
 Mailer: As between “a neutron” and “an active principle,” Mailer announced for the active principle . Mailer said the difference between a neutron and an active principle is between "a neutron"
 He still read prepared speeches in a monotone but was increasingly effective in extemporaneous delivery . He still reads prepared speeches with monotones but is increasingly effective .
 They showed him a brochure with a photograph in which he was displayed Shaking hands with a labor leader . The photo was taken with a picture of him shaking hands with labor leaders .
 Clips of the candidate surrounded by apparently demented teenagers did not give the desired impression of statesmanship . The candidate was surrounded by teenagers .
 His strongest television piece emerged from a session with antagonistic students at Columbia University . His strongest TV piece came from a meeting with antagonism students .
 In mid-October Johnson and Kennedy Campaigned together for two days from Buffalo to Brooklyn . Kennedy and Johnson campaigned together in New York .
 At the end of two crowded days, Kennedy asked Johnson whether he had enjoyed it . Kennedy asked him whether he'd enjoyed the trip .
 A speechwriter revises a draft from the research staff had sharpened a considerably more qualified statement portraying Keating’s early misgivings about the test ban .
 Kennedy submitted documentation of Keating’s test ban equivocations and personally telephoned members of the FCPC board of directors . Kennedy, indignant over what he regarded as unwarranted overkill, submitted documentation .
 In September, Keating, when he was running behind, had proposed a debate . Keating had proposed debate in September .
 Kennedy, after evading the challenge, accepted it in early October when he was behind in the race . Kennedy, who evaded it, accepted the challenge in October . Kennedy was the first person to accept it .
 At the end of October, Keating bought a half-hour of prime television time . He called on Kennedy to appear with him .
 When he arrived without warning just before the telecast, studio guards turned him back . Studio guards turn him back without warning .
 Edward Kennedy, leaning heavily on a cane, his smashed back enclosed in a steel brace, gaunt after months in the hospital, took the oath with him . Edward Kennedy leans heavily on cane, leaned heavily on his cane, and his back is covered in steel brace .
 That evening the Women’s National Press Club threw its annual soiree for new senators . The event was held in honor of the new senators.
 Edwin Guthman left in April to resume his newspaper career . Wes Barthelmes, a former paratrooper and reporter, became press secretary . He had been working for Congresswoman Edith Green .
 Walinsky had gone to Yale Law School, Edelman to Harvard; Walinsky clerked for a judge in the Court of Appeals . Edelman for Arthur Goldberg on the Supreme Court . Both had been junior attorneys at Justice, who, when they forced their way into the senatorial campaign
 Tom Corcoran and Ben Cohen were part of the New Deal team that materialized around secure patrician reformers . They were one of those teams that materialize around secure Patrician reformsers .
 Only a secure man could absorb so much needling brilliance without feeling threatened thereby; only a reformer would wish it . Only a secure man could absorb such brilliant brilliance without being threatened thereby .
 Walinsky writing speeches, Edelman drafting bills; one the eloquent salesman, the careful researcher . One ostentatiously arrogant, the other deceptively gentle . Both passionate, obstinate, heroworshiping, exasperating, engaging .
 The sixties were breaking open, and they, far more than his New Frontier friends, could tell him what it was all about . They could talk to him about the sixties, and he could find out .
 At the start he intended to live within the official allowance, but by the end he was adding a hundred thousand dollars of his own for salaries .
 He just sort of indicated that he thought something should be done in an area and then he expected you to grab hold and go do it . "He said he wanted something to be done, and that he wanted it done in that area," he said .
 Barthelmes excited because of the feeling that he carried “a hidden agenda with him.” And he excited because he felt he had a ‘hidden agenda” with him, Barthelms says .
 U.N. apartment high in United Nations Plaza with a startling view of the East River .
 From his apartment he could see two huge Consolidated Edison stacks belching smoke into the air across the East River . "It infuriated him that no one was doing anything about it," he says .
 Sen. Ted Cruz visited mayors, city councils and regional development groups in places that had never seen a Democratic senator . He methodically visited mayors and city councils in places where he had never been seen .
 He worried about the poisoning of Lake Erie, pulpwood scum on Lake Champlain, the wetlands of Long Island, the preservation of parks and forests . He also expressed concern for the protection of the environment .
 In the summer of 1965 he received distraught letters from parents with children in state institutions for the mentally retarded . The letters included letters from distraught parents who had children in institutions .
 Javits, a sensitive and talented man too liberal for his party, was sometimes driven to bouts of equivocation in order to maintain Republican credentials . Javits: Javits was a sensitive, talented, talented man .
 He had, in addition, minor vanities, especially on the question of newspaper publicity .
 Kennedy told Barthelmes, “Javits is so facile.” He said Javits is “so facile” and “javits’s a facile,” he later said .
 Kennedy came to appreciate Javits’s solid qualities, his acute intelligence, his breadth of informed interest, the genuine conscientiousness underneath his sensitivities . Javits: "His acute intelligence and breadth of an informed interest"
 Kennedy spoke to Javits in 1967 about Javits’s reelection contest in 1968 . They became collaborators and in the end friends . Kennedy: Javits and Kennedy became friends .
 After his election Robert had visited his brother Edward in the Boston hospital . Vil Vil after his election had visited Robert's brother Edward . Vil
 Ted Cruz's return after his accident greeted by other senators with genuine pleasure . Ted knew the ropes and was amiable, courteous and popular in the Senate .
 They called each other “Robbie’s and “Eddie” and teased back and forth endlessly . The pair teased each other for years .
 At hearings senators asked questions in order of seniority, Robert was almost at the bottom of the list . Robert's father is a former congressman from New York City .
 Robert's bill would be voted out if he accepted invitation to speak in his state . Another member said he would help vote out one of Robert’s bills if Robert accepted an invitation . Robert is a member of the House of Representatives .
 All | want to know—when | shake my head from side to side and you nod your head up and down. All | Want to know: When | shake . from side . side of side and head up, you nod . down and shake your head . When . shake my
 In other words when . wanted to vote no | should have nodded my head up and down . You would have shaken your head from side to side—then . would have known just how to vote. In other . words, you would have nodded your head up, down .
 Robert remained the head of the family, despite the playful competition to top the other . They consulted constantly, occasionally differing on inconsequential matters, but, for all the .
 Kennedy’s daily chums were the three freshmen with whom he shared a new fifth row, installed in the back of the chamber to accommodate Democratic gains in the Goldwater election . Walter Mondale of Minnesota, Fred Harris of Oklahoma, Joseph Tydings of Maryland .
 Harris was drawn to him by his earnestness, commitment, his “insatiable curiosity about things, people and issues,” Harris said . Harris was also drawn to Harris by his commitment to his ‘informable curiosity”
 McGovern too was struck anew by his continued “hunger to learn” and by his ready cooperation . McGovern also was struck again by his willingness to learn and his eager cooperation .
 The next day your relationship would be just as though it never happened . You would be able to walk away from your relationship with someone else .
 A few, like Edward Long of Missouri, whom he regarded as the Teamsters’ senator, and Carl Curtis of Nebraska, he could not abide . He had detested Carl Curtis since the Racket Committee, he said .
 Ralph Nader tried to testify, over Curtis’s interruptions, about the dangers in automobiles . Nader was beginning his career as consumer ombudsman . Curtis interrupted Nader's testimony on the dangers of automobiles .
 First, you admit you haven’t read the book, and, secondly, you haven't heard his testimony . First, he admits you've never read or heard the testimony . Second, you've heard the witness testify .
 In addition to Labor and Public Welfare, he went on Government Operations . A decade earlier he had been a subcommittee counsel, and on the District of Columbia Committee .
 The committees offered ample scope for his concerns with education, civil rights, welfare, poverty, poverty and juvenile delinquency .
 He was generally accounted a more effective senator than his older brother . He was less a ‘senator’s senator’ than his younger brother .
 Critics found too much sudden, isolated attack in his performance, too many eye-catching amendments, too little detailed follow-through . Too much sudden attack in performance was too much eyecatching amendments .
 Robert Kennedy’s manner was also more brusque than senatorial tradition approved . Robert Kennedy's manner was often more than Senate tradition approved.
 "You always had the feeling that Robert was ready to explode," says Burke's aide . Burke's brother says, "you always had to feel that Robert would explode" Whether he was in a committee room or on the Senate floor, there was always the feeling he was about to explode
 Javits: "They feared him. They feared him" Javits says Kennedy . Javits' colleagues feared Kennedy .
 They thought he was a dangerous opponent, or they had a certain reverence about him and his history . Or they were fascinated by the loner aspect of him and the boldness of his boldness .
 John Kennedy had so long postponed the appointment of Francis X Morrissey to the federal district court in Massachusetts . This was the only thing his father had ever asked of him, the appointment he'd asked him .
 Morrissey's qualifications were no more apparent in 1965 than they had been in 1961 . Morrissey’s qualifications were not more apparent than in 1965 .
 With their father hopelessly disabled, his last request hung on his sons' consciences . But, with their father's last request hanging on their sons’ conscience, their sons said .
 Johnson must have noted that the Attorney General had not fought for the appointment himself . Johnson must also note that Johnson must note that he fought for his appointment .
 Johnson sent Morrissey’s name to the Senate . Then, with what can only be assumed as unrestrained internal glee, Johnson sent it to his Senate .
 The Kennedys would suffer the obloquy for the nomination, it would place them under obligation to him while exposing their own pious pretensions . It would also expose their own pretensions, says historian John Sutter .
 Judge Charles Wyzanski was presiding judge of the district bench in Boston . The Boston Globe and the respectable bar denounced it .
 He was exasperated by what seemed to him establishment snobbery toward a poor Irish lad who had not been able to afford an Ivy League law school . He was also exasperated with what seemed . to him .
 The Judiciary Committee, if with nearly half its members abstaining, sent the nomination to the floor . Nearly half of the members of the Judiciary Committee abstained .
 Morrissey’s own testimony had shown troubling discrepancies in his account of his legal education . The discrepancies soon widened by the investigative reporting of the Boston Globe .
 Senator Tydings, a Kennedy friend but also a guardian of the judiciary, told the Kennedys he would have to vote against confirmation . The Kennedy-led Supreme Court nominee will be confirmed by a Senate vote .
 Robert Kennedy had made him a federal attorney and helped him become a senator . Robert Kennedy made him an attorney and became a senator in Washington, DC .
 In his way Morrissey was violating it too, by insisting on the fight in face of the mounting embarrassment he was causing his patrons . Morrissey is violating the law by refusing to let the fight go .
 It had been mainly Edward’s problem so far, but Robert now became more involved . Robert now becomes more involved in the fight for his country .
 After counting the votes, the brothers saw they could not win and decided to send the nomination back to the Judiciary Committee . The brothers decided not to win the nomination and sent it back to committee .
 When either sought to embarrass the other, it was done under the cloak of solicitude . The pair sought to humiliate each other in a bid to embarrass each other, but did not do so .
 Dear Mr President, You were most courteous to me today at the signing of the Voting Bill . I wanted you to know how much | appreciate your thoughtfulness.
 Lady Bird and | join in congratulating you on this, this, your first birthday in Congress .
 The celebration of Chirstmas is a holy time, a time of renewal and hope, says Pope Francis . He says the celebration of the holy holiday is a time for renewal .
 It is a time for families and friends, neighbors and colleagues to join in the goodness of God.... | could not let this Christmas pass without telling you .
 He saw Kennedy as his only rival within the party and naturally wanted to weaken him as much as possible short of open provocation . Kennedy was Kennedy's only rival in the party .
 Weisl is not even a registered Democrat . He did this without consulting Kennedy, who rejoiced to discover that Weisl was not even registered . Kennedy was delighted to discover Weisl wasn't even registered Democrat.
 His own people knew the eyes of Texas were on them if they spent the evening at Hickory Hill . But his own people also knew they were on their own people .
 Fred Harris and his wife were at Hyannis Port when the phone rang during dinner . Fred Harris: "Once, when Fred Harris was there, he was shocked to hear the phone ring .
 He was well aware of the widespread impression that he regarded the White House as Kennedy property and Johnson as a uSurper . The White House was Kennedy property .
 Kennedy believed Johnson's policy disagreements with Kennedy would be attributed to a personal vendetta . Kennedy was determined not to let it happen to be a vendetta, Kennedy said .
 He saw Johnson more than ever as a formidable but flawed man, powerful and dangerous . He saw him as a powerful but flawed leader, but flawed .
 The President, he confided to Barrett Prettyman, “does not know how to use people’s talents, to find the very best in them and put the best to work” Prettyman says .
 Privately he resented the popular explanations of Johnson’s legislative success . Privately, Johnson said, “I don’t like it. I’m not sure what I think about it.”
 The Goldwater debacle in 1964 had given Johnson nearly 40 new Democrats in the House . Johnson had nearly 40 Democrats in Congress .
 This made him the first Democratic President since Roosevelt before 1938 with a working progressive majority in Congress . He was the first President to have a working Democratic majority in the Congress .
 Newspapers ascribed the result not to parliamentary arithmetic but to presidential genius . The newspapers ascribed his accomplishments with his predecessor's failures .
 JFK's first policy disagreements with the Johnson administration arose in foreign affairs . Kennedy's first foreign policy meeting with Johnson was in Latin America .
 The snuffing out of negotiations with Castro, the Thomas Mann appointment and the controversies over Panama and Cuba were followed in April 1964 by a generals' coup against the Goulart regime in Brazil .
 Johnson thought Johnson embraced the new military dictatorship with unbecoming alacrity . But he thought that Johnson embraced it with albecome alcrity . Johnson thought that he embraced the military dictatorship .
 He was still in the cabinet, however, if now shut out of foreign policy, and he held his peace . He still held peace .
 The Alliance for Progress, in the hands of Johnson and Mann, was undergoing a basic transformation — so much so that the historian must talk of two Alliances for Progress .
 Kennedy's Alliance struggled on after the political and social components of its heart were removed . Another program by the same name now struggles on after its political, social components have been removed .
 Fear of Castro had given urgency and legitimacy to pressure from Washington for social change . In 1961-63 the fear of Castro gave urgency from Washington .
 When this fear diminished — as it had after the missile crisis and after the success of counterinsurgency in Venezuela — interest in social change diminished too . The fear of social change in Venezuela diminished too, as did interest in change in the country .
 This encouraged Mann to liquidate two of the three goals of Kennedy’s Alliance—structural reform and political democratization—and to convert much of what remained into an instrumentality for North American corporations .
 He doubted that criticism of Johnson would be received on merits . As usual, he doubted that any criticism of him was received on its merits .
 The target was the ineffectual authoritarian regime installed by the Dominican military in September 1963 after the overthrow of Bosch’s democratic regime . The Dominican military overthrew the Bosch regime in 1963 .
 The rebels were a mixed group of Boschists, disgruntled officers and romantic leftists . They were a group of disgruntled officers, romantic leftists and Boschistists .
 A panic-stricken American ambassador in Santo Domingo sent out hysterical cables about bloodbaths and the capture of the revolt by the Communists . The U.S. ambassador to the island nation sent hysterical cables . The cable was sent by the American ambassador .
 CIA director relayed unverified messages from secret operatives in Santo Domingo about decapitations in the streets . CIA director was zealous to prove his anti-Communist credentials . He provided dubious lists of the Dominican Communists .
 Bill Moyers tracked me down and asked me to come at once to Washington . He did this with minimal attention to the Organization of American States . Moyers once said, “It couldn’t pour piss out of a boot if the instructions were written on the heel”
 President Obama has been briefed to the teeth by the CIA and foolishly believing its absurd reports, | agreed to go to Afghanistan .
 Johnson urged on Moyers and Bundy that Johnson call in Betancourt at once . Then | discovered that Romulo Betancour was in Washington. Then . discovered that . Romulo ... was in D.C.
 No one in the White House, given their master’s attitude, would talk to Betancourt, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Venezuela had maintained a top-flight intelligence operation in the Dominican Republic . Trujillo had sent his thugs to kill Betancourt, killing him .
 Venezuelan intelligence is skeptical of the CIA thesis, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "To my astonishment, | found Venezuelan intelligence entirely skeptical" Sutter says .
 Betancourt told me he had every confidence that the U.S. could work with the nonCommunist leaders among the rebels and swiftly isolate the few Communists .
 He thought the U.S. military intervention an “outrage” and asked me to put something on paper for him . “He thought the American military intervention was an ‘outrage,' he said .
 He called for assurances to “all honest Dominican democrats, including those who took part in the revolution,” of a future role in their country . He criticized the policy of driving “the genuine democrats in the Dominican revolution into association with the Communists by blanket characterizations
 In the United States, apprehension spilled over to Johnson's foreign policy in general . In the U.S. it was feared that Johnson's policies would be unpopular .
 Stevenson contrasts Johnson’s impulsive reaction with the methodical exploration of alternatives during the missile crisis . Stevenson was reluctant to praise John Kennedy, but he praised him for his work .
 Johnson, it appeared, was the aficionado of overkill in foreign as well as in personal relations . Johnson was the president of the United States in 1973 .
 In any event, the Dominican intervention irretrievably shattered his foreign policy consensus .
 On June 23, 1965, Robert Kennedy made his formal maiden speech in the Senate . Robert Kennedy was the first senator to speak in the U.S.
 He chose the subject that had most consumed his brother in the last year of his life . He chose to focus on the spread of nuclear weapons .
 Should nuclear weapons become generally available, the planet would be at the mercy of irresponsible military commanders, internal dissidents, anonymous madmen, says Julian Zelizer .
 He called on the U.S. government to extend the test ban treaty of 1963 to underground tests . He called for a new treaty covering nonproliferation to be extended .
 Both superpowers must set an example to mankind by cutting back their own nuclear forces or freezing these forces at their present level . The world's nuclear powers must also be frozen at their current level .
 He also said that “we should vigorously pursue negotiations on this subject with China” then regarded as the most fanatic of Marxist states . Seventeen senators rose to praise his remarks .
 The speech, though not expressly critical of the administration, was filled with somber quotations from John F Kennedy about nuclear proliferation and carried the inescapable implication that Johnson was not doing enough to stop it .
 Johnson struck the disarmament proposals from his own pending address to the United Nations . Johnson was so annoyed that he struck the proposals out of his pending U.N. address .
 The nuclear proliferation soeech deepened mutual suspicion of each other . Suspicions over foreign policy deepens mutual suspicion .
 He had been there only once, the overnight mission to Goulart in 1962, since his discharge from the Navy in 1946 . He had only been there once before, the jaunt with Lem Billings .
 He decided to take advantage of the November recess and revisit the subcontinent . He was invited to speak in Brazil .
 In September Jack Valenti asked Johnson for guidance about the Kennedy trip . Valenti: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do next."
 Bundy had proposed that Bundy brief Kennedy . Vaughn had become assistant secretary for inter-American affairs when Mann was promoted . Vaughn was promoted to the more powerful job of under secretary for economic affairs . Bundy proposed that he brief Kennedy.
 Kennedy and Walinsky were placed on one side of a long table at the White House . Kennedy arrived for a briefing with Walinsky and Kennedy . Walinsky was placed on the other side of the table .
 Kennedy began by wondering what he should say about the Dominican intervention . Kennedy: "I don't know what I should say" Kennedy: It's time for the president to speak out .
 Vaughn said, “In the first place, nobody will ask you about it because they don't care about that issue.” Vaughn said . Vaughn said: “Nobody will ask about it. Because they don’t care about it .
 He offered to bet that it would be one of his first three questions in Latin America . He said it was one of three questions he would ask about Latin America's first three Latin American questions .
 Vaughn mentioned that the U.S. would not tolerate communism in the western hemisphere . Vaughn: "The United States will not tolerate communist communism in western hemisphere" Vaughn: The United States would never tolerate communism .
 Mankiewicz, who had been Peace Corps director in Peru at the time, agreed . The Peace Corps was in the Peace Corps .
 Kennedy questioned the punitive suspension of aid to a democratic regime . Kennedy: "It's not a good idea to suspend aid to democratic regime"
 A Brazil desk officer read off a prepared statement in departmentese expressing regret that a great power had seen fit to curtail certain freedoms temporarily, etc. etc. The statement was read off by a Brazilian desk officer .
 The Alliance for Progress has come down to is that if you have a military takeover, outlaw political parties, close down the congress, put your political opponents in jail, and take away the basic freedoms of the people, you can get all the American aid you want . You’re
 "If you mess around with an American oil company, we'll cut you off without a penny," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . But, if you mess about with an oil company .
 American-owned factories and a white-tie reception for the King of Belgium . The King was in Belgium at the end of his visit to Belgium .
 Kennedy said that there had been too much American aid to right-wing regimes . Kennedy said left-wing countries had received aid too, including Yugoslavia, Poland, Ghana .
 It reminded Tom Johnston of a meeting of reform Democrats on the West Side of Manhattan . It reminded him of the meeting with reform Democrats .
 Kennedy’s irritation with the Lima barriadas of Lima and the desperately poor Andean Indians . They showed no concern about their own problems, but complained endlessly about American imperialism and the IPC .
 "The United States government isn’t going to send destroyers or anything like that," says President Obama . "We're not going to be sending destroyers," says Obama .
 They were appalled; the Rockefellers ran United States policy . They ran U.S. policy; they wouldn’t permit it. They would be appalled, they said .
 A reporter in Buenos Aires asked Kennedy whether it was true that he had breakfast every morning with the Rockefellers . Kennedy later said he didn't believe the story .
 Kennedy cut his right cheek in the melee but declined a tetanus shot and wore a ripped suit for the rest of the day . Kennedy cut himself in the face but refused to get tetanus shots .
 He talked to Indians and Peace Corps volunteers and on November 13 flew to Chile, to be inundated with more crowds .
 It was the first day on the trip, someone noted, that Kennedy had failed to visit a slum . Someone noted that someone noted that Kennedy hadn't been to the slums .
 He had luncheon and a meeting of minds with Eduardo Frei, the Christian Democratic President of Chile, and along with Betancourt, the emblem of the Latin American democratic left . He also had lunch with Frei and Eduardo .
 The day after, he went to Concepcion, Chile’s third largest city, and a center of Communist enthusiasm . The next day, he visited the city of Santiago, Chile's third largest, and center of communist enthusiasm .
 The student leader said, “We do not condemn you personally, but as a representative of a government whose hands are stained with blood.” He said the student leader was condemned personally by the student .
 If | don’t answer the questions satisfactorily, then, hell, your position is much stronger, he says . He adds: 'If | don't answer the question satisfactorally, then ... your position will be much stronger. If | you don't . answer
 Universities were off limits to police by Latin American tradition . Universities were not able to guarantee Kennedy's safety . The rector could not guarantee Kennedy’s safety .
 President Kennedy entered a gymnasium packed with students screaming “Kennedy—paredon"" and throwing eggs and garbage . That night he entered a school gym where students threw eggs, garbage and threw eggs .
 Eggs splattered over vanden Heuvel and others, but Kennedy walked along, never looking back, and was untouched .
 Kennedy shook hands with Marxist leader he had met in the afternoon . Even as they shouted “Kennedy—paredon,""some had leaned across the rails to shake his hand .
 The embassy had kept the mine off Kennedy’s schedule . Mine officials now begged him not to go down the shaft . The embassy kept the mines off Kennedy's schedule .
 Ethel had arranged a party at the Sao Paulo house of Mildred Sage, who was handling the Brazil schedule . Mildred had arranged for the party to be held in Sao Paulo, Brazil .
 Displaying a toy airplane, Ethel explained that it was a U-2 sent by Lyndon Johnson to report on Bobby's activities .
 He gathered barefoot children around him in a forlorn community center named for John Kennedy . The center is named for the Kennedy family .
 More than a hundred thousand people turned out later in the day in Natal . More than 100,000 turned out to celebrate Nelson Mandela's victory .
 They spent the night at Recife, Brazil, in the heart of the horribly poor northeast . The next morning walked the sugar cane fields where cutters worked for less than a dollar a day .
 Kennedy became a zealous advocate of the Brazilian minimum wage law . Kennedy became an advocate for the law after discovering the wage was below the legal level .
 They did not like the military regime anyway and were not minding their manners . They did like the regime anyway, they did not mind their manners, he said .
 Mildred Sage found Kennedy himself, however weary, entirely cooperative . Mildred sage: "Kennedy was not afraid to be taken seriously seriously"
 He lectured business leaders, argued angrily with Roberto Campos at the American embassy . He harassed Castello Branco Branco, the military President, about the minimum wage .
 Rio resident says he heard the crackle of shots from a cafe in front of a Rio hotel on November 24 . He was sitting in a cafe outside a hotel in Rio when he heard shots being fired .
 They flew to Manaus, deep in the interior, where they made their way up the Amazon in a paddle-wheel steamboat . The group made its way up Amazon in the Amazon via paddle-wheeled steamboats .
 Determined to go even farther, Kennedy boarded an ancient single-engine seaplane . Kennedy boarded the ancient seaplane for the first time .
 An interlude of reckless adventure and misadventure culminates in a dash down foaming rapids in a dugout canoe and swims in piranha-infested waters .
 An unsigned report to Lyndon Johnson from an American in Latin America speculated that Kennedy’s trip was meant to launch his campaign for the presidency . V. V .
 Without saying so, he disassociated himself from the Johnson Administration . Without actually saying . He disassociated himself from Johnson Administration. Without saying . he disassociation himself .
 Embassy aides in the countries he visited shuddered at some of the things he said and did . Embassy aides said they were shocked by the things they heard from him .
 Americans closest to the scene "resented the way he and the group acted," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Americans "resent" the way they acted, he says .
 They were cocky and overbearing and made themselves as much at home as if they were in Massachusetts . They made themselves feel like they were at home in New England .
 The theory that he had gone south in order to dish Lyndon Johnson was one more expression of the reductionism that so exasperated Kennedy in these years . Kennedy was exasperated by reductionism, which he exasperated himself in his years .
 Martin Arnold said, “he did a good job for President Johnson, really, in the sense that he used to tell these people that Lyndon Johnson had come from the soil and that he would understand their type of problems . In fact, Arnold said .
 “The sense of legacy was the essential reason. So | came to get myself educated;”44 The sense of . legacy was ‘essential reason” for his education .
 His hope was to remind the Latin Americans that there was more to the United States than the International Petroleum Company . His hope is to remind them that there were more to America than the company .
 Robert Kennedy came to revive the message of liberal revolution that made the United States an exemplary nation, a revolution forgotten by those that today intend to transform a great democratic country into a protector of tyrannies . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 He felt an obligation to do what one man could to help defenseless people in other parts of the world . He felt it was his duty to help people in the region .
 He did not in the end suppose it could be done by governments; certainly not by intervention in the Dominican fashion . He said he did not think governments could do the same .
 His idea was to help awaken the people and enlighten the oligarchies in the hope that countries might be moved to solve their own problems . He hopes that countries will be moved by the idea to help them solve their problems .
 It was a quixotic venture uncommon in history, but it was a premonition perhaps of the world society someday to come . It was the first time in history that it was possible to build a nation's first skyscraper .
 The Latin American trip, the response of the students, the outpouring of crowds, strengthened the feeling that it might be possible to rouse other countries to humanize their policies .
 Frank Mankiewicz took over the Kennedy administration in the spring of 1966 . Barthelmes left the Kennedy White House in spring 1966 . Mankiewiews replaced President Kennedy when he left .
 Son of the Herman Mankiewicz who had written Citizen Kane and nephew of Joseph L Mankiewiewski, author and director of other notable films, he sprang from an alert and witty tradition .
 John and RoBerT Kennedy visited Vietnam in 1951 . They were impressed by the toughness of the French soldiers . Vietnam has been a source of controversy .
 The new leader in Saigon was Ngo Dinh Diem, a robust nationalist opposed to the French and Ho Chi Minh’s Communists alike . Diem was sponsored in the United States by such exemplary men as William O Douglas and Mike Mansfield .
 Having argued for Vietnamese nationhood, John Kennedy felt a responsibility for the new nation . Kennedy felt responsibility for Vietnam's future .
 When Kennedy came to office in 1961, no revolution had been offered or undertaken . No revolution was planned or undertaken in Kennedy's time in office .
 Eisenhower would himself have gone it alone with American troops in Laos . It is hard to believe that the canny Eisenhower would never go it alone .
 Whatever Eisenhower’s motives, Kennedy had no desire to follow his advice . Kennedy was not interested in following the advice of Eisenhower .
 He had no desire either to be denounced or denounced by the national military hero . But he said he would not want to be seen as a national hero .
 Eisenhower's wartime friend Harold Macmillan to argue the case against intervention . He therefore enlisted Eisenhower's war hero to argue against intervention in the US .
 So | would hope that in anything which you felt it necessary to say about Laos you would not encourage those who think that a military solution in Laos is the only way of stopping the Communists in that area .
 It was after Cuba that he began inquiring intimately into the situation in Laos . Laos is now Laos' most important ally in the world .
 It was then that he found out that the Communists could send five men into Laos for every one that we sent in . The Communists were able to send in five men for every mission they sent in, he said .
 President instructed Averell Harriman to negotiate the neutralization of Laos with the Russians . In order to preserve Laos, for instance, we had to be prepared to engage in a major atomic war with China and Russia .
 The neutralization accord worked out at Geneva in July 1962 did not stop the fighting . It succeeded at least in removing Laos from the area of great-power conflict .
 Kennedy, compromising, sent a hundred military advisers and four hundred Green Berets . Kennedy sent them to Washington, D.C., to protect the nation .
 It is essential to understand what Vietnam's Vietnam legacy was, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says it was important to understand the legacy of his brother, who died in Vietnam .
 He was stalling the military, he said, by sending Maxwell Taylor and Walt Rostow to look at South Vietnam . The two men were sent to South Vietnam by President Nixon in 1964 .
 No doubt Kennedy supposed him to be, along with MacArthur, Matthew B Ridgway and James Gavin, a charter member of the Army’s ‘never again’ club .
 Rostow, the high priest of counterinsurgency, would oppose the use of conventional force in a guerrilla war . Rostow would presumably oppose using conventional force against insurgents .
 The U.S. must make a formal and total commitment to prevent the fall of South Vietnam to communism . Above all, the United States must commit itself to preventing the fall, he says .
 He did not think limited assistance would weaken his control of the situation . Nor did he suppose that limited assistance . He said he didn't think he would be weakened by the aid .
 Kennedy said, “You’re crazy as hell; it can’t happen” not so long as he was President . George Ball warned that it would lead to 300,000 American troops on the Asian mainland .
 Kennedy feared that if Congress learned the Pentagon wanted to send ground troops, his own hand might be forced . Kennedy feared if Congress and the newspapers learned that the Pentagon was planning ground troops .
 The White House disingenuously let the impression seep out that Taslor opposed combat units . Accordingly, the White House said Taslor was opposed to combat units.
 The policy disagreement was concealed, but the subsequent increase in military assistance was not . The subsequent increase of military aid was not concealed .
 Specialist Fourth Class James Thomas Davis of Livingston, Tennessee, became the first American soldier to die in Vietnam . He was killed in Vietnam three days before Christmas .
 His compromises, minor as they seemed, were storing up trouble for the future . But his compromises, . minor as . they seemed at the time, they seemed to be minor as well as the . time .
 The establishment in February 1962 of the Military Assistance Command Vietnam under General Paul Harkins gave the Pentagon a new stake in the war . The establishment of the MAFV in Vietnam was a major factor in the Pentagon's involvement in Vietnam .
 American helicopters ferrying South Vietnamese troops to the front and American pilots strafing Viet Cong territory . Reporters soon described U.S. pilots straking Vietnamese territory . American helicopters were ferrying troops from the front .
 These men saw the problem as one of civil war rather than external aggression . While accepting the strategic importance of South Vietnam, these men saw it as a civil war instead of external aggression.
 The remedy, they believed, had to be at least as much political and economic as military . The remedy would have to be political, economic and military, they said .
 The introduction of American troops, they believed, would hand the nationalist issue altogether to the Viet Cong . They believed the introduction of U.S. troops would hand it all over to the Vietnamese .
 It would strengthen Diem’s authoritarianism at the expense of the reforms essential for his survival . It would also strengthen his authoritarianism, which would also be weakened by the reforms .
 Taylor and Rostow roared home from Saigon dreaming of big battalions . As for counterinsurgency, it was never really tried in Vietnam . Taylor, Rostow, for all their enthusiasm in Washington, they roared home .
 Edward G Lansdale, the one American with counterinsurgency experience in South Asia, accompanied the mission . Lansdale was the only American in the region with anti-insurgent experience .
 Lansdale considered the idea of building a fence along the northern frontier . But Taylor gave him the task of assessing the feasibility of building the fence .
 State repeatedly recommended Lansdale’s assignment to Vietnam, but the Pentagon as repeatedly vetoed him . Thereafter, though State . repeatedly recommended, the Pentagon . vetoed Lansdale's assignment .
 Diem handed the strategic hamlet program over to his creepy brother Ngo Dinh Nhu . Nhu used it as a means of police control . Diem's brother used it to get control of the program .
 Their own vision of a counterinsurgency alternative was, however, fantasy . The Taliban's own vision was fantasy, but it was not reality .
 He thought and said in 1961 that the U.S. had been “overcommitted” in Southeast Asia . In 1961, he said that the United States had been overcommitted to Southeast Asia.
 President Nixon was willing to give restricted aid to a South Vietnamese government prepared to rally its own people and fight its own war . Still, we were there, and he was .
 Diem, if he used the aid well, had the numerical superiority to put down the Viet Cong . Diem had the strength to do so well, says historian .
 President didn't accept Truman-Eisenhower-Pentagon view that a President had inherent authority to send an expeditionary force into battle . Nor did he accept the Truman- Eisenhower- Eisenhower view that the President has inherent authority .
 As against both win-the-war factions, Kennedy, | believe, was vaguely searching for a nonmilitary solution . Vietnam was still a side show . Kennedy, though, was vague about Vietnam because it was still Vietnam .
 In April 1962 Galbraith proposed that the U.S. offer “phased withdrawal” as an element in a larger deal with the Soviet Union . In return, Hanoi might get Hanoa to call off the Viet Cong, he proposed .
 The White House has not been able to pressure the President on the issue . But they have failed in their efforts to force it on the President .
 Kennedy, disturbed, asked Bundy how Ball’s disquisition had slipped by . Bundy: “I’m not sure what happened. I’ve been here since I was a kid,” Bundy said .
 The assumption was that South Vietnamese troops would take up the slack as their capabilities improved under U.S. training . The assumption is that they will take up their training under American training .
 The generals saw the withdrawal plan as a means of putting pressure on Diem to accelerate the training of Vietnamese troops . After several tries, the military produced an acceptable plan in May 1963 .
 Kennedy saw it as a way of setting a limit to demands from the national-security bureaucracy for escalation . Kennedy, however, saw it at the very least as a limit . Kennedy: "It was a way to set a limit"
 Mansfield had served forty years with the Marines in the Far East and thirty years before as a professor of Far Eastern history . Mansfield was no novice in the area .
 His public statements, while they improved morale in Saigon, also misled Americans about the national stake in Vietnam . But his public statements also narrowed choices in Washington .
 "Instead of controlling the situation, the situation was beginning to control him," she said . "I don't want to control the situation. Instead of controlling it, I want it to control it"
 He grew uncharacteristically snappish about pessimistic newspaper dispatches from Saigon, not because he thought they would lead to withdrawal . That was not the national mood in 1963, or for long years after, in 1963 . He thought they might lead to escalation .
 The evidence suggests that, underneath his uncertainties, withdrawal, which had begun for him in 1962 as a precaution, was turning in 1963 into a preference .
 President Obama asked Lester Pearson what the U.S. should do for the country . Lester Pearson said the United States should follow in the footsteps of Martin Luther King Jr.
 When Mansfield left, Kennedy remarked to O’Donnell, who had been present, “If | tried to pull out completely now from Vietnam, we would have another Joe McCarthy red scare on our hands, but | can do it after I'm reelected .
 After two years of intensified U.S. aid, he was starting to conclude that they could not win it for themselves . He said he was beginning to conclude he was disappointed by the outcome .
 President Obama began preparing the American people for the idea that the U.S. must limit its involvement in the Iraq War .
 Kennedy still playing out his public hand while secretly wondering how to get out . His two schools of advisers, united in perceiving an American responsibility to win the war but bitterly antagonistic to each other .
 The Harriman group had reached the conclusion that Diem and more immediately his brother Nhu and the serpentine Madame Nhu were disasters . The group concluded Diem's brother and sister were disasters.
 Anti-Diem school at last had a purposeful ally in Saigon . In the new ambassador to Saigon, Henry Cabot Lodge replaced the complaisant Frederick Nolting . The anti-Diems school had purposeful, even highhanded ally .
 Cable authorizing Lodge to tell anti-Diem generals that if they overthrew Diem, the U.S. would recognize their new regime . The cable of August 24 was drafted by Harriman, Hilsman and Forrestal .
 In February 1962, he had stopped over for two hours in Saigon on his way from Indonesia to Siam .
 He did not leave the heavily guarded airport but held forth boldly on the war . He was greeted by dignitaries from around the world, including President Obama .
 The reports we get indicate that the political problem is growing relatively worse . The reports indicate that this is not the first time the political problems have worsened .
 There has been very little indication to date that Diem’s Government has been able to follow up the military operations with the type of social and economic programs . The people whose security has been assured that they are better off with Diem than with the Viet Cong .
 The struggle for racial justice left the Attorney General little time for anything else . But in the spring and summer of 1963, he was able to make a difference .
 John Kennedy wanted his brother at his side . Now American policy in Vietnam was in crisis . John Kennedy was at the center of the crisis .
 Gilpatric could not remember when anyone in the presence of a President “took the tongue-lashing that Nolting did from Harriman’s .
 Vill In Saigon Lodge was determined to overthrow Diem . Diem had cabled Washington on August 29, 1968 .
 Time has arrived for the U.S. to use what it has to bring about the fall of the existing government and the installation of another government .
 Attorney General, who had questioned Lodge's appointment, was not surprised . The Attorney General had questioned the appointment .
 Robert Kennedy had warned his brother that Henry Cabot Lodge in Vietnam would cause him a lot of difficulty in six months, he later recalled . Robert Kennedy: "He said it was terrific about me because I could always remember when | was right"
 On the other hand, his Washington instructions were hardly clear or firm . A reflection both of the continuing quarrel in Washington and of the President’s own uncertainties .
 The President himself had said that if Diem did not make changes in personnel and policy, his chances of winning the war would not be good .
 Thereafter he signed cables laying down a checklist of reforms to which Diem would not conceivably accede . The list includes a free press and free elections . Thereafter, he signed a list of reforms he would not accede to .
 It’s bad policy to get into for us to run a coup out there and replace somebody we don't like with somebody we do . It would just make every other country nervous as can be that we were running coups in and out of the country, he said .
 Robert Kennedy adopted the win-the-war perspective shared by supporters as well as by opponents of the coup . Robert Kennedy adopts the same perspective as supporters and opponents .
 John Kennedy had withdrawal in mind, but there was all the more reason to take care . Kennedy had withdrawn from the White House in 1968 .
 For a coup encouraged by Washington would drag the U.S. ever more irrevocably into responsibility for the fate of South Vietnam . The U.N. would have to accept responsibility for South Vietnam's fate .
 And disengagement was increasingly, | believe, the presidential purpose, the president's purpose .
 At the end of September the President dispatched McNamara and Taylor on one more reconnaissance . The President dispatched them to the White House .
 The political school, however, regarded the recall of 1000 advisers with consternation .
 William Sullivan, State Department representative on the McNamara-laylor mission, threatened a minority report . William Sullivan was the State Department rep on the mission . Sullivan: "I'm not going to let it happen"
 Chester Cooper of McGeorge Bundy’s staff, much agitated, rushed to Bundy, who was closeted with his brother . Chester Cooper was also closeted . Cooper of Bundy's staff was much agitated . Cooper, who worked for Bundy, said Bundy's brother, was a closet
 Troop withdrawal would destroy any credibility the McNamara-Taylor mission could have had, Cooper said . Cooper: Troop withdraws would destroy credibility the mission could've had .
 McGeorge Bundy called McNamara but could not persuade him to change his mind . Bundy tried to persuade McNamara to give up on his decision . Bundy: "McNamara is not a good man"
 Kennedy had fought off a total commitment for three years and was not about to capitulate now . Kennedy was not going to give up on the deal .
 The President called an all-agency conference in Honolulu to consider, as he somewhat confusedly told his press conference, “how we can intensify the struggle, how we can bring Americans out of there.”
 O'Donnell once inquired how he could pull out without damaging American prestige . O’Donnell once asked how to pull out of the U.S. without damaging America’s prestige .
 The Ngo brothers were, in their anachronistic fashion, authentic Vietnamese nationalists . The brothers were Vietnamese nationalists, according to the historian . They were, for example, the Ngo sisters of the late Hoang-Ng brothers, who died in 2003 .
 They were reluctant about American troops and resistant to American interference . They are reluctant about U.S. intervention .
 In the spring of 1963 Roger Lalouette, the French ambassador in Saigon, asked Maneli to serve as an intermediary between the Ngo brothers and Hanoi . Maneli was a French diplomat in Vietnam and worked as a liaison between the brothers .
 De Gaulle’s interest was plain enough—to show up the blundering Americans, to rescue the west from a hopeless predicament, to restore French influence in Indochina . The French leader wanted to show up American blunders .
 He pressed Ho Chi Minh and Phan Van Dong, the North Vietnamese Premier, about their peace terms . The peace talks were held in a secret meeting in Hanoi .
 They replied that Hanoi would settle for a coalition government in a neutralized South Vietnam . The Vietnamese government would be neutralized, they said . They said they would be willing to accept a government in neutralized Vietnam .
 The North Vietnamese added that, if the Americans withdrew, Hanoi would give the south guarantees, including perhaps American participation in a supervisory process . The North Vietnam added that if the U.S. withdraws, they would give guarantees to the south .
 As American pressure mounted against the Diem regime, Hanoi refrained from exploiting the confusion as by a new Viet Cong offensive . The Vietnamese government was defeated in Vietnam in 1968 .
 The anti-Diem faction was quite willing to believe that Nhu and de Gaulle were up to some deviltry . Nhu was assassinated in 1968 .
 The State Department was already furious at de Gaulle for European reasons . The State Dept. was already angry at the French leader .
 On August 30 a Hilsman memorandum suggested that if Diem were in fact negotiating with Ho, Washington should “encourage the generals to move promptly with a coup.”
 Later Madame Nhu informed a visitor that “the two brothers had sought to negotiate an end to the conflict, and that it was to prevent this that the coup was Carried out”
 But | found no evidence that Kennedy was ever adequately informed on the matter .
 The deal did not seem real enough to have been a major factor in U.S. attitudes toward a coup, CNN says .
 Washington would have been hard put to save Diem from the generals in any case . There was no guarantee that Diem, once assured of U.S. support, would have negotiated an end to war .
 A Diem-Ho deal followed by an American withdrawal would not have been applauded in the U.S. of 1963 . Had he done so, it would have not been applauded .
 A Diem-Ho deal could have been the means of an American exit from Vietnam in 1963 . The life expectancy of a Diem government in Saigon would have been minimal thereafter . Still, the life expectancy for a government in Vietnam would have likely been minimal .
 Whether it might have been seized later, if Kennedy had never gone to Dallas, is another question . Kennedy never went to Dallas to get the gun .
 Robert Kennedy thought the situation no different from August, when the generals talked big and did nothing . Robert Kennedy: "It's not a different thing from August," says Kennedy . Kennedy thought it was no different .
 President says any attempt to engineer a coup would be silly . Pro-Diem forces appeared about equal, he says . President observed that since pro-Dem forces looked about equal .
 The coup was a Vietnamese and a popular affair, which we could neither manage nor stop after it got started and which we couldn't have influenced, he says . The coup, he adds, was a very popular affair which was neither managed nor stopped after it started .
 Kennedy said, “Wayne, | want you to Know you’re absolutely right in your criticism of my Vietnam policy.” Kennedy said. “You’ve absolutely right” in his criticism .
 He should have realized the cumulative momentum of the policy of small concessions, he says .
 Troops, once sent, could be withdrawn, as they were in Cuba and the Dominican Republic, as Kennedy already planned to do in Vietnam . Troops could also be withdrawn from Cuba, Dominican Republic and Vietnam .
 Kennedy had proved his manhood in the Solomon Islands and did not have to prove it again . Kennedy had proven it again in Solomon Islands . He had proved it to the people in the country .
 He was a prudent executive, not inclined to heavy investments in lost causes . He was not interested in heavy investments, he says .
 His whole Presidency was marked precisely by his capacity to refuse escalation . He refused escalation in Laos, the Bay of Pigs, the Berlin Wall, and the missile crisis .
 Halberstam was a penetrating critic of the American performance in Vietnam . He was critical of the U.S. performance in the Vietnam .
 "We were caught in a quagmire and probably would not learn the lesson in time to save Vietnam," he says . "We probably would probably not learn a lesson from Vietnam," the author says .
 He had left on the public record the impression of a major national stake in the defense of South Vietnam against communism against communism .
 He had left steadily enlarging programs of military and economic assistance . President Obama had left the country in 2003 .
 He had left national security advisers who had been urging an American expeditionary force and a total commitment to the salvation of South Vietnam .
 He had consistently refused to send such a force or to make such a commitment, he said . On the other hand, he added that he had repeatedly refused to commit himself to sending troops .
 He had left a formal plan, processed successfully through the Pentagon, for the withdrawal of American advisers by the end of 1965 .
 He had left a public campaign, belatedly begun, to instill the idea that U.S. involvement must be limited in a war that only the South Vietnamese could win .
 President Obama has expressed opposition to the dispatch of American ground forces to Afghanistan . He has left private opposition to U.S. ground forces, he said .
 Lyndon Johnson was carrying forward Kennedy’s policies . But it is not sufficient to say that Lyndon Johnson carried forward Kennedy's policies . Kennedy was not carrying forward JFK's policies.
 The new President could choose the continuity of deepening involvement with the U.S.
 Or he could choose the continuity of absolute limitations—no combat troops, no heavy bombing, and planned withdrawal by 1965 . Or he would choose to choose the continuation of the war with no combat troops .
 It was Johnson's of course within the framework of public illusion to which Kennedy had made significant contributions . Kennedy had significant contributions to the public illusion, Johnson said .
 A generation of Ssuperpowership had persuaded most Americans that they had the power and the responsibility to work their will around the planet . The U.S. had convinced most Americans of working their will .
 The strength of this national mood constrained Kennedy to defer disengagement till after the 1964 election . Kennedy's withdrawal from the White House was delayed until after 1964 election.
 He was a stout supporter of Diem, whom in 1961 he had hailed as the ‘Winston Churchill” of Southeast Asia . In 1961 he hailed Diem as ‘The Winston Churchill’ of the Southeast Asia.
 President Johnson showed Hubert Humphrey a portrait of Diem hanging in the hallway of his house . “We had a hand in killing him.” Johnson said .
 Pentagon history: It was “essentially an accounting exercise” and achieved no reduction in U.S. strength . It was, in the words of the Pentagon history, ‘essentially a accounting exercise.’
 Johnson's worries were unexpectedly eliminated by a second coup on January 30, 1964 . Johnson was overthrown by a coup in 1964, but his worries were later eliminated .
 John Kennedy had not even found an occasion to discuss his deeper doubts and intentions with his brother . There always must have seemed a world of time to do that later .
 Vietnam did not come up when he went to Indonesia and Malaysia in January 1964 . Vietnam was not mentioned when he visited Malaysia and Indonesia in 1964 .
 The fundamental questions he had tried to raise the previous September signified an instinct to get to the root of the matter on his brother’s behalf, rather than a conclusion of his own that the United States should get out .
 In Vietnam policy in early 1964, he probably noted that Johnson stayed within the Kennedy guidelines . He probably assumed he was doing what had to be done, and assumed he did it .
 One finds a flurry of Vietnam papers in his files, including a CIA document doubting an immediate domino effect from the fall of Vietnam . Mansfield had written to Johnson, restating his old doubts and saying that if the President planned to pursue the war, he had better make a
 Dear Mr President: 'If you wished me to go to Viet Nam in any capacity | would be glad to go. Would be happy to go'
 It is obviously the most important problem facing the United States and if you felt . could help, I am at your service . I have talked to both Bob and Mac about this and believe they know my feelings .
 Have never been sure why he wrote this letter—probably for reasons no more complicated than old-fashioned patriotism . Respectfully, Bob+8 .
 He could do it damn well, but can’t trust the security there and someone or some group might want to do him in, he says . He could . do it well, he could . but can't trust security there, he adds .
 Asked for his “exact position” by the students at Columbia, he responded with considerable inexactitude that he had no easy solution . He said he remembered the French in 1951, that the political and social effort was vital .
 At the end of 1964, according to Chester Cooper, “the get-out option was by no means academic.” “Get-out options were no longer academic,” Cooper says . “The get-outs option was no longer an academic. It was
 The President assured him, as Presidents do, that the idea was under consideration . The idea was "under consideration"
 Johnson asked Congress for a supplemental $700 million for Vietnam, explaining that this was no “routine appropriation” but a vote of confidence in the whole policy . Almost at once, however, Johnson asked for the additional money .
 The appropriation, as he told me, was not necessary; ample funds were already available . The appropriation is not necessary, he told CNN.com.com .
 Johnson wanted congressional approval for further escalation . What Johnson plainly wanted was congressional approval of further escalation.
 It would be hard to vote against the request without seeming to let down the boys at the front . Still, it would be a tough decision to vote for .
 This was also the week of the Dominican intervention; and my speech for him touched on Vietnam as well . "This was also a week of Dominican intervention," he says .
 Wayne Morse, Ernest Gruening and Gaylord Nelson voted no . Wayne Morse: "To their eternal honor, Wayne Morse ... voted no" Wayne Morse voted no. Nelson voted yes .
 Kennedy discussed three possible courses in Vietnam in a speech on May 6, 1965 . Kennedy: "There are three courses to go"
 He was voting for the resolution, he said, in the understanding that it was no ‘blank check’ for wider war but rather a necessary prelude for negotiations .
 He accepted invitation to give the commencement address at the International Police Academy in July .
 The academy, AID’s contribution to the counterinsurgency program, was a part of Kennedy's past . The academy was part of AID's contributions to the program . Kennedy was a member of the U.S. State Department .
 He thought now to suggest how the Americanization of the war was departing from the theory of counterinsurgency, he said . He said he thought now that the U.S. was departing .
 Adam Walinsky worked with him on the speech, but Walinsky, as he said later, was not yet on fire about Vietnam . Walinsky: "I'm not sure what I think about Vietnam"
 Kennedy said the war was ultimately a contest for the allegiance of men . Nobody pushed him to do it, Kennedy said . Kennedy: The war was a battle for allegiance .
 Kennedy: Our approach to revolutionary war must be political, political first, political last, political always . Kennedy: The last twenty years have demonstrated “beyond doubt” that our approach to revolution is political . He said: “Our approach to war must always be political first
 President Johnson's speech contained more than a hint that he had abandoned his predecessor’s policies . Also, framed as it was by quotations from John F Kennedy, it contained more of a hint of his own policies .
 Counterinsurgency might have done it once, Kennedy seemed to say, but its day had passed . Kennedy seemed like it was the end of counterinsurgentency, he said .
 His reluctance to force the issue with Johnson showed the fear of misunderstanding that inhibited him throughout his senatorial years . Yet his reluctance to push the issue showed him that he still fears misunderstanding .
 Joseph Kraft was interested in the case of Gustave Hertz, an AID official kidnapped by the Viet Cong . Hertz was an official from AID in Vietnam . Kraft: "Gertz was a good guy, a good man, a great man, good man"
 The National Liberation Front, as the Viet Cong were formally known, had a diplomatic outpost in Algeria . The N.N.C. was formally known as the Vietnam Cong .
 Kraft took Kennedy to Cherif Guellal, the Algerian ambassador, who asked Ben Bella to intercede with the NLF . The Algerian chief of state Ben Bella then went to Algiers himself to press the negotiations .
 Hertz was exchanged for one of their own men under sentence of death in Saigon . The NLF agreed to exchange Hertz for a man under a death sentence in Vietnam . Hertz died in a POW POW camp in Vietnam in 1968 .
 It was Guellal’s impression that the NLF saw an opportunity to open larger contact with the Americans . The NLF wanted to open contact with Americans, he said .
 Hertz would be released to Senator Kennedy in Algiers if he wished . Hertz was released to Kennedy in an exchange between Hertz and Kennedy . The exchange would take place in the U.S.
 Kennedy took the proposal to Maxwell Taylor, who rejected it on the ground that the arrangement would upset the Saigon government . Kennedy's proposal was rejected by Taylor on the grounds it would upset Saigon .
 Kraft later suggested that the effort made Kennedy understand that the Viet Cong were not roving bands of terrorists but a National Liberation Front with a political structure and legitimacy of its own . Kraft suggested that Kennedy understood that the N.L. Front was not a terrorist organization but a national liberation front
 If counterinsurgency were dead, then negotiations with the NLF might offer the best exit from Vietnam . The NLF could offer a better exit from the country .
 Guellal: Kennedy pursued Hertz matter because he saw there was "a possibility" that might lead to broader negotiations . He said Kennedy saw "there was a possibility, an opening" that could lead to a broader deal . The Hertz case is the subject of a new
 Professor Eugene Genovese, a Rutgers historian, said that he hoped the Viet Cong would win . Professor Eugene St. Genevese said he hoped that Viet Cong won .
 It was the year of teach-ins, the first antiwar turbulence on the campuses . The first bonfires of draft cards were among the first draft cards .
 In the same month the Defense Department denied burial in Arlington Cemetery to the American Communist leader Robert Thompson .
 He had won the Distinguished Service Cross for heroism in New Guinea in 1943 . He had also won the D.C. for heroism .
 Rusk took a fortnight to acknowledge Fanfani’s report and then asked him to check back with Hanoi for clarification . Rusk then took a further two weeks before issuing a statement of his own .
 On December 15, before Hanoi responded to Rusk's inquiry, Johnson ordered the bombing of Haiphong . The bombing was ordered by Johnson on December 15 . Johnson's order came before the inquiry was launched .
 If, on Friday night, we had asked the Soviet government for an explanation of their message instead of just agreeing to our own interpretation of it, it might have been chaos . ‘| don’t believe in pulling out the troops.’
 "If we can hold them for about 20 years, maybe they will change the way Russia has," says Putin . Russia has not changed the way it has, Putin says .
 With the casualty lists growing, the decision to send more troops will be critical . The U.S. military is sending more troops to Afghanistan .
 We may have reached the point of no return once that decision has been made . The decision may have been made on whether to accept a new contract .
 I’m upset over our policy in Vietnam, says Johnson . 'Don’t think we’ve shown an open approach. | really think Johnson wants negotiations. Really think he wants negotiations,' says Nixon .
 Fifty percent of the government is probably for them, but fifty percent against them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Fifty percent of government probably will be for them"
 President Obama broke with the administration, but it could be disastrous for the country . Obama administration has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy .
 He said a Gallup Poll would show most of the American people favoring it . He said that if we had accepted the four points a year ago, or even last week, in a short while, possibly 14 days, a Gallup poll would show it .
 McNamara, the most ardent supporter of negotiations in the cabinet, had argued since early November for a bombing pause . McNamara had argued for the pause in bombing .
 Cabot Lodge, who had returned to Saigon as ambassador, and General William Westmoreland, the new commander in Vietnam, were at the time . Cabot lodge, who was ambassador, was in Saigon .
 Clark Clifford and Abe Fortas were Johnson’s closest unofficial advisers . Clifford and Fortas have been longtime advisers to the president .
 Ball supported the pause, and Rusk and Bundy dropped their earlier opposition . Ball supported a pause, but Ball supported an earlier version of this article .
 The pause began with a Christmas truce and ran through the month of January 1966 .
 McNamara asked me to arrange a private meeting with New Frontier friends . About this time McNamara was asked to meet with friends of New Frontier .
 John S. Galbraith, Richard Goodwin and Carl Kaysen dined at my house in Georgetown on January 6 . Carl Goodwin, who had by now left the Johnson White House, dined in Georgetown .
 McNamara told us that he did not regard a military solution as possible . McNamara said he didn't think he would be able to find a solution to the crisis .
 His objective, he said, was “withdrawal with honor” | noted, “He seemed deeply oppressed and concerned at the prospect of indefinite escalation’s . His objective was to withdraw with honor .
 In closing let me say how impressed I have been with the most recent efforts to find a peaceful solution to Viet Nam . In closing, I say I'm impressed with the efforts to deal with the conflict .
 President Kennedy had to face, by himself, the agony of the Cuba missile crisis . It was one of those hours when he felt alone, prayerfully alone .
 In the past, bombing has not proved a decisive weapon against a rural economy or guerrilla army . The past has failed to prove decisive weapons against rural economies .
 The temptation will now be to argue that if limited bombing does not produce a solution, that further bombing, more extended military action is the answer, is the solution . The temptation to argue is to argue further bombing is not the answer .
 The danger is that the decision to resume may become the first in a series of steps on a road from which there is no turning back—a road which leads to catastrophe for mankind .
 On February 4, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee opened public hearings on Vietnam . V. V is the first time the Senate has heard from Vietnam .
 No one seemed to have thought through the detail of a negotiated settlement . No one seems to think through the details of the deal .
 He concluded that the price of settlement was taking the National Liberation Front into the political process . He said: "He tried to think it through himself and concluded that ... he concluded that . He concluded .
 Sen. Ted Cruz made the point on his own when it did not emerge before the Foreign Relations Committee . Cruz: "When this point does not emerge, he decided to make it his own. When this point did not come before the committee, Cruz made it his stand .
 He put out his statement on February 19 before going off to ski in Vermont . He put it out before going skiing .
 The United States was insisting that South Vietnam should not be turned over to the North . The U.S. was insisting South Vietnam shouldn't be handed over to North Vietnam .
 North Vietnam insisted South Vietnam should not be a hostile state dedicated to the extermination of Communists . North Vietnam was insisting that South Vietnam shouldn't be an extermination state . The North Vietnam government was insisting South Vietnam wasn't a hostile South Vietnam .
 The United States had to recognize that many people in South Vietnam wanted change . The U.S. had to accept that people wanted change, the U.N. said .
 His statement mentioned “a compromise government” as only one of the possible forms of acceptance of the NLF might take . His statement also mentioned a compromise government .
 His language was imprecise, and he was immediately denounced as the advocate of coalition with the Communists . But his language was not clear enough, he was quickly denounced as an advocate .
 Vice President Humphrey led the counterattack from the far Pacific, where he was touting the war for the administration . Vice President Hubert Humphrey was in the Pacific to promote the war against North Korea .
 Bundy quoted John Kennedy in opposition to united front governments . Bundy quoted Kennedy's particular irritation, to Kennedy’s particular irritation . Bundy: ‘I don’t want a united front government.’
 Bundy had planned to quote Robert himself, but Johnson warned him not to do so if he valued his friendship with the senator . Bundy had intended to quote himself, Johnson said .
 Bundy said Kennedy might equally have called before he took out against the administration . Bundy said that Kennedy might have called . Bundy: "Kennedy might equally call" before taking out against administration .
 Kennedy replied that he had in fact discussed the statement with Moyers the day before he put it out . Kennedy said he had discussed the issue with the TV host the previous day .
 Maxwell Taylor saw no serious divergence, assuming that Kennedy had not implied the establishment of a coalition government in advance of free elections . Maxwell Taylor said that Kennedy did not imply that he intended to establish a government .
 If the people of South Vietnam themselves brought the fox into the chicken coop, Taylor agreed . The administration would abide by the result, he said . Taylor agreed that the people would be allowed to bring the fox in Vietnam .
 NLF participation in interim government would be negotiable, Moyers says . Moyers added that participation in an interim government is negotable . The NLF was laboring to keep Johnson and Kennedy together .
 Johnson defended his Vietnam course at a Freedom House dinner . Two days later, Johnson defended Vietnam at Freedom House .
 Impersonating an interrogator, | challenged him about John Kennedy’s responsibility for the trouble we were in in Vietnam . John Kennedy's responsibility for Vietnam was to blame for the problems, he said .
 It iS not part of any ruthless scheme to open and read all your mail before it goes to your office . It is not a ruthless scheme, but it is not an attempt to read and read your mail .
 'I am somewhat shocked and surprised at the close working and social relationships you are establishing with some people. However | am somewhat surprised . I am somewhat . surprised . at the closeness and closeness of some people you have established with . some people .
 'I shall breathe no word about any of this to Clarence Mitchell or Martin Luther King or anyone like that. Needless to say | shall breathe . no word' to Mitchell .
 Kennedy: "I think it was unpopular politically. The public remained confused" Kennedy: “| made some mistakes in handling it,” Kennedy said later .
 Fear that disagreement would be ascribed to a personal vendetta held him back . Mostly the old fear that . disagreement would . ascribed a personal . vendetta . Held back .
 Goodwin: Johnson was a man possessed, wholly impervious to argument . Goodwin: "He was possessed" Johnson, Goodwin said, was "a man possessed"
 Galbraith wrote How to Control the Military. | wrote The Bitter Heritage.
 We discussed the formation of a national committee against the widening of the war . We also discussed the form of an anti-war committee against widening the war.
 Kennedy seemed skeptical when we raised the issue with the White House on July 20 . Kennedy is skeptical of the idea .
 A mass movement against escalation would have to tie itself to an issue or to a man, he says . The movement would need to be tied to a specific issue, he said .
 LBJ could always justify each specific step on the ground that it was necessary to save the lives of U.S. troops and that it would shorten the war . LBJ always justified each specific action .
 The polls were already showing him the leader of the Democratic opposition . The polls already show him as the Democratic leader .
 Goodwin observed that the more an anti-escalation movement seemed a pro-Kennedy movement, the less likely it would be that Johnson would respond to it . Goodwin: The more anti-peace movement seemed to be a pro Kennedy movement, less likely Johnson would react .
 The next weekend | resumed the discussion with George McGovern at Galbraith’s farm in Vermont .
 He had kept up relations with the city bosses like Daley of Chicago . He kept up his relations with city bosses .
 He added that Johnson had a ‘great yellow streak’ and might conceivably be bluffed out of running again . Johnson said he thought Johnson would be a candidate for the White House .
 A fortnight later | was at Hyannis Port. did not bring up 1968, but we talked about the establishment of a Vietnam information center in Washington. A fortnight after that, did not mention 1968 .
 Third, there is the question of our turning prisoners over to the South Vietnamese and becoming accomplices in torture . Third, the question is turning prisoners into South Vietnamese prisoners .
 George Ball, the most persevering critic of the war among his advisers, found him unfailingly courteous . George Ball was the most persistent critic of war among advisers .
 Chester Bowles, on home leave from India where he was now ambassador, met with him in the summer of 1966 . Bowles met with Bowles on his return from his post as ambassador to India . He was in India at the time of the incident .
 They control the three major networks, you know, and the forty major outlets of communication, they control, they say . They control most of the world's major communications networks, the government says .
 Reedy left in July 1965, thereafter to write in The Twilight of the Presidency . Reedy's classic account of the way the isolations of power withdrew Presidents from reality .
 Goodwin left in September 1965, Bundy left in February 1966, Valenti in May . Goodwin left the hospital in February 1965 . Bundy left February 1966 and Valenti left in May 1966 . Goodwin and Bundy left hospital .
 Had there been no escalation in Vietnam, there would be Robert Kennedy out in front leading the fight against me . Robert Kennedy would have been telling everyone that | had betrayed John Kennedy's commitment to South Vietnam, he says .
 "Every night when | fell asleep | would see myself tied to the ground in the middle of a long, open space," she says . "I would see me tied to ... the ground"
 The language, Doris Kearns noted, betrayed unconscious concerns —“coward,” “unmanly,’ “without a spine”—along with his envy for Kennedy, whose manliness no one questioned . The language of the language betrayed unconscious
 The sense of Kennedy as “the enemy,” she believed, only hardened his determination not to change course in Vietnam . She said Kennedy's sense of being ‘the enemy’ only hardened him to Vietnam .
 Robert Kennedy had already carried his Campaign, as the exasperated White House saw it, to Latin America . Robert Kennedy was already carrying his Campaign to Latin American .
 In the autumn of 1965 the anti-apartheid National Union of South African Students invited him to speak at its annual Day of Affirmation . In the fall of 1965 he was invited to give a speech at the annual event in South Africa .
 As Attorney General, Kennedy had supported independence movements in black Africa . Kennedy had also supported black African independence movements .
 William Loeb begged the South African government from his New Hampshire eyrie . Loeb: "I want the South Africa government to help South Africa's democracy" Loeb says he wants the government to give South Africa a better life .
 He told Fredericks he preferred now to wait until after the fall elections . He said he wanted to wait for the fall election .
 The week before he left, Lyndon Johnson delivered a speech on Africa, his first as President . Johnson delivered the speech in Africa .
 The South African government was even less enthusiastic than the White House . South Africa's government was also less enthusiastic about the visit .
 Kennedy asked South African embassy for advice on his itinerary . Ambassador responded that he had nothing to say, that his government disapproved of NUSAS . Ambassador: "No ministers would receive him"
 Forty American newspaper and television correspondents assigned to cover the trip were denied visas . Then it denied visas to forty American journalists assigned to travel .
 The party arrived in Johannesburg just before midnight on June 4, 1966 . Angie Novello, Adam Walinsky and Angie .
 Kennedy made his way through a screaming crowd, his cuff links torn from his sleeves in the process, and climbed on top of an automobile waiting outside . Kennedy climbed on to the top of the automobile waiting for him outside .
 It showed both the hunger for a liberal voice and the emotionalism of the family argument into which he was entering .
 Hendrik Verwoerd declined to see him or to permit other ministers to do so . Hendrik has declined to meet him or allow others to .
 They could not understand why the U.S. did not embrace South Africa, they told him . South Africa was after all the most staunchly anti-Communist of nations, they said .
 He tried to explain that anticommunism was not enough . Here and for the rest of his stay he tried to . explain that anti-communistism is not enough, he said .
 He was two hours late, but three thousand people waited at the airport . Three thousand people were waiting for him to arrive .
 He promptly called on lan Robertson and gave him a copy of Profiles in Courage, inscribed by Jacqueline Kennedy . Robertson was given the book by Kennedy and gave it to him .
 When he emerges from Robertson's apartment, the street was filled with people and resounded with applause . When he emerged, Robertson was greeted with cheers .
 Allard Lowenstein, a liberal activist who had traveled in South Africa, thought it too cautious . You really had to go full tilt, he said, to go to South Africa . Lowenstein: "I thought it was too cautious"
 Few will have the greatness to bend history itself; but each of us can work to change a small portion of events . In the total of all those acts will be written the history of this generation. Few can bend history .
 It is from numberless diverse acts of courage, belief that human history is shaped . It is not only from courage and belief that humanity is shaped, it is from courage to courage .
 Each time a man stands up for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot of others, or strikes out against injustice, he sends a tiny ripple of hope . Those ripples build a current which can sweep down walls of oppression and resistance .
 Denis Hurley, the Roman Catholic archbishop; two Zulu chiefs; and Alan Paton, whose novels he so much admired . The Archbishop of Cambridge, the Archbishop of Cornwall, was also a fan of the novels .
 There was a tour of Soweto, the steaming ghetto where half a million blacks lived behind wire fences, passing in and out with identity cards . Half a million black Africans live behind wire fence, passing into and out of the city with identity documents .
 He made speeches from the roof of the automobile, the steps of the Catholic cathedral, from a chair in the middle of a school playground . He also spoke from the top of an automobile and the top steps of a Catholic cathedral .
 Later the inhabitants papered their shacks with Kennedy photographs cut from the newspapers . The inhabitants of the shacks were papeered with photos of Kennedy .
 Hope lay in “the most fragile and the most powerful of human gifts— the gift of reason,” says President Obama . “Hope lay in the most fragile, most powerful and most powerful human gifts,’s hope, says Obama .
 "We could eat any other African state for breakfast," says Nelson Mandela . "We are growing militarily stronger every day," says Mandela .
 Kennedy, through tact, directness and simplicity, came over to a surprising degree not as meddling intruder but as honest friend . Kennedy recognized white South Africa’s kinship with as well as its estrangement from western civilization .
 It was well to leave, he decided, before he began to have more influence than he wanted to have, he said . He decided to leave before becoming more influential than he hoped .
 There was a common humanity, he insisted, which went beyond superficial differences of race and culture . He insisted that there was a universal humanity, which transc transc transcended superficial differences .
 "Why, among the black schoolchildren | saw today there might be an Einstein— or a Dr. Dr. Albert Einstein" "Among all there may be people with extraordinary capabilities," he said .
 With him a great shaft of outer daylight was let into the air-conditioned comfort and concrete corridors of the bastion that nearly everybody believed, or feared, or hoped, was shut shut tight against such natural illumination .
 Senator Robert Kennedy’s visit is the best thing that has happened to South Africa for years . Senator Kennedy's visit is best thing to have happened to the country for years, says South African politician .
 It is as if a window has been flung open and a gust of fresh air has swept into a room in which the atmosphere has become stale and foetid . The atmosphere in the room has been 'frivolous' since the end of the day .
 This younger Kennedy has taken the youth of the country by storm through his message of confident, unashamed idealism . Kennedy has 'taken the youth by storm' in the U.S. through his messages of confidence and idealism.
 The black leaders gave him the kind of reception usually accorded to visiting chiefs of state . He was greeted with a warm welcome by the black leaders .
 He found Nyerere lucid and forceful; Kenyatta seemed ancient, bemused and out of it . Haile Selassie had presence and dignity but appeared a relic of another age, he said .
 In Dar es Salaam, Kennedy met with Eduardo Mondlane, still fighting for a free Mozambique . Kennedy meets with Mondlane in the capital, Tanzania .
 Mondlane’s account of the guerrilla war against the Portuguese gave the Americans a chastening sense of how the Vietnam War must look to the Viet Cong . Mondlane: “The story of the Portuguese guerrilla war in Vietnam gave the U.S. an insight into how the
 Pope said, “‘We took an interest in African art in North Africa’ as if this were a satisfactory response . When Kennedy was discussing South Africa, the Pope said: “We took . An interest in . African art ... in North . Africa”
 The International Control Commission could be helpful in opening a dialogue between the North and South, he said .
 The trouble Kennedy was encountering in South Africa, wrote Joseph Kraft while he was away, “is apt to look like child’s play when he comes home.” Kennedy was still away .
 He was, as his friend John Burns, the state chairman, said, “bored” with politics . He was also "bored" with politics, his friend said .
 Kennedy told Goodwin that clubhouse politicians were not interested in issues . Kennedy said he was against communion break-break-asts and county dinners . The clubhouse politicians, he told Goodwin, were not .
 He felt an obligation too to the public-spirited young men and women whom the Kennedys had made a business of encouraging to enter politics . He felt too much of an obligation to encourage young people to join politics, too .
 He wanted to restore the traditions of Smith, Roosevelt and Lehman, to raise the quality of candidates, to make the party an instrument of progressive government, he said .
 JFK wanted to secure his base against the depredations of Lyndon Johnson, who was still withholding patronage . By 1966, he would have liked to sneak the state party (and the presidential convention) away from Kennedy .
 Reformers divided between opportunists trying to get into the organization and emotionalists with an "incurable" will to lose . But, except for his West Side friends, like Ronnie Eldridge, the reformers seemed to be divided .
 He admired Alex Rose’s talents in political maneuver but didn’t warm to him as a person . As for the Liberals, he said he admired Rose's talents but did not warm up to him personally . He said he didn't warm to the Liberals .
 Manhattan Democratic leader J Raymond Jones made a deal with the Republican county leader by which Arthur Klein would get Republican endorsement in exchange for Democratic endorsement of a Republican candidate for state supreme court .
 Wechsler reprinted excerpts from a twenty-year-old wiretap showing that Klein, wittingly or not, had once nominated a judicial candidate selected by the mobster Frank Costello . The mobster named the judicial candidate chosen by Costello, Klein said .
 Liberal leader threw in the thought that John Lindsay, the dashing Republican congressman elected mayor the previous November, believed nothing could be done . Lindsay was elected mayor in November 2012 .
 Kennedy’s face changed for several reasons, of which only one was disgust over the intrusion of the underworld into politics . Only one of the reasons for Kennedy's disgust was that he was disgusted by the intrusion .
 Its function was the probating of wills, in the course of which favored lawyers received large fees out of the estates of deceased citizens . The function of the function was to probate of wills .
 The reform of the surrogate court was a way of protecting poor people who often saw inheritances draining away in surrogate fees . The reform was meant to protect poor people from seeing their inheritances drained away .
 It was also a way of denying the party organizations their most lucrative source of patronage . The party organizations were also denied the party's most lucrative patronage .
 It was a way to consolidate his own relations with the Liberals and reformers, Kennedy said . It was also a way, as Kennedy said, to “stick it to John Lindsay,”24 who had shunned the fight .
 He asked Stephen Smith and William vanden Heuvel to come up with a candidate . Stephen Smith is the author of a new book, The Book of Life .
 V Silverman, a justice of the state supreme court, had been a partner in Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison, the city’s leading liberal law firm . Silverman had been partner in the firm .
 He had participated in Robert Oppenheimer’s defense against security charges brought by the Atomic Energy Commission . He had been involved in the defense of Robert Oppinheimer against the charges .
 If Silverman would stand for surrogate, this would be an example to others, he would be a model for others . Silverman says he wants to be a role model for people like him .
 Silverman says he saw the risks Kennedy ran, but the only risk he could see for himself was that he might be elected . Silverman was happy on the Supreme Court, but was happy with Kennedy's decision .
 Kennedy said he would talk to the reform leaders and, unless they were willing to get off their asses and work, it wasn’t worth doing . Kennedy: Unless they’re willing to work, the work isn”t worth anything . Kennedy said, “Unless
 They were almost resentful to find him urging them on to the barricades . They almost resentfully found him encouraging them to take part .
 Ray Jones was fighting for political survival, and Kennedy feared he might raise the race issue . Kennedy feared that in his desperation he might .
 Stephen Smith described it as ‘two unknowns running against each other for a job nobody understood”©2 Kennedy went off to Africa.
 It was a rollicking few days. | accompanied the Kennedy motorcade on one suffocatingly hot June evening .
 At each street-corner rally Silverman would make four crisp points about the surrogate court, and James Farmer would boom away, then Kennedy would speak . Silverman and Farmer would speak at each rally .
 He would put his hands to his head in mock pain and say, “No, no. | don’t think you have the right idea,” and the marimba band would strike up and the motorcade would move on to the next rally .
 Kennedy sat, as he customarily did, in the front seat of the car to the right of the driver . Kennedy sat in the car, as well as the driver, to the left of the vehicle .
 Kennedy liked him well enough but hardly considered him a model of the new spirit with which he hoped to infuse the party, a feeling that O’Connor, a realist, accepted . Kennedy was not a model for a new spirit that he hoped for .
 Among other aspirants, Franklin Roosevelt, Jr, had claims on Kennedy’s support . Franklin Roosevelt Jr. had claims of support .
 Eugene Nickerson is Nassau County's county executive . He was able, informed, honorable, with a tested appeal to the suburbs . His preference was to Nickerson, who was able and informed .
 Nickerson was little known upstate, however, and not a stirring campaigner . Nickerson died at the age of 92 at the time of his death .
 O’Connor agreed to let Burns pick the delegation in 1968 and to keep Burns as state chairman . He put out a statement saying he would abide by the wishes of the convention . After O'Connor agreed, Burns said he wouldn't abide by convention wishes .
 Three years had passed since the radical reporter had glared with hatred at the hardfaced Attorney General shouting to demonstrators before the Justice Department . Three years later, the reporter was back in the news .
 Newfield had described Kennedy as an existential man, preoccupied by suffering, who could understand himself only in action . Kennedy had given a unique sense of the absurdity of life .
 Kennedy, chancing to see the show, had asked Newfield for lunch . Kennedy was not fully prepared for the changes, Newfield wrote .
 Instead of the military crew cut, his graying, ginger hair now lapped over his earlobes in the shaggy style of the alienated young . Instead of a military cut, he now has a ginger ginger hair lapping over his ears .
 Kennedy was the first national politician | had met who had human reactions . Kennedy was first national . politician to have human reactions, she says .
 Newfield had grown up in Bedford-Stuyvesant, the only white kid on the block, helped found Students for a Democratic Society . He joined SNCC and went to Mississippi and saw the world from an angle Kennedy wanted more than ever .
 He noticed a ten-year-old girl wearing glasses as he walked with Carey and Newfield along crowded sidewalks . Shaking hands, Carey said, he noticed the girl's glasses . Carey: "It's a good thing you can do"
 He rubbed the back of her neck, then turned to shaking hands again . Lost for a moment to the world, he rubbed his hands on her .
 He was telling me the Church was such a problem. 'I wonder why the kids who come out of parochial school are so conservative. I wonder why,' he said .
 Kennedy completed the schedule, then invited Newfield to his apartment in U.N. Plaza . Kennedy then invited the Newfieldist to the apartment .
 When he finished, Kennedy peered out the window at the barges making their way along the East River . Kennedy: "I don't think it's a good day for me. It's a great day for you."
 Robert Kennedy spent election night with John Steinbeck and Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the Soviet poet, to Sam Silverman . Kennedy spent the night with a small group of writers, including Steinbeck .
 Robert Kennedy moved dramatically ahead of Lyndon Johnson when public opinion polls asked whom Democrats and independents favored for 1968 . In the last months of 1966, Robert Kennedy was ahead of President Johnson .
 The voters, he told me, probably agreed 80 percent with Johnson on the issues between them . But people did not believe Johnson any longer, he said .
 There had been premonitions in the summer of 1966 when Katzenbach told Kennedy the Justice Department was filing a brief with the Supreme Court confessing that the FBI had engaged in illegal electronic eavesdropping in 1963 .
 Kennedy asked Katzenbach to state in the brief that the Attorney General at the time had no knowledge of the FBI’s bugging habits either in the case at hand or in general .
 Katzenbach refused, not because he disbelieved Kennedy but because he thought the addition irrelevant . Katzenachbach refused to accept Kennedy's claim .
 I’m getting too old | guess. | can’t write you as many memos as J Edgar Hoover . I'm getting old, I guess. I'm too old . I guess . can't write you a memo .
 Then Senator Edward Long of Missouri proposed an investigation of wiretapping and bugging . Roy Cohn was a friend of Roy Cohn and of the Teamsters, who were involved in the investigation .
 "Of course, he bugged me now and then’s now,’”8—but he knew that damage had been done. ‘He knew that . He knew that he had done. Of course,” he said . ‘I’
 After Dallas, Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy had resolved to spare the indignity of having a book written about his last days by Jim Bishop . Robert distrusted Bishop because of a pro-Hoffa series Bishop had written in 1959 . Jacqueline thought Bishop a hack and Robert dist
 Jacqueline later inaccurately and infelicitously put it down to William Manchester . Jacqueline said she and Jacqueline had approached William Manchester to do the book .
 Manchester, a skilled writer and a decent but highly emotional man, had written novels, an excellent biography of Mencken and a deft and admiring sketch of John Kennedy . Manchester had also written a deft sketch of Kennedy .
 On March 28, 1964, Manchester signed a contract providing that “the final text shall not be published unless and until approved” by Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy . The final text of the book will be published only if approved by the Kennedy family .
 A provision requiring family approval of the use of . materials made uniquely available by the family would have been proper . The use of letters, oral history transcripts and like . like . the like . would have required family approval .
 A provision requiring family approval of the entire text compromised Manchester’s freedom as a writer . It made the Kennedys responsible for the author's independent research .
 The Kennedys were in an unduly protective mood after the assassination . But in the aftermath of the assassination, they were in a protective mood .
 When John Kennedy’s old friend Paul Fay wrote his bouncy memoir The Pleasure of His Company, Robert Kennedy landed on him as if it were the only book through which posterity would ever know his brother . John Kennedy's brother died in 1968 .
 Galbraith, reading the manuscript at Jacqueline’s behest, thought it harmless . The manuscript was published by Jacqueline at the request of Jacqueline .
 Fay published it with some excisions in 1966, and it was published again in 1966 . Fay published the book with excisions, but it was never published again . Fay's friendship with Fay has since broken up .
 In early 1966 Manchester turned over a long, deeply felt, greatly overwritten manuscript . Manchester turned it over in early 1966 after prodigious research .
 The draft opened, with a hunting scene in which a boorish Johnson pressed a reluctant John Kennedy to shoot a deer on the Johnson ranch . The draft opens with a scene of a reluctant Kennedy shooting a deer at the ranch .
 It was rather the impression the manuscript left that the Kennedys had never given Johnson a fair chance . The manuscript left the impression it was not given a good chance .
 In his own case, | recommended the elimination of the mythodrama depicting Johnson as monster-usurper . But felt that Evan Thomas had gone too far in deleting strictly factual references to Johnson .
 He observed to Manchester of one chapter that it “will injure both Johnson and me, but apparently it’s factually correct and a contribution to history.”
 The contract probably should have been rewritten to release the Kennedys from responsibility; but | cannot remember anyone’s suggesting that .
 Manchester United have been linked with a move to Manchester United . The club has been without a permanent replacement since the summer . Manchester United will be looking to sign a new manager in January .
 Manchester’s use of material derived from his interviews with Jacqueline Kennedy . Manchester's use of the material is based on interviews with the Kennedy family .
 The proposition that an oral history interview became the private property of the interviewer was indefensible . It's indefensible that oral history interviews should be treated as private property by interviewers .
 If the person interviewed lost all rights over the transcript, the oral history program would be dead . Oral history program promised so much to the historian of the future, it would have been dead .
 Manchester subdued most of Johnson's mythodrama and retained most of his history . With regard to Johnson, Manchester subdued his mythodramatic history .
 He was unwilling to surrender personal detail that Jacqueline Kennedy, increasingly agitated, regarded as an inexcusable violation of her privacy . But he refused to surrender detail .
 Robert Kennedy, who had other things on his mind, became weary of the business . Robert Kennedy became increasingly weary of his role in the White House .
 At one point he impulsively wired Thomas that publication should be canceled . Thomas: "I don't think it's a good idea to print this out, but it's not a bad idea"
 Fifteen months before, the press had almost unitedly risen to denounce a writer for reproducing in A Thousand Days comment about public officials acting in their public capacities .
 Historical truth of the comment was not under challenge . But editorial writers then brusquely dismissed the claims of history . The historical truth was not challenged .
 The widow of a murdered President was rebuked for guarding her grief against a writer who sought to use her confidences without her permission . Now with almost equal unanimity they invoked historical truth as an absolute in order to rebuke the widow .
 The Kennedys had won their case but, as Robert perfectly understood, it was at a fearful cost . Robert was not happy with the outcome of the case, but he was happy with it .
 "The stereotype of ruthless, arrogant Bobby Kennedy, riding roughshod over everybody, had received a tremendous infusion of new life. The stereotype of the arrogant, arrogant Kennedy, had been given new life," says CNN's John Sutter .
 There wasn't very much time anyway anyway and | certainly didn't want to spend it on that . There wasn’t very much . time anyway .
 Ethel Kennedy was riding with her children near Hickory Hill when she noticed a cadaverous horse standing miserably in a chicken coop . The horse was found in the coop of a chicken farm .
 Despite maternal care, the horse died five days later . She told her groom to bring the horse to Hickory Hill where it died .
 The trial, in January 1967, lasted two days, and the jury deliberated for a longer two and a half hours . The trial was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Ethel began to tease Louis Oberdorfer, her lawyer, about what would happen if they lost when, to popular applause, the jury came back with an acquittal . Ethel joked about the possibility of losing the case .
 He had called for an end to the bombing in a question period after a speech in California . He added that the people of South Vietnam had a right to determine their own destiny .
 This irreverence, at a moment when Johnson was meeting the new leader of South Vietnam in Manila, scandalized the statesmen of the press . Johnson was met by the new South Vietnam leader in Manila .
 Kennedy: "| would make it tomorrow. If another soeech would do any good, Kennedy said, “| would . make it today.”
 The last time | spoke | didn’t have any influence on policy, and | was hurt politically politically . But the last time . spoke | spoke . didn't have any . influence on . policy, he said, but the last . time didn't influence policy and was hurt
 'He hates me so much that if | asked for snow, he would make rain, just because it was me,' she said . 'I hate him so much. He hates me'
 KENNEDY 48. JOHNSON 39. J.R. 39 . J.O. R.A. KENNedy 48 J.J. 39. Kennedy . Democrats and Republicans share the vote .
 The poll had been taken before the Manchester denouement . If this results, you may have to dump old HUCKLEBERRY CAPONE LOVE and KISSES .
 Waiting for Prime Minister Harold Wilson, he wrote his father a letter on 10 Downing Street stationery, recalling the family’s stay in London nearly thirty years before . Waiting for PM Harold Wilson he wrote a letter to his father on the same stationery .
 The first question after his address at Oxford was about Vietnam . Then to Oxford, where the first question was about the Vietnam war .
 Kennedy confined himself to expressing “grave reservations” about the bombing . Kennedy was reluctant to attack his own government beyond the twelve-mile limit .
 Aleksei Kosygin, the Soviet Premier, is due to visit to London this month .
 The questions went on for an hour, ranging from birth control to China . He endorsed birth control, despite the deplorable example of his own family .
 The French, however much they disagreed on everything else, were united on Vietnam . The French were united in Vietnam, despite their differences, in Vietnam .
 Saintény, recently back from Hanoi, talked about Ho Chi Minh’s determination to be independent of both Moscow and Peking . He also talked about the determination of the Vietnamese to remain independent .
 Kissinger appeared to agree that further escalation would be folly and that negotiation was a possibility to be pursued . Kissinger: "Negotiations are a possibility"
 There could be no peace until Washington stopped bombing and declared its intention to withdraw, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 America, the general continued, had always presented the highest ideals to the world . America, he said, had presented the world with highest ideals .
 After seventy minutes de Gaulle concluded by offering Kennedy some remarkably bad counsel . De Gaulle: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 John Gunther Dean, Vietnam expert at the U.S. embassy, went with him to Vietnam . Dean is a Vietnam expert . Dean: "It's been a long way to Vietnam. It's a long road to Vietnam"
 Manac’h stressed Hanoi’s “complete mistrust” of U.S. peace gestures . Manac'h stressed that Hanoisisis mistrust of American peace gestures.
 The talk was in French, which he understood imperfectly and which he translated on the run . Dean translated the talk in the run from the French .
 Dean, better versed in both the language and the negotiating nuances, got something more specific . Dean: "I'm not sure what I really want to do, but I'm sure we're going to do it"
 Up to this time Hanoi had conditioned negotiation on American acceptance of four prior joint joints . The U.S. had accepted four prior joints in Vietnam .
 Hanoi is waiving its preconditions and asking only that the bombing stop, Manac’h says . Manac'h cites a declaration made to him by the head of the North Vietnamese mission in Paris .
 Hanoi, in short, was offering an important concession; and Manac’h evidently felt that, if he passed the message to an American diplomat in Kennedy’s presence, it could not be ignored in Washington . It was not the first time the U.S
 Dean drafted a cable, showed it to Manac’h to make sure he had it right . Dean then heard Manac'h say again how important the new Hanoi position was .
 Kennedy returned to the U.S. unable to find any leader on the continent who supported or even understood America’s Vietnam policy . Kennedy's own misgivings redoubled, he flew back to the United States .
 While Kennedy was still abroad, someone in the State Department showed Dean’s cable to Edward Weintal, the diplomatic correspondent of Newsweek . The cable was sent to Edward .
 The weekend of Kennedy’s return Johnson hardened his negotiating position . He demanded that the North stop reinforcing its troops in the South as a condition precedent to the cessation of the bombing .
 Johnson was sure Kennedy had leaked the story to Newsweek in Paris . The State Department could find no Paris cable on the Kennedy-Manac’h talk .
 He told Mankiewicz he did not have the ‘foggiest idea’ of what they were talking about .
 Kennedy left no record of the meeting; Johnson published none . The others present—Katzenbach, who had become under secretary of state, and Rostow—have held their peace, except to agree that it was most unpleasant .
 Kennedy described it all incredulously to Mankiewicz and Edelman, and the historian must rely on their recollections . Kennedy: "When he got back to his office, Kennedy described the whole thing incredulously"
 Kennedy replied that he had not leaked the story; he was not aware there had been a peace feeler . Kennedy said he still was not sure there had ever been one and that he still wasn't sure there was one .
 Kennedy asked whether Johnson would like to know what Kennedy thought he should do . After a time Kennedy asked Johnson what he thought Kennedy should do, he asked him to tell him what he wanted to do .
 He outlined a series of possibilities, including a cease-fire in stages, an expanded International Control Commission, an international presence gradually replacing American forces, a political settlement .
 Kennedy and his friends, he said, were responsible for prolonging the war and for killing Americans in Vietnam . He said Kennedy and friends were responsible .
 Kennedy said, “Look, | don’t have to take that from you,” and started to leave . Kennedy: "I’m not going to take it from you. It’s OK, I’ll leave," Kennedy said .
 Kennedy asked Kennedy to tell the waiting press that there had been no peace feelers . Kennedy told the press that he had been asked to tell them that there were no peace talks .
 Kennedy refused to say whether there had been peace feelers or not . Kennedy refused, saying he did not know whether there were peace feeler feelers .
 Dean finally agreed to say that he had not brought home any feelers . The message had been sent to Washington by Dean, who had sent it back .
 Jime, rising to the occasion, announced that Kennedy had called Johnson a son of a bitch to his face, which he had not . Kennedy had not. Jime said that Kennedy called Johnson . Johnson had not called him .
 He appeared a publicity-seeking meddler in international relations, a compounder of trouble for an overburdened President . As always, as always, he was ruthless and arrogant .
 A more legitimate criticism would have been of his failure to spot the negotiation feeler, but the press did not pursue this point . The press should have pointed out this point, but it is not the case .
 Kosygin’s assurance to Harold Wilson in London in the second week of February that unconditional cessation of the bombing would bring negotiations . Neither did assurances to Wilson that the cessation of bombing would lead to negotiations .
 On February 13 Wilson and Ambassador David Bruce urged Washington to continue the brief bombing pause over Tet, the Buddhist New Year, so that Kosygin might have time to persuade Hanoi to meet Johnson's insistence on reciprocal military deescalation in exchange for a halt .
 The administration had evolved the thesis that the real enemy in Vietnam was China . In its quest for reasons sufficiently dire to justify the growing fury of U.S. intervention, the U.N. had evolved .
 Kennedy took care to talk with McNamara, Taylor and Harriman to get the administration's latest thoughts . do not know what they told him; he always protected such confidences .
 McNamara by this time had lost all faith in the efficacy of bombing . do not imagine he gave Kennedy to understand that victory was imminent . McNamara had lost faith in bombing .
 His misgivings about the war were deep but carefully buried because, | always thought, he wanted to conclude his distinguished career by negotiating a Vietnam settlement . He feared that any hint of disloyalty would lead Johnson to give the job to someone less determined to make negotiations succeed .
 Kennedy had recently read The Other Side, an account of a trip to Hanoi . Kennedy asked Newfield to arrange a meeting with Tom Hayden and Staughton Lynd . Hayden and Lynd were two articulate radicals . Kennedy had read a book about a visit to Vietnam and visited Hano
 The New Leftists advocated not unilateral withdrawal but an unconditional bombing halt as a preliminary to negotiations, with which Kennedy agreed . Kennedy of course agreed with the New Leftist .
 Hayden thought he was superior to “Reuther or Rauh or any of those guys” and was reminded of Mendes-France . Hayden thought him superior to Reuther or Reauh . He said he thought he would be a better man than any of his predecessors
 Goodwin, along with Kennedy himself, had the largest hand in the result . Goodwin and Kennedy were both involved in the decision . Goodwin had the biggest hand in Kennedy's decision .
 Morse and Gruening had been joined by Fulbright, McGovern, Nelson, Clark, Church, Javits, McCarthy and more . Fulbright and McGovern were among those who fought for the White House .
 Johnson directed Westmoreland, “in anticipation” of the Kennedy speech, to denounce a bombing pause . Johnson: "In anticipation’s [Westmoreland] to denounce the bombing pause"
 Gallup poll that morning had said that only 24 percent of the country wanted a bombing halt . Gallup poll said that morning that only . 24 percent had said they wanted a halt .
 He muttered that Sorensen had advised against the speech, but that he was sure it was the right thing to do . He said he was determined to do it regardless of consequences .
 He had been up till three-thirty hours working with Goodwin, Walinsky and Mankiewicz to put the speech into final final shape .
 Bobby Jr. Jr. brought along a coatimundi which suddenly attacked Ethel, sinking sharp claws and teeth into her leg . Bobby Jr., the animal collector, brought along along with Ethel . Ethel was bitten by the animal and bitten on the leg .
 In the course of the day, determined to deny Kennedy the headlines, he made (in the computation by vanden Heuvel and Gwirtzman) two unscheduled speeches in Washington . He announced he was inviting governors to the White House .
 Johnson said speeches like Kennedy’s were a disservice to the boys overseas . One asked about his charge that speeches like JFK's were disservice .
 His speech, like all respectable anti-escalation discourse of the time, began with a brief declaration of U.S. determination to stay in Vietnam until commitments were fulfilled . His speech was like that of the times, it began with an anti-war speech .
 It was also said because it was still accepted by all except the New Left . It was said to have been accepted by most of the country's left .
 Unilateral withdrawal, we thought, would lead, not to negotiation, but to a Communist Vietnam . We thought it would lead not to a negotiated withdrawal, but a Communist Communist Vietnam. We thought this would lead to an unilateral withdrawal. We were surprised to find out.
 In retrospect, we feel that while we were right in our forecast of the consequences of withdrawal, the New Left was right in seeing these consequences, whatever they might be, as less ghastly than continuing the war . wish that unilateral withdrawal rather than negotiation had been the dove objective in
 It would have done even less well than ‘negotiation now” in a country still a good deal more hawkish than dovish . But it wasn’t; and it would have been even less effective than negotiating now . The U.S. is still a
 In any case, Kennedy rushed through the obligatory ritual in two sentences . Kennedy rushed to the podium in two words .
 He himself had been involved in ‘many’ of the decisions that brought the United States into Vietnam, he said .
 He enjoined his countrymen to visualize the “horror” of this “distant and ferocious” conflict . He also urged them to visualize this ‘distant” and ‘fierce’ conflict .
 Kennedy: This horror was “not just a nation’s responsibility, but yours and mine . This horror, Kennedy said, was ‘your and mine.’ Kennedy said .
 It is our chemicals that scorch the children and our bombs that level the villages. It's our chemical scorch children, it is our bombing that levels the villages, it says . It's not our chemicals scorching children's bodies, it's our bombs scorching villages .
 We were “steadily widening the war” at just the time when opportunities for settlement appeared to lie at hand . And now we were ‘steadly widening’ the war,’s author says .
 He asked the administration to test Hanoi’s sincerity by halting the bombardment of the North and saying the U.S. was ready to negotiate within the week .
 "We are not in Vietnam to play the role of an avenging angel pouring death and destruction on the roads and factories and homes of a guilty land. As for the idea that we must punish the North for its iniquity, “We are . not in . Vietnam to
 Kennedy's proposals put the U.S. into a position of weakness, Jackson said . Kennedy’s proposals, Jackson added, put the United States in a 'position of weakness' Jackson: Kennedy's plans put the country in a position that is weak .
 Fulbright, McGovern, Clark, . Clark, Tydings, Claiborne Pell, . Pell, Albert Gore, . Gore, John Sherman Cooper, supported Kennedy . Fulbright and McGovern backed Kennedy .
 Phil Ochs, who had come down to Washington to hear the speech, was with him . The folk singer had come to D.C. for the speech .
 Kennedy remembered that Bob Dylan was supposed to have changed his name to help his career . Kennedy asked Ochs whether this was so and asked him whether it was so .
 The national committeeman read aloud a letter to the sister of a soldier killed in Vietnam . He went on, said William Dunfey, in ‘an unbelievable tirade,” ending by reading aloud . The letter was read aloud by the brother of a Vietnam solider
 The letter, Johnson revealed with unconcealed relish, was signed John F Kennedy .
 Robert Kennedy pursued his campaign to drive home the meaning of the war . The war was over for the first time in six decades .
 In the question period someone asked about student deferment from the draft . Student deferment is not allowed to be accepted by the government .
 Kennedy said he was against it; he could afford to send his children to college, but others couldn't, and it was unfair . Kennedy: "It was unfair. It was unfair"
 Fred Harris: There was a “giant gasp’; then stunned silence; then overwhelming applause . There was, Said Fred Harris , “a giant gasp”; . Then stunned silence . Then overwhelming applause, he said .
 So long as the Americans dying in Vietnam came from the other side of the tracks, the respectable middle class did not mind the war . In fact, so long . as long as . the Americans died in Vietnam, the middle class didn't mind .
 Only when the contraction of educational deferments late in 1967 exposed their own sons did community leaders begin to turn against further escalation . Community leaders began to turn away from further escalation. Only when .
 In mid-April 1967, Joseph Rauh invited Vice President Humphrey to hear the views of long-time liberal friends . Humphrey was invited to meet with friends of his longtime liberal friends in Washington .
 He said LBJ's Vietnam speech had probably stiffened LBJ’s determination to pursue the opposite course . He said gloomily that his Vietnam speech “probably stiffened . LBJ .”
 At Rauh’s house an impassioned defense of the war, at once voluble and pathetic, Humphrey gave us a defense of war . The war was at the center of the Vietnam War, and at the end of it, he said .
 He thought a physical barrier across northern South Vietnam was a great idea . Lansdale was most depressed by the lack of the sense of the concrete human dimension of problems, he wrote .
 Westmoreland denounced the doves for leading the enemy to believe ‘he can win politically” what he could not win militarily . Westmorelands denounced the . enemy for leading him to think “he can . win politically . What he could . not win politically,
 He condemned the policy of seeking peace “through military action which is really going to bring about the destruction of Vietnam and the people’s people” 2& | spoke to McGovern and Kennedy the next day .
 Both were a little melancholy, felt that the senatorial revolt could be no more than a gesture, and wondered what kind of national support they could get .
 The irony is that all of us for years have been defending the presidential prerogative and regarding the Congress as a drag on policy . The irony of this is that we defend the president's prerogation, but we also back him in Congress .
 It is evident now that this delight in a strong Presidency was based on the fact that, up to now, all strong Presidents in American history, have pursued policies of which one had approved . It is also evident that this is based on a strong President's policy .
 We are now confronted by the anomaly of a strong President using these arguments to pursue a course which so far as 1 can see, can lead only to disaster .
 In May 1967, nearly half college students described themselves as hawks, hardly more than a third as doves . Nearly half of college students said they were hawks or doves, but only a third said otherwise .
 professions of support licensed a larger measure of opposition on issues by making it harder to charge politicalambition or personal resentment . And, in a way, it's a way to make it harder for opponents to be accused of political ambition .
 Sorensen handed him a hyperbolic paragraph as he rushed from the airport to the Americana Hotel . He handed him the story to him during a rushed trip to Americana hotel .
 At the end of the evening, he walked out with me into the soft spring night . "He walked out of the night with me," she says .
 The Tribune of the Underclass's Robert Kennedy saw Vietnam in Vietnam . He saw a village smashed, children scorched, the mother clasping the baby while fire rained from the sky .
 "This compulsion to be at one with individuals in extreme situations was increasingly the key to his politics," he said . This compulsion was increasingly important to him, he added .
 From childhood he had, as an underdog, sympathized with underdogs . Dallas, at once agony and liberation, had charged sympathy with almost despairing intensity . Dallas was once agony, liberation, and then Dallas, once agony .
 His own experience of the waste and cruelty of life gave him access to the sufferings of others . His own . experience of . the waste of life . gave him . access to others .
 So long as the Great Society absorbed the President, there was strong reason for Kennedy, despite differences on foreign policy, not to break with the administration . Kennedy was a strong supporter of the president's Great Society .
 As the civil rights struggle moved north, poverty and racial inequality were more than ever intertwined . The civil rights movement moved north .
 In 1963 Kennedy had observed that race problems were “at least temporarily ... more easily resolved” in the south . In 1963, Kennedy had said race problems in the South were "more easily resolved"
 When segregation was based on law, repeal the law, “release a valve,” and the oppressed, for a time, were satisfied . The oppressed were satisfied, but the oppressed were not satisfied .
 Segregation had been abolished, political and legal equality affirmed, but inequality remained . Here segregation was abolished .
 You could pass a law to permit a Negro to eat at Howard Johnson’s restaurant or stay at the Hilton Hotel . Howard Johnson's restaurant or Hilton Hotel could be a reason to allow blacks to stay there .
 Martin Luther King began a campaign to register black voters in Selma, Alabama, in 1965 . The campaign was part of the Selma Voting Rights Movement .
 In March, Johnson asked Congress for new voting rights legislation . When local whites responded with tear gas and bull whips, Johnson called for new legislation .
 The passage in August of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 started a far-reaching transformation of southern attitudes . The act was the first act of civil rights in the southern U.S.
 A Mississippi legislator of the old school compared Kennedy’s visit to a murderer returning to the scene of his crime . Kennedy's visit to Mississippi was compared to a murder .
 Kennedy's deadpan account of Ross Barnett’s erratic behavior in 1962 produced gales of laughter . Kennedy: "When in the question period someone asked about Ross Barnett, someone asked, to his astonishment, laughter."
 The trip confirmed his conviction that the next battle for racial justice lay in the northern city . The trip confirms that he is convinced that the battle will continue in the city .
 White northerners rushed off to Selma forgetting their own problems at home, he said . But he was also concerned when white northerner rushed off Selma for Selma . He said he was concerned that they forgot about their own issues at home .
 Thousands do not flock to Harlem to protest these conditions, much less to change them . Thousands of people are expected to attend the demonstration .
 In August 1965 violence broke out in Watts, the black ghetto in Los Angeles . Watts was the heart of the Watts riots in the city's black ghetto .
 Beating, looting, burning, sniping, bombing, went on for six days . 34 people dead, more than tooo injured . More than 30 injured .
 Kennedy said the problem would yield “only to other kinds of fundamental change” Kennedy said in April 1966 . “Better education and better housing and better job opportunities” would help, he said .
 The northern black sought “more significant participation in government, and the restructuring of his economic life to end ghetto existence” Martin Luther King wrote in early 1965 .
 The Southern Christian Leadership Conference’s first and last campaign in the north ended in grisly riots . His nonviolent demonstrations —the . Southern Christian . Leadership Conference's first . and last . campaign in . the north . ended in . riots .
 Nonviolence appeared impotent before the despair of the ghetto, the obduracy of the white establishment and the anger of the black militants, who now claimed from King's failure further evidence that “burn, baby, burn” was the road to salvation . Nonviolence seemed imp
 There remained “a strange attitude of both admiration and caution in Martin’s conversation about Bobby,” Andrew Young wrote the year after both men died . Still, there remained a strange attitude, Young wrote .
 Martin tended to feel overly humble about his own accomplishments and somewhat afraid of “power” Martin was a man of moral courage and a keen sense of political timing .
 He was clear on moral issues, but anguished over implementation of them . He said he was clear of moral issues but was disappointed with the implementation of those .
 He could remember only a casual chat during the hearings of a Senate committee . He could not recall any of his conversations with senators .
 Perhaps this distance was dictated by attempts to link the statements and actions of these two great statesmen through some direct financial or political alliance . But perhaps this distance may be dictated by the attempts to . link them up .
 Neither man could profit by such an overt relationship and both avoided any direct association with each other . Neither man was able to profit from such a relationship .
 They continued down parallel paths of opposition to racism, poverty and war . Yet they continued down paths of opposing racism and poverty .
 "If there is an after life, and | have no doubt there is, | am sure they are together," she writes . "I'm sure they're together—finally able to share the much denied love that could never be fulfilled"
 Kennedy had been exploring city slums since the days of the Committee on Juvenile Delinquency . Kennedy explored slums more intently than ever . Kennedy was exploring slums for the first time in his career .
 Rats, filth, bad housing, bad schools, unemployment, segregation, powerlessness, alienation, hate, crime, violence, “burn, baby, burn”—all seemed interlocked in an endless chain to which no one had the key . “Burn, baby
 Johnson began to hold back domestic spending after Vietnam began to escalate . But, as Vietnam escalated, he held back domestic budget .
 He thought it broke up families (the “man in the house” rule reduced payments for families that stayed together), destroyed self-respect and subjected the poor toa “orying’ing” middle-class welfare bureaucracy .
 "We believed in land reform in Latin America because, you know, people ought to have land to work," says Obama .
 Employment for the poor was the centerpiece of the urban program he first presented in a series of speeches in January 1966 . Employment was a centerpiece of his urban program, which he began in 1966 .
 With the administration otherwise engaged, Kennedy moved out of the White House on his own . Kennedy has been with the administration since 2010 .
 In July he introduced a bill calling for tax incentives to induce private enterprise to bring plants, shops and jobs into urban poverty areas .
 His more basic proposal, introduced in the autumn with Joseph Clark of Pennsylvania, was to make the national government itself the employer of last resort .
 The Kennedy-Clark bill contemplated the creation of two million new jobs through public service employment . The bill would create two million public service jobs in public service .
 There remained gnawing political problems —powerlessness and participation . There remained the gnawed political problems .
 The slum clearance and public housing programs of the New and Fair Deals had perpetuated segregation . Slum clearance, public housing and slums clearance programs were part of the programs .
 Kennedy understood the Black Power point that black families might better develop pride in their own culture and self before they attempted integration . Kennedy: Black families, economically and psychologically unprepared for white neighborhoods, should develop pride before integration .
 Otherwise the multiracial society would be founded on the white man’s values . Otherwise, it would have been founded on white man's values, he says . "Otherwise, it's not possible"
 He proposed in 1966 the establishment of community development corporations, owned and controlled by the residents of the area . Community development corporations would mobilize both local talent and resources and outside capital .
 HARYOU, the Urban League and other organizations providing some five thousand summer jobs in New York City . Thomas Johnston, a Yale Drama School graduate, was the leader of the organization in 1965 .
 The program was a success, but investigations afterward revealed incompetence or worse in the handling of funds . Auditors baffled auditors from the Office of Economic Opportunity for months to come .
 The experience showed too —as Kenneth Clark had already discovered in HARYOU—how hard it was to get things done in a locality dominated by powerful and selfish personalities like Adam Clayton Powell .
 Bedford-Stuyvesant had streets lined lined with brownstones . Harlem was filled with large, crumbling tenements, but streets were filled with brownstone .
 Fifteen percent of the people owned their homes as against 2 percent in Harlem . 15 percent of people in Harlem own their homes, compared to 15 percent in Manhattan .
 On February 4, 1966, Kennedy took a long walk through Bedford-Stuyvesant . Kennedy took the walk through the neighborhood .
 State supreme court judge Thomas R Jones, the leading black politician in the area, met with community activists .
 One said, “You’re another white guy that’s out here for the day; you’ll be gone and you'll never be seen again.”
 The Negro people are angry, Senator says, and, judge that | am, I’m angry, too, too . Senator says he's angry, and judge that judge that .
 The Taconic Foundation, which had helped Kennedy on the black registration drive when he was Attorney General, was interested . Kennedy was the Attorney General in the 1960s .
 McGeorge Bundy, now head of the Ford Foundation, was drawn in . Later Mrs. Bundy was married to Bob Bundy, who is a former president of the United States .
 Money by itself is not a solution and could even create difficulties, as it had in Harlem the previous summer . But money by itself was not a . solution, as well as money, it could create difficulties .
 Johnston suggested the possibility of enlisting white business leaders who might provide technical and managerial advice as well as capital . Johnston suggests enlisting business leaders to provide advice and capital for the project .
 Vietnam consuming available federal money, social policy would require a larger infusion of private funds . Social policy would need to be funded by private money . Vietnam consumes available federal funds, but Vietnam is consuming available funds .
 Kennedy recognized that he would get nowhere if business saw Bedford-Stuyvesant as a Kennedy promotion . At the same time, he recognized that business would not want to see it as a business promotion .
 President Obama courted business leaders with an assuagement of Republican fears . So he accompanied his courtship with a courtship of business leaders . The White House has been courted by business leaders in recent weeks .
 He saw at once the value of the idea, had come by now to like Kennedy and provided wholehearted cooperation . He saw once the . value of his idea, said the president .
 Kennedy privately thought Lindsay was a lightweight . He was also a little jealous of Lindsay, who was very tall, very handsome and filled with what girls called charm and journalists charisma .
 Both sides agreed on most things, especially on the importance of racial justice . Each essentially respected the other, but they agreed on the issues .
 Jacqueline Kennedy relied heavily on André Meyer of Lazard Freres, on whom she had come to rely for counsel . He counted heavily on Meyer, who had advised Kennedy on legal matters .
 Johnston stiffened, wondering what inordinate capitalist demand was about to come . Johnston stiffens, wondering if inordinate capitalism demand was coming . Johnston: "I don't know what's going to happen"
 Welch Grape Juice, Equitable Life Assurance and National City Bank came up with names of the winners of the contest .
 André Meyer also suggested David Lilienthal, the old New Dealer who had carried his developmental genius from the Tennessee Valley to the far corners of the planet . Lilientshal was the New Dealer of the 1930s and 1940s .
 Schmidt said he had voted for Nixon in 1960 and Keating in 1964 . Schmidt also said he voted for Keating, Nixon and Nixon . Schmidt: "I'm a Democrat. I'm a Republican"
 On December 10, 1966, ten months after his walk, Kennedy unfolded the development plan to a thousand people gathered in the auditorium of a Bedford-Stuyvesant school . Kennedy, Lindsay and Javits by his side, unfolded the plan in a school auditorium .
 John Doar was persuaded in 1967 to leave the Justice Department and run the Development and Services Corporation . Doar left the department in 1967 after being persuaded to run the corporation .
 Lilienthal observed him at a meeting the next spring, “looking quite handsome in spite of the fact that his tie wasn’t fully pulled up, his suit was rumpled, his sox were droopy,” he wrote . Lilienth: “
 He had already amended the Economic Opportunity Act to provide for a ‘special impact’ program to channel federal development aid into urban poverty areas . Javits’s cosponsorship had already been amended the bill .
 The first thing you hear about it is on television. Now they came out with this thing, and the first | hear about . It's not surprising that the first thing we hear about is on TV. It's a good thing for the first time.
 Kennedy’s openness, his conviction that something could be done, even his occasional abruptness of challenge, proved that he was treating them as equals . Black leaders liked Kennedy's openness and his conviction he could do something was done .
 Kenneth Clark, whose dismay over Kennedy at the Baldwin meeting in 1963 had been compounded by Kennedy’s surrender of HARYOU to Adam Clayton Powell in 1964, met him again in 1967 . Kenneth Clark was dismayed at Kennedy's surrender to Powell .
 "You know, it is possible for human beings to grow. This time, the longer they talked, "the more ... came around to saying, ‘You know . It is possible that human beings can grow. It's possible for humans to grow."
 His work on the Migratory Labor Subcommittee of the Senate Labor Committee gave him a vivid understanding of the wretched conditions among itinerant farmworkers . His work gave him an insight into the plight of the workers .
 Kennedy was incredulous when a witness from the American Farm Bureau admitted that his group of prosperous farmers had no program of its own . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say, but I'm glad you're going to vote on it"
 National Farm Workers Association is conducting a strike of migratory grape workers in California . The group is urging a national boycott against grapes picked by nonunion labor .
 Reuther strongly recommended that the subcommittee go to California and hold hearings on the situation in the grapefields . Reuther: Hearings should be held in California and the United States .
 He was trying to figure how to save the cities; he was digging his way out of the Vietnam chicken coop; and he was reluctant to leave Washington . He was reluctant, but he was also reluctant, to leave D.C.
 The local sheriff came before the committee to explain his manner of keeping the peace . The committee also heard from the local sheriff about his role in the community .
 He took photographs, he said, to identify potential troublemakers . He had five thousand, he bragged, in his files. He took photos, he claimed, of five thousand .
 Kennedy asked why he had arrested forty-four of Chavez’s men engaged in lawful picketing . Kennedy: “I’m not sure why I’ve been arrested,” he said. ‘I'm not sure’ why he’d
 The two men had met in 1960, when Chavez was running a drive to register Spanish-speaking voters . Chavez and Chavez met in the 1960s when Chavez ran a drive for Spanish-language voters .
 Bobby Kennedy was standing there; he was talking to a lot of people . Bobby Kennedy saw this wild-eyed looking person walking toward him, and he threw up his hands and he said, ‘| know.’
 He found three migrant families living in an old bus with the seats ripped out . The seats were ripped out of the seats on the bus .
 Inside he saw six small children, their bodies covered in running sores . The children's bodies were covered in sores, he said . He said the children were covered with running sore .
 He made a face, shook his head and held her calloused hand for a moment . He shook his hand and said, 'Yes'
 Cardboard covered the windows of the next bus, where a child played forlornly on a filthy mattress . The bus was covered in cardboard, and the children were sleeping on a mattress .
 Kennedy demanded that Rockefeller investigate health conditions in the camps . Kennedy also called on labor leaders to organize the migrants . Kennedy called on Rockefeller to investigate the conditions .
 As senator from the state eighth in the country in Indian population, Kennedy visited the remnants of the once mighty Five Nations in their upstate reservations . Kennedy: "As senator from New York, you can't be surprised"
 He talked Indians with LaDonna Harris, the Indian wife of his Oklahoma colleague, in March 1967 . In March 1967 he addressed an organization she had founded called Oklahomans for Indian Opportunity .
 He went into the schools on the reservations and asked if there were Indian teachers and whether they were teaching Indian culture and history . He went to the schools in the reservations .
 He looked at library shelves to see what Indians could read about their own past . He looked around the library to find out what Indians can read .
 At the Blackfoot reservation in Fort Hall, Idaho, they turned up only one book on Indians . Captive of the Delawares, its jacket showed an Indian scalping a blond child .
 At one reservation he learned that a baby had died of starvation the same day . He learned that he had learned of starvation from a baby who had died the day after he arrived .
 Loving a public official for an Indian is almost unheard of, as history bears out . Loving an Indian for an official almost always has been rare in the U.S. history .
 Kennedy, Deloria concluded, “somehow validated obscure undefined feelings of Indian people which they had been unwilling to admit to themselves” Kennedy ‘validated undefined feelings’
 In March 1967 the Senate Labor Committee’s Subcommittee on Poverty held new hearings . The hearings were held in March 1967 in the Senate .
 One of the witnesses was Marian Wright, a twenty-seven-year-old black lawyer from South Carolina and Yale Law School, now in Mississippi for the NAACP’s Legal Defense Fund . Wright is now a lawyer for the organization .
 Marian Wright told the committee how mechanization and reduction in cotton planting under the federal subsidy program had thrown thousands of blacks out of work in the Mississippi Delta .
 At this point Mississippi counties had shifted from the program that gave surplus food to the poor to one that required the monthly purchase of food stamps in lump sums the poor did not have .
 Joseph Clark, the chairman of the committee, said the committee should go to Mississippi and see for itself . Joseph Clark: The committee should visit Mississippi .
 Kennedy sent Edelman down a few days in advance to get a sense of the problem, he says . Kennedy sent him down to assess the damage .
 They dined with a spectrum of Mississippians, from Oscar Carr to Charles Evers . Oscar Carr was Oscar Carr's hero . The couple sat down for a meal at the end of the evening .
 Kennedy, as usual, was not interested in the explanations of officials . Kennedy was not satisfied with the explanations he received .
 After the hearing Kennedy told Charles Evers, “I want to see it” The next day Kennedy and Clark toured the Delta .
 This lady came out with hardly any clothes on, and we spoke to her and told her who he was . We spoke with her and she was shocked to find out who he had been .
 Bobby looked down at the child, and then he picked him up and sat down on that dirty bed . Bobby then sat down and sat on the dirty bed, looking down at his son .
 Kotz tried, said Kotz, to evoke a response from the child, talking, caressing, tickling . Kotz said he tried to evoke the child's response by talking, touching, touching .
 Freeman wondered if conditions were really so bad as they thought . Freeman wondered whether conditions were so bad that they thought they might be .
 Johnson asked Joseph Califano, his chief assistant on domestic affairs, what it was all about . Johnson asked Califano to explain the controversy surrounding domestic affairs .
 The Field Foundation sent down a team of doctors headed by psychiatrist Robert Coles . Coles combined the concerns of a sociologist with the sensitivity of a literary artist .
 If their efforts offend conservatives on the Agriculture committees, there would be even less money for commodity distribution and food stamps . Johnson officials warned that if their efforts offended the southern conservatives, the money would go to food stamps and commodities distribution .
 In July, John Stennis, the conservative Mississippi senator, introduced an emergency food and medical bill .
 The Texas chairman of the House Agriculture Committee derailed the bill . But the administration remained hostile, and the Texas chairman remained hostile . The bill was approved by the Texas Agriculture Committee .
 In October ani administration Nutrition Task Force recommended $300 million more for food programs . In October the task force recommended that the government should spend more on food assistance .
 Johnson learned that Freeman was planning to spend $145 million over the 1968 budget on food programs . Johnson learned later that Freeman planned to spend more than $150 million on food .
 In his only known criticism of Johnson in these years, he set forth the situation to Mrs. Johnson in his only written criticism .
 Arthur Krim was concerned about the effects of malnutrition on the mental development of small children . His husband was the Democratic party’s chief fund raiser .
 Perhaps he feared to incite disorder by encouraging social protest . Perhaps he also feared that social protest would incite social disorder .
 A contagion of riots, marked by arson, looting and sniping, began in the south in May, spread to the north in June and reached an awful climax in July . The riots began in May and spread across the north and the south .
 Twenty-six people were killed in Newark in disorders lasting from July 12 to July 17 . The disorders lasted between July 12 and July 17.
 It was continuing two days later when | had dinner with Robert and Ethel Kennedy, Pete Hamill and José Torres . The gentle former world’s light heavyweight champion and a respected leader of his people .
 After dinner we piled into Torres’s car and drove through the anxious streets of East Harlem . Buildings shuttered and knots of policemen on each corner .
 That same night the greatest violence of all exploded in Detroit, where forty-three people died in the next four days . YOU CROSS THIS LINE, YOU BE DEAD .
 He explained his decision over nationwide television in a cold statement, notably lacking any acknowledgment that human despair might possibly lie behind the explosion . He also didn't mention any mention of human despair .
 Kennedy said he would ask heads of the three networks to produce as rapidly as possible—and run in prime time—a two-hour documentary showing what it was like to live in a ghetto . Kennedy said that, first, he would be asking the heads of three television networks to make
 "Let them show the sound, the feel, the hopelessness, and what it's like to think you'll never get out" Let them show what it feels, what it is like to be hopeless .
 Show a black teenager, told by some radio jingle to stay in school, looking at his older brother, who stayed in school and who's out of a job . Show a young black teen looking at older brother and who’s out of school .
 Show the Mafia pushing narcotics . Put a Candid Camera team in a ghetto school and watch what a rotten system of education it really is . Show the mafia pushing narcotics; put a team of Candid Cameras in the ghetto .
 I’d ask people to watch it—and experience what it means to live in the most affluent society in history—without hope, he says . Then I'd ask them to go home and see what it's like living in an affluent society without hope .
 Next, Kennedy continued, he would put together the racial data on every major city . Kennedy: "Next, we'll put together data on all major cities' racial data"
 He would call meetings at the White House—one a day if necessary—for each city on the danger list . He would hold meetings in Washington, D.C. for each city .
 We could do it, he told Thomas Johnston, the way we did Bedford-Stuyvesant, the mayor said . We could . It could be the same thing, he said, as well as Bedford Stuyveant . It's a good idea, he says .
 Let the local community define its problems and plans; let the government define the available resources . Let us work it out together to save the cities. Let's work out together, let us work to save our cities .
 It was their sense of him as a man who had “lived with tragedy himself, felt suffering and could Share that without speaking it.” It was a sense of his sense of himself, he said. “He had lived with tragedy. He felt suffering. Share that
 When he went into Harlem or Watts, when he visited a sharecropper’s cabin or an Indian reservation, these were Ais children with bloated bellies, his parents wasting away in dreary old age .
 "That is the wound about him which speaks to children he has never seen," he said . "That's the wound he speaks about," he added. "He spoke of children he never seen"
 It is just below the surface; he can't quite see it . He doesn't know its size or Shape or worth or even what it’s called . He can’t see it; he doesn’ve known its size .
 Among the grape-pickers on strike in central California, in Cloth Market Square in Cracow, on the Ole Miss Campus, in a Senate hearing room . The grape pickers are striking in California's Central Valley .
 Kennedy spends an inordinate amount of time at schools and colleges talking with the young . Kennedy spends inordinate amounts of time talking with them . Perhaps the young know what it is .
 "In the predominant half of his nature he remained the realistic political leader. He remained a realistic leader," he said . "He was realistic," he added .
 He wanted to be President, he believed in constitutional democracy, he abhorred violence, he said . "He could not have been a revolutionary. He could not be a revolutionary," he added .
 It was not giving the poor a fair break or the minorities an equal opportunity, it was not the poor or minorities . The poor were not giving them a fair chance, the government said . It was giving the minorities a fair opportunity .
 It appeared to be good only at keeping power arrangements as they were . It was also good at keeping the power arrangement as it were .
 Because it seemed useless for change, the poor, the minorities, the young were losing faith in it . The poor and the minorities were losing their faith in the government, he says .
 He had mastered the textbook components of power in America, including nominations, nominations, elections, legislatures, cabinets, courts, the unions, the press, television, academia, academia and the press . He says he had mastered all the components of the power in the country .
 The “enemy within” was wider and deeper than Kennedy had supposed a few years before . Kennedy himself had supposed that the ‘enemies within’ was wider than he had supposed . Kennedy: The ‘enemy’ within the U.S.
 Lowenstein's book was dismissed at that time as overwrought, read later, Lowenstein observed, less as fanatic than prophetic . Still his book, dismissed in that time, was read later as prophetic than overwrought .
 With all its faults, the old liberalism had at least arrayed itself against the immovable and impenetrable institutions, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: With all the faults, liberalism had been arrayed against immovable institutions .
 Kennedy had overcome most of his former scorn for liberals, even called himself a liberal on occasion . Kennedy had openly addressed liberal groups he would have disdained a decade before . Kennedy: "I'm going to be a hero. I'm a hero."
 Bill Green’s father had been the Democratic boss of Philadelphia in the days when Joseph Clark was elected mayor of the city .
 Its distinctive institutions tended to leave out those too poor or demoralized to form organizations of their own . And its distinctive institutions often left out those who were not able to form their own organizations .
 In September 1967, Moynihan urged the ADA to join with conservatives in protecting ‘the social fabric of the nation” against radical students and militant blacks . The ADA joined with conservatives to protect ‘social fabric’ of the U.S.
 The civil rights movement, the antiwar movement, and the nationalist movements of the Third World represented direct action . The great forces for change were direct action, the author says .
 If new institutions of power could be built among the powerless, if the new movements could avoid violence, change might come without tearing a fragile society apart . This is why he so greatly valued Martin Luther King and Cesar Chavez .
 He was too much a skeptic, or an Augustinean, to be altogether optimistic . He was not optimistic, but he was skeptical of the future .
 "He sort of conveyed the futility of most means and the uncertain glory of most ends," he said . He said. "The futility and the glory of the ends" of the end was the end result .
 Robert Kennedy was the most original, enigmatic and provocative figure in midcentury U.S. politics . By November 1967 when Robert Kennedy had his fortysecond birthday, he was the best known figure in American politics .
 He gave hope to some groups in the country, generally the weak; threatened others, the strong . "He gave hope" to some of the country's poorest groups .
 Some saw him as compassionate savior, some as ruthless opportunist . Others as irresponsible demagogue plucking at exposed nerves of the American polity . Some thought him a compassionate savior .
 His movement beyond liberalism both fascinated and alarmed the young militants of the day . He was a leader in the 1960s and '60s, but his views on the liberal-minded side of the liberal revolution .
 Robert Scheer, a radical journalist before he became Playboy's expert on the mental lusts of Jimmy Carter, registered both reactions in an article for the New Left magazine Ramparts in 1967 . Scheer wrote the article for Ramparts magazine Rampart .
 Kennedy was “undoubtedly a very charming and alive man for a politician” but “dangerous” because he provided “the illusion of dissent without its substance” Kennedy, he said, was ‘undoubtedly” a charming and . alive man .
 Hubert Humphrey is a bad joke to most young people, but Bobby is believable, and for that reason, much more serious . "Bobby" is believable and more serious than Humphrey's joke .
 After reading the Ramparts piece, Kennedy merely told him he had some interesting points . Kennedy: "It's very tough. It's very interesting," he said .
 Kennedy cried out to Dorothy Schiff in 196524 and to others from time to time later . Kennedy called her a "woman of honor" in 1965 .
 The English journalist Margaret Laing told him she had met two people in the previous week who felt so strongly about him they wanted to hit him . She told him two people said they felt so strong about him that they wanted him to hit them .
 Averell Harriman said, “It was impossible for him not to tell the truth as he saw it. I think that is why some people thought he was ruthless.”
 Matthew Maxwell Taylor Kennedy was born on January 11, 1965; Douglas Harriman Kennedy on March 24, 1967 . There were more children —Matthew Maxwell Taylor Taylor Kennedy on January 10, 1965 . Matthew Maxwell Kennedy was also born on the same date .
 "I think people work out their own lives ... just as long as they understand that in the last analysis what is important that they give something to others, and not just turn in on themselves," she says .
 Kennedy was now more than ever the collector of overachievers . An overachiever himself since infancy, Kennedy now more of a collector .
 Remember the party in November 1966 to celebrate Harriman’s seventy-fifth birthday . One never knew whom to expect at Hickory Hill—novelists, entertainers, columnists, decathlon champions, astronauts .
 Ethel directed the guests to come in costumes commemorating an aspect of Harriman’s life . Guests were invited to come dressed in costumes .
 Art Buchwald was a coxswain roaring jokes through a megaphone at Yale . The Yale crew was a team of men and women who rowed together .
 Kennedy found Harriman's distinctive style of long black overcoat and creased felt hat that he had worn as wartime ambassador to Moscow . Kennedy himself found somewhere in the style of the overcoat .
 Hubert Humphrey gave the best toast of the evening at Kennedy's inauguration . Kennedy was not feuding with Humphrey, but he was not a feudist . He was witty, charming, relaxed and brief .
 Life-size wax replica of Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin as at Yalta . Life-sized wax replica was created of the bay windows in life-size bay windows . Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill were pictured in wax .
 Buchwald was chief judge and master of ceremonies . There were annual pet shows, with prizes for the longest nose, the shortest tail and other oddities .
 Since the Kennedys had more pets than anyone else, they won more prizes . They won more than any other family .
 Brumus, still monstrously in the picture, distinguished himself one year ago by lifting his leg and discharging on a nice old woman sitting placidly on the lawn .
 Mr Buchwald ordered to take a complete rest by his physician until such time as he recovers from the traumatic neurosis from which he is suffering .
 Since Broomass is black, the case is fraught with civil rights’ undercurrents . The case is also fraught with the case of a black man .
 Kennedy ministered to him whenever he could, in winters at Palm Beach, in summers at Hyannis Port . His father was no better, but he ministered him when he could . Kennedy: "I'm a man of God, and I love you"
 Robert Kennedy went often to Hyannis Port for long, lazy, sundrenched summer days with the Kennedys or the Smiths . Robert's endless curiosity, irreverent wit and acerbic honesty was propelled by Robert's wit .
 For all one’s forebododings about the republic these were good and joyous times . For all the forebodies about the Republic, the times were joyous and happy .
 He had always been a taker of risks from that day, so many years before, when he had thrown himself off the yawl into Nantucket Sound in his determination to learn to swim . John Kennedy had said he had shown either a lot of guts or no sense at
 After Dallas the Canadian government named the tallest unclimbed peak in North America, 14,000 feet high, in honor of his brother . Dallas was named after his brother, who died in 2007 .
 The National Geographic Society proposed that the remaining Kennedy brothers join in the first assault on Mount Kennedy . The remaining members of the Kennedy brothers should join in on the assault .
 Robert reluctantly—he hated heights, he decided to climb Mount Kennedy himself . Robert reluctantly, he hated heights .
 Two veterans of the successful Mount Everest expedition of 1963, James Whittaker and Barry Prather, came with him . The expedition was the first to successfully complete a successful climb to Mount Everest .
 Whittaker asked Kennedy what he had been doing to get in shape for the climb . Kennedy says he has been getting in shape to prepare for his climb .
 They flew north to the Yukon Territory, Kennedy reading a book by Churchill . Kennedy and his wife visited Yukon, Canada, for the first time . Kennedy: "It's a great honour to be part of the family"
 They helicoptered to a base camp at 8700 feet; then roped themselves together, Kennedy in the middle . They set out across glaciers and crevasses to the summit . The group roped together to the 8700ft summit .
 After two days, they saw the final cone standing vertically against the sky . The final cone was seen in two days .
 Whittaker dug his ax into the steep ice ridge and began to pull himself, almost, it seemed to Kennedy, straight up . Kennedy: "It almost seemed to be straight up. It's almost impossible to pull yourself out of the hole"
 Kennedy managed to join Whittaker, Prather and Prather following . Kennedy was joined by the other players for the first time in a row . Prather was the first to join Kennedy in the first half of the fight .
 When they reached the crest, Kennedy went ahead for the last two hundred feet . Kennedy led the team to the top of the course .
 He deposited Kennedy memorabilia, crossed himself, stood a moment in inscrutable silence and then, with immense relief and exhilaration, made his way down .
 Professional climbers thought that, roped between Whittaker and Prather, Kennedy could hardly fail, and deprecated the achievement . Professional climbers thought that . professional climbers thought . that . Professional climbers . thought that,. roped to Kennedy could . hardly fail .
 In September 1965, as the Kennedy schooner was buffeted by a thirty-knot wind off Long Island, a Coast Guard cutter hailed them to say that Kathleen Kennedy had received head injuries at a horse show .
 Kennedy swam fifty yards to the Coast Guard cutter in ten-foot waves . Kennedy decided that the quickest way to reach the hospital would be via the coast guard .
 "We all worried and speculated about this almost compulsive courtship of danger," says President Obama . "It's been a terrible week for us, but we're here," says Obama .
 Dean Markham died in September 1966 in a plane crash in western Idaho . Ethel's brother George Skakel was also killed in the crash .
 The evening was spent in Irish-wake style with uproarious reminiscence of their dead friends . The evening spent in . Irish-wedding style . The night was spent with laughter and laughter .
 If | had had a choice, | would never have lived. | had no control over it. Had no control of it. Would never have been able to live with it. If . had lived with it, I would have no choice,’s not. had no choice
 V The paradoxes of Kennedy were a natural for the literary imagination . V. Kennedy was a natural natural to the imagination .
 Politics has generally been remote from literature in the United States . Unlike Europe, where culture and the state share the same capitals, politics has been remote in the U.S. But unlike Europe, the state and culture share the capital capitals .
 Writers, journalists apart, have not often been stable-companies to statesmen . Except for an occasional Henry Adams, writers have not been stable companionsaries to presidents .
 Franklin Roosevelt acquired grand literary friends like Archibald MacLeish and Robert Emmet Sherwood, but this was after he became President . Roosevelt acquired the literary friends after becoming President .
 Robert Kennedy sought out, interested, beguiled and sometimes repelled the writers of his day . Robert Kennedy as senator, however, sought out interest, interest and interest of the writers .
 George Plimpton was an overachiever of impressive versatility and the only writer Kennedy knew who kept up with him in the melodrama of physical risk . Kennedy was an old friend, an over-achiever, and a writer .
 He had been affectionately known through labor racketeering and Watts with Budd Schulberg . He had an affectionate nickname for him through labor racketeering .
 Irwin Shaw was always great fun when he made his annual descent from Switzerland . Irwin Shaw made the descent in Switzerland on his way back to Switzerland .
 Galbraith was a close counselor, John Bartlow Martin a loyal friend through the years . John Bartlow Martin was a longtime friend of the late actor and author .
 He had a good time with newspapermen like Jimmy Breslin and Pete Hamill, who made much of the fact that they, unlike Kennedy, had really Known what it meant to be poor .
 He liked James Wechsler, the liberal, and Jack Newfield, the radical, and Murray Kempton, the anarchist . He liked them because they were bright and entertaining and passionate, he said .
 In the summers Kennedy, his brother and assorted friends often sailed from Hyannis Port to see William Styron or Art Buchwald on Martha’s Vineyard . Kennedy's brother and other friends often sail to see artists on Vineyard in the summers .
 Richard Yates, the novelist who worked at Justice in 1963, did not like Kennedy . Yates, who worked for the Justice Department, worked at the Justice Center .
 Nothing, even Kennedy’s affinity for the wounded of the world, could appease Gore Vidal . Nothing even Kennedy's affinity for wounded could appease Vidal, he says .
 James Baldwin could never get over stormy session in 1963 . Baldwin acknowledged complexity in Kennedy, though he acknowledged complexity . Baldwin: "I can't get over that stormy moment"
 Kennedy was talking sternly to two small boys when he was approached by a man in his car . The incident happened in the early hours of the day .
 Kennedy made them promise to give up cigarettes, and they ran like maniacs down the street . Kennedy told them they would give up smoking, but they didn't .
 K looks at the immense, rather theoretical paintings . Reading the Newspaper’s ‘Sleeping on the Stones of Unknown Towns’; ‘Reading the Newspaper'
 The artist, who has been standing behind a dealer, regards K with hatred . The artist is standing in front of the dealer, standing with a dealer .
 His hands beat the surface of the water which tears and rips about him . He beat it with his hands beating the surface .
 The white foam, the green depths of the water, is the perfect place to throw a line . The coils leap out over the surface of the surface, leaping into the air .
 His right hand grasps the line that | have thrown him . Pulls him out of the water .
 Norman Mailer thought Kennedy, the sheriff who could have been an outlaw, was the sheriff . Mailer: Kennedy, Kennedy, was a sheriff who may have been outlaws .
 Mailer, who might have relished Kennedy most, even perhaps understood him best, met him only once . Mailer met Kennedy only once.
 Kennedy thought Stevenson was interesting too and began to like seeing him . Kennedy thought he was interesting and liked seeing Stevenson .
 "He abandons, piece by piece, the outside world," he writes . "He puts away the magazines, the cigar is forgotten, the offer of gum is unheard, and he is utterly alone"
 His face, close up, is structurally hard; there is no waste, nothing left over and not put to use . Everything has been enlisted in the cause, whatever it may be, whatever may be .
 His expression is tough, but the toughness seems largely directed toward himself, inward . The toughness seems to be directed toward self-indulgence, for weakness, he says .
 The sadness in his face, by the same token, is not sentimental sadness, which would imply self-pity, but rather, at some level, a resident, melancholy bleakness . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September .
 Vi Kennedy read history and biography and an occasional novel but most of all he loved poetry . Vi Kennedy loved poetry and history, but also loved history .
 The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep Moans round with many voices . Moans of many voices. Moans for many voices in the deep, dark and silent silence .
 Come, my friends, Tis not too late to seek a newer world —and provided title and epigraph for a book he published at the end of 1967 .
 Kennedy was delighted once when he was able to finish a couplet that had slipped Burton’s memory . Kennedy said he was delighted that he had finished the couplet once .
 "They inhabit his face like two beings uninvolved in the general gaiety," says the author of the novel . They inhabit him like two creatures uninvolved with the general .
 Yevtushenko proposed a toast to Robert's completion of his brother’s work . Robert's brother, Robert, completed his brother's work at the end of the day .
 According to the Russian custom, the goblets must be emptied in a single gulp and smashed against the floor . He reminded Kennedy that, according to the custom, it must be empty in one gulp .
 Kennedy: "wives will be wives" Kennedy produced glasses from the kitchen from Ethel's heirlooms . Kennedy, a little embarrassed, said these were Ethel’s . Kennedy: “I’m embarrassed.” Kennedy said, “wives will
 Probably he, too, was superstitious” | doubt it; he was more probably tired or bored . ‘I doubt it,” he said. ‘Probably he was probably tired, bored or bored. Probably he also was tired,’ he said .
 Yevtushenko was the poet whom the Soviet authorities liked sending abroad . The poet was sent abroad by Soviet authorities . He was also sent abroad .
 The American Academy of Poets invited him to the U.S. in the spring of 1967, then received word that the authorities might not permit him to come . He died at the age of 92 .
 Kennedy's intercession was thought that Kennedy’s intercession could help . He sent off a cable at once, and he sent it off at once .
 Voznesensky and Kennedy talked about the frustrations of the young, he says . He also talked about Pasternak, Saint-Exupéry and John Kennedy . He and Kennedy spoke about the young .
 Allen Ginsberg, the bard of the counterculture, chatted with Kennedy about the Soviet poets . Ginsberg later chatted about the poets' work with Kennedy .
 Ginsberg, as Peter Edelman, who was present, recalled that, “when he appeared on a platform with both of them, Yevtushenko had embraced him; but Voznesensky was clearly the more open person because they had kissed deeply and soulf
 Ginsberg, a sweet and obsessed man, had come to explain to Kennedy his intricate theories about drugs, the Narcotics Bureau and the Mafia . Ginsberg was the author of a series of books about the drug trade and Mafia .
 Kennedy wanted to hear Ginsberg on the relations between the flower people and the young political militants . Kennedy already knew about the syndicates . Ginsberg was patron saint for flower people, for whom he was .
 He asked what were the serious possibilities of alliance between ‘hippy’ and ‘black’ groups . He asked if he’d ever tried grass. | was unsure .
 Ginsberg asked whether he had two minutes to hear the Hare Krishna mantra . Ginsberg: "I don't believe in Hare Krishna. It's not a two-minute rule"
 Kennedy said, “You ought to sing it to the guy up the street,” gesturing toward the White House . Kennedy: “I think you should sing it for the guy in the street.”
 Lincoln and Edmund Burke were great statesmen, like Lincoln and Burke, who were also great writers . Then there were those wonderful statesmen like Lincoln, Edmund Burke, and Edmund .
 'I think you are putting into practice that kind of courage and ability that your Brother so subtly praised in his Profiles, and know how to be brave without becoming simple-minded. Well, | do think you're putting it into practice .
 Lowell once asked him where in Shakespeare he would cast Kennedy in Shakespeare, Lowell replied, "I would cast him in Shakespeare" John Kennedy .
 He had died young, leaving in France a son who was murdered and an expeditionary force that was destroyed . He had also died young .
 He meant he had a very difficult career coming from this difficult but very elevated forebear who made it possible . He had to deal with a difficult but difficult forerunner who made his career possible .
 One was refreshed when you wisecracked through the guests, usually somewhat woodenly, hoarsely dry, dry, pure Celt on the eastern seaboard . One of the best places in the world to play in the Irish .
 He could see ample reason for street demonstrations against the war . While he thought it a “bad mistake” to shout down government officials, he said it was a ‘bad mistake .
 In August, McNamara told the Senate Military Affairs Committee that it was militarily pointless to keep bombing the North . McNamara testified without clearing his testimony with the White House .
 The afternoon papers had McNamara leaving Defense to become head of the World Bank . McNamara will take over from the Defense secretary to head the world bank .
 RFK said that RFK had not had any intimation that Johnson had sent his name up for the Bank . RFK: Bob had no intimation of Johnson's interest in the bank . Bob said that Bob had never had intimated that Johnson's name had been sent up for
 He had a general conversation with Johnson about it last spring ... but that was all . He had had a conversation with him last spring, he says .
 President Obama was told by a leak in London that he was on his way out of the White House . Bob Corker expressed incredulity at the President's apparent acquiescence in this .
 Bob would not take the World Bank job and would instead quietly resign from government, he said . Bob said he thought that would finally happen, and that Bob would resign quietly from government .
 We all supposed that McNamara’s dismissal removed the last hope at the summit of government for restraint in the war—a supposition reinforced when Johnson soon announced a leading hawk, Clark Clifford, as the new Secretary of Defense .
 Only McNamara, Kissinger told me in December, had kept negotiations alive . Kissinger: "Only McNamara had kept talks alive" Kissinger: McNamara was only one of the negotiators .
 Kennedy called for hand vote at Catholic girls’ college in November . Kennedy was appalled when a majority wanted more, not less, bombing .
 The United States had originally gone into South Vietnam in order to permit the South Vietnamese to decide their own future, Kennedy said . Kennedy replied that the U.S. originally went into Vietnam to allow the South Vietnam to decide its own future .
 Plainly the South Vietnamese did not like the future held out by the Saigon regime . Plainly they did not want to see the future of Saigon's regime .
 Those who stay in the U.S. "must feel it when we use napalm, when a village is destroyed and civilians are killed," she says .
 "We love our country for what it can be and for the justice it stands for and what we’re going to mean to the next generation," says President Obama . "We're going to be a great nation," says Obama .
 It is not just the land, it is what this country stands for, it's what it stands for. It's not the mountains or the land. It is the country's identity, says President Obama .
 In the summer of 1967 Lowenstein conceived the quixotic enterprise of organizing a movement to dump Johnson . Lowenstein had conceived the idea of organizing an anti-Johnson movement .
 It was, as Jack Newfield observed, rather like Castro and a handful of guerrillas in the Sierra Maestre planning to dump Batista . It was like Castro's plan to dump the Batista, but it was not like Castro .
 It could not succeed without a presidential candidate determined to end the war . And it could not fail without a president determined to ending the war.
 When Lowenstein began his quest for a candidate, liberals had an alternative strategy, advocated by Joseph Rauh . Lowenstein: "When Lowenstein was trying to run for president, he had to think about a candidate for president."
 Robert Kennedy thought that this tactic would only make it easy for Johnson to sidetrack the doves by promising to let them help write the platform . At first, Kennedy thought this tactic only made it easier for him to sidestrack Johnson . Kennedy thought it would make it easier
 He added that Jesse Unruh, the powerful organization Democrat in California, had turned against Johnson . Mayor Daley in Chicago was “very deeply opposed” to the war, the son of his closest friend had recently been killed in Vietnam .
 Around ten-thirty that evening Lowenstein, Newfield and Loeb came by to meet Lowenstein . Lowenstein and Newfield were invited to meet with Loeb at the end of the evening .
 Lowenstein set forth in fervent language his certitude that Johnson could be beaten in the primaries . Lowenstein brought up the peace plank .
 Johnson, Lowenstein said, might even pull out if defeated in the early primaries . Lowenstein: Johnson could pull out of the race if he is defeated .
 Kennedy was too precious a commodity to be expended in a doomed effort, Loeb argued . Loeb and | argued that Kennedy was a precious commodity that should not be expended .
 No one would believe that Alis was doing it because of how he felt about Vietnam and poor people . Alis: "I think Alis doing the right thing, but ... think that someone else will have to be the first to run"
 He dashed around the country, sought out like-minded Democrats, set up local committees, prosecuted the search for a challenger . He set up a local committee to find a challenger and set up committees .
 McGovern said he had been urging Kennedy since 1965 to run against Johnson . McGovern had urged Kennedy to run for president since 1965 .
 He feared that his materialization as a peace candidate against the President might defeat him for the Senate in his still hawkish state . As for himself, he was up for reelection in South Dakota and feared that .
 McCarthy held the dinner table with his eloquent denunciation of the war . McCarthy had held the . table with an eloquent . denunciation . McCarthy . McCarthy was held to the . dinner table .
 McCarthy had been a disappointing senator, especially after the frustration of his vice presidential hopes in 1964 . McCarthy, who had had a brilliant career in the House in the fifties, had been disappointing senator . McCarthy was a disappointed senator .
 He was immensely intelligent and attractive but had come to seem indolent, frivolous, cynical, cynical . He was also unduly responsive to the legislative requests of the Minneapolis-St.S. City Council .
 His concern about the war, though now intense, had come distinctly later than Kennedy's and far later than McGovern's . McGovern’s concern for the war came much later than his concern about it came from Kennedy's .
 He had led the fight in the Senate that day for the abolition of the Subversive Activities Control Board . The board was abolished by Congress .
 In the course of conversation, | passed along McGovern’s arresting bulletin .
 He said, “He’s going to get a lot of support. I can tell you right now, he’ll run very strong in these primaries.” He said .
 The danger, of course, is that Gene will make himself the hero and leader of the anti-war movement . RFK will cast RFK as Johnny-come-lately. The danger is that he will cast himself as Johnny, come-late .
 The hope is that he may increase the fluidity of the situation and draw the Johnson fire, making it possible for RFK to emerge as a less divisive candidate . RFK may be less divisive than LBJ .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of the scenes in the gallery for next week .
 The legend that the Kennedys had never forgiven McCarthy for his nomination of Adlai Stevenson in 1960 was a legend . McCarthy's nomination of Stevenson was a mistake, McCarthy said in 1960 .
 John Kennedy thought McCarthy’s speech was the best speech of the convention . John Kennedy said McCarthy's best speech was McCarthy's .
 The two men, said O’Donnell, “were never soulmates, but the President was a very practical fellow.” He said the two men were “never soulmates” but were ‘real practical”
 In 1961 President Kennedy spoke at a fund-raising dinner in Minneapolis . President Kennedy attended the event in Minneapolis, Minnesota .
 The next morning local Democratic dignitaries proposed to accompany him to mass . The next day he was asked to attend mass by local Democrats .
 Abigail McCarthy, a strong-willed wife, later recalled, “He was interested in where F Scott Fitzgerald had lived and he was frank about his own casual Catholicism,” she said .
 The two men did not know each other well, then or later . Perhaps for that reason, but probably more because he favored Humphrey, he would have declined, if asked, to nominate McCarthy for Vice President .
 He thought McCarthy was undependable and uninvolved . McCarthy was too often absent when needed for a debate or a vote, he said . McCarthy is too cozy on the Finance Committee with special interests .
 McCarthy and Kennedy had been inevitable rivals from the day in 1949 when they first met in the House of Representatives . They were men of the same age, faith, party, heritage, heritage .
 Gene McCarthy was a small-town boy from the upper midwest who attended, and later taught at, a Benedictine college and spent the year in between in a monastery . Kennedy was rich, eastern, secular, glamorous, while McCarthy was rich and eastern .
 McCarthy had made it on his own and, as Galbraith said, simply thought he was intellectually “better qualified than the Kennedys.” McCarthy was intellectually better qualified than any other man in the world .
 McCarthy probably had no greater hostility for Robert Kennedy in 1967 than he had for the rest of the Senate . Yet, for all this, McCarthy had no more hostility for the Kennedy than he did for the other Senate members .
 In March he told James Wechsler that he would be glad to support Kennedy as the strongest candidate against Johnson .
 Had Kennedy told McCarthy that he would go, | have little doubt that McCarthy at this point would have supported him . McCarthy would likely have supported Kennedy's efforts to win the presidency .
 Kennedy, while he respected them on issues, discounted them on politics on politics . Kennedy respected them, but Kennedy said they should be respected on issues . Kennedy: "I respect them. But I don't like them. They respect them, respect them"
 He believed them inexperienced, emotional and, like all staff people, institutionally committed to make their boss President . He said they were committed to making him President .
 The general feeling, put most forcefully by Theodore Sorensen, was that Kennedy should wait for 1972 . "The general feeling" was that JFK should wait until 1972, says Theodore .
 Kenneth O'Donnell, however, said that Johnson was a bully and a coward who would run away from a fight . Kenneth O’Donnell said that he was a coward and a bully who would never fight .
 O’Donnell soon came privately to believe that Kennedy should run in 1968 . He felt that only Kennedy could make the decision and that meetings about it were a waste of time .
 He began, curiously, by saying that he would advise against his trying in 1968 in 1968 .
 If President Johnson were reelected, he would devote all his attention to making sure Kennedy did not succeed him . If reelected he would spend his life trying to prevent Kennedy from becoming president .
 When there was a tide in the affairs of men, it should be taken at the flood, says George W. Bush . The president of the United States should not have waited for a long time .
 People can forgive mistakes, ambition, etc., but they never get over distrust . People forgive mistakes and ambition, but they can't forgive distrust, she says .
 On November 3, Fred Dutton, an equally valued adviser, took the opposite side . On Nov 3, in another long letter, Fred . Dutton wrote to the White House, a valued adviser . On November .
 The polls proved Johnson's weakness, not Kennedy's strength, says Dutton . Dutton: Polls proved Johnson’s weakness, rather than Kennedy’S. strength .
 In domestic politics | have never thought he is a fighter at all in a personal crunch . His toughness is of the locker room or cloakroom kind, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Of course, you might “decide LB] is so dangerous and Vietnam so bad that he must be defeated and a Democratic election blocked regardless of who the GOP nominee may be. Of course .
 If you were to enter at some later point, there might well be serious resentment on the ground that you were a Johnny-come-lately trying to cash in after brave Eugene McCarthy had done the real fighting . Eugene McCarthy .
 As for the theory that Kennedy’s entry would split the Democrats and elect Nixon, this prospect, | argued, contained its own cure . “| think that you could beat LB] in the primaries,” said Kennedy . If this led the Republicans to nominate Nixon,
 He is the one Republican candidate who would reunite even a divided and embittered Democratic party, Hillary Clinton says .
 State leaders might ask McCarthy to run in the interests of party unity . Perhaps “as McCarthy beats LBJ in primaries,” state leaders may ask him to run, perhaps in the interest of unity .
 Kennedy would have advised McCarthy to say that he did not expect to win in New Hampshire and that he was entering in order to give Democrats a chance to discuss the issues . Kennedy would also advise McCarthy to tell him that he didn't think he would win .
 He should not talk about Vietnam very much, since he has all the peace votes anyway, anyway . He should be careful not to mention Vietnam again, especially in Vietnam .
 Kennedy doubted that Johnson would get more than 20,000 votes in New Hampshire . Kennedy thought McCarthy had a “good chance” of actually taking New Hampshire, he said .
 It was one of those hopeless encounters where two men meet, not much liking one another . One was too proud to seek advice, the other too embarrassed to volunteer it .
 The meeting confirmed Kennedy’s belief that McCarthy would be no more serious as a Candidate than he had latterly been as a senator . Kennedy: "The meeting confirmed McCarthy would not be a serious candidate for president .
 McCarthy made his formal announcement on November 30, when he made it formal announcement . Kennedy was asked whether he might not take over McCarthy's movement . McCarthy says Kennedy is not a candidate for president .
 Ted Kennedy, Ted Sorensen, Dick Goodwin, Fred Dutton, Pierre Salinger and myself. Present, in addition to Bobby and Bill, were Ted Kennedy . Ted Kennedy and Bill Clinton attended the memorial service .
 The serious discussion began with my putting the case for his running in 1968 . I said... that if McCarthy did moderately well in the primaries, he might expose Johnson without establishing himself; that state leaders would understand that their own tickets would go down if LB) were at the head of the
 The dissension in the Democratic party, | said, would tempt the Republicans to nominate Nixon, who would be the easiest candidate to beat . Nixon would be easily defeated by the GOP, according to a former aide .
 Dick Goodwin argued that running in the primaries would be the best way to avoid McCarthy's withdrawal . Goodwin also argued that a candidate should enter the primaries, assuming a McCarthy withdrawal, and carry the fight through to the convention . Goodwin said that running at once would be a way of avoiding McCarthy
 RFK then said that the talk up to this point had revolved around himself and the party . RFK said the talk had been focused on himself and his party .
 He was not sure whether the country or the world could survive five more years of Johnson . He said he was unsure whether the world or the country would survive .
 Ted Kennedy’s view was that LB] is sure of reelection and that Bobby was sure of nomination in 1972 . Ted Kennedy said LB LBJ was ‘sure of reelection’ and 'sure of nomination’ for 1972 .
 Dick suggested LB would use all his wiles and powers to prevent RFK's nomination . Dick suggested that LB]. if reelected, LB]. would use his powers to stop RFK from being nominated .
 Ted felt that he would try this, but his capacity to do damage would be limited, he said . Ted said he would do this, 'but his capacity was limited' Ted said: 'Ted's capacity for damage is limited'
 To do anything now, Ted said, would be to jeopardize, if not destroy, Bobby’s future . Ted said anything now would be jeopardizing, if they were to do so . To do so would jeopardize Bobby's future, Ted says .
 It would be an unpopular step within the party, but no one should underestimate the amount of sentiment in the country, and this would still be there in 1972 . It would not be the first time the party has been in power since 1972 .
 Ted Sorensen thought it would be futile to go into the primaries and impossible to buck up the McCarthy effort without implicating the Kennedys in his failure . Ted Sorennsen: "It would be impossible to go in the primaries" Ted said it was impossible to
 Ted S. Pierre questioned the inevitability of LBJ’s reelection . Pierre, who said afterward that he agreed philosophically with me, said he agreed with me and politically with Ted . Pierre .
 Bobby said he was by no means sure he would be any stronger in 1972 than he is now . Bobby said that he was no longer sure he was any stronger than he was in 1972 .
 He would have been around five years longer, taken more positions, estranged more interests, gained more enemies . He would also have taken more interests and gained enemies .
 A series of primary victories, he said, would have an impact on other delegations and change the picture . He said a series of primaries would have a significant impact on the map .
 He would in a way like to get into the fight, and he also is deeply fearful of what another Johnson term might do to the world . He would like to fight back, but he also fears what another term will do to world .
 He said practically he did not Suppose he would have much chance of getting the nomination, though he thought, if he did, he could beat Nixon . But he said he thought he would beat Nixon if he ran for the nomination .
 He added that people in whom he had confidence were strongly opposed to him doing anything . He said he had no confidence in doing anything, nor did many people in the party for it .
 No final decisions had to be made for a few more weeks, he said . But he said no final decisions were made until the end of the year . He said everyone should keep on brooding .
 To date, however, he has kept it as ‘Phase I’—random guerrilla attacks . He has kept his campaign as 'Phase I' -- random guerrilla attacks.
 He is an arrogant little schmuck, but nobody should underestimate his intelligence . Nobody should underestimate him, but he is intelligent, says CNN's John Sutter .
 For Kennedy the decision posed moral as well as political questions . Vil Vil Vil for Kennedy: For Kennedy, the decision was moral as a matter of political questions. Vil Vil For Kennedy: "For Kennedy, it was a moral and political question." Vil Vil
 He deeply believed that Johnson's war, his neglect of poverty and racial justice and his violent personality were disasters for the republic . He also believed that he was responsible for the war, neglecting poverty, racial justice .
 "If Kennedy does not run in 1968, the best side of his character will die," he says . Kennedy's best side will die, he says, if he doesn't run for president in 1968 . Kennedy: "If you run for the presidency, you will never be able to
 He will kill it every time he butchers his conscience and makes a speech for Johnson next autumn, he says . Johnson will kill his conscience if he makes speeches for him next year .
 It will die every time a stranger quotes his own words back to him on the value of courage . It will also die when someone quotes him on courage and courage .
 Newfield was prepared for expostulation on his next meeting with Kennedy . Newfield is prepared for the next meeting .
 BAD BoBBY. will back the Democratic candidate in 1968 . expect that will be President Johnson .
 We think we’re going to have a difficult time explaining this to ourselves .
 In the question period a student observed that the young people had come because they thought Kennedy was a man of courage and integrity .
 James Rowe to Fred Dutton and Edward Kennedy thought his entry would be an act of hara-kiri . Edward Kennedy and James Rowe thought it would be a surprise entry to the country .
 The intellectuals who liked to pose as professionals thought likewise . John Roche to Theodore Sorensen thought likewise, as did John Roche . The intellectuals thought they were professionals .
 If Robert Kennedy yielded to the temptation, Alsop wrote, as Theodore Roosevelt had yielded in 1912, “he will destroy himself.” If he did, he would “destroy himself,’s own cousin Theodore Roosevelt wrote in 1912 .
 Only one professional was urging him on; and this, Kennedy recognized, was for Unruh's reasons as much as for Kennedy's . Fortunately, Joe said, his “astute brother’s Edward and his ‘wise adviser” Sorensen were providing
 McGovern called Gaylord Nelson, Frank Church, Quentin Burdick of North Dakota, and several midwestern governors, including Harold Hughes of lowa. North Dakota . McGovern also called several governors of midwestern states .
 Kennedy knew the resources of the office, and he feared the desperation of the incumbent . Kennedy knew that he was in danger of losing his seat in the House of Representatives .
 In the course of his ruminations he expressed a desire to consult Walter Lippmann . He took him to the Lippman apartment for a drink on a cold January afternoon .
 After some chat Kennedy said he had to decide about the Presidency . Kennedy said: "I have to decide what I want to do about it"
 "He set forth his concern about the war, the cities, the poor, his sense that we were drifting toward disaster, his conviction that so many things might be done," he said .
 Four more years of Johnson, he said, would be a “catastrophe” for the country . So would four years of Nixon, he added, as would four more of Johnson and Nixon .
 He could not see how he could overcome the advantage that Johnson had through his command of foreign policy . And he couldn't see a way to overcome that .
 Kennedy thought nothing would restrain Johnson from manipulating the war in whatever way it would help him politically . Kennedy thought he could escalate, deescalate, pause, bomb, stall, negotiate, as the domestic political situation required .
 On the way to the airport afterward, Kennedy said he had washed 1972 out of his calculations . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what happened to 1972," he said .
 He could not make decisions now in terms of consequences four years from now, he says . He says: "He could not ... make decisions ... four years later, four years after now"
 Melina Mercouri, the Greek actress, swept down and asked him whether he wanted to go down in history as the senator who waited for a safer day . She asked him in her best histrionic style: "I want him to be remembered as the man who waits for a
 The polls were turning against him too, as Kennedy hovered on the brink of challenge . The polls are also turning against the former president .
 Kennedy observed bleakly to Dorothy Schiff that he had “a lot of enemies’— business, labor, the newspapers, even most of the politicians,” he said . Kennedy: “Business, labor and the newspapers are all the enemies I have’"
 The taciturn O’Donnell rarely offered advice to Kennedy unless directly asked . O'Donnell's advice, while lavishly offered, lacked the professional imprimatur .
 Ethel Smith, Jean Smith, Goodwin, Schlesinger and others were telling Kennedy it could be put together . Against the massed professional judgment only amateurs told Kennedy it was possible to do .
 North Korea seized the U.S. intelligence ship Pueblo on January 23 . The ship was seized by the North Koreans on January 24 .
 It was one of those rally-around-the-flag moments, and it renewed Kennedy’s apprehension about the power foreign affairs conferred on the Presidency . It renewed Kennedy's apprehension about foreign affairs .
 That evening we dined with the Kennedys and the Benno Schmidts at the Caravelle . That evening they dined on the Carvelle.
 Robert went through the familiar arguments— ruthlessness, personal vendetta, no political support, lack of popularity in the country, etc. etc. Robert said, "Ruthless" and "personal vendetta" were the reasons for his decision .
 Ethel said, “Bob, you’ve got to get that idea out of your head; you're always talking as though people don’t like you.” Bob said, "You’re always talking about people don't like you."
 John Glenn, Mike Nichols, Rod Steiger, Rod Stiger, George and Elizabeth Stevens, among others . John Glenn and Mike Nichols among those at his memorial service .
 'I imagine that he did not want to go over it all again with those he had prepared to disappoint. Obviously we were not about to settle anything,' he said . 'Obviously we're not going to settle things. Obviously I'm not going for it,' he added .
 Mankiewicz, hoping to salvage something from the wreckage, persuaded him to substitute “foreseeable” for “conceivable” before releasing the statement . The statement was released by the White House .
 Dolan said he could not vote for Johnson and requested sabbatical leave for the campaign . He had to do something about Johnson and the war, he told Kennedy, and, if Kennedy would not run, he was going to do it some other way .
 Mankiewicz, regarding life as uncertain, put his trust in the unforeseeable . He put his faith in the unknown .
 Lowenstein said the honor and direction of the country were at stake . Lowenstein: "Honour, direction and direction" are at stake in the nation's future .
 A political leader, as Burke pointed out long ago, differed from a moral philosopher . “The latter has only the general view of society; the former, the statesman, has a number of circumstances to combine with those general ideas, and to take into his consideration.”
 Kennedy felt that Kennedy had not lost sight of principles and that circumstances were changing every day . A statesman is to be guided by circumstances, he said .
 Antiwar activists said to hell with it and set to work for Eugene McCarthy . McCarthy was a hero of the McCarthy era . McCarthy died in a house fire explosion in 1944 . McCarthy's supporters say he was the only person to get the job done .
 Even while Robert Kennedy was breakfasting at the National Press Club, the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese unleashed a surprise assault on South Vietnam, convulsing thirty provincial capitals and invading the American embassy in Saigon .
 No doubt the attackers suffered grievous losses and failed to achieve major objectives . No doubt they failed to reach major objectives, but failed to do so much more .
 Lyndon Johnson's credit with millions of Americans remains intact . But they destroyed what remained of his credit with many of them .
 Tet showed that the administration had deceived either the U.S. people or itself about the military prospect . Tet showed the administration was deceived either by the American people or by the military .
 Clark Clifford led to a basic re-examination of Vietnam by the new Secretary of Defense, Clark Clifford, who turned out to be not such a hawk .
 Richard Goodwin, who had done the original draft, and Walinsky had proposed alternate passages . Here and there Richard Goodwin and Walter Walinsky suggested alternate passages of the book .
 "He put in nothing, as he had done so often, to preserve his relations with the administration," he said . "I put nothing in nothing to preserve my relations," he added .
 Gallup poll taken before Tet showed 61 percent hawks as against 23 percent doves . 70 percent wanted to continue the bombing .
 Kennedy said to me, “It’s just like Hitler—not a very, good comparison—but | mean the way people who think themselves good and decent become accomplices,” he says . Kennedy: ‘It's like Hitler, but it's just like
 Escalation, he said, had been our invariable response to difficulty in Vietnam—and had invariably failed . Escalating, he added, was an "involvement" that had always failed in Vietnam .
 For the first time in public he struck directly, and bitingly, at Johnson . The first time he had struck directly at Johnson in public, he struck at him .
 The claim that we had to fight in Vietnam to protect our own security reminded him of the justifications made by the Germans and Russians made when they overran Poland and the Baltic states at the start of the Second World War .
 In his most intense passage he returned to the question of moral responsibility . In the most intense part of his book, he wrote about the responsibility of moral morality .
 He was willful, impervious to advice, scornful of associates . But he was also strong, cool, slashing and gallant, he said .
 His choices now were to endorse McCarthy, which he could not bring himself to do, to remain neutral, or to enter himself . He could either endorse McCarthy or remain neutral or enter himself, he says .
 Within a week of the National Press Club breakfast he was once again in palpable indecision . The president was in palpable concerns with the White House .
 Jacqueline Kennedy wrote out excerpts from William Graham Sumner’s scathing anti-imperialist essay “The Conquest of the United States by Spain” and sent them to him . Kennedy: “I am not a politician. I am a person who should not be
 Even Robert McNamara concluded that Johnson was no longer capable of objective judgment . Even McNamara .
 Goodwin and Edward Kennedy agreed that Robert’s chances of winning the nomination were about one in five . Goodwin and Kennedy: Robert's chance of winning nomination was about 1 in 5 . Goodwin: Robert would be a great candidate for president in 2016 .
 Goodwin reported to Robert Goodwin that “clearly all your instincts push you to this direction.” They agreed too, Goodwin reported that ‘clearly, all your instinct push you’s this direction .
 Kerner Commission submitted a powerful report in February 1968 . The Kerner report was published by the Kerner commission in 1968 .
 Kennedy was skeptical when the commission was established, but was impressed by its report . Kennedy was impressed with the report .
 He spent the late evening with Hughes and the Democratic governors of Missouri, Kansas, and North Dakota .
 The governors criticized Johnson and doubted whether he could carry their states . The governors were skeptical of his ability to win their states.
 Kennedy went on to California. "No governor promised any support," he said . Kennedy's trip was obliquely encouraged .
 Cesar Chavez was fasting in penance for violence provoked by his union’s struggle for survival . Chavez had been fasting for a year to protest violence against his union's struggle to survive .
 The fast was ending, and his friends wanted Kennedy to be with him at the Mass of Thanksgiving . Now, he has been with them since the fast ended, and they wanted him to attend .
 A television Cameraman said, “This is perhaps the most ridiculous remark I’ve ever made in my life’s life.” A television cameraman said he was shocked by the remark . The Senator made the comment .
 When we are really honest with ourselves, we must admit that our lives are all that really belong to us . When we must be honest, our lives must be our own .
 It is my deepest belief that only by giving our lives do we find life . I am convinced that the truest act of courage, the strongest act of manliness is to sacrifice ourselves for others in a totally nonviolent struggle for justice .
 He would definitely run if McCarthy could be persuaded to withdraw after New Hampshire . McCarthy could run for president if McCarthy withdraws from the race . McCarthy has said he would run for the White House if McCarthy withdrew .
 He had already asked his brother to notify McCarthy of his intention . IV He had asked him to notify his brother that he was planning to kill McCarthy . IV
 McCarthy feared McCarthy might somehow turn the news against his brother . Perhaps he feared McCarthy would somehow turn his brother against him . McCarthy's brother's brother was killed in 2011 .
 He then called Goodwin, who had joined McCarthy’s New Hampshire campaign, to ask him to join him . Goodwin then called McCarthy and McCarthy's New Hampshire team . Goodwin is the son of McCarthy and Goodwin is a former New Hampshire senator .
 Goodwin, who felt sufficiently under suspicion as a Kennedy man, was reluctant intermediary . Goodwin was reluctant to act as a reluctant intermediary for the Kennedy family . Goodwin felt under suspicion, but was not under suspicion .
 McCarthy says he only wants one term as President . McCarthy said he would only want to serve one term . McCarthy: "Tell him to support me."
 Since Tet there had been a stunning rise in the intensity of his support, especially in the universities and in the liberal community, he said .
 Joseph Rauh, who had already endorsed McCarthy, said Kennedy would make a stronger candidate and a better President . He said he wanted to minimize an anti-Kennedy explosion among those who, in his season of vacillation, had turned to McCarthy .
 If Kennedy came out for McCarthy in New Hampshire, Rauh said, this would make it easier for pro-Kennedy people around McCarthy to urge his subsequent withdrawal .
 Kennedy asked me to meet him later in the evening at “21."" | went to a small dinner for Anthony Eden at Hamilton Fish Armstrong’s fine old house on West Tenth Street . Kennedy, who was speaking that night in the Bronx, was speaking . Kennedy was speaking in
 The President explained away all criticism as based on personal or political antagonism . The President said all criticism was based on political or personal .
 "He is willing to take on people like Goldwater and Nixon, to whom he feels superior," he says . "He feels superior. He feels superior."
 Moyers: Kennedy doesn't like confrontations when he doesn't feel superior . Moyers says Kennedy doesn’t like confrontation when he does not feel superior, but he likes confrontations .
 Moyers said he thought it would be a great mistake for him to go . He said he could not win; that he would alienate the party; that, if he did nothing, he would be the inevitable successor . Moyers: "If he did not do nothing, if
 McCarthy had won 42. percent of the New Hampshire vote . Because of oddities in the selection system, 20 of 24 delegates were awarded to McCarthy . McCarthy won 42 percent of New Hampshire's vote .
 Kennedy said, “Of course he feels that he gave me my chance to make the try, that | didn’t and that he has earned the right to go ahead.” Kennedy said. “I’m not going to blame him. | can�
 He has done a great job in opening the situation up, suggesting that he might endorse McCarthy on the theory that he could not conceivably get the nomination . But he could, with the help of Bobby, show how vulnerable he was .
 McCarthy played out his hand, he would be obliged to endorse Kennedy . With the professionals now persuaded Johnson was a loser, the nomination would inexorably go to Kennedy . Then, when McCarthy played . McCarthy played a . hand, it would be . Then McCarthy would be compelled to endorse
 He cites again the hypocrisy of saying, or seeming to say, that he wanted McCarthy for President . He was not impressed, citing again the hypocritical of saying .
 | gave him McCarthy's phone number in New Hampshire . We departed, perplexed and rather dejected .
 Later they had a conversation—friendly, he told me, but not productive . Later, he said, "I'm not sure what's going to happen"
 The country is in such difficulty and | believe headed for even more that it almost fills one with despair . It is almost impossible to believe that the country is not going to be able to cope .
 Dick Goodwin and Arthur Schlesinger have been against my running. But everyone who have respect with the exception of Dick Goodwin, have supported me running for president .
 "My basic inclination and reaction was to try, and let the future take care of itself," he said . "I'm not going to try. Let's let it happen," he added. "But I'm going to do it, and it's a good thing for me to
 Bob McNamara, Bill Moyers and Bob Moyers said he would not run for president if he ran for president in 1968 . But the prophecies of future doom were made to him by McNamara and Moyers, and politicians’ almost unanimous feeling that my running would bring about
 Johnson is also going to do nothing about the riot panel report . But the last two days have seen Rusk before the Foreign Relations Committee, New Hampshire primary .
 If not off in the California primary Ethel and Ethel will be coming to Ireland at the end of May . If not, they will travel to Ireland in May .
 The Irish government is dedicating a memorial to President Kennedy on his birthday May 29th . The memorial will be dedicated to Kennedy in Ireland .
 He congratulated McCarthy on his success and told him he was re-evaluating his own situation . He told McCarthy he was reappraising his situation .
 McCarthy said he had a "perfect right" to go ahead but didn't intend to get out himself, Kennedy says . McCarthy accepted that, Kennedy said, “had accepted that’s said he’d accept that, but that he did not intend to . get out
 Ted Kennedy, looking a bit unhappy, crisply set forth various alternatives . Ted Kennedy: "Total inaction to total participation" is one of the alternatives .
 Sorensen proposed that Kennedy continue speaking on the issues but remain neutral as between McCarthy and Johnson . Kennedy would continue to speak on the issue but be neutral .
 Pierre Salinger suggested that Kennedy enter some primaries and support McCarthy in those he did not enter . Salinger said this would make Bobby look like a political opportunist and make him look like an opportunist .
 Burke Marshall felt that Kennedy had to enter all the primaries he could . Burke Marshall said Kennedy should be allowed to run in all primaries .
 Robert had taped an interview earlier that day with Walter Cronkite . Robert taped the interview . Walter had taped that day . Robert's interview later that day was canceled .
 Discussing his reasons for reassessment, he stopped only a hairline short of a declaration . Discusses his reassessment of his decision to re-evaluate his decision .
 Maybe it would be better to wait for 1972, when a hundred thousand Americans will be killed in Vietnam; but don’t think so . Hell, maybe it would also be better for 1972 .
 He had told Mayor Daley that he had no choice but to challenge Johnson if there were no change in the war .
 Daley spoke of getting the President to appoint a commission of eminent outsiders to review Vietnam policy . Daley had spoken of getting a commission to review the Vietnam policy of the U.S.
 Kennedy was seeing Clark Clifford about this the next morning at 11.30pm ET . Kennedy was also seeing Clifford the next day at eleven .
 Daley was unlikely progenitor, but he disliked the war and had mentioned the idea to Kennedy in Chicago on the day in February Kennedy had blasted the Vietnam policy . Daley died in 1968 .
 On the Monday before the New Hampshire primary he had discussed it with the President . On the day before the primary, he said he had talked about it with President Barack Obama .
 Sorensen, to general amusement, received a message to call the White House . During the meeting in the Smith apartment on Wednesday, he got a message from the president .
 Johnson, he was told, was interested and wanted a list of possible names . Johnson, Johnson, was told he was interested, and wanted to name him .
 What Kennedy really thought of it | do not know . suppose he would have readily traded his candidacy for a guaranteed end to American involvement in Vietnam .
 Dutton, O’Donnell and |Donnell thought Johnson would surrender control over foreign policy to an outside group . But it was inconceivable—or so Dutton and O'Donnell thought— that Johnson would relinquish control to the group .
 He could not appear to reject an overture that purported both to unify the party and move toward peace . But he could not seem to reject the overture .
 One way to correct the policy would be for Johnson to become a candidate, he says . The other is to persuade Johnson to change the policy .
 Clifford said at once that Johnson could not possibly announce that his Vietnam policy was a failure . Clifford said that Johnson's Vietnam policy would be a failure. Clifford said he could not . Johnson said he would not announce that Vietnam policy had been a failure, Clifford said .
 If Kennedy were counting on the war to get him the nomination, he might be ‘grievously disappointed” as events developed, he said .
 If Kennedy somehow got the nomination, it would so divide the party as to be valueless . And, if Kennedy somehow . somehow got . the nomination . It would be so much divided that it would be worth nothing to Democrats .
 McGovern hosted a series of periodic luncheons held by a group of liberal Democrats who had served together in the House in the 1950s . McGovern was host for one of the lunches held by the liberal Democrats .
 McCarthy had planned to celebrate McCarthy’s success in New Hampshire . This time they had planned a celebration of McCarthy's success in the state . McCarthy was elected to New Hampshire in 2010 .
 McCarthy had not shown up; so, when Kennedy called, they invited him instead . McCarthy was invited to a dinner at Kennedy's request, but he didn't show up .
 Thompson, Metcalf, Udall and Udall said he should Campaign for McCarthy in Wisconsin, the next primary primary .
 Kennedy said, “Gene McCarthy’s not competent to be President” if it were McGovern who had gone into New Hampshire, that would have been different . McGovern would not have gone to New Hampshire .
 Kennedy launched into an impassioned account of the war, racial divisions, the cities, Udall says . Then, in ‘impassioned way,” he said, “in rather anImpassioned’ way, he said . Kennedy: “I
 The Wise Men rejected the proposition because, “no matter how the arrangement was handled, it would still appear to be a political deal” Johnson could not appoint Kennedy to such a commission without causing resentment on the Hill . They all agreed in rejecting the proposition .
 Clifford asked Kennedy whether it would make any difference if he himself were not a member of the group . Clifford so informed Kennedy, who asked if it would be any difference . Clifford said it would not make a difference if Kennedy were not in the group, Kennedy said . Clifford then informed Kennedy
 Clifford thought his removal from the list would make no difference . Clifford thought, since the main objection was the appearance of a political deal, his removal would make it no difference to his removal . Clifford: "I'm sure it's a good thing that I'm not being removed from the
 Kennedy: "So long as Lyndon B Johnson was President our Vietnam policy would consist of only more war, more troops, more killing and more senseless destruction"
 To many, however, it looked as if he was deciding to enter only after McCarthy had shown the way in New Hampshire . McCarthy won the New Hampshire primary in 2012 .
 Kennedy managed to pull a group of reporters into a side room at the end of the night . Kennedy's staff and Allard Lowenstein were also there .
 Sorensen and Walinsky had already written announcement statements . Walinsky is expected to announce his resignation at the end of the year .
 Walinsky and Greenfield regarded the Sorensen draft as pontifical and righteous . Greenfield and Walinsky regarded the draft as Pontifical . The draft draft was drafted by the government .
 Kennedy would have been a presidential candidate in the 1960s . But the reaction to the prospect of a Kennedy candidacy had made him more anxious than ever about conciliating McCarthy people .
 Edward Kennedy was on his way to meet McCarthy in Green Bay, Wisconsin, with a proposal for a joint KennedyMcCarthy effort . As we talked, Kennedy was meeting McCarthy in Wisconsin .
 Together Kennedy and McCarthy could amass more anti-Johnson delegates than McCarthy could by himself . Kennedy could win more delegates by amassing more than he did by himself. McCarthy could win a majority of delegates in 1964 .
 With the blessing of Blair Clark, McCarthy’s Campaign manager, Goodwin, who was still with McCarthy, had pursued the idea with Edward Kennedy . Goodwin had been with McCarthy's campaign manager when he met with Kennedy .
 McCarthy told his wife nothing about any meeting with Ted Kennedy and went off to bed . McCarthy seemed to his wife “preoccupied and depressed,” according to her . McCarthy told her nothing about the meeting with Kennedy .
 Abigail McCarthy learned of Kennedy's imminent arrival, she invaded her husband’s room . She invaded the room when she learned of the arrival .
 She trusted neither Goodwin nor Clark, who had gone to Harvard with John Kennedy, nor Clark . Goodwin's attachment to the Kennedys was notorious, but Clark had gone Harvard with Kennedy .
 Kennedy started to open his briefcase and show the plan for a coordinated campaign . Kennedy: "We are going to do a lot of things we can do to win the election"
 He sardonically proposed that Robert Kennedy enter primaries in Louisiana, Florida and West Virginia . Kennedy's supporters say he should be allowed to run for president .
 It was Edward Kennedy looking for Sorensen . Edward Kennedy asked how it had gone with McCarthy. McCarthy had been killed in a car crash .
 An hour or so later | was awakened again, this time by Robert Kennedy, wandering in rather gloomily in pajamas .
 He can’t possibly win, so you will be the certain inheritor of his support, he says . He looked at me stonily and said, “I can't do that.” He said .
 Edward Kennedy, Sorensen and vanden Heuvel were at the breakfast table at the time . He stayed a moment longer, then left the room .
 The morning sun was glinting through the French windows, and sounds of small children enlivened the house . But the atmosphere around the table was somber .
 Vanden Heuvel and | proposed that, as an interim measure, he come out for McCarthy . McCarthy is accused of sexual misconduct in the wake of a sexual assault scandal .
 "Both Teds thought this might be preferable to him declaring for himself," he said . His impression was that both Teds think this might not be preferable .
 He said, "Look, fellows, | can’t do that. | can't come out for McCarthy. He said . He said: "Look . fellows, . can't do that." McCarthy . said, ""Look, fellowers, can't . do that"
 There must be some other course besides endorsing McCarthy or running himself . McCarthy is not running for president in 2016 .
 "If we discuss it any longer, it will shake his confidence and put him on the defensive," says the former Manchester United star .
 Robert Kennedy asked me to stop worrying his brother about the Bay of Pigs . But all | could think of was was a conversation seven years before in the same house . Robert Kennedy told me he would not worry his brother .
 We reviewed the statement as redrafted by Sorensen in light of the Green Bay fiasco .
 The announcement took place in the caucus room in the Old Senate Office Building, where John Kennedy at the same age had announced his candidacy eight years before . Kennedy's announcement was made in the same room where Kennedy announced eight years ago .
 He was trusting his instincts at last, and those who loved him all felt freer . He was relying on his instincts, he said .
 John Kennedy’s carefully prepared quest eight years earlier . Except for the scene of announcement, it bore no resemblance to the Kennedy's .
 Robert Kennedy had no campaign staff, no national organization, no delegates, almost no promises of support . Robert Kennedy's campaign had no staff, national organization and no delegates .
 At the end, all the advisers around the breakfast table at Hickory Hill, even those who had favored his running, were against his going ahead at that particular moment and that particular way .
 If by any chance Kennedy got the nomination, "We can beat that little S.0.0," he said . "We're going to win the nomination. We're not going to lose it. We can win it," he joked .
 There are many who liked his brother — as Bobby will find out — but who don't like him . There are also many who didn't like his brother, Bobby will learn .
 We may find ourselves in a 1964 Goldwater situation if Bobby tears the party apart . Bobby Nixon could be the next President of the United States .
 This iS particularly the view expressed by Wayne Morse and Abe Ribicoff . The iS iS is concerned about the future of the technology industry .
 Even Gruening, even Morse, were unwilling in March 1968 to come out against Johnson . Gruening and Morse were the two brave originals of the anti-Vietnam fight .
 Organization Democrats, like Mayor Daley, automatically rallied to the President . President Barack Obama is a Democrat in Chicago .
 Harold Hughes of lowa, so eloquently inveighing against Johnson only a few nights before, fell into a deep silence . Harold Hughes was so eloquent that he fell silent.
 The angriest reaction came naturally enough from the supporters of McCarthy . McCarthy's supporters were quick to slam the former Manchester City boss's decision .
 Kennedy’s problem was a problem for Kennedy, but they hoped to influence their own candidate toward a coordinated anti-Johnnson campaign . Kennedy's campaign is a coordinated effort to defeat Johnnson .
 Kennedy understood their problem too, after all, he had caused it, and did not press . Kennedy understood the problem too .
 The movement that has made Senator McCarthy its symbol exemplifies rationality, courage, morality, morality . McCarthy exemplifies the movement that's made him its symbol . The movement exemplifies rational, courage and morality, it says .
 In one day, he managed to confirm the worst things his enemies have ever said about him . The former president confirmed that he had confirmed those things in one day .
 We can see him now working for Joe McCarthy, tapping phones of tax dodgers, setting a spy on Adlai Stevenson at the UN, sending good loyal Arthur Schlesinger to fall upon William Manchester in the alleys of the American Historical Association .
 To this historian it seemed a curious doctrine that priority in entering a political competition conferred the moral right to be the only liberal candidate . The historian says it seemed to be a curious policy that prioritised in entering political competition .
 McCarthy beat an incumbent Democratic President in New Hampshire and then went on to win every major primary . McCarthy is a Democrat with stronger liberal credentials than McCarthy . One recalled that sixteen years before, McCarthy won every major New Hampshire primary .
 He came to the convention as the certified people’s choice . He led on the first two ballots .
 If anyone had ever ‘earned’ the right to exclusive liberal support, one supposed, it had been Estes Kefauver in 1952 .
 The Democratic organization put across a candidate who had not entered a single primary primary . But at the convention the Democratic organization had put across the candidate . The candidate was not a candidate for a primary .
 Most liberals went to Adlai Stevenson without moral qualms . Despite Kefauver’s priority, most liberals went for Stevenson . Despite his priority, Stevenson was the first African-American senator to be elected to Congress .
 Kennedy missed a single primary primary . Now liberals were complaining bitterly because Kennedy had missed the single primary .
 Kennedy made one last attempt to explain himself on Meet the Press the day after his announcement . Kennedy made a final attempt to defend his decision to leave the White House .
 Conservative Kansas likely backed the war and detested the rebel young . Conservative Kansas presumably backed the fight . The war was likely to have been won by conservatives .
 When he changed planes at Kansas City, Missouri, a cheering crowd broke through the barriers to get near him .
 Later that night, at Topeka, “they tore at Robert Kennedy,” wrote Jimmy Breslin . ‘They tore at him,’ he wrote .
 The stories about the Vietnam commission had misrepresented the differences between himself and Johnson, he said . He said the stories about his role in Vietnam were misrepresented by the stories he wrote .
 He jabbed the air with clenched fist, his voice intense and controlled . The actor jabbed his fist in the air, jabbing his fist into the air as he spoke .
 Kennedy said to Breslin, "You can hear the fabric ripping" Kennedy said on the plane east Kennedy said, "I can't believe the fabric is ripping." Kennedy said he was flying east from New York .
 If we don't get out of this war, | don’t know what these young people are going to do, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I’m not going to be able to get back into this war. I’
 On television the tumultuous crowds frightened people for whom the pictures on the screen evoked the riots of the summer before . On television, people were frightened by the chaos of the riots .
 Kennedy’s playing on his audiences by rhetorical excess . Some were also repelled by what they regarded as what they saw as mk. Laughter . Kennedy's playing on audiences by . rhetorical excess.
 He had got it into his head that the Saigon government was not drafting its eighteen-year-olds . He continued saying this after Saigon had changed its policy .
 Kennedy wrote him after his Nashville attack on Johnson: "It is a little early in the campaign for that. So perhaps was Kennedy?"
 The press agitation over this phrase was unfairly blamed on Walinsky; it had actually come from material sent along by Goodwin . Goodwin sent the phrase along with material from Walinsky . Goodwin: "Pomposity" is a sign of pomposality .
 Of course Johnson and his Vietnam policy had called upon the darker impulses of the American spirit . Johnson and Vietnam policy called upon darker impulses, the author says .
 The very day Kennedy announced his candidacy Lieutenant William Calley and Company C had yielded to precisely such impulses in My Lai . The very same day Calley announced he would run for president in Vietnam, the very day .
 A candidate without organization or delegates had no choice but to demonstrate irresistible popular appeal . A candidate with no organization or delegate had . no choice . But he showed irresistible appeal, the candidate would have had to demonstrate .
 A half hour of police pushing and the crowd pushing back and Kennedy trying to smile while they pulled his hair and scratched his face . Kennedy tried to smile as the police pulled him down and scratched him up .
 He had gone ahead that Saturday morning at Hickory Hill surrounded by advisers exuding gloom . The president had gone into office surrounded by gloom .
 He had thereafter been savagely attacked, many people he respected and liked, he said . He said: "He had thereafter attacked, in many cases by people he respects and liked"
 "Let people seize his cuff links, grab his hands, reach out to touch him," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Let people seize the cuff links and reach out for him, he says .
 Two days later, addressing the National Foreign Policy Conference at the State Department, “We are the Number One Nation.” Two days after the conference, President Obama addressed the nation’s foreign policy conference .
 Democratic leaders across the country; the press; even, on March 26, most of his own private Vietnam commission, the Wise Men, Acheson, Dillon, Bundy, McGeorge Bundy, Cyrus Vance—all now abandoning the war .
 On the surface an unaccustomed benignity suddenly overtook the President . President Obama's administration has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy .
 He had been confiding to senior advisers since at least the previous October that he was ‘inclined’ not to run in 1968 . He talked about this a good deal more now .
 In mid-March he asked McPherson to give three reasons why he should run for president . McPhersson says he has three reasons to run .
 Johnson said McPherson said that no one else could get a program through Congress . Johnson: "Wrong. No one else can get it through Congress"
 The portrait of Woodrow Wilson hangs in the Red Room of the White House . Wilson thought of him as powerless to move, with the machinery of the U.S. government in disarray .
 He would take a flashlight, walk downstairs, touch Wilson’s portrait; then, soothed, he could sleep again . He would sleep in a cold sweat, then touch Wilson's portrait; he would sleep again.
 He was alone on a vast plain, sitting in a tall, straight chair, with cattle storming down on him . He was sitting on a tall chair, staring in front of a crowd of cattle . He sat in the chair, looking back at his own fate .
 "I felt that | was being chased on all sides by a giant stampede," he told Doris Kearns . He tried to move but could not .
 The thing I feared from the first day of my Presidency was actually coming true. The thing | feared from . the first-day of my presidency was actually . coming true, says President Obama . Obama .
 Robert Kennedy had openly announced his intention to reclaim the throne in the memory of his brother . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 He felt that the country would be divided and angry so long as he remained in the White House, he said . He said that he felt that he would not be able to keep the country together .
 If he waited till after Wisconsin, he would be a repudiated President . Lawrence O’Brien told him that he would beat him two to one in the Wisconsin primary .
 This was his last chance to make withdrawal appear his own decision, rather than one forced upon him . This was the last chance he could make withdrawal look his own .
 At nine o'clock on the evening of March 31, President Lyndon Johnson went on television ostensibly to address the nation on the war .
 Robert Kennedy held a hearing of his Indian subcommittee in Flagstaff, Arizona, March 30 . Kennedy held the hearing March 30 for the subcommittee on the Indian Board of American Indians . Kennedy: "It's a good thing that you can do"
 Barry came up with Alone, Richard E Byrd’s memoir of a winter in Antarctica . Barry wrote Alone, a memoir of the Byrd winter of Antarctica .
 Sorensen was at work on a statement for Kennedy’s press conference the next morning . Walinsky was working on the statement for the next day . Kennedy's press conference was scheduled for the morning .
 He said angrily to reporters, in the style of Richard Nixon, “You fellows won’t have me to pick on any more.” He said to reporters: “I’m glad you’re not picking on me anymore. You’ll
 Sorensen accompanied Kennedy; Walt Rostow and Charles Murphy were with Johnson . Kennedy was accompanied by Kennedy; Rostow was with Johnson; Murphy was with him .
 Johnson delivered a monologue about Vietnam, the Middle East, the budget and the budget . Johnson delivered the monologue on Vietnam and the Vietnam War .
 Johnson said he planned to stay out of it but would let Kennedy know if he changed his mind . Johnson: "I don't want to get involved in the debate"
 The President then began talking about John Kennedy, how well they had worked together, how he had tried to continue the Kennedy policies . The President said he had been trying to carry on the Kennedy legacy .
 He did not ask Humphrey to run, though this assumption seemed to underlie the conversation . Humphrey was not asked to run for president .
 Humphrey said he had considered the possibility of an immediate announcement but feared it might ‘demean’ the President’s statement . Humphrey: “I had considered a possible announcement, but I feared it would ‘ demean” the President, .
 President says if he ran, "he must do a better job than he was able to get organized in Milwaukee" But, if Humphrey ran, he must do better job, he would be responsible for the Wisconsin result .
 Humphrey said he was in preliminary contact with Daley, Governor Richard Hughes of New Jersey and other party leaders . Humphrey: "I'm not sure what's going on for me"
 He repeated the line about John Kennedy’s putative approval as he looked down from heaven . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was killed in the assassination of John Kennedy .
 Johnson: "This is where the credibility gap started, not over Vietnam. This, Johnson said, was where it started" Johnson said .
 One never quite believed them, but they were right, and now he was gone, a giant vanishing in a puff of smoke . "Now he's gone," he said, "and now he has gone"
 Kennedy and McCarthy, instead of running against Johnson, were left to run against each other . McCarthy and Kennedy were left out of the race .
 Schell declined McCarthy’s invitation to join his staff and returned to graduate studies at Harvard . Unwilling to work against Kennedy, Schell chose to focus on graduate studies .
 McCarthy’s “and I’m Jack” is, by this interpretation, total mystification . McCarthy's ‘and I'm Jack’ is a total mystery, but McCarthy says it's not a mystery .
 McCarthy meant that he had more of John Kennedy’s qualities than Robert had . Perhaps McCarthy meant he had . John Kennedy's qualities: maturity, intellectuality, urbanity, control .
 Edward Kennedy was his brother’s closest adviser, always resourceful and energetic . Edward was resourceful, energetic and protective . Edward Kennedy's brother was his closest adviser .
 Stephen Smith, Robert told me, would be Campaign manager, Sorensen, campaign director, O’Donnell, director of organization . Asked what in the world the difference was between campaign manager and campaign director .
 McCarthy: "1 understood his motives and his loyalties,” McCarthy said later . They parted on friendly terms, McCarthy said . McCarthy: “I understand his motives. 1 understood his motive. 1 understands his motives .
 Hackett brought in Fraser Barron from the poverty program for ‘grassroots development’—the organization of the poor, of blacks, Mexican Americans, white Appalachians . Barron is the director of the program for the poor .
 McCarthy’s strength, as Goodwin said, lay in his understanding of the new politics of television and the kids . Goodwin thought that the Kennedy people greatly underrated McCarthy's seriousness and his political acuity .
 Dutton later thought that the prevailing disorganization caused no serious troubles in the primaries . I am sure he was right.
 Kennedy himself arrived at a unique blend of the old and new politics in 1968 . Both, in fact, were necessary in 1968, and both were necessary .
 After California he intended to reorganize the campaign and place Stephen Smith in full charge, he said .
 One felt a certain letdown in Kennedy, though of course he was tired after his transcontinental fortnight . Kennedy is tired after being tired after travelling around the world .
 He bridled a little and said, “1 know | look tired, but I’m all right. | know the limits of my strength very well well.”
 Sen. Ted Cruz has been in the Senate for more than a decade . He says he's focused on the war, but also on the issues of national security and national security .
 More than anyone else in American politics, he had become the tribune of the underclass . He was determined “to show that the individual does count in a society where he actually appears to count less and less”©2 .
 When Roy Reuther died in January 1968, Kennedy was the only one outside the family to sit with the Reuthers at the funeral . Kennedy was also the only person outside the Reuther family to attend the funeral of the late union leader .
 Victor Reuther, Leonard Woodcock, Douglas Fraser, Jack Conway and Jack Conway worked for Kennedy in Indiana, Michigan and California . Reuther's wife was on the Kennedy delegation in D.C.
 Walter Reuther delayed his decision because of an old friendship with Humphrey, but Victor was sure he would have supported Kennedy in the end . Victor would have backed Kennedy because of his friendship with Reuther, Reuther .
 Martin Luther King was a crucial figure in any coalition of the disestablished . King was the leader of the anti-war movement in the U.S.
 Kennedy and King had kept their distance, but events were bringing them closer together . Kennedy: "I'm not going to keep my distance from King, but I'm going to see him again"
 In the summer the two men began collaboration, through intermediaries, on a new drive for economic and racial justice . The two men have worked together since the summer . They hope to create a new push for economic, racial justice in America .
 The next week Marian Wright presented the idea to King at a Southern Christian Leadership Conference retreat . Wright presented King the idea at the retreat .
 Kennedy office was now working closely with Marian Wright and organizers . King said to Walter Fauntroy, head of the SCLC’s Washington office, “He's just doing like a Baptist preacher... you know, trying to get a vote of confidence.”
 King was “very hopeful” that Kennedy would make it, Fauntroy recalled . King was "very hopeful" that Kennedy was going to survive, he said .
 He was scheduled in the evening to speak in the heart of the Indianapolis ghetto . His speech was scheduled for the evening .
 Pierre Salinger telephoned that Martin Luther King had been shot in Memphis . A few moments later, as they boarded the plane for Indianapolis, Salinger phoned that King was shot .
 Kennedy sent Ethel on to the hotel but was determined to keep his rendezvous . Kennedy sent her on to a hotel room to meet up with his mistress .
 People had been waiting in the street for an hour but were in a festive, political-rally mood . People were waiting for the crowd to get into the festive mood .
 Kennedy climbed onto a flatbed truck in a parking lot under a stand of oak trees . Kennedy climbed on to the flatbed . Kennedy: "I'm not going to be afraid. I'm not scared. I want to be scared"
 Martin Luther King dedicated his life to love and to justice for his fellow human beings . He died because of that effort, and he died from that effort .
 In this difficult day, in this difficult time for the U.S., it is perhaps well to ask what kind of a nation we are and what direction we want to move in, says CNN's John Sutter .
 For those of you who are black, you can be filled with bitterness, with hatred, and a desire for revenge . For those who are not black, the evidence there evidently is that there were white people who were responsible for the crimes .
 We can move in that direction as a country, in great polarization—black people amongst black, white people amongst white, filled with hatred toward one another, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Martin Luther King did, as he did, to understand and to comprehend, and to replace that violence, that stain of bloodshed that has spread across our land, with compassion and love . Or we can make an effort to understand with compassion, love .
 For those of you who are black and are tempted to be filled with hatred and distrust at the injustice of such an act, against all white people, can only say that . I feel in my own heart the same kind of feeling. I had a member of my family killed, but
 "We have to make an effort in the U.S. to understand, to go beyond these rather difficult times," says Obama . "But we have to ... make an ... effort," he says .
 It is not the end of violence, lawlessness or disorder, says President Obama . Obama: "It is not an end of lawlessness, it is not end of disorder. It is the end to violence"
 "Vast majority of white people and the vast majority of black people in this country want to live together, want to improve the quality of our life, and want justice for all human beings who abide in our land"
 "Say a prayer for our country and for our people. Let us dedicate ourselves to that, and say a prayer," she said .
 She remembered 1960, when Martin was in prison and John Kennedy was running for President . She remembered Martin's time in prison, when he was in jail .
 King’s death was not the worst thing that ever happened, he said . Thinking of Dallas, perhaps also of Sophocles , he said to Jeff Greenfield that he said it was not Dallas's death .
 The first stories after Dallas, Greenfield remembered, had so miscalled Oswald . Greenfield: "It was a mistake to call Oswald. It's a mistake"
 He found Greenfield asleep on top of his bed and threw a blanket over him . Early in the morning, restlessly roaming the hotel, he found him asleep . Greenfield slept in the middle of the night .
 The next morning Kennedy kept an engagement to speak at the City Club in Cleveland . Kennedy kept the next morning to speak .
 The Cleveland speech had contributions from Sorensen, Walinsky, from Greenfield, all writing through the dreadful night . Greenfield: "It was a terrible night. It was the worst night of my life"
 We glorify killing on movie and television screens and call it entertainment . We glorified killing on TV screens and film screens, says Dr. John Sutter .
 This is the violence that afflicts the poor, that poisons relations between men because their skin has different colors, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This is the violent violence that affects the poor"
 He flew back to Washington, a city of smoke and flame, under curfew, patrolled by troops . Washington is under curfew .
 The troops saw us coming at a distance, and they put on gas masks and got the guns at ready, waiting for this horde of blacks coming up the street . The troops were waiting for a horde of black people coming up, he says .
 "When they saw it was Bobby Kennedy, they took off their masks and let us through," says Bobby Kennedy . "They took on their masks when they saw that Bobby Kennedy was there, and they took them through"
 Humphrey, Nixon, Rockefeller, Rockefeller and McCarthy were all there, all save the President himself . Humphrey and Rockefeller were at the White House .
 Afterward there was a straggling march, five miles under the fierce sun, from the church to Morehouse College . The march was five miles from Morehouse .
 Kennedy hung his jacket over his shoulder and walked with shirtsleeves rolled up . Kennedy hung it over the shoulder and wore a shirtleeves . Kennedy hangs it over his jacket .
 The Kennedy party got most of the offers of water and Coca-Cola from the black crowd along the streets . Roy Jenkins, a friend from England, noted that the Kennedy party had the best water and Coke .
 Kennedy observed, without bravado, that lack of physical courage kept him away . Kennedy: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared," he said .
 Sammy Davis Jr. was a star of the late 1960s and early '60s . He says entertainers exerted great influence on the black community . Davis' career was a big success .
 Julian Bond, a young Georgia political leader, observed it with disgust . Julian Bond: "Julian Bond is a young Georgian political leader. Julian Bond is not a politician."
 Bevel demanded to know whether Kennedy had a program for racial justice . Bevel: "I want to know if Kennedy had any plans to address the problem of racial justice" Bevel said Kennedy had 'a program for black people'
 Katzenbach, now under secretary of state and obliged to support the war, had questioned a Vietnam quote Kennedy used in his book .
 Kennedy had asked Katzenbach if she had noticed how “very kind and helpful” Ramsey Clark, now Attorney General, had recently been “in the renewed dispute with Hoover regarding the Department of Justice wiretapping.”
 Kennedy touched Katzenbach’s knee and said, “Forget about what happened and just erase the whole thing.” He said, "Just forget what happened"
 Eugene Pulliam’s farright Indianapolis Star, the most popular paper, assailed Kennedy brutally in daily cartoon and editorial . Pulliam's farright newspaper, the Indianapolis Star .
 State officeholders and party leaders backed the Democratic governor Roger Branigan . Branigan headed the administration slate as a stand-in for the yet undeclared Hubert Humphrey .
 The assassination of Martin Luther King and the ensuing riots had sobered the nation . The assassination and subsequent riots in the 1960s were the nation's first riots .
 Kennedy spoke, as usual, about the miseries of the underclass and the duty to reclaim the miserable for the national community . Kennedy spoke as usual: "I'm not surprised at what happened to me, but I'm proud of it"
 He spoke too about the dangers of violence and the need for public order . He also spoke about the need to protect the public from violence .
 Martin: Petition circulators encountered good response in both black ghetto and backlash areas . Wade, Martin told Kennedy, “You come through as a strong executive capable of controlling disorders.”
 Kennedy had made the point about public order often before before, and he now made it more often in Indiana . Kennedy: "I'm going to make the point that public order is important"
 Meet the Conservative,’s effect was to suggest an opportunist tailoring his politics to his audience . ‘Meet the Conservative’ is a reference to the Conservative Party’
 Kennedy never once failed to show the other side of the coin, Martin says . Martin: Kennedy never denounced violence and let it go at that but instead always followed it by denouncing injustice . He says Kennedy never let violence go and denounced injustice .
 He denounced injustice with great emphasis, and gave less emphasis to rioting; but he said both . Naturally in Negro areas he denounced injustice . He said both in both areas of America .
 'At least, this was true every time | heard him Speak, and | was watching for it carefully, because | knew the press would watch and | warned him to be sure and say both' 'Every time' he spoke, he was sure and said both .
 McCarthy deleted references to "white racism" from his speeches . McCarthy also adjusted his campaign to Indiana, deleting references to ‘white racism’ from his speech .
 White voters were not led in either case to suppose that the candidates had weakened their stand on racial justice . But white voters are not led to think that they have weakened their stance .
 Charles Quinn, the television correspondent, interviewed Poles and Lithuanians after Kennedy’s rally .
 They were the main victims of riots, and in the end they voted overwhelmingly for Kennedy . Kennedy was the main beneficiary of the riots .
 In retrospect the argument hardly appeared as earthshaking as it did at the time . In retrospect, it hardly looked as earth-shaking a decade ago .
 Kennedy saw no incompatibility between racial justice and the rule of law . Instead he thought that each reinforced the other and that only someone committed to equal rights could hope to stop violence in the ghetto .
 As for the blue-collar whites, they too felt government had forgotten them . They too felt that they too were among the unrepresented .
 In later years, intellectuals discovered their existence and gave them the awful name of ‘ethnics’ Kennedy’s effort to keep the black and white working class at peace with each other in Indiana no longer seemed so sinister .
 "He always looked so alone,” wrote John Bartlow Martin, standing up by himself on the lid of the trunk of his convertible . “So alone, so vulnerable, so fragile, you feared he might break.”
 He did not chop the air with his hands as his brother Jack had . Instead he had a little gesture with his right hand, the fist closed, the thumb sticking up a little, and he would jab with it to make a point .
 When he got applause, he did not smile at the crowd, pleased; instead he looked down, down at the ground or at his speech, and waited till they had finished, then went on . "When he got a speech, he didn't smile, pleased," he said .
 He could take a bland generality and deliver it with such depth of feeling that it cut like a knife . He could also deliver a bland generalality but delivered it with a deep feeling that cut .
 Someone asked where the money for Kennedy’s health program was coming from . Kennedy's health program is coming from, he says . Kennedy: "It's a good thing for Kennedy to be able to do so," he said .
 Many black faces don’t see many black faces who will become doctors, he says . Let’s say something about the tone of these questions, he adds .
 You don't see many people coming out of the ghettos or off the Indian reservations to medical school . You don’t see many of those coming out from ghetto or off Indian reservations .
 It’s our society, not just our government, that spends twice as much on pets as on the poverty program . It's not just government, it's our society that spends more on pets than on poverty programs .
 "You sit here as white medical students, while black people carry the burden of the fighting in Vietnam," student says . White students say they sit as a white medical student in Vietnam . White medical students sit as white students in Vietnam, students say .
 Afterward, he shook his head incredulously, he said to Halberstam, “They were so comfortable, so comfortable. So comfortable. That's so comfortable," he said .
 He visited a day nursery a few steps away from James Whitcomb Riley’s house in old Indianapolis . Riley's house was built in the 1930s and is now a museum .
 You can build an image with a lot of sharpsters around you with their computers and press releases . You can also build your image with the sharpest people around you .
 Kennedy also beat Hubert Humphrey 62 percent to 37. percent in D.C. on the same night . Kennedy beat Humphrey in the District of Columbia in 1968 .
 McCarthy airily observed on television that it didn’t really matter who came in first, second or third . McCarthy airly observed on TV that it was not really important who came first or second . McCarthy: "It didn't really matter" who came second, third or fourth
 He ended talking till early in the morning with two young McCarthy volunteers he found in the airport coffee shop . He ended up talking to them for hours until the morning .
 He had spent a month after Johnson’s withdrawal assembling his troops . He spent that month assembling troops .
 Mondale owed his political career to Humphrey, and Kennedy understood his position . Kennedy understood the position. Mondale owes his career to the Humphrey .
 The Harrises had been frequent and happy guests at Hickory Hill and Hyannis Port .
 Of course, Harris had earlier declared for Johnson and was, like Mondale, a hawk on Vietnam . Harris had also declared for the Johnson administration .
 Kennedy hoped that, after Johnson’s withdrawal, Harris would rally to the causes he and Kennedy had espoused . The Kerner Commission report, of which Harris had been a leading author, was of which he had been leading .
 He had representatives of every establishment in America for him, from George Meany to Henry Ford Il, from the segregationist governor of Louisiana to the black mayor of Cleveland . He had all the campaign funds he needed, and all the support he needed .
 In his declaration he chirruped about “the politics of happiness ... the politics of joy.” It was perhaps small wonder that in his declaration, Mr. Obama said “politics of happiness” is ‘politics of joy .”
 Labor, party regulars and the south brought Humphrey great strength . But labor, the south and the party regulars were key to Humphrey's victory .
 After the Six Day War, American Jews needed “continual reassurance” about Israel, Rabbi says . One of his visitors said that after the Six-Day War, after that, Americans needed ‘continual reassurance’
 Kennedy wearily said he would make his position clear again on the west coast again . Kennedy said he will make his stance clear again in the future again .
 He rubs his hand over his face again, as if to tear away the exhaustion . "I'm not going to be able to go back to sleep," he says .
 Rita Dallas noticed the deep lines in her husband's face and thought he could hardly drag himself out of the plane . Rita Dallas said she thought he was going to die if he didn't get back in the air .
 He ran to his father, kissed him, then drove him to the compound, laughing, talking, elaborately emphatic in gestures . But he ran to the father and kissed him .
 They said goodbye, the old man holding his son's hand with tight, lingering grip . The old man held his son’s hand with a tight grip .
 Kennedy always snapped back quickly from fatigue; and he was beginning to move with the rhythms of the campaign . Kennedy always snaps back quickly, and he always snapped quickly .
 Early in Indiana reporters had thought he would be uncomfortable on the hustings . Early in the state's history, reporters thought him uncomfortable on hustings.
 In fact what conventional judgment saw as defects may well have been strengths . In fact, the defects may be strengths, the author says .
 His many hidden dimensions appeared less on the rostrum than in his spontaneous excursions into the ghettos and in his easy rapport with the surging generosity .
 Some fellow from Massachusetts was in this state last week and pronounced it Indian-er . "Indian-er" is a term used to refer to the state's Indian population .
 Campaign wit Richard Tuck explains why he was making such an effort over Freckles . Tuck: "Fckles" is a joke .
 Trains had gone out of fashion in campaigns, but everyone missed whistle-stopping . Small Indiana towns, clustered around their depots, were ideal settings .
 A banjo group plays the old song “The Wabash Cannonball” at each stop . A banio group played the old version of the song at each of the stops .
 He forgot to conclude with Shaw, and some reporters were left behind . Once he forgot, he forgot to finish with Shaw .
 George Bernard Shaw once said...” became the signal for the dash to the press bus . Thereafter, “as George Bernard shaw once said ...” was the signal .
 A thousand Radcliffe dropouts all massed for the attack, but Bobby’s bought the right-of-way from here back to St. Louis . Gene McCarthy came down the other track . Now good clean Gene McCarthy was down the track .
 Ruthless Robert, may his name forever stand, to be feared and genuflected at by pols across the land . So here’s to Ruthless Bob .
 Old Ho Chi Minh is cheering, and though it may appall, he’s whizzing to the White House on The Ruthless Cannonball . He’ll be cheering as he makes his way to the Oval Office .
 Some in the press wondered whether irreverence had gone too far . It went on too long—seven verses .
 During one speech a gust of wind blew a small piece of paper out of his hand . During one of his speeches, he was blown out of the room by wind .
 He convulsed the press by saying in a conservative Indiana town, “Make like, not war.” The president said in a speech in Indiana, "Make like not war"
 When I was trying to make up my mind whether to run for President, | discussed it with my wife and she said | should, because then . would be able to get to Nebraska, she said . When she said she wanted to run, 'she said she should'
 "If you look at any regiment or division of paratroopers in Vietnam, forty-five percent of them are black," he says . "Forty percent of the paratroops in Vietnam are black"
 Between them, Kennedy and McCarthy polled over 80 percent of the Nebraska vote . Kennedy said it was a smashing repudiation of the Johnson-Humphrey administration . The two men were both elected to the presidency .
 Kennedy's Senate records were comparable by ADA standards but McCarthy's entirely respectable . McCarthy's Senate record was comparable to Kennedy's .
 McCarthy was generally bolder in his attacks on the national security complex . He continued to accuse the CIA of having “taken on the character of an invisible government answering only to itself”°8 .
 In foreign policy both denounced the idea of the U.S. as global policeman .
 Both Kennedy and McCarthy continued to attack the hawks . The war receded somewhat as an issue after Johnson's retreat from escalation .
 Neither came out for unilateral withdrawal from the U.S. from Syria .
 It was even Nixon’s year for ‘bringing us together’—but they conceived the task in very different terms . ‘Bringing us together,’ Nixon said. ‘I’m sorry. I’ll never be able to do that
 The early primaries encouraged Kennedy in his quest for an alliance of the disestablished and unrepresented . Kennedy won the early primaries in his bid for the presidency in 1968 .
 In April he took his Indian subcommittee to South Dakota, much to the irritation of his staff who thought it was a waste of time .
 He was in a campaign, Fred Dutton reminded him, and he should knock off the Injuns . He should knock them off, he said, in a bid to win the election back in the polls .
 Richard Harwood of the Washington Post and other newspapermen began to change their minds about the clamorous crowds . The crowds began to get bigger and louder at the end of the day .
 Many called him a ‘polarizer’ and scoffed at the idea of Robert Kennedy, of all people, taking on a mission of reconciliation . Robert Kennedy took on the role of reconciliation in the aftermath of his assassination .
 Roosevelt had carried his nation farther toward reconciliation than a less ‘divisive’ President would have done . So had Franklin Roosevelt; but by confronting problems he had carried the nation farther . away from reconciliation .
 'I'm the only man who can deal with these people. Maybe so, but just Suppose he were to Say, ‘I’m the only . man who . can . know where to draw the line. Suppose . He were to say, 'I am the only
 Kennedy: "It was an undertaking that, as Kennedy conceived it, required not only specific programs but active leadership" Kennedy: It was a major undertaking that required specific programs and leadership . Kennedy: 'It was not only programs but leadership'
 Kennedy had no doubt that Johnson had abused executive power in foreign affairs . Kennedy says Johnson abused his authority in foreign policy .
 A general recession of presidential leadership, he believed, would increase the nation’s impotence in the face of deep and angry national division, he said . But a recession of leadership would increase nation's impotency, he added .
 Only an activist Presidency and an affirmative national government, as he saw it, could pull together a divided people in a stormy time, he said . He said only an activist President and affirmative national . government can pull together divided people .
 Vill McCarthy had both a different constituency and a different theory of the Presidency . Vill McCarthy was a different president and had a different idea of the presidency .
 In a February article in Look called “Why I'm Battling LBJ,” he had concentrated on the war and on constitutional questions .
 He had said not a word about racial justice or the fate of the dispossessed . He had not said anything about the dispossession of people .
 His speeches, Jack Newfield thought, revealed “a pattern of psychic distance from the poor’s poor . But his speeches, Newfield said, reveal ‘psychological distance’ from poor .
 Seymour Hersh resigned from his staff in Wisconsin because of the candidate’s reluctance to go into the ghettos . Hersh: "I’m not sure if I’ll be able to go back to work for the candidate." Hersh was a journalist who
 McCarthy met with black leaders in Indianapolis two weeks after King’s murder . McCarthy: King's murder was the first black leader to meet with him in Indianapolis .
 The polls, he says, showed Kennedy running best “among the less intelligent and less educated people in America’s America, he told an audience in Corvallis .
 The constituency was real enough, but, unlike Kennedy’s, it did not readily yield a campaign theme . The constituency is real enough but not readily readily yielded a theme .
 Lamer argued McCarthy must “identify himself with a positive vision of America’s America” Lamer: McCarthy must identify himself with ‘positive vision’ of the U.S. Lamer said McCarthy must have a “positive vision of the America�
 His staff worked up a document proposing “public participation’s” theme . The document proposes how governing institutions could be brought under popular control .
 Johnson, McCarthy felt, had been “eroding and weakening” the other agencies of government . Johnson felt that he was ‘eroding’ and ‘weakening’ other agencies, McCarthy said .
 He had taken the war-making power away from Congress, diminished the Supreme Court by appointing its Chief Justice to head the commission investigating John Kennedy’s assassination . He also had politicized the Council of Economic Advisers, enfeebled the Democratic National Committee and national party .
 Johnson had “done it defensively as things got more and more out of control. Johnson had done it defensively,’s manager said . Johnson said: “Things have got more than more out-of-control. It's not the first time I’ve seen
 McCarthy, one felt, was the first liberal candidate in the century to run aga/nst the Presidency . McCarthy ran in times of turbulence that seemed to call for a strong Presidency to hold the country together .
 Some felt a debt to McCarthy for venturing ahead while Kennedy lingered behind . Some felt that McCarthy had done so much for the country .
 Others felt Kennedy would be the stronger candidate against Humphrey and Nixon . Others felt that Kennedy would have been a better candidate than Nixon .
 McCarthy attracted people by his detachment, his serenity, his very nonchalantness, his nonchalance . McCarthy attracted attention by his detachedness, serene demeanor . McCarthy was known for his detachment and nonchalancy .
 McCarthy had the look of a man who intended to rock the boat, wrote David Halberstam . McCarthy said radical things in a temperate way .
 He was civilized, literate, quoted other people’s verse and wrote his own. "He was civilized and literate," he said .
 McCarthy... ‘meanders’ through his campaign; Kennedy drives on like a sprinter. McCarthy... 'meanders' through his . campaign . Kennedy . ‘Meander’ 'means’ for McCarthy, but Kennedy ‘drives on’ like
 J Edgar Hoover would not have lasted thirty seconds in his administration, but he thought it cheap for McCarthy to seek easy cheers from academic audiences by promising to fire him . I think it fair to say that, the closer people were to them, the more they liked Kennedy .
 Richard Harwood could find ‘little camaraderie’ between McCarthy and those who enlisted in his campaign . McCarthy was elected to the House of Representatives in 2007 .
 The aide says Kennedy was the one thing Kennedy could not offer . Kennedy's aide: "The reason" is that he was not able to offer the same .
 It was hard in later years, after McCarthy glided away as mysteriously as he had appeared, to recall the intensity of feeling on his behalf in 1968 . McCarthy's death in 1968 marked the end of McCarthy's career .
 The rage among his supporters against Kennedy, far from subsiding, appeared to grow . Kennedy supporters continue to rage against the former president .
 Kennedy with his machine, personal fortune, Irish Mafia, puffed-up names from the past (Sorensen, Salinger, Schlesinger), against McCarthy with his Children’s Crusade, youth and idealism, ministers and housewives, living on the land .
 George Plimpton, a strong if lonely Kennedy supporter, gave a party for McCarthy friends and invited me to present the case for our candidate . Kennedy was invited to give a speech at the party, but he says it was a mistake .
 McCarthy could have come out fot the auto-da-fe, one felt; this crowd would still prefer him to Kennedy . McCarthy finally asked what it was specifically they had against Kennedy .
 Nat Hentoff, a jazz critic and a civil libertarian, is a goodhearted civil libertarian . He says McCarthy, Hoffa, Manchester, the old litany of the old . He asks: "What do you think? What do we think of the civil rights movement?"
 A charisma suit is made of cloth and cardboard; at the touch of the weakest admirer, it pulls apart . At touch of a feather, a feather or a feather can pull apart; at touch of an admirer's touch, a charisma suit will pull apart .
 In fact, across the country, the arts and letters divided evenly enough between the two candidates . The arts, letters and letters are divided evenly between the candidates .
 Elizabeth Hardwick Lowell later said of Kennedy, “I felt about him that he was one of the few people in public life who had truly changed”
 Many people stopped by an image of Bobby Kennedy formed in the past . Many people were stopped by the image of the former president .
 At the end he had transcended his earlier self, whatever that was . And actually at the end, he had . transcended himself, the author says .
 McCarthy had William Styron, Mary McCarthy, Wilfrid Sheed, Wilfred Sheed among novelists . McCarthy's novelists include William Styrons and Mary McCarthy herself .
 Kennedy had Norman Mailer, James Jones, Alison Lurie, Joyce Carol Oates, Irwin Shaw, Wright Morris, Truman Capote, Budd Schulberg .
 McCarthy had Arthur Miller, Kennedy, William Inge and Alan Jay Lerner among playwrights . McCarthy also had playwrighting success in New York .
 McCarthy had Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward; Kennedy, Lauren Bacall, Henry Fonda, Shirley MacLaine, Warren Beatty . Kennedy, Bacall and Fonda starred .
 Kennedy had Archibald Cox, Paul Samuelson, Seymour Harris, Robert Coles, James Loeb. Galbraith, Joseph Rauh, Allard Lowenstein, Barbara Tuchman, Erich Fromm . Galbrith was the co-founder of the
 It was interesting how many people who had tangled with Kennedy in the past rallied to him now. Kennedy's supporters rallied around him now, he says .
 J Edward Day, who as Postmaster General had had his troubles with Kennedy; G Robert Blakey, who had criticized his explanations of wiretapping; Joseph Mankiewicz, who opposed him for the Senate, all endorsed him . J. Edward Day; G. Edward Blakey;
 He used to say wistfully that McCarthy had the A students, and he envied McCarthy their devotion . He envied him for his devotion to McCarthy .
 Come on, Bobby said, join the mystery battle against the television machine . Bobby said: "Come on, join in the battle against television machine"
 In Mississippi, Charles Evers and Oscar Carr were cochairmen of the Kennedy committee . Oscar Carr, the enlightened planter, was also cochairman of the committee .
 Kennedy pulled the lapels of his coat against his face and headed back in the cold wind . Kennedy pulled up his coat and headed out of the park .
 Someone saw on top of a building, etched against the sky, a man with a gun . A shadow had fallen across the happy day of the Wabash Cannonball .
 Thomas Congdon long remembered the “agonized” look on the face of Jerry Bruno, the advance man . He turned out to be a policeman .
 Salinger froze, stared at Gary for a long moment, then said, “I live with that fear.” Salinger . Salinger said he lives with it .
 Barry tried to hire off-duty policemen to stay in the hotel lobby . Barry tried surreptitious precautions, such as hiring them to stay at the hotel .
 He dared not risk Kennedy’s displeasure by putting them in corridors next to his room . ‘Kennedy’ was not happy to put them next to him, he said. ‘He dared not . risk Kennedy's displeasure’
 When Kennedy learned of such extracurricular arrangements, he canceled them . Kennedy canceled them after learning of extracerricular arrangements .
 A man with a rifle went into a building across from a hotel in Lansing, Michigan, on April 11, police say . Barry Barry was shot in the head by a police officer . Barry was not injured in the incident .
 Barry Barry had Kennedy’s car driven into the basement garage, so he could enter it without going out on the street . Kennedy's car was driven out of the garage, and Barry had it driven into a basement garage .
 "I’m not afraid of anybody. Don’t ever change whatever we’re doing until you talk to me," he says . "I'm not afraid"
 He told Charles Quinn, yes, he had thought about it, but he wasn’t going to change his campaign because of it . Charles Quinn: "Yes, yes. He said yes."
 President Obama says he's never going to ride in one of those bulletproof, bubble-top cars . "If I’m ever elected President, he said, “You know, if I'm ever elected president, I”t he said . He meant one of
 There was the usual Kennedy surprise party, poems, gags, joke presents, balloons, champagne, champagne. There was a surprise party .
 The back of his hand came up toward his face, which was frowning, and he held his hand there, his head bent, for perhaps a count of ten . The back came up to his hand, and the frowning face bent down .
 In miID-May Kennedy paid a flying visit to South Dakota, where Hubert Humphrey, a native son, and Eugene McCarthy, from Minnesota across the border, had also entered the primary . To Sail Beyond ... the Western Stars, Until I Die IN miID is published by
 Afterward he asked whether McGovern really thought the quest impossible . He asked whether he really thought it was impossible .
 Even the working class was middle class, with boats on the lakes and weekend cabins in the mountains . The working-class was also middle class .
 He had in Oregon, he said later, “a better organization than we had in any other state.” And he had a “better organization” than he had in other states .
 McCarthy had grown increasingly bitter toward Kennedy, conspicuously refusing to congratulate him, after Indiana and again after Nebraska . McCarthy refused to congratulate Kennedy after each state victory .
 McCarthy’s own explanations for his ‘bad’ votes were complicated . Voting records are sometimes hard to interpret, and McCarthy's 'bad' votes are complicated . McCarthy's own explanation for his 'bad votes' was complicated .
 Salinger had promptly disclaimed this leaflet on behalf of Kennedy headquarters . Salinger later disclaimed the leaflet from Kennedy HQ .
 McCarthy was angered by Kennedy’s repeated public assertions of a desire to work together . McCarthy was also angered that Kennedy had said he wanted to work with the president .
 He saw them as a way of channeling McCarthy delegates to Kennedy, not vice versa . McCarthy delegates were channeled into Kennedy delegates, he said .
 Do you think Kennedy could conceivably have brought himself to come out for McCarthy? Kennedy's analysis was not unreasonable. His analysis is not unreasonable .
 McCarthy was not expected to come out for Kennedy after Indiana and Nebraska victories . McCarthy was in office at the time of those states' defeat .
 Despite Vietnam and the politics of joy, each, | would guess, preferred Hubert Humphrey to the other . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 McCarthy gave a speech assailing Humphrey and Kennedy equally at the Cow Palace in San Francisco . Jeremy Larner and Paul Gorman soon drafted a speech for McCarthy .
 He read the sentences on Humphrey, Larner wrote later, “in a subdued, rapid tone.” Then he read them in a subdued tone . Larner: “In a subdued and rapid tone,” Humphrey’s sentences were read in a
 He criticized him for advocating federal gun control —a well-calculated criticism in a state that regarded gun ownership as one of the rights of man .
 McCarthy ridiculed Kennedy’s advisers, his astronaut, his dog and his dog . With mordant and condescending wit, McCarthy ridiculed JFK's advisers and his astronaut . McCarthy was the voice of the Kennedy administration .
 This restraint signified no affection for McCarthy, rather a desire not to antagonize McCarthy’s supporters, especially the kids . McCarthy's supporters, including the kids, are at risk of antagonizing McCarthy, especially .
 For the rest of the rest, he talked about the poor, the poor and jobs . He talked about jobs; he tried persiflage. He tried persilage.
 Congresswoman Edith Green agreed to run his campaign on condition that her béte noire David Hackett be forbidden to enter the state . Hackett was banned from entering the state of New Jersey .
 On April 28, a month before the vote, the Kennedy headquarters consisted of two desks and three people . Kennedy headquarters had two desks, three people and a few people on April 28 .
 The Teamsters, the strongest union in the state, had not forgotten the Rackets Committee investigations in Portland, Oregon . The Committee is investigating the case .
 He yielded to the temptation to take a dip in the Pacific on May 24 . He did so often around the world .
 Minorities—blacks, Indians, Chicanos —were 2 percent of the population . Minorities were 2 percent in the population. Minorities in the U.S. were only 2 percent .
 An observer watched him speak at an oscilloscope plant outside Portland, Oregon . He was speaking at a plant outside of Portland .
 He dodged McCarthy personally when their schedules accidentally brought them together at the Portland Zoo . He even dodged McCarthy when they met at the zoo .
 No Kennedy had ever before lost an election, except for the Harvard Board of Overseers . Kennedy had never before before losing an election .
 Kennedy’s two student organizers avoided him; they thought they had let him down . As the returns came in, he thought he had been let down, Kennedy's two students avoided him . Kennedy: "I’m not going to be disappointed. I’ll be
 To a reporter, he said that Humphrey, not McCarthy, was the real winner .
 Kennedy’s California support, ranging from Jesse Unruh to Cesar Chavez, was multifarious and sometimes discordant . Kennedy's California support was often discordant, sometimes with little or no rhyme .
 Jack Conway and Walter Sheridan set up a parallel campaign for labor and minorities . Walter Sheridan and Jack Conway campaigned for the minorities .
 Stephen Smith had taken charge in Los Angeles and John Seigenthaler in San Francisco . Paul Corbin, who organized Salinas under an assumed name, claimed to be a former lieutenant commander in the Navy .
 'I was enchanted by the mixture of banter and intensity with which he beguiled and exhorted his hearers,' he said . At some stops they were mostly Mexican American .
 At times he launched into wonderful travesties of stump speeches, pointing out how much more he could do for the local product, whatever it might be, because his family consumed more of it than any other family possibly could . At times, he pointed out that his family consumes more of
 He would turn with great seriousness to poverty, racial injustice, the war in Vietnam, he would say . He would then turn to poverty and racial injustice . Then he would turn to Vietnam, Vietnam and poverty, he said .
 The Olympic decathlon champion, Rafer Johnson, who loved Kennedy, stood up to apologize for his people . Johnson's apology comes from the president of the country .
 He said he liked some white people, and some he did not like; also he liked white people . "He liked some of them and some of the people he liked," he said .
 Seigenthaler said he was sorry, after such a long day, to have exposed Kennedy to this incident . He said he is sorry for exposing Kennedy to such a public embarrassment . Seigeler: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not surprised"
 To the surprise of the Kennedy party, Black Jesus was circulating cheerfully in the crowd .
 When he finished, the crowd swarmed around the car, reaching out to touch him . The crowd reached out and touched him as he finished the song .
 Kennedy was mobbed by admirers in Watts, spat on by haters at San Francisco State . Kennedy died of a heart attack at the age of 50 .
 He was holding his constituency, the blacks, the Chicanos, the poor, but suburban Democrats were sharply divided . Suburban Democrats are sharply divided, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The debate, scheduled for June 1 in San Francisco, promised to be decisive . The debate will be held on June 1 .
 Kennedy knew he had to show that he could handle McCarthy intellectually and, as ever, that he was not ruthless . Kennedy had to prove he could deal with McCarthy intellectually, not ruthless, in the face of the media .
 Kennedy's staff prepared the customary black, loose-leaf books on the issues . I do not know how carefully Kennedy went through them .
 President Obama held briefings in San Francisco on Saturday . He spent the day staring out the window at San Francisco sparkling in the sunlight .
 Around noon he went off to Fisherman’s Wharf to campaign a little and savor the air . Around noon, he went for a little .
 Kennedy had long believed that the only way to achieve integration was to give blacks the economic and psychological security that would enable them to become full members of a community . Kennedy: "The only way of achieving integration is to give black people economic, psychological security"
 If a choice had to be made, this argued for the use of public money to improve the ghetto . If you had to make a choice, this argument was made for public money, it argued .
 Thomas Finney, Clark Clifford’s law partner, tried to get McCarthy to focus on the debate . Finney had come west to run McCarthy's California campaign . He was trying to get him to focus .
 The managers were by now furious with their candidate’s personal coterie . The manager was furious with his candidate's personal .
 Lowell, who thought that, if McCarthy lost, his people should support Kennedy and vice versa, had gone to see Kennedy . Lowell thought that if McCarthy won, his supporters should support him . Lowell: "That Saturday morning Lowell went for Kennedy, who had gone for Kennedy."
 McCarthy went into his sequence about the government officials he planned to fire . McCarthy said he was going to fire government officials . McCarthy was fired from the White House .
 Kennedy's position had been consistent for decades . It was not so demagogic as it sounded, however, because it had been Kennedy’s consistent position .
 McCarthy was at his most eloquent. Kennedy, for some reason, did not understand there were to be sum-ups and was caught off guard . McCarthy was a master of sum-up.
 A stand-off, in the context of expectations, was a Kennedy victory . A Kennedy victory was a victory for the president, but it was not expected .
 Hodding Carter, the old Mississippi editor, now nearly blind, joined us . Remember the marked consideration Kennedy, with so much else, showed him .
 Ethel, who was carrying her eleventh child, took Ethel back to the Fairmont . Later that night, Ethel was taken back to her Fairmont home in New York .
 He visited San Francisco’s Chinatown, where Abba Schwartz had organized the Chinese Americans . He visited the Chinatown in San Francisco's Chinatown .
 Kennedy continued to stand and wave while motioning a friend toward Ethel, who, pale and stricken, had slumped down in her seat . Kennedy continued and waved as he motioned a friend to Ethel . Ethel slumped down and slumped down, pale, stricken and stricken .
 The Kennedys and Seigenthaler sang the Waseda song at the Japanese Cultural Center in Japan .
 Robert flew back to Los Angeles, spoke in Long Beach, Long Beach and San Diego . Robert flew to San Diego, California, and then flew to California .
 By the end of the long day he was worn to the bone and near digestive collapse . He was worn out of the bone by the day's long day .
 He took Ethel and six children for the night to the Malibu beach house of John Frankenheimer, the film director . He took them to the house of the movie director .
 Kennedy played with his children on the beach; then plunged into the gray sea . Kennedy's children played with him at the beach, then went into the ocean .
 He found him by the pool, stretched out across two chairs, his lips slightly parted, motionless . He said he found him stretched out on two chairs .
 The candidate asked Dutton what could be done in the hours remaining to push it up to 50 percent . Dutton: "I can't wait until the end of the day to see what can be done"
 Kennedy had more votes, he said, than Humphrey and McCarthy, the local boys, combined . Kennedy won more votes than any other local boys combined, he added .
 Stephen Smith scheduled a series of meetings to work out the campaign reorganization . Stephen Smith has been in charge of the Democratic National Party since 2008 .
 The objective by convention time was 1432% for Kennedy, 1152% for Humphrey . Kennedy won the majority of the vote in 1964 . Humphrey won the presidency in 1964, 1964, 1968 .
 Kennedy finally took Goodwin into a bathroom to find a place to talk in the crowded suite . Kennedy eventually took Goodwin to a bathroom .
 I've got to spend that time going to the states, talking to delegates before it’s too late. I’ve got to go to states, talked to delegates ... before it's too late, he says . I've spent that time, he adds .
 "I’m not doing this in any order of importance, but | also want to thank my wife Ethel. I’ve been married for more than 30 years,’s wife . ‘I want to say goodbye to my wife. I love her.
 Kennedy left the room for a press conference, taking a short cut through the kitchen . Kennedy then took a short walk to the kitchen to get to the press conference .
 KKK | heard the California returns at Saul Bellow’s apartment in Chicago . KKK heard the returns at the apartment in the apartment where Bellow lived . KKK members of California heard the return of the KKK .
 When it was evident that Kennedy had won, | went back to my hotel and tried to call him in Los Angeles, but the line was always busy . | went to sleep. Then went to bed.
 On Thursday evening | stood with many others in the soft summer night at La Guardia Airport waiting for the plane, as | had waited on a November night in Washington an eon before .
 Ethel Kennedy, incredibly composed, told me to come to the United Nations Plaza apartment . Kennedy was "incredibly composed" at the time of her death .
 The rest of the time it’s often rather silly little men running around in their black suits .
 Martin Luther King Jr. was looking at those faces, and realized that they know death . I'll tell you who else understands death are the black churches, he says .
 Through the night, friends of Robert Kennedy stood honor guard by the casket . Friends of the late senator stood guard by his casket.
 George McGovern noticed Richard Daley, his head bowed, the cords of his neck standing out, crying uncontrollably . Daley cried uncontrollably during the memorial service . McGovern said Daley was a hero of the day .
 Tom Hayden, the revolutionary, wept silently by himself in a back pew . Hayden, a green cap from Havana sticking out of his pocket, weeps silently . Hayden was a revolutionary in Cuba .
 Mourners with twinkling candles followed the coffin into Arlington Cemetery . The coffin was accompanied by twinkles of twinkled candles .
 The pallbearers, not sure where to place the coffin, walked on uncertainly in the night .
 Smith: "I distinctly heard a voice coming out of the coffin saying, ‘Damn it.” Smith said . Smith said Smith heard the voice of a man saying, 'Damn it' Smith said he heard the man say, "Damn it" Smith said.
 See Acknowledgments for the location of manuscript collections and also for explanations of certain abbreviations .
 When two or more oral history interviews were held the same day, they are designated by a roman numeral following the date . The date of the interviews is the date of each interview .
 Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy’s memoir, Times to Remember, is illuminating and indispensable . Kennedy's book is published in New York, New York .
 Kennedy wrote Roosevelt, October 24, 1936, that the speech had been partly written by a French journalist . Kennedy said Roosevelt's speech was partly written in France .
 The second sentence is ordinarily given as “My children were born here,” but it makes much less sense that way . “I’m glad you’re here, but it’s much less common to say, ‘My children are born here
 Myra McPherson, “Losing Was Never Funny to Joseph P Kennedy,’” Washington Post, November 19, 1969 .
 Ralph Horton, Jr., in recorded interview by Joseph Dolan, June 1, 1964, 3-4, JFK Oral History Program . Ralph Horton Jr. was a member of the Kennedy administration . He was interviewed by Dolan on June 1-4 .
 Rose Kennedy, in recorded interview by Felicia Warburg, April 6, 1973, tape in possession of interviewer. Rose Kennedy in interview with interviewer . Rose Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Charles Spalding, in recorded interview by John Stewart, March 14-14, 1968, 3-4, JFK Oral History Program . Spaldin was a member of the Kennedy administration . He was assassinated in 1968 .
 William vanden Heuvel in interview with author, May 1, 1975 . Interview with author . Interview from May 1 to May 1 .
 Arthur Krock, in recorded interview by Charles Bartlett, May 10, 1964, 3, JFK Oral History Program . Krock's interview was recorded in the JFK oral history program .
 Franklin D Roosevelt and William C Bullitt wrote 437 letters between Roosevelt and Bullitt . Roosevelt was assassinated in 1941 . Bullitt died in 1944 . Roosevelt died in 1945 . Roosevelt's assassination was the first assassination of his life .
 FDR to JPK, May 3, 1940, in Franklin D Roosevelt, His Personal Letters, 1928-1945, ed. In Franklin D. Roosevelt's letters, he wrote: "I love JPK. You can't wait to see what's going to happen next."
 The review was of course unsigned in that benighted period . It was made on the basis of internal evidence .
 Clem Norton is the author of The Best and Last of Edwin O'Connor, ed. He has written a biography of the late poet . Norton has also written a book of his own .
 David Hackett, in recorded interview by John Douglas, July 22, 1970, 4, RFK Oral History Program . Interview with John Douglas on RFK oral history program .
 Cleveland Amory, “Curmudgeon-at-Large,"" Saturday Review, September 7, 1974 . Amory: Amory was a "curmudgeon at-large"
 The Caseys, who were political realists, understood the problem and were in later years good friends of John and Robert Kennedy’s . They were good friends with the Kennedy family .
 General Lewis Hershey was, of course, director of the Selective Service System . Hershey died in 1945 at age 92 .
 Kathleen Kennedy to JFK, July 29, in Rose Kennedy, Times to Remember, 292. Rose Kennedy's memoir, "Rose Kennedy," is published by Rose Kennedy in New York .
 Robert Kennedy, in recorded interview by John Stewart, July 20, 1967, 6-7, JFK Oral History Program . Interview with John Stewart was recorded July 20-21, 1967 . Interview is part of JFK oral history .
 John Knowles, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, July 2, 1974, 5-7, RFK Oral History Program . Knowles was assassinated in 1968 in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 William J Brady, Jr. in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 5, 1974, 7, 23, RFK Oral History Program . Brady was a member of the Kennedy administration .
 Eunice Kennedy Shriver, in interview by Roberta Greene, April 29, 1971, 8-9, and January 13, 1972, 24, RFK Oral History Program . Shriver's interview with Greene is part of the RFK oral history program .
 Joseph P Kennedy, “The United States and the World,” Life, Life, March 18, 1946 . Kennedy: "The U.S. and the world" Kennedy: The United States, the world, and the United States .
 Kenneth O’Donnell, “Joseph Kennedy Felt the Generation Gap "" London Sunday Telegraph, November 23, 1969 . Kennedy felt the gap between the two generations of American youth .
 Robert Kennedy told me the story, but he evidently got the two occasions confused . Robert Kennedy said it was a mistake, but it wasn't a lie .
 RFK quotations about the trip, not otherwise identified, are from the diary . RFK: "The trip was a very special experience for RFK" RFK says RFK was "a very special person"
 Alastair Forbes, “Upper Classmates,” Times Literary Supplement, March 26, 1976; Forbes, ""Camelot Confidential," June 13, 1975 . Forbes, "Upper . Classmates," "Classmates," was Forbes' book of "C
 For the Bunche incident, | am indebted to Charles O Gregory for a letter of September 13, 1975, and to Hardy Dillard for an interview .
 Eunice Kennedy Shriver, in Greene interview, 14, 33; Patricia Kennedy Lawford, in interview by author, July 2, 1975 . Shriver and Lawford appeared in interview with author in 1975 .
 Kathleen, Joe, Jr., Bobby, Jr. and David, David, June 15, 1955, Courtney, September 9, 1956 . Kathleen, July 4, 1951; Joe, 111, September 24, 1952; Bobby Jr., January 17, 1954; Bobby, Sr., January .
 RFK, “ United States Must Deal with New Asia,” Boston Post, September 8, 1951 . RFK: U.S. must deal with new Asia .
 Kenneth P O’Donnell and David F Powers with Joe McCarthy, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 81 . Joe McCarthy's "Johnny" was released from prison in 1964 .
 O'Donnell and Powers, “Johnny,"" 83; Stein and Plimpton, American Journey, 41 . Stein, Plimptpton, "American Journey,"" 41; O’Donnell, Powers, "Johnny"" 83 .
 O’Donnell, “Joseph Kennedy Felt the Generation Gap "" London Sunday Telegraph, November 23, 1969 . O'Donnell: Kennedy felt the gap between the two generations .
 William O Douglas, in recorded interview by John Stewart, November 9, 1967, 14, JFK Oral History Program . Douglas was a member of the Kennedy administration . Douglas appeared in a recorded interview with John Stewart . Douglas spoke to John Stewart about his role in JFK .
 Jack Alexander, “The Senate’s Remarkable Upstart,” Saturday Evening Post, August 9, 1947 . Alexander was the first senator to be elected to the Senate .
 Billings, in Stein interview; Billings in interview by author, July 8, 1975 . Stein interview with author .
 A Jones to Louis B Nichols, “Robert Francis Kennedy, Request to Meet the Director,” July 20, 1955, RFK/FBI/FOIA release . RFK requested to meet with the director of the Department of Justice .
 Secretary of the Army Robert T Stevens, John G Adams, H Struve Hensel and Senator Joe McCarthy, Roy M Cohn, and Francis P Carr .
 Some writers have held Kennedy and the reconstituted committee responsible for a report of April 25, 1955, entitled Army Signal Corps — Subversion and Espionage . The report supported McCarthy theories about Fort Monmouth .
 Sylvia Berkowitz to Joseph Starobin, February 7, 1976; Starobin to the author, October 1, 1975, and February 20, 1976 . Berkowitz and Starobin married in 1976 .
 Walter Lippmann, “Kennedy Destroys False Hopes,” Boston Globe, April 12, 1954 . Lippman: Kennedy ‘destroys false Hopes’.
 Charles Spalding, in interview by author, February 24, 1975; Jacqueline Onassis in interview with author . Jacqueline onassis, Charles Onassis, on Jacqueline in interview, February 25, 1975 . Onassis was Jacqueline's first president, George Kennedy Kennedy III
 Douglas, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 13, 1969, 1, 3, RFK Oral History Program . Douglas was assassinated in 1968 . Douglas said he was proud of his achievements in Washington, DC .
 RFK’s diary, letters and speech drafts in the RFK papers . W O Douglas, Russian Journey; and the Flott and Eichholz . interviews with the author .
 Interview with Robert Kennedy, “A Look Behind the Russian Smiles,” U.S. News & World Report, October 21, 1955 . Kennedy: "A look behind the Russian smiles"
 For good discussions, see John Hutchinson, The Imperfect Union , ch.; and Daniel Bell, “The Scandals in Union Welfare Funds,"" Fortune, April 1954 . For good discussion, see Hutchinson, Hutchinson, and Bell .
 This work, based in considerable part on interviews with Hoffa and Kennedy, is the paperback reprint of Martin’s indispensable series “The Struggle to Get Hoffa” Saturday Evening Post .
 The paperback title was imposed by the publisher over the author’s vigorous protest . It was imposed over the publisher's vigorous protest.
 For reasons of convenience, we will cite the book, as Martin, Hoffa .
 Mr Martin has also made available to me the original manuscript of the Post series . This was considerably cut for publication .
 RFK, Enemy Within, 15; Nathan W Shefferman, The Man in the Middle, 1-3. RFK was RFK's partner in the late Senator Bobby Kennedy's assassination .
 Flannery, “The Other Kennedy,” Ave Maria, August 31, 1957; Martin, ""Hoffa,’11. Martin, 11. Flannery .
 There were 34 assistant counsels and investigators deployed on field investigations . An average of 35 to 45 accountants and investigators from the General Accounting Office .
 Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field, Fina/ Report, 86 Cong., 2 Sess. , 869. Senate . Report: Report, . 86 Cong. 2 sess. (869)
 Cheyfitz evidently denied the story; see RFK, Enemy Within, 64, though this reference does not explain in full lurid detail what he was denying . RFK: RFK's Enemy Within .
 In reconstructing this dinner, | have relied on Kennedy's own accounts in contemporaneous notes and in his book; on Martin . Martin interviewed both Kennedy and Hoffa shortly afterward; and on Mollenhoff shortly afterward .
 The account in the first of Hoffa’s autobiographies (Trials, 150) is exceedingly brief . Hoffa's account in his first of his autobiographies is extremely brief .
 Kennedy, Salinger and Bellino allegedly invaded Hoffa's office in the summer of 1956 and were humiliated by him . Hoffa, or his collaborator, describes an earlier meeting when, allegedly, Kennedy and Salinger, invaded his office in Detroit .
 This is wholly imagined, though it may have been inspired by the visit of Salinger and Bellino to Detroit in the summer of 1957 . This is a wholly imagined novel .
 Boston Traveler: Dedicated?— Depends on Whom You Ask?"" Boston traveler, January 9, 1961, published this week .
 J Edgar Hoover spoke of “Giancana's close relationship with Frank Sinatra” in a memorandum of May 10, 1962 . Hoover: “I'm not surprised at the extent of the relationship between the two men .”
 Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, 94 Cong. 1 Sess. , 133. , was 94-94 . Alleged assassination plots involved foreign leaders in the U.S. Senate .
 Peter Lawford with Steve Dunleavy, “Peter Lawford Tells,” Star , February 17, 1976 . See also Lawford’s interview with the Star .
 Walter Lippmann, “The Underworld, Our Secret Servant,” Forum, Forum, January 1931 . Lippman: "The Underworld is our secret Servant"
 Scarface and Little Caesar do not depict their Italian protagonists as inhabiting the sentimental mythic realm later celebrated by Mario Puzo and Francis Ford Coppola in The Godfather . Scarface does not depict Italian protagonists inhabiting sentimental mythics later celebrated in the Godfather film .
 RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, IV, 22, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first president of the United States in 1964 .
 Ronald W May, ""Organized Crime and Disorganized Cops,” Nation, June 27, 1959. May, wrote: "Organized crime and disorganized police are a problem"
 RFK, memorandum, February 22, 1958, March 1-2; RFK: Enemy Within, 275276; Senate Select Committee, Hearings, 85 Cong. Cong., 2 Sess. , 8330. RFK was assassinated in September 1968 .
 John T Dunlop, “The Public Interest in International Affairs of Unions,” address before the American Bar Association, July 12, 1957 , 4-5 . John T. Dunloper: "The Public interest in international affairs of unions is the public interest of
 Sheridan, Fal/ and Rise, 33, 50; Senate Select Committee, /nterim Report, 85 Cong. Cong., 2 Sess. Sheridan, 32, 50 . Sheridan, 29, Sheridan, 28, Sheridan and 33, Rise .
 Hackman, April 18, 1970, 73, RFK Oral History Program; Salinger, /e suis un Américain (Paris, 1957), 158. Hackman and Salinger were married in 1968 .
 Donald R Larrabee, “Crooks Exposed, Not Prosecuted,” New Bedford Standarad-Times, October 4, 1959 . Donald R. Larrabab: Crooks were exposed, not prosecuted, in 1959 .
 Felix Frankfurter, “Hands Off the Investigations,” New Republic, May 21, 1924 . Frankfurters: ‘Hands off the Investigations.’
 Philip B Kurland, "The Watergate Inquiry, 1973,” in Congress Investigates, 1972-1974, ed. Philip B. Kurland . Philip B . Kurland: The Watergate Inquiry was held in 1973 .
 John Bartlow Martin, "The Struggle to Get Hoffa," was published in 1976 . Carmine Bellino, a member of the Hoffa, was interviewed by Carmine in 1976.
 The Case Against Him for Attorney General,” New Republic, January 9, 1961. “The Case Against him for attorney General”
 Pierre Salinger in recorded interview by Theodore H White, July 19, 1965, 28, JFK Oral History Program; Salinger, With Kennedy, 30. 30. Salinger . Salinger's interview with White was recorded in 1965 .
 Kenneth P O’Donnell and David Powers, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye", 151. Kenneth P . O‘Donnell and . David Powers wrote the book, "Johnny"
 Joseph Alsop, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June 10, 1971, 55, RFK Oral History Program . Alsops was a member of the Kennedy administration in the 1960s .
 "Remember Hubert,"" United Auto Workers Washington Report, January 16, 1978. Remember Hubert."
 Koskoff, joseph P Kennedy (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1974), 399, 596; James MacGregor Burns, /ohn Kennedy , 196. Burns, 196 .
 Theodore C Sorensen, “Election of 1960,” in History of American Presidential Election, ed. ed. “The Election of 1960’s 1960.” In 1960, Barack Obama ran for the White House .
 Joseph Tydings, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 3, 1971, 6, RFK Oral History Program . Tyding was assassinated in 1968 in the assassination of President Richard Kennedy .
 RFK quotations are from RFK, in recorded interview by author, February 27, 1965, JFK Oral History Program . RFK: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of my life" RFK was assassinated in 1968 . JFK was assassinated at the age of 50 .
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 13, 1964, Il, 5, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first President of the U.S. in 1964 .
 Richard Wade, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, December 13, 1973, 9-10, 20, 20 . Wade was interviewed by Greene in 1973 . Wade's interview was recorded by Greene at the request of Greene . Wade: "Richard Wade is a great man, a great
 Stewart Alsop, “Kennedy’s Magic Formula,” Saturday Evening Post, August 13, 1960. Kennedy”s magic Formula, was the president of the United States .
 Stein and Plimpton, American Journey, 90. Stein, 90, is famous for his work in New York City, New York .
 Wofford, Christmas letter; as amended by Theodore H White, in interview by author, February 8, 1978 . Author: "Christmas letter" was published in 1978 .
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, February 29, 1964, 1, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first President of the U.S. in 1964 .
 John F Kennedy, A Compendium of Speeches, Statements, and Remarks Delivered During His Service in the Congress of the U.S. Kennedy, 1108. Kennedy . Kennedy's book is published by the Library of Congress .
 Robert A Lovett, in recorded interview by Dorothy Fosdick, July 20, 1964, 9, JFK Oral History Program . Lovett was a member of the Kennedy administration . He was killed by a plane crash in 1964 .
 RFK, in recorded interview by author, February 27, 1965, 53, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first president of the United States . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, I, 14, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first president of the United States .
 For a sketch, see Charlotte Hays, "South of the Line of Succession," Washington Post, Dec. 30, 1973 .
 Louis Oberdorfer, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, February 5, 1970, 18, RFK Oral History Program. Louis Oberdorffer was assassinated in 1968 . He was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy in 1968, 1968 .
 Nicholas Katzenbach, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, November 16, 1964, 42, JFK Oral History Program . Interview with Anthony Lewis was recorded by Anthony in 1964 .
 This brilliant if sometimes overschematic book is indispensable for an understanding of Robert Kennedy as Attorney General . Robert Kennedy would have drawn heavily on the book .
 Il Il, Inte/ligence Activities and the Rights of Americans, 94 Cong. 2 Sess. , 44. Il . Il . I, Il, I, I and I, II, I wrote a book on the rights of Americans . The book is entitled "Int
 Allen was interviewed by Ovid Demaris in 1975 . Allen: "The Private Life of J. Edgar Hoover was a private man"
 Sullivan, in interview by Jack Nelson of the Los Angeles Times, May 15, 1973; Frank J Donner, “Hoover's Legacy,” Nation, June 1, 1974 . Sullivan, Frank J. Donner: Hoover's legacy will be remembered for his work
 Dean Rusk testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, July 23, 1974; quoted in Church committee, Final Report, bk. 1974 . Rusk's testimony is quoted in the Church committee's Final Report .
 Sullivan: Ramsey Clark became Attorney General in 1977 . The situation changed when Clark was Attorney General, Sullivan says .
 Jackson to Congressman Hatton Sumners, March 19, 1941, in Church committee, Fina/ Report, bk. Jackson . Jackson to Sumners: "I am a man of God, I am not a woman of God."
 Elsey to Truman to Truman, February 2, 1950, in Church committee, Final Report, bk. Elsey . Report: Elsey, Truman, Elsey and Truman. Report .
 Brownell to Hoover to Hoover, May 22, 1954, in Church committee, Final Report, bk. Brownell . Brownell: Brownell's report was a result of a Church committee .
 RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, IV, 22, JFK Oral History Program . RFK in recorded interviews by John Bartlow Martin and Anthony Lewis . JFK oral history program features interviews with RFK and others .
 RFK/FBI/FOIA release: "Attorney General’s Effort to Get into Bureau Gymnasium,"" February 1, 1961, RFK . Edwards to John P Mohr, “Attorney General's Effort . to get into Bureau gymnasium"
 William Barry, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, October 22, 1969, 69, RFK Oral History Program. William Barry was assassinated in 1968 . Barry was killed by the assassination of RFK President Bobby Kennedy .
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 13, 1964, 1, 34, 36, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first President of the United States in 1964 .
 The Attorney General quoted the Attorney General in the London Sunday Times as saying that half the . membership of the CPUSA consisted of FBI agents . An outraged patriot sent the clipping to Hoover .
 The FBI director's instructions to the FBI Boston office, October 28, 1954; and his notation on a memorandum of June 15, 1962; . He wrote a memo to FBI St. Nicholas, July 21, 1950; his instruction to FBI .
 William C Sullivan, in interview by author, July 26, 1976; Navasky, Kennedy Justice, 44, 44 . Sullivan: "Navasky" was Kennedy's first Supreme Court decision to grant clemency .
 Gerald Goettel, “Why the Crime Syndicates Can’t Be Touched,"" Harper's, November 1960 . Gerald "Why the crime syndicates can’'t be Touched"
 RFK, in Martin interview, |, 37; Theodore C Sorensen, The Kennedy Legacy , 242. RFK was assassinated in 1968 . RFK died in 1968 at age 37; RFK's funeral was held in New York City .
 In 1968 the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act attempted to establish standards for wiretapping . The act was passed by the House of Representatives in 1968 .
 Report: 94 Cong. 2 Sess. Ill, Supplementary Detailed Detailed Staff Reports on Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans, 94 Cong., 2 . Sess., 301. Ill . Report: "Intelligence Activities" and "Rights of Americans"
 J Edgar Hoover, "The FBI’s War on Organized Crime,"" U.S. News & World Report, April 18, 1966 . Hoover, FBI Director of the FBI, J. Edgar Hoover . Hoover: The FBI is fighting organized crime in the United States .
 Robert H Jackson, “The Federal Prosecutor,” Journal of the American Judicature Society, June 1940 . Jackson was a Federal Prosecutor in 1940 .
 In congressional testimony in 1967, quoted by Herman Schwartz, “Six Years of Tapping and Bugging,” Herman Schwartz said . Herman Schwartz quoted by Schwartz in 1967 .
 Martin Luther King, Jr, Jr. “It’s a Difficult Thing to Teach a President,” Look, November 17, 1964 . King: “I’m not sure what I’ve done to teach a President.” Martin Luther
 RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, Il, 4, 9, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first President of the United States in 1964 .
 Burke Marshall also participated in the civil rights interviews on that date . Burke Marshall and Burke Marshall were interviewed on that day .
 Hoover, in interview by Dean Fischer, Time, December 14, 1970; see also interview by Ken Clawson, Washington Post, November 17, 1970 . Hoover: "I don't want to be president of the United States again" Hoover said in interview with Dean Fischer . Hoover said
 James Wechsler, “The FBI’s Failure in the South,"" Progressive, December 1963 .
 Journal of Negro History, October 1969, 352. Pat Watters and Stephen Gillers , 184; Alan Lichtman, ""The Federal Assault Against Voting Discrimination in the Deep South, 1957-1967 ""Journal of Negro history"
 Stein and Plimpton, American Journey, 96; Guthman, We Band of Brothers, 175. Guthman was 175 . Guthman is a member of the band's collective collective .
 Miriam Feingold, “Chronicling the ‘Movement,’"" Reviews in American History, March 1974, 155. Reviewer: "The ‘movement’s” movement is “a movement that began in the 1970s .
 Samuel Lubell, “It’s Bobby Who Roils Dixie,"" Detroit Free Press, July 13, 1961 . Lubell: "It's Bobby who Roil Dixie"
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, May 14, 1964, . JFK Oral History Program. RFK was RFK's first President of the United States .
 See “Judicial Performance in the Fifth Circuit,"" Yale Law Journal, November 1963, 87. See ‘Judicial performance in the 5th Circuit’ in 1963 .
 Clarke County situation is well described by one of the government attorneys in Gerald M Stem, in Southern Justice, ed. Stem .
 This Yale Ph.D. dissertation draws on confidential interviews and is available only in summary . It is based on interviews conducted by anonymous sources .
 Kennedy’s integrationist judges were largely appointed in the upper and western south . The somewhat rigid Curzan criteria had the curious result of classifying Judge Frank Johnson as a segregationist .
 Archibald C Cox spoke before the Associated Harvard Alumni, Harvard Today, June 1975 . Cox spoke at Harvard Today in June 1975. Cox was a member of the Harvard Today Alumni Committee . Cox was the president of Harvard's Alumni Association in 1975 .
 Theodore M Hesburgh, in recorded interview by Joseph E O’Connor, March 27, 1966, 21, 23, JFK Oral History Program . Hesburgh was assassinated in 1966 .
 Martin Luther King, Jr., ""Fumbling on the New Frontier,"" Nation, March 3, 1962 . King: "Fumbling" on the new frontier. King: King was a pioneer of civil disobedience .
 Robert C Weaver, in recorded interview by Daniel Patrick Moynihan, October 1, 1964, 210, JFK Oral History Program . Weaver was interviewed by Daniel Patrice Moynihan in 1964 . Weaver's interview is part of the JFK oral history program . Weaver talks about Weaver's
 Bayard Rustin, “The Meaning of the March on Washington,” Liberation, October 1963 . Rustin: The meaning of the march on Washington is to be known .
 On Meet the Press, May 26, 1963; James Meredith, Three Years in Mississippi, 294 . Meredith was a prominent civil rights activist in Mississippi . Meredith died of a heart attack in 1963 .
 RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, VII, 6, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first president of the United States in 1964 .
 Martin Luther King, Jr., “Bold Design for a New South,"" Nation, March 30, 1963 . King: "Bold" design for a new South .
 RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 22, 1964, 4, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first president of the United States in 1964 .
 The Trial of Martin Luther King was the trial of King's life . King was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi, in 1968 .
 Burke Marshall, in recorded interview by Jean Stein, October 6, 1968, 31, 31 . Interview with Jean Stein .
 Meet the Press, May 26, 1963; Meredith, Three Years in Mississippi, 299, 299. Meredith, Meredith, three years in Mississippi .
 RFK in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 30, 1964, . RFK was RFK’s presidential candidate in 1964 . JFK Oral History Program: RFK, RFK and RFK .
 Hackman, April 11, 1972, 83, RFK Oral History Program; William V Shannon, The Heir Apparent , 49. Hackman was RFK's son-in-law; Shannon was the son-of-law . Hackman and Shannon were married at the
 RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, VIII, 25; and December 6, 1964 - 3, 5, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was assassinated in June 1968 . JFK was assassinated at the age of 16 .
 RFK, in Lewis interview, December 22, 1964, 4, 4; December 4, 6, 8, 14 . RFK: "RFK was a hero of the day" RFK was assassinated in September 1968 .
 RFK, in Lewis interview, December 4, 1964, VIII, 24; and December 6, I, 3, 3. RFK was assassinated in 1968 . RFK: "I don't believe in the future"
 Douglas, in Hackman interview, and Raywid, in Greene interview . For details, see Douglas and Greene interview with Hackman . Raywid interview will be published on Thursday .
 Bayard Rustin, “The Washington March—a 10-year Perspective,"" Crisis Crisis, September 1973 .
 Don Oberdorfer, "King Adviser Says FBI ‘Used’ him,” Washington Post, December 15, 1975 . Don Oberdorffer: King adviser says FBI "Used" him .
 Victor Navasky, “The Government and Martin Luther King,” Atlantic Monthly, November 1970. “Martin Luther King’s legacy will be remembered,’ he said .
 The King's trial was the subject of a review by the Department of Justice . King was a prominent figure in the U.S. Supreme Court in the 1980s .
 Hugh Sidey, “L.B.J., Hoover and Domestic Spying,"" Time, February 10, 1975 . Sidey: Hoover, Hoover and domestic spying are the subject of a new book .
 Donald M Wilson, in recorded interview by James Greenfield, September 2, 1964, 31, JFK Oral History Program . Wilson was interviewed by Greenfield in 1964 . Wilson's interview is part of JFK oral history program .
 Milton Gwirtzman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, December 23, 1971, 6-9, RFK Oral History Program . Gwirtz: "Milton was a hero of the day for the Kennedy administration . He was assassinated in November 1968 .
 RFK, in Lewis interview, December 4, 1964, IV, 2; RFK in Martin interview, April 13, 1964 . RFK was assassinated in September 1968, 1968, at age 40 .
 Kenneth O’Donnell and David Powers with Joe McCarthy, “Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 280. Kenneth O'Donnell, David Powers, and David . Powers with . David Powers . Joe McCarthy's "Johnny" is a classic novel .
 Felix Frankfurter, in recorded interview by Charles McLaughlin, June 10, 1964, 52, JFK Oral History Program . Frankfurters' interview with McLaughlin is part of JFK oral history .
 Clark Mollenhoff, Despoi/lers of Democracy (Garden City, N.Y.Y, 1965), 21. Clark Mollsenhoff was 21.
 Ronald Goldfarb, "Politics at the Justice Department," in Conspiracy, ed. Ronald Goldfraib, "politically at the Department of Justice’s"
 John Kennedy, in whatever mood of truth or teasing, told such a story to Joseph Alsop . John Kennedy was in a playful mood when he told the story . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1964 .
 No one in the Department of Justice with whom | discussed the story had heard of it . No one then in the Justice Department had heard the story .
 Justin Feldman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, October 23, 1969, 48, RFK Oral History Program. Justin Feldman was a member of the Kennedy administration .
 For different language but the same points, see Navasky, Kennedy Justice, 389. For different . language but . the same . points, read Kennedy Justice . For . different language, but the . same points of the same point, read Justice.
 Robert Kennedy told me on December 21, 1962; noted in my journal of that date . So Robert Kennedy said to me on Dec. 21: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 Anthony Lewis, “A Tribute to Robert Francis Kennedy,” delivered at unveiling of RFK portrait, Justice Department, July 22, 1975 . RFK was RFK’s life partner in Washington, DC .
 Abba Schwartz to author, memorandum,d.d. , with supporting material from 1963, from 1963 . Abba wrote: “Abba Schwartz was the author of the book’s first book, “The American Museum of Modernism”
 Anthony Lewis, ""Legislative Apportionment and the Federal Courts,"" Harvard Law Review, April 1958. Anthony Lewis . Lewis . Anthony Lewis. Lewis, "The Federal Courts" .
 James Clayton in the Washington Post. James Clayton writes in Washington Post; see Navasky, Kennedy Justice, 277.
 Archibald C Cox, The Role of the Supreme Court in American Government . Cox: The role is important to the U.S. Supreme Court . Cox says the role is vital to the nation's government . Cox writes that the Supreme Supreme Court is a vital part of the U
 “The Search for a Wage-Price Policy, 1945.1971, ed.” in Exhortation and Controls: The Search for . a Wage . Price Policy . “” was a wage-price policy,” according to the author of “
 David McDonald, in recorded interview by Charles T Morrissey, February 15, 1966, 15, JFK Oral History Program . McDonald was interviewed by Charles Morrissey in 1966 . McDonald's interview was recorded in 1966, 1966 .
 RFK, in Martin interview, April 13, 1964, Illinois, 5, 7-8, JFK Oral History Program . RFK in Martin: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future" RFK: "It's a dream. I'm scared to be scared
 Department ofjustice release, “Text of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy's Statement,” April 6, 1961 . Department of Justice release: ‘Text of attorney general's Statement.’
 “Antipoverty and the Community Action Program’s” in American Political Institutions and Public Policy, ed. Antipoverty, “in American political Institutions, Public Policy.” “In the United States,” is a series of articles
 Blumenthal's essay, derived from a Harvard honors thesis, draws extensively on unpublished interviews and is an essential source . Blumenthal: "The essay is derived from an essay that draws extensively from unpublished interviews"
 Social Reform Politics tn the Kennedy Administration is based on the files of the President’s Committee on Juvenile Delinquency .
 Kenneth P O’Donnell and David F Powers, “Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 278. Kenneth O'Donnell and . David F. Powers,  David F Powers wrote the book .
 The article was never published, perhaps because Joseph Kennedy feared to complicate his son’s political career . Joseph Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 George F Kennan, in recorded interview by Louis Fischer, March 23, 1965, 5-6, JFK Oral History Program . Kennan was assassinated in 1968 . JFK was assassinated at the hands of President Richard Nixon .
 John F Kennedy, review of Deterrent or Defense by B H Liddell Hart, Saturday Review, September 3, 1960 . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1960 .
 Gardner, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Jr., and Hans Morgenthau, The Origins of the Cold War (Lexington, Ky., 1970), 98. Gardner, Jr. and Hans M. Morgentha, wrote, "The Origins of The Cold War" The
 Dean Acheson, in recorded interview by Lucius Battle, April 27, 1964, 12, 20, JFK Oral History Program. Dean acheson recorded interview with Lucius Battle .
 Soviet historians denied opportunity to write honest contemporary history . It is pathetic that Soviet historians are denied any chance to write history .
 In the absence of Soviet evidence, western historians have no alternative to speculation . Western historians must rely on Soviet evidence .
 Philip Bonsai, “Open Letter to an Author,” Foreign Service Journal, February 1967, published by the Foreign Service .
 Eric Hobsbawm, “Why America Lost the Vietnam War’s Vietnam War "" listener, May 18, 1972 . The Vietnam War ended in 1972 .
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, March 1, 1964, Il, 9, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first President of the U.S. in 1964 .
 Gilpatric, in O’Brien interview, June 30, 1970, 69, and August 12, 1970 . O'Brien interview with GilPatric in 1970s .
 Howard Hunt, “The Azalea Trail Guide to CIA,"" National Review, April 29, 1977 . Hunt: "Azalea trail guide to CIA" Hunt: The Azalee Trail Guide is a guide to the CIA .
 Robert Lovett, in recorded interview by Dorothy Fosdick, August 17, 1964, 5, JFK Oral History Program . Lovett was a member of the Kennedy assassination squad . He was killed in 1964 .
 Rostow, “Guerrilla Warfare in Underdeveloped Areas,” in The Guerrilla — and How to Fight Him, ed. Rostow . Rostow’s book is “The Guerrilla Warlord” and “How to Fight him’
 For a good account, see Maurice Halperin, The Rise and Decline of Fidel Castro , chs.-29 . For a very good account of Castro's fall in Cuba, read the book .
 The Rise and Decline of Fidel Castro is a detached, incisive and valuable work . Since | had some harsh words about the author in A Thousand Days, may . say here that the work is detached and incisive .
 Romulo Betancourt, “The Venezuelan Miracle,” Reporter, August 13, 1964 . The Venezuelan Miracle was Venezuela's first major success .
 Quoted by Eqbal Ahmad, “The Theory and Fallacies of Counterinsurgency,"" Nation, August 2, 1971. Quoted from Ahmad, "The Theory" of Counter-insurgencies .
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 30, 1964, Ill, 17, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's presidential candidate in 1964 . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Richard M Nixon, ""Cuba, Castro and John F Kennedy,” Reader's Digest, November 1964 . Richard M. Nixon, "Cuba" and "John F Kennedy"
 The White House meeting described by the assistant to the head of the CIA unit working on Cuban operations . The meeting was described as a meeting by a CIA assistant .
 Bissell himself could not recall such a meeting, though he agreed in essence with the spirit of the instruction . Bissell: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure I'm not going to be surprised"
 Fora useful, though incomplete and occasionally inaccurate, account of the Miami operation, see Taylor Branch and George Crile Ill, “The Kennedy Vendetta,"" Harper's, August 1975 .
 Ramon Barquin, review of Give Us This Day by E Howard Hunt, Society, July/August 1975 .
 Anson: “The CIA and the Mafia,” New Times, May 30, 1975; and “Jack, Judy, Sam & Johnny’s” January 23, 1976. Anson, ‘Jack and Judy’: New Times .
 Trafficante was a double agent, says George Crile Ill . For this and other evidence pointing to the thesis that Trafficante may have been an agent, see Washington Post .
 George Lardner, Jr., Jr., “Fear of Retaliation Curbed AntiCastro Plots,"" Washington Post, July 21, 1975. George: Fear of retaliation curbed anti-Castro plots .
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, March 1, 1964, . JFK Oral History Program. RFK was assassinated in 1968 . RFK: "I was a hero of the day"
 Llewellyn Thompson, in recorded interview by Elizabeth Donahue, March 25, 1964, 4, JFK Oral History Program . Thompson was interviewed in 1964 . Thompson's interview is part of JFK oral history program .
 Sorensen, who put Kennedy's manuscript in final shape for publication, made the change in an excess of modesty .
 RFK, in interview by author, February 27, 1965, 6, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first president of the United States . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Dean Acheson talks to Kenneth Harris,” Listener, April 8, 1971. No Yearning to be Loved.”
 Dean Acheson: Robert Kennedy's Version of the Cuban Missile Affair . Robert Kennedy’s version of the affair was the Cuban missile crisis, he says .
 Meeker, an able and incorruptible public servant, was ambassador to Rumania . Meeker was later ambassador to the Republic of Romania .
 Alexis Johnson, in recorded interview by William Brubeck, d. d. , 45, JFK Oral History Program . U Alexis Johnson was in a band that performed at JFK's JFK memorial .
 Robert McNamara, in interview for David Wolper’s television special on Robert Kennedy, October 23, 1969 . McNamara: “Robert Kennedy was not a hero. He was a hero of the day. He had been a hero for the United States. He died in
 Kenneth O’Donnell and David F Powers, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 318. Kenneth O'Donnell and . David F. Powers, "Johnny" was born in 1946 .
 Bohlen to JFK, October 18, 1962, in Charles E Bohlen, Witness to History, 1929-1969 , 491 . Bohlen was a witness to JFK's assassination in 1962 .
 RFK, Thirteen Days, 4849. RFK: "Thirteen Days" is RFK's 13th birthday . RFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Dobrynin said to Averell Harriman in Hobe Sound, Florida, in the winter of 1969, in Florida, as described by Harrimans to me . Dobrynins: "I'm going to be a hero in my life, but I'm not going
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, May 14, 1964, Il, 1, RFK Oral History Program . RFK was assassinated in 1968 . Interview was recorded in 1964 .
 Fidel Castro, in interview with Claude Julien, Le Monde, March 22, 1963 . Fidel Castro in interview: "I don't want to be seen as a terrorist"
 See Graham T Allison, “Cuban Missiles and Kennedy Macho,” Washington Monthly, October 1972, .
 Richard Nixon, “Cuba, Castro, and John F Kennedy,"" Reader's Digest, November 1964 . Richard Nixon .
 Report to the Committee on Foreign Relations, 94 Cong., 1 Sess. , 14. May 1975, report to the . Committee on the Committee of . Foreign Relations .
 John Nolan, in recorded interview by Frank DeRosa, April 25, 1967, 6, JFK Oral History Program . John Nolan was interviewed in the April 25/6, 1967 interview . Nolan's interview was recorded in the JFK oral history program .
 Joseph Dolan, in recorded interview by Frank DeRosa, July 8, 1964, 2-3, JFK Oral History Program . Dolan's interview was recorded in the JFK oral history program in 1964 .
 Lloyd N Cutler, in recorded interview by Frank DeRosa, June 22, 1964, 23, JFK Oral History Program . Cutler was interviewed on June 22 and 23, 1964 . Cutler's interview was recorded in 1964 .
 Robert Hurwich was interviewed by John Plank, April 24-May 4, 1964, on JFK Oral History Program . Hurwich, in recorded interview, was interviewed on May 4, 1965, on the JFK oral history program .
 Sir Herbert Marchant, “Cuba on the Brink — Il,” London Sunday Telegraph, October 22, 1967 . Marchant: ‘Cuba’s Cuba is on the brink of collapse .
 Ayers' CIA experience broke up his marriage, created an impassioned identification with the Cubans . Ayers resigned from both the Agency and the Army when interest passed in 1964 from Cuba to Vietnam .
 His book is at times highly emotional, though ordinarily prosaic when describing covert operations . The author's book is often highly emotional and sometimes prosaic .
 Dick Russell, “Litthe Havana’s Reign of Terror,” New Times, October 29, 1976 . Dick Russell: Havana's reign of terror was ‘reign of terror’
 Hugh Thomas, Cuba, 1286-1287; George Crile Ill, “The Riddle of Am LAsH,” Washington Post, May 2, 1976. Hugh Thomas was born in Cuba .
 Church committee, Assassination of President Kennedy, 14; Johnson, Bay of Pigs, 354, 354 . Church committee: Assassination was assassination of president Kennedy .
 Statement from office of Senator George McGovern, July 30, 1975; Church committee, Assassination Plots, 71. Statement from . McGovern's office . Statement from Office of Senator McGovern on July 30: “George McGovern’s office”
 The FBI deleted the words “in place” before sending copies of Morgan's deposition to the Attorney General, the Secret Service and the White House . The words were deleted before the deposition was sent to the attorney general and Secret Service .
 For further detail, see Ronald Kessler and Laurence Stern, "Slain Mobster Claimed Cuban Link to JFK Death," Washington Post .
 George Crile Ill, “The Mafia, the CIA and Castro’s Castro,” Washington Post, May 16, 1976 .
 Jean Daniel, "Unofficial Envoy,"" New Republic, December 14, 1963 . Jean Daniel was an official envoy to the Soviet Union .
 Attwood-Vallejo talks were held on November 12, 1963 . Bundy signed a memorandum to the U.S. Supreme Court on November 11, 1963. Bundy said the talks were "a non-party affair" Bundy also signed a memo to the Supreme Court . Bundy said
 Attwood, Reds and Blacks, 144; Church committee, Assassination Plots, 174. Attwood was a member of the Church Committee . Attwood is the author of the novel "Reds and Blacks"
 George Crile Ill, “Our Heritage—the Exile Cuban Terrorists,” Washington Post, November 7, 1976. George Criele Ill. Ill.
 RFK, recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 13, 1964, Il, 2, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first President of the United States . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 A Retrospective,” in Latin America: The Search for a New International Role, ed. ed. “The search for a new international role’s Latin America” is published in Latin American: The search for an international role in the world .
 “The Roots of Latin American Underdevelopment,” in Readings in U.S. Imperialism, ed. ed. “In Latin America Underdevelopment is Latin America’s underdeveloped. The Roots of Underdevelopment are Latin American underdevelopment.
 The Alliance That Lost Its Way,” Foreign Affairs, April 1967, 437438, 442.38 . The Alliance that Lost its Way was published in 1967 .
 John F Kennedy foreword to Theodore C Sorensen, Decision-Making in the White House , xii. John F. Kennedy, foreword . Theodore C. Sorenensen .
 Art Buchwald, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, March 12, 1969, 11, RFK Oral History Program . Buchwald's interview was recorded in 1969, 1969 and 1969 .
 Adlai Stevenson to Mary Lasker, May 21, 1962, in a forthcoming volume of letters, edited by Walter Johnson .
 John English, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 3, 1969, 4, 6, RFK Oral History Program. John English was assassinated in 1968 . English was the first African-American to be assassinated in the United States .
 Listener: "Under the Eye of the KGB — a Former Police Chief Looks Back" Listener, May 22, 1975. Nosenko, a former police chief, was a former KGB chief .
 Mansfield, UPI interview by Mike Feinsilber, Buffalo Evening News, September 16, 1976 . Mansfield was interviewed by UPI, Buffalo, NY, on Sept. 16th, 1976. Mansfield: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die" Mans
 Stein and Plimpton, American Journey, 129; Spalding, in Stewart interview, 7-8 . Stein andPlimpton's American Journey is published by Stein, Plimptptpton, and published by Stewart Stewart .
 Roy Wilkins, in recorded interview by Berl Bernhard, August 13, 1964, 14, JFK Oral History Program . Wilkins was interviewed by Bernhard on August 13 and 14, 1964 .
 RFK, in Martin interview, April 30, 1964, 1, 21; RFK in Lewis interview, December 4, 1964 . RFK was assassinated in 1968 in Washington, D.C.
 RFK, in recorded interview by William Manchester, May 16, 1964, 4-5, 8. RFK in recorded interviews with William Manchester . RFK was RFK's first black president .
 John Bartlow Martin, Overtaken by Events (Garden City, N.Y.Y, 1966), 632. Martin. Martin: "Overtaken by events" Martin's book is published in 1966 .
 Senate Select Committee to Study Government . Operations with respect to Intelligence Activities (Church committee) Final Report, bk. Senate Select . Committee . Final Report: Report on Intelligence Activities .
 Vivian Cadden, “The Murder of President Kennedy,"" McCall's, March 1977. Vivian . Cadden .
 Walter Sheridan, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 1, 1970, 3-4, RFK Oral History Program; Sheridan, The Fall and Riseof Jimmy Hoffa , 300, 356, 408. Walter Sheridan . Walter Sheridan: "Jimmy Hoffa is a man who
 The letter writer, Frank Chavez, SecretaryTreasurer of Local 901, was later murdered by one of his own bodyguards . Chavez was later killed by a member of the union .
 This was a loose-leaf volume kept by Angie Novello under various headings . It was used by RFK for sustenance when he had to give a speech or write an article .
 He used the last three sentences in the third Camus quote as the epigraph for his own book To Seek a Newer World . However, he omits the word believer in the last sentence of the quote .
 American Bar Association, Special Committee on Election Reform, “Symposium on the Vice-Presidency,” Fordham Law Review, February 1977, 750, 750 .
 The ABA, wrong again, insists on the usage of Vice-President . For some reason the ABA insisted on the use of the VP, not vice-president .
 Bill Moyers, in television interview with David Susskind, October 13, 1974; Daniel Patrick Moynihan, interview, Playboy, March 1977 . Moyers: "I'm not a guy who doesn't like people who don't like me" Moyers' interview with S
 Michael Janeway, “LBJ and the Kennedys,” Atlantic Monthly, February 1972 . Janeway: "LBJ" was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives in 1968 .
 Bishop and Robert Kennedy were old foes in consequence of pro-Hoffa articles Bishop had writtten in 1959 . Bishop and Kennedy, it should be added, were old enemies .
 RFK in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, February 29, 1964, 30, JFK Oral History Program; RFK, in interview by author, 42. RFK was RFK's first president to be elected in 1964 .
 RFK, in Martin interview, May 14, 1964, I, 30, JFK Oral History Program . RFK: "I, 30" RFK was RFK's first president of the United States . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 FBI’s Hoover Scores Ramsey Clark, RFK,” Washington Post, November 17, 1970 . RFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Walter Sheridan, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 1, 1970, 4, RFK Oral History Program. Walter Sheridan was assassinated in 1968 . Walter Sheridan is credited with saving the life of his life in prison .
 McGeorge Bundy, in recorded interview by William W Moss, January 12, 1972, 23, RFK Oral History Program . Bundy was interviewed by William Moss in 1972 . Bundy's interview is part of RFK oral history program .
 Guthman, We Band of Brothers, 251; Theodore H White, The Making of the President, 1964, 261 . White's book is "Making the President of the United States"
 RFK, in Martin interviews, March 1, 1964, Il, 21, May 14, 1964 . RFK was assassinated in June 1964 in New York City .
 David Moynihan, Adam Yarmolinsky and others have been critical of the OEO . The OEO is a program to help people in poverty .
 Haywood Burns, “The Federal Government and Civil Rights,” in Southern Justice, ed. Burns . Burns: The federal government and civil rights of civil rights in the U.S. are at risk of civil liberties .
 Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., “Hammer of Civil Rights,” Nation, March 9, 1964 . King: “I am proud of my work in the field of civil rights. I am proud to be able to continue my work.”
 James Weschsler, “The FBI’s Failure in the South,” Progressive, December 1963 . Wesch: The FBI failed in the south .
 Staff Reports on Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans, 94 Cong., 2 Sess. , 7-8. III, Supplementary Detailed Staff Reports . III . III, . Detailed Detailed Brief Brief Briefings, . and the rights of Americans. , .
 Hoover to Bundy, July 25, 1961, in Church committee, Final Report, bk. Hoover to McGeorge Bundy, . Hoover to . Bundy, in church committee, final Report, . Final Report of the Church Committee . Hoover .
 Richard D Cotter, “Notes toward a Definition of National Security,” Washington Monthly, December 1975 . Cotter’s notes were published by Washington Monthly in 1975 .
 Sullivan, in interview by author, July *6, 1976; Ovid Demaris, The Director , 326. Sullivan . Sullivan: "The Director" is a film about the director's life . Demaris: The Director was born and died in 1976 .
 For the case against informers, see Frank Donner, “Political Informers,” in Investigating the FBI, ed. ed. For more information on political informers in this article, visit www.fbcc.org .
 The Vice Presidency 1. | am indebted to the Johnson Library for searching its records to the above effect .
 Kenneth P O’Donnell and David F Powers, “/ohnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 391. Kenneth P . O'Donnell and . David F. Powers . Powers .
 Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Jr., “On the Presidential Succession,” Political Science Quarterly, Fall 1974. See Arthur M. Schlesingers, Jr. ‘On the President Succession’
 Susan Wilson, “A Guide to Travelling with the Robert F Kennedys,” ms. in the author's possession, 4-5. In her possession, Susan Wilson wrote a guide to travelling with Robert F. Kennedy . Susan Wilson's book, "A Guide
 Moss, January 27, 1971, 22, JFK Oral History Program; William V Shannon, The Heir Apparent , 12. Moss . Moss was JFK's son, William Shannon, the son of William Shannon . Moss, the daughter of Shannon and Shannon, was assassinated in 1968 .
 Joseph Kraft, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, March 7, 1970, 18, RFK Oral History Program; Shannon, Heir Apparent, 12. Joseph Kraft . Kraft was RFK's son and wife .
 Benjamin C Bradlee, President of the State of the Union, spoke with President Kennedy in 1964 . Bradlee and Kennedy met in the Oval Office at the White House .
 Lawrence O'Donnell and Powers, “/ohnny,” 397; see Lawrence O’Brien, No Final Victories , 175. O'Brien, 175.
 Senate Select Committee to Study Government . Operations with respect to Intelligence Activities . Fina/ Report, bk. Senate Select . Committee to . Study Governmental Operations with . respect to . Intelligence Activities , Fina .
 Jack English, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 25, 1969, 13, RFK Oral History Program. Jack English was assassinated in 1968 .
 Stevenson to Marietta Tree, August 10, 1964, in John Bartlow Martin, Ad/ai Stevenson and the World (Garden City, N.Y., 1977), 812. Stevenson to be published in 1977 . Stevenson was married to a woman who died in 1964 .
 Justin Feldman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 36, 1969, 97, RFK Oral History Program. Justin Feldman was a member of the Kennedy administration .
 Mailer wrote his endorsement “A Vote for Bobby K.” for the Village Voice . Mailer endorsed Bobby K.'s candidacy .
 Wes Barthelmes, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 20, 1969, 6, RFK Oral History Program. Wes Barthemes was the leader of the Democratic Party in 1968 .
 Adam Walinsky, in recorded interview by Thomas Johnston, November 29, 1969, 34, RFK Oral History Program . Walinsky was a member of the Democratic National Committee for the Kennedy administration .
 Walinsky, in Johnston interview, November 29, 1969, 32, 32; November 30, 1969 , 16, 25. Walinsky . Walinsky was interviewed by Johnston in November 1969, 1969 .
 Jacob Javits, in recorded interview by William vanden Heuvel, June 19, 1970, 11, RFK Oral History Program . Javits: "Jacob Javits" Javits' interview was recorded in 1970s interview with William vanderen Hevel .
 Javits, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June 7, 1973, 7, RFK Oral History Program . Javits was interviewed in 1973, 1973 and 1973. Javits' interview was recorded on RFK oral history program .
 Fred Harris, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, July 29, 1970, 5, RFK Oral History Program . Fred Harris was a member of the Kennedy administration .
 Meg Greenfield in the pro-Johnson Reporter, December 15, 1966, and elsewhere, was the subject of several stories .
 Kennedy had considered Mansfield for judicial appointment when he was Attorney General and endorsed him now . Dolan, in Hackman interview, April 10, 1970, 37, 37. Mansfield was considered for appointment by Kennedy .
 Walter Mondale, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 17, 1973, 19, RFK Oral History Program . Mondale was a Democratic candidate for president in 1968 . Mondales was a Democrat in the House of Representatives .
 Richard Goodwin, “Our Stake in a Big Awakening,” Life, April 14, 1967. Quoted by Richard Goodwin . Goodwin: Our Stake is in a big awakening .
 Juseelino Kubitschek, ""L Alliance pour le progres,” Historia, hors série 33 , 151. Juseleino Kubitchek .
 He had already cut another significant part of the draft because it had been leaked to Reston of the Times . The UN ended up with thin fare .
 Hackman, June 26, 1969, 5-8; Frank Mankiewicz and Tom Braden, “United States on Wrong Side in Dispute with Peru,” column released March 13, 1969 .
 Andrew J Glass, “The Compulsive Candidate’s” Saturday Evening Post, April 23, 1966 . Glass: “Compulsive Candidate.” Glass was the candidate for the 1964 Democratic Party. Glass: "Compulsive candidate"
 John Seigenthaler, in recorded interview by Jean Stein, May 15, 1970, 27. 27. He was killed by a car bomb in 1968 . He was the first person to be killed in a car crash in the United States .
 Paulo de Castro, “Robert Kennedy,"" Correio da Manha , November 23, 1965 . Paulo de . Castro: "Robert Kennedy" was assassinated in 1968 .
 Jann Wenner, in interview with Daniel Ellsberg, Rolling Stone, December 6, 1973 . Wenner: "I'm a rocker. I love you"
 JFK before the American Friends of Vietnam, Washington, June 1, 1956, and August 1, 1957 . JFK visited Vital Soeeches in Washington, D.C. to meet with friends of Vietnam . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 William Bundy was the deputy assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs . Bundy's unpublished manuscript on U.S. policy in East Asia during the Kennedy-Johnson years . Bundy was a senior defense official at the time .
 Directorate for Information Operations, Department of Defense, issued statement on March 22, 1972 .
 Charles Maechling, Jr., Jr., review of Anatomy of Error by Henry Brandon, Foreign Service Journal, March 1970 . Charles Mechling Jr. wrote a review of the Foreign Service Manual of Error .
 Gilpatric, in O’Brien interview, August 12, 1970, 1; Ellsberg, in Rolling Stone interview, in 1970, 2; . The two men were involved in the Pentagon Papers, the documents that led to the release of the documents .
 Report of Senator Mike Mansfield, Senator J Caleb Boggs, Senator Claiborne Pell, Senator Benjamin Smith to the Committee on Foreign Relations, 88 Cong., 1 Sess. , 8. Report of the Committee of 88 Cong. Senators .
 Roberts was the very well informed diplomatic correspondent of the Washington Post . Roberts was a well informed diplomat .
 Washington Post, August 3, 1970; Jack Anderson, “The Roots of Our Vietnam Involvement,” Washington Post,. May 4, 1975; Washington Post .
 Ellsberg, the Pentagon Papers, were released by the U.S. government in the 1960s . The Pentagon Papers were released in 1968, and the Pentagon leaked the documents .
 Bui Kien Thanh, “Mandarins of Vietnam,” International History Magazine, January 1974. Bui . Thanh was the leader of the country's most powerful military force .
 James M Gavin, “We Can Get Out of Vietnam,” Saturday Evening Post, February 24, 1968 . Gavin: ‘We can get out of Vietnam.’
 Mieczyslaw Maneli, “Encounters with John F Kennedy and Discussions on ‘Democratic Socialism,' Polish Policy, and Vietnam"" , 24. Miezyslaw . Maneli: "Encounters were with Kennedy and discussions on 'Democratic Socialist,' Polish
 Scott Scott and Reginald Zelnick, The Politics of Escalation in Vietnam, 26. Scott . Zelnick: Vietnam's rise in Vietnam has been a source of tension in the U.S.
 RFK's 1965 commencement address at International Police Academy was July 9, 1965 . RFK: "RFK was a hero of the day for the United States" RFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Cherif Guellal, in recorded interview by Jean Stein, October 18, 1968, 1-7; Cherif, in interview by author, January 1, 1978. Cherif and Cherif were assassinated in 1968 . Cherif was assassinated by the Soviet Union in March 1968
 Frank Taylor, “In South Africa, a Kennedy turns Jeers to Cheers,” National Observer , June 13, 1966 .
 Anthony Delius, “Daylight from Outside World—Why Kennedy Visit Made Such a Stir,” Cape Times, June 10, 1966 . Kennedy’s visit to Cape Cape, Cape County, was one of the most high-profile events in American history .
 John Burns, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 25, 1969-February 25, 1970, 19, 66, RFK Oral History Program. John Burns was assassinated in February 1968 .
 Richard Goodwin, a 1967 jotting book, was published by Richard Goodwin in 1977 . Goodwin is best known for his work on television and radio series, which he co-produced in New York City . Goodwin's book, "Goodwin," was published in 1977; Goodwin died in
 To Albert H Blumenthal, Ronnie Eldridge, Jack Newfield, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr, and others. To Albert . Blumenthal . Blumenthal, Eldridge . and others .
 Ronnie Eldridge, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, April 21-July 13, 1970, 92, RFK Oral History Program . Eldridge in interview with Greene . Interview with Greene: "Ronnie Eldridge" Eldridge .
 Milton Gwirtzman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, February 10, 1972, 68, RFK Oral History Program . Gwirtz: "Milton was a hero of the day for the Kennedy administration . He was assassinated in 1968 . He says he was killed by a
 Justin Feldman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, February 4, 1970, 190, RFK Oral History Program. Justin Feldman was a member of the Kennedy administration .
 Frank O'Connor, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June 19, 1970, 34, RFK Oral History Program. Frank O’Connor was assassinated in 1968 . He was assassinated by the assassination of President Kennedy in 1968, 1968 .
 Jack Newfield published Bread and Roses Too in September 1966 . The piece was reprinted in Bread and Rose Too, a collection of essays by Newfield .
 For further reflections on this theme, see Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., “On the Writing of Contemporary History,” Atlantic Monthly, March 1967 . For further reflection on this topic, read Arthur MSchlesinger’s ‘On the writing of contemporary History
 Peter Osnos, “Kennedy Acclaimed on Oxford Visit,"" Washington Post, January 29, 1967 . Kennedy was awarded a Nobel Prize for his work .
 For Rostow’s categorical denial of the SOB story and its withdrawal by Hugh Sidey of Time, see Denis O’Brien, Murderers and Other Friendly People , 258, 262 . Rostow denies the story and Sidey withdraws .
 The quotation, unattributed in the commonplace book, is from Keats's Fall of Hyperion, canto 1, 1.147 . The quotation is from the poem, which is from a famous poem .
 Robert F Kennedy, 78, died April 28, 1965, at age 78 . He was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy was a prominent figure in Washington D.C. and New York .
 Martin Luther King, Jr, “Let Justice Roll Down,” Nation, March 15, 1965 . King: "Let Justice roll down" King was assassinated in 1968 .
 Robert F Kennedy, “Crisis in Our Cities,” Critic, October-November 1967 . Kennedy: "Crisis of Our Cities" is the result of a crisis in cities .
 Robert F Kennedy, Jo Seek a Newer World (Garden City, N.Y, 1967), 21, 37. Robert F. Kennedy, 21, was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 RFK Oral History Program: Johnston, Hackman, January 21, 1970, esp.7-250, RFK oral History Program; supplemented by my interview with Johnston, June 21, 1977 . Hackman interviewed Johnston in 1977 .
 Edelman, in Hackman interview, July 15, 1969, 127; in Stein interview, 8. Edelman was interviewed by Stein and Hackman in 1969 . Edelman's interview with Stein is published by Stein .
 Edelman, in Stein interview, 12; vanden Heuvel and Gwirtzman, On His Own, 108. Edelman. Gwirtz, in interview with Stein, on his own, on Stein interview .
 Steve Bell on ABC, June 9, 1968, reprinted in An Honorable Profession, ed. ed. Steve Bell, on ABC .
 Gertrude Claflin to Ethel Kennedy, June 6, 1968, in Salinger, Honorable Profession, 71, in . Salinger . The couple were married in 1968 .
 Hackman, August 12, 1969, 87; Frank Mankiewicz and Tom Braden, Washington Post, February 24, 1970; Johnston, in interview by author. Hackman.
 Anthony Lewis, “A Tribute to Robert Francis Kennedy,” Washington, July 22, 1975, quoted by Anthony Lewis .
 Allard Lowenstein, memorandum on Robert Kennedy, d. d. , kindly made available to me by Mr Lowenstein . Robert Kennedy .
 Julius Duscha, “Kennedy Man of Hour at ADA Dinner in N.Y.,” Washington Post, January 28, 1966. Dusch was JFK's hero .
 The Ellinger and Barthelmes quotations are from Viorst, “The Skeptics""; the Meany quotation is from Joseph C Goulden, Meany , 361 . The Ellers and Barthes quotes are from Ellingers .
 Theodore H White, "The Wearing Last Weeks and a Precious Last Day," was published June 21, 1968 . White died in 1968 .
 Excerpt from interview used in “The Journey of Robert F Kennedy,"" David Wolper television production, aired February 17, 1970 . Excerpts from interview were used in "The Journey Of Robert F. Kennedy"
 Robert F. Kennedy,” Life, Life, April 9, 1965; Robert F Kennedy, “A Peak Worthy of the President,"" National Geographic, July 1965 . Kennedy, who was assassinated in 1968, died in 1968 .
 Hackman, March 22, 1969, 66, RFK Oral History Program; Lawford, Shining Hour, 216. Hackman and Lawford were RFK leaders in the 1960s .
 John Glenn, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June 26, 1969, 15, RFK Oral History Program. John Glenn in interview with Roberta . Glenn was the leader of the U.S. Democratic Party in 1968 .
 The story of Lowenstein’s guerrilla movement, and indeed the whole political history of 1968, has been well told . The story has been told of the guerrilla movement in 1968 .
 Newfield's account in Kennedy generally corresponds to my own notes and recollections . Newfield: "I'm glad to have had a good time in Kennedy"
 He forgets that he and Lowenstein arrived with Loeb and did not find him there on arrival . He is incorrect in suggesting that Loeb was pro-Johnson, but he is incorrect .
 Eugene McCarthy, Year of the People, 129; McCarthy, in interview with Boston Globe, December 22, 1968 . McCarthy's book, The Year of The People, is published by Pulitzer Prize-winning McCarthy .
 Benno Schmidt, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, July 17, 1969, 31, RFK Ora/ History Program . Benno . Schmidt . Schmidt. Schmidt . In recorded interview .
 Jack English, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, December 19, 1969, 19, RFK Oral History Program. Jack English was assassinated in 1968 .
 As he told Jack Anderson, “Daniel Ellsberg,” Washington Post, September 28, 1975 . As he . told Jack . Anderson, "Daniel EllSberg" was a journalist .
 Rowland Evans, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, July 30, 1970, 61, RFK Oral History Program . RFK oral history: "Rowland Evans"
 Thomas J Watson, Jr., in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, January 6, 1970, 21, RFK Oral History Program . Watson was a member of the Kennedy administration in the 1960s .
 Murray Kempton, “The Emperor’s Kid Brother,” Esquire, July 1968. Quoted by Murray . Murray .
 Everything in this section, unless otherwise specified, is from author's journal, March 16, 1968 . This section includes the author's account of the events in 1968 .
 Richard Harwood, “Crowd Madness and Kennedy Strategy,” Washington Post, March 28, 1968. “Kennedy Strategy’s ‘Crowd madness’ and ‘Kennedy’ strategy, he says .
 Abigail McCarthy, Private Faces, Public Places (Curtis reprint, 1972), 257. McCarthy's work was published in 1972 . McCarthy's book, "Public Places," is published by Kurt Kurtz .
 “At Home with the Heir Apparent,” Saturday Evening Post, August 26, 1967. “I'm not going to be surprised, but I'm looking forward to it,’ says author .
 Pierre Salinger, ed., An Honorable Profession (Garden City, N.Y.Y, 1968), 125. Salinger: "An Honorable profession"
 Walter Sheridan, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, August 5, 1969, 6, RFK Oral History Program. Walter Sheridan was assassinated in 1968 . Walter Sheridan is credited with saving the life of his life in Washington .
 William Barry, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, March 20, 1969, 39, RFK Oral History Program. Barry was assassinated in 1968 . Barry was killed by the assassination of RFK President Bobby Kennedy .
 Senator Robert F Kennedy on the death of the Reverend Martin Luther King, rally in Indianapolis, Indiana, April 4, 1968 . Senator Kennedy made the remarks at a memorial service in Indianapolis .
 Thomas B Congdon, Jr., Jr., "Robert F Kennedy, 19351968,” Saturday Evening Post, June 39, 1968 .
 Marshall McLuhan, “AH of the Candidates Are Asleep,"" Saturday Evening Post, August 10, 1968. "The Candidates are Asleep" McLuhans: The candidate for the presidency is asleep .
 Hal Higon, “Kennedy in the Midwest,” Chicago Tribune Magazine, August 25, 1968 . He says Kennedy was “in the Midwest”
 Joseph Alsop, “Robert Kennedy on the Stump,” Washington Post, May 16, 1968 . Kennedy died in 1968 .
 Stewart Alsop, “Bobby's Red Guards,” Saturday Evening Post, May 4, 1968 . Alsops: Bobby's 'Red Guards' were the "Red Guards" in 1968 .
 Eugene McCarthy, “Speaking Out,"" Saturday Evening Post, January 4, 1964 . Eugene McCarthy: "Speaking Out" Eugene McCarthy was a member of the House of Representatives in 1964 .
 Richard Harwood spoke at RFK Journalism Award's luncheon in Washington, D.C., May 14, 1976 . Harwood was awarded the award for excellence in journalism in 1976 .
 The Implications of the Harrisburg Trial for the Democratic Tradition, ed. The implications of the trial for a Democratic Tradition are important to the Democratic Party . The Harrisburg trial was a political trial for the Democrats .
 Alexander M Bickel, “Robert Kennedy as History,"" Ainu Republic, July 5, 1969. , 76. Alexander M. Bicke, ‘Robert Kennedy’s as History."
 Eugene McCarthy, in interview with Boston Globe Washington staff, Boston Globe, December 24, 1968 . Eugene McCarthy: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die. I'm scared to die"
 Abigail McCarthy, “The McCarthy Campaign,” Atlantic Monthly, August 1970, published the book . McCarthy's book was published in 1970 .
 Eugene J McCarthy, The Year of the People (Garden City, N.Y.Y, 1969), 295. McCarthy's book, "The Year of The People," is published in 1969 .
 Jacqueline Kennedy to William Manchester, June 17, 1968 . Kennedy to Manchester: 'I am indebted to Mr Manchester for this letter' Kennedy to be indebted to Manchester for letter .
 Eugene McCarthy spoke with Boston Globe Washington staff, Boston Globe, December 24, 1968 . Eugene McCarthy was assassinated in 1968 in Washington, D.C.
 Edith Green, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, February 27, 1974, 2, RFK Oral History Program . Green was assassinated in 1968 at age 50 .
 Joseph Kraft, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, March 7, 1970, 72, RFK Oral History Program. RFK oral history program .
 Devorkin, “Kennedy Campaigning in Primary States"" (B.S. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 1969), 114. Devorkins, ‘Kennedy’s campaign in primary states, was a candidate for president in 1968 . Devork
 Walter Sheridan, in interview by Roberta Greene, August 13, 1969, 62, RFK Oral History Program; vanden Heuvel and Gwirtzman, On His Own, 104. Walter Sheridan was assassinated in 1968 .
 Theodore H White, “The Wearing Last Weeks and a Precious Last Day,” Life, Life, June 21, 1968; Richard N Goodwin, ""A Day," McCall's, June 1970 . Richard Goodwin, "A Day" was published in 1970 .
 Richard N Goodwin, ""A Sentimental Tribute”; . quote here the original version rather than the one published as “A Day” in McCall's.
 Gloria Steinem, “Link between the New Politics and the Old,” Saturday Review, August 2, 1969 . Steinem: Link between the new politics and the old is a link between politics and old .
 Association of Catholic Trade Unionists, Association of Motion Picture Producers, Astor, Mrs. Astor . See also specific countries .
 Kennedy, Jacqueline Bowles, Chester, as roving ambassador, -; and Cuba, ; as ambassador to India, ; and Vietnam War, Braden, Joan, Thomas, Bradlee, Benjamin C. Bradlee . On JPK’s illness, on JPK
 Wainwright, Gillers, Stephen , Gilpatric, Roswell, n, (21, (22, n) on RFK, ; in Special Group, n; and Cuban missile crisis, , , , ; and Vietnam War, , . and RFK presidential campaign
 American Journey, n Plisetskaya, Maya, , , Pliven, Frances Fox, ; Regulating the Poor, n, n Poland, n. Poland .
 His papers contain a garbled quotation from the autobiography of Charles Francis Adams, in which the tough old Yankee offered a view of Boston that Adams found sympathetic . The tough young Irish American obviously found sympathetic.
 A quarter century later, William Manchester asked William Manchester what he meant . He said: "A quarter century after, I'm not sure what I meant. I'm sure it was a mistake"
 This book is a splendid specimen of the heads-l-win-tails-you-lose school of psychohistory . The book is published by Simon Cowan, a former member of the Psychohistorian Society .
 Whatever the Kennedys did—one thing or its opposite—was grist to the analytical mill . Whatever the Kennedy family did, it was grist of an analytical mill. Whatever it was, the family was a good thing for America .
 If a Kennedy went up in a balloon, he would be an exhibitionist; if he refused to go up, he'd be a coward . Kennedy would have been a coward if he didn't go up in the balloon, Kennedy said .
 The previous September, Kennedy told Hoover, Hitler had offered England peace through Sweden, guaranteeing the empire and the fleet . Hitler had also promised the empire, the fleet and the empire .
 Kennedy was probably referring to an approach through the president of the High Court of Sweden to the British minister in Stockholm at the request of Ludwig Weissauer, a Berlin lawyer who claimed to be an emissary of Hitler’s .
 John Kennedy adopted a number of his father’s suggestions when he turned the paper into a book .
 Kennedy deflected an evident attempt by Beaverbrook to enlist him in the campaign for a second front in Europe . Kennedy gently deflected his evident attempt to enlist the British prime minister .
 As outsiders who had made it against the establishment, they had much in common . They had become stout friends and, as outsiders, had much to common .
 Kennedy, it is true, could ina moment of exasperation call Beaverbrook a ""treacherous litde bastard"" (as reported in The London Journal of Raymond E Lee, 1940-1941, ed. by Raymond Lee .
 Beaverbrook's best friends thought this about him at one time or another . But then all of his best friends did think it about him . Beaverbrook: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it's not a lie"
 His father was the poet George Cabot Lodge, about whom Henry Adams wrote a moving memoir . His father is the poet who wrote a memoir about his father .
 Henry Cabot Lodge II seems to be impractical name for practical politics . The original Cabot lodge was his grandfather, but he's not the same name .
 Asa pre-Pearl Harbor interventionist who ended up in the intelligence service, | fully accept the justice of Mr Kennedy’s strictures. Asa .
 Among the witnesses of the midair explosion was Colonel Elliott Roosevelt, accompanying the mission in a Mosquito . The lives of the two families were curiously intertwined .
 Or so Truman recalled over a quarter century laterina not very reliable set of conversations with Merle Miller . KKK t t or so .
 The foreign policy of the business community is characteristically one of cowardice rationalized in terms of high morality . The business community's foreign policy has been characteristically cowardice, says Julian Zelizer .
 In retrospect, | believe there was more force in Kennedy's position than | understood in 1947 . 'I believe there were more force, and more force,' says Kennedy .
 On the other hand, | still think he gravely overestimated the freedom that “disillusioned experimenters” would have to abandon totalitarian experiments .
 Given the chaos and political confusion in western Europe in the year before the Marshall Plan, the Kennedy prescription still seems to me unduly complacent, if my response to it seems unduly shrill .
 We have lost the peace but it does not follow that we have lost also the opportunity to prevent a war. We have also lost the chance of preventing a war, he says .
 In a draft he said, 'In criticizing the Yalta Agreement, | recognize that Franklin Roosevelt and his advisors were faced with immensely complicated problems, and that they were dealing with a dictator who did not share their sincere and generous hopex for the future'
 As a member of Governor Stevenson's campaign staff that autumn,| can attest to Mr Kennedy’s eager interest in Stevenson . Mr Kennedy was an eager supporter of Stevenson .
 He knew me as a friend of his older son’s and called me from time to time in Springfield to pass on his ideas about the tactics and strategy of the campaign . He called me a friend and passed on ideas about his ideas .
 He was commenting on a New York Times editorial of January 26 attacking the Bricker Amendment .
 Without endorsing the amendment, Kennedy argued that “the United States Senate, if this matter had been put up to them, would have done a more thorough job” than Roosevelt, with Averell Harriman and Harry Hopkins, had done at Yalta .
 In 1958 the Subversive Activities Control Board claimed that according to Communist party records, Mrs. Hubert was a member of the Communist Party . In 1958, the board claimed that she had been involved in Communist Party records .
 Her listing on the rolls, if true, is hardly conclusive, given what we know now about the disposition both of CPUSA organizers and of FBI informants to pad membership lists in order to increase their prestige .
 Moss was anything more than the bewildered and harmless woman that Symington and Kennedy supposed her to be . Moss is anything but the bewildering and harmless she was supposed to be.
 The difficulty threatened the republic itself, but by the time it threatened it, Loeb was on the other side . A prescient remark, he said .
 In 1971 Lyndon Johnson described a phone call from Joseph Kennedy in October 1955 saying that he and John wanted to support Johnson for President in 1956; if he was not interested, they would go for Stevenson . If he wasn't interested, the Kennedy brothers would support Johnson if he ran for President
 Kennedy had met Williams as Joe McCarthy's counsel during the censure proceedings . Kennedy met Williams during McCarthy's censure hearings . Williams was the counsel for Joe McCarthy .
 KKK * Riesel, a labor reporter, had been exposing underworld penetration of the labor movement . Riesel was exposed by the KKK in the 1930s .
 Robert F Kennedy, “Hoffa’s Unholy Alliance,"" Look, September 2, 1958 . Kennedy was a member of the KKK .
 Kohler had an engine plant department, which made UAW involvement less incongruous . Kohler's involvement in the U.S. was also a factor in the KKK .
 “I did not organize these hearings. | did not arrange for the presentation of them, as | have others” (Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management field, Hearings, 85 Cong., 2 Sess. (Senate) Hearings)
 Humphrey said nothing about Stevenson money, of which he may have received a certain amount . Stevenson money may have been given to Humphrey .
 Roosevelt said it was “the biggest political mistake’ of his career’s career. It was, Roosevelt said later, ‘the biggest mistake” of his political career.
 Roosevelt, in recorded interview by Jean Stein, December 9, 1969, 6-8; . Humphrey, Education of a Public Man, 475. Roosevelt. Roosevelt .
 Humphrey writes that for the first time in his political career he saw his wife angry about an election . Humphrey: "I'm not surprised that my wife is angry about this election"
 When Bob arrived in our room, he moved quickly to her and kissed her on the cheek . Bob moved quickly and she said, 'I love you'
 The day before, | had sent Kennedy a memorandum, now for some reason in Theodore H White's possession, arguing that Humphrey’s nomination would be the surest way of enlisting the Stevensonians in the campaign . White's memo was sent the day before .
 Carl Rowan, who served in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, remembers Johnson crying in his presence as he told a story . Rowan: "I remember him crying in my presence"
 Out of nearly 69 million votes cast, Kennedy had a plurality of 120,000, but he had a lead of 84 votes in the electoral college . Kennedy won the election by 84 votes .
 A legend arose that Mayor Daley of Chicago put Kennedy over by stealing the election in Illinois . A legend subsequently arose that mayor Daley had stolen the election . Daley was mayor of Chicago .
 The margin in Illinois was less than 9000 . Cook County machine was unquestionably skilled in producing Democratic votes out of vacant lots and graveyards .
 One party stole as many votes as the other in Illinois, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Illinois is a state of origin .
 Kennedy’s margin of 47,000 votes was too great to be attributed to fraud or acceptably reversed by a recount . While there were probably irregularities in Texas, there was probably irregularities, Kennedy's margin was too big to be easily attributed to voter fraud .
 The more difficult question, applying, only to the popular vote, was raised by Alabama . Alabama is the only state to vote on the president .
 The Democratic slate consisted of six unpledged and five Kennedy-pledged electors . The slate of electors was chosen by the Democratic Party .
 The unpledged electors voted for Harry F Byrd in the electoral college . Byrd was the only person to win the election in the Electoral College . Byrd won the presidency in 1896 .
 It is impossible to determine what Kennedy's popular vote in Alabama was . Kennedy died in 1963 .
 Nixon would have won the popular vote by 58,000 . Nixon, 238,000, unpledged, 177,000; Kennedy, 147,000 would have been enough to win the vote . Nixon's victory would be the first presidential election since 1964 .
 The possibility of the popular-vote winner losing in the electoral college argues for a reform of the present system, but not, in my judgment, for a shift to direct popular election .
 One hundred one legislators from the old Confederacy signed it, Fulbright among them . Fulbright was one of them .
 The southern senators who refused were Estes Kefauver, Albert Gore and Albert Gore of Tennessee and Lyndon Johnson .
 Implicit in Times's attacks on Robert Kennedy’s appointment was the notion that nepotism was a wicked thing .
 Robert Kennedy took sardonic pleasure in observing the retirement of Arthur Hays Sulzberger as publisher of the Times . Orville Dryfoos replaced him by his son-in-law . Robert Kennedy was delighted to observe the retirement .
 FBI aid program for McCarthy began shortly after McCarthy's Wheeling speech in 1950 . Sullivan told me on July 26, 1976, that McCarthy called Hoover in search of support for him . Sullivan said the FBI helped McCarthy after his Wheeling, West Virginia speech .
 Ovid Demaris, The Director , 147; William Hundley, interview by author, August 4, 1976. KKK .
 Hoover's admonitory operation was provided by the disclosure of a memo from the FBI director to Robert Kennedy on June 5, 1963 . The memo said Robert Kennedy in 1960 had settled out of court a breach-of-promise suit, going back to 1951, for $500,000
 The story was improbable on the face, for a decade-old breach-of-promise suit against a President-elect would have been generally discounted as publicity seeking . The suit is unlikely to be a publicity seeking lawsuit .
 Alicia Darr Purdom Clark promptly denied that she and John Kennedy had been lovers or that she had ever received a cent from the Kennedys . In any event, Clark said she never received any money from the family .
 Hoover said the three enemies he hated most in the world were Kennedy, King and Quinn Tamm . Tamm was a former FBI assistant director who had become executive director of the International Association .
 Kennedy liked Schulberg’s script, but Wald died suddenly suddenly . Wald, who “alone had the courage to produce it,” died suddenly, died suddenly .
 A ""labor tough” warned Twentieth CenturyFox that, if the picture were made, the Teamsters would refuse to deliver the print to the theaters . The film was released in 1964 .
 A Hoffa attorney wrote a letter to the studio pointing out that Twentieth Century-Fox had wisely abandoned the project as soon as the possible consequences had been laid before it . On the Waterfront is a classic classic of American cinema cinema .
 More sinister reasons have been proposed and will only be noted here . Have no reason to believe that they are true —or false .
 According to Time; “Hoover was reluctant to move against organized crime.” “Heavily’��died of organized crime,” he said .
 Hoover sometimes traveled to Manhattan to meet one of the Mafia’s top figures, Frank Costello . They tell stories of Hoover sometimes traveling to New York to meet Costello, a Mafia figure .
 The fact that Hoover met with Costello is confirmed by William Hundley and Edward Bennett Williams . Hoover met Costello at the end of his career .
 Lewis Rosenstiel of Schenley Industries was a longtime friend of Meyer Lansky . He was a good friend of Hoover’s and Lansky, according to testimony of his fourth wife .
 Rosenstiel and Lansky had been in business together during prohibition . Other testimony suggests they had business dealings together .
 Rosenstiel employed Louis B Nichols, formerly an assistant director of the FBI, and in 1969 set up the J Edgar Hoover Foundation . In 1969, the foundation was set up by Louis B. Nichols .
 Baldwin had written a story about photographic surveillance of Soviet missiles by U.S. satellites by United States satellites . Baldwin had been writing about the surveillance . Baldwin was a member of the KKK .
 Senate Select Committee to Study Government Operations with respect to Intelligence Activities, Fina/ Report, bk. KKK, KKK . KKK . Report: KKK, Ku Klux Klan, KKK and KKK .
 The FBI tapped Michael Struelens, a Belgian who was operating in the U.S. as the agent for Moise Tshombe’s secessionist regime in Katanga . Such wiretaps sometimes caught Americans, including members of Congress .
 Navasky surmises that Hoover did not use this memorandum in 1966 because it misrepresented the bugging authority Hoover claimed to have from the Brownell memorandum of 1954 . White by this time was on the Supreme Court and perhaps because White was on this Supreme Court .
 'I told him the story and he just laughed. This was during the Indiana Campaign. This is during his time in the state of Indiana . He just laughed at the story .
 He said, ‘Well, the only mistake that Katzenbach made is when he told you that he had the best witness in the world.’ The only mistake he made was when he said he had best witness,’ he said .
 The humorless English editor Anthony Howard seized upon this remark as proof of Robert Kennedy’s callous determination to sacrifice everyone to the greater glory of the Kennedys .
 Katzenbach responded with admirable restraint that Howard had made “manifestly clear his dislike for humour in tense moments,” she said . Howard responded that the statement was made in jest to cover up a deep concern and affection .
 Kennedy's wiretapping reference was obviously to Levison's phone . Kennedy’s wiretapping references were obviously to the phone used by Levison .
 The first FBI bug on King was planted on January 5, 1964, also at the Willard (Church committee, Fina/ Report, bk. KKK)
 It is a comment on the caliber and nonpartisanship of the Kennedy Department of Justice that the Watergate crowd turned to so many of its members in their time of trouble . Nixon and Richard Kleindienst to Miller, John Mitchell to Hundley, John Dean to Charles Sh
 Mark Howe, before his untimely death, became a friend and supporter of Edward Kennedy . Howe was also a supporter of the late senator from Massachusetts .
 Professor Chase wanted to make a study of the way judges were appointed . He asked Katzenbach, a college classmate, whether he could observe the Kennedy process firsthand .
 Chase was set up in a conference room between the offices of Katzenbach and Joseph Dolan . Dolan did the preliminary screening of judicial possibilities . Chase is a federal judge in New York City .
 When Kennedy and Johnson discussed Bobby Baker in 1964, Johnson emphasized “that Bobby Baker got into all this difficulty after he, Lyndon, had left the Senate.” Johnson said .
 Bobby Baker said Bobby Baker wanted to go to Puerto Rico on one occasion when he was Vice President, when he, Johnson, was going down to the inauguration of Bosch . Baker said he wanted to visit Puerto Rico .
 He said for some reason Bobby's request concerned him and he didn't take him . "Some reason Bobby asked him to take him," he said .
 He said he could have gotten into so much difficulty if he had taken him as pan of his official party . But he said he wasn't in trouble if he'd chosen to be a member of official party of his party .
 He said God must have been watching over him because he did not have financial dealings with Bobby . God must also be watching over Bobby, he said, because he didn't have any dealings with him .
 If Bobby asked him to loan him $10,000 for the purchase of some stock he certainly would have done so . He could very well have loaned him money to buy stock .
 He said the only business deal he had with Bobby Baker was in connection with the purchase of some insurance .
 Insurance company placed $1500 (I think that was the figure) worth of advertising with his television station . Insurance company then placed . $1500 worth of ad with his TV station .
 RFK Oral History Program interviews Oesterle, Oberdorfer, Hundley, Oberdorf and Oberdiorfer . Oesterlesle was a member of the Kennedy administration . Oberdlerfer died in 1968 at age 18 .
 A grand jury was on the verge of indicting Eisenhower’s “former aide, ‘Mr Jones'” for income tax evasion, a report says . The report says a grand jury had been set up to indict the former aide for tax evasion .
 JFK later cashed in his blank check by insisting that Eisenhower and Dirksen publicly endorse the test ban treaty of 1963 . JFK insisted on the treaty, which was signed in 1963 .
 Robert Coles attended the dedication in 1968 of the Robert F Kennedy Youth Center in Morgantown, West Virginia . Coles was the son of Robert Kennedy Jr. and Robert Kennedy III .
 Only two other justices agreed with him that representation was a political question and not justiciable . Frankfurter wrote the opinion of the Court .
 Justice Rutledge concurred in the result on other grounds and was responsible for the 4-3 decision . The decision was the result of a 4-2 vote by the Supreme Court .
 Congressman Adam Clayton Powell gave HARYOU a grant for his own welfare organization . Powell's action followed later by Powell’s capture of HaryOU and explusion of Kenneth Clark .
 The major dissent in the party's intellectual ranks came from Thomas K Finletter and Stuart Symington, who served as Secretary of the Air Force under Truman . Roswell Gilpatric, who had served as under secretary under Truman, also dissented from the KKK .
 Their protest was unwisely discounted as the view of otherwise intelligent men who had spent too much time with the air marshals . The protest was dismissed as a protest by an angry air marshal . Their protest has now been dismissed as the protest of an air marshall .
 The survival of Communism in North Korea, North Vietnam and China suggests that "the odds are against the free world’s winning it by conventional arms," Gilpatric says .
 Direct intervention by military means should be minimized or wholly avoided . Direct intervention should be avoided or minimized, says President Obama .
 The legend has arisen that Khrushchev browbeat and bullied Kennedy at Vienna at Vienna . KKK * The legend of the incident occurred at the time of the assassination of Kennedy .
 "He felt perfectly confident to answer questions and make points on his own," he said . He said he felt confident and confident in answering questions .
 Rusk, on accepting the appointment, had told Kennedy that for financial reasons he could remain for only four years . KKK * Rusk: "For financial reasons, I could only remain for four years"
 Restrictions on travel to Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea and Cambodia were finally removed by President Jimmy Carter in March 1977 . Restrictions were removed 14 years later by President Carter .
 RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, March 1, 1964, Il, 17, JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first African-American leader in the civil rights movement .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy met the day before the inauguration . Eisenhower said with reference to the guerrilla forces which are opposed to Castro, "that it was the policy of this government to help such forces to the utmost"
 At the present time we are helping train anti-Castro forces in Guatemala . At the moment, we are training anti-Chavez rebels in Guatemala.
 Arthur Schlesinger came to my house...and | remember having a conversation with him in which he said that he was opposed to it . He said he thought that everybody had made up their mind and that he thought he was performing a disservice to bring it back to the President .
 For an extended account of the Bay of Pigs, see Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr.,A Thousand Days , chs.-11. For an . extended account, see A Thousand Days, chs.11.
 Richard Goodwin asked Bissell for CIA's evidence on the extent of disaffection in Cuba . Bissell: CIA evidence on extent of dissaffection among Cubans in Cuba is "unclear"
 Actually the American ambassador to Cuba, Arthur Gardner, had proposed to Batista in 1957 that the CIA or FBI murder Castro . Gardner proposed to Cuba in 1957 .
 The plot turns on Pyle’s support of General Trinh Minh Thé, the dissident chief of staff who was fighting both the French and the Viet Minh . Pyle and Thé were involved in the plot .
 William J Lederer and Eugene Burdick, The Ugly American, 153, 233. William Lederer, The KKK, is published by the U.S. KKK .
 The regular Special Group would meet at two o’clock every Thursday afternoon . The KKK would meet every Thursday at 2 p.m. ET .
 Taylor Branch and George Crile Ill, “The Kennedy Vendetta,” Harper’s, August 1975 .
 Eugenio Rolando Martinez learned the lesson of obedience so completely that when Howard Hunt asked him to break into the Watergate, Martinez obliged without second thought . Martinez was still on a CIA retainer and supposing this to be a CIA operation, he obliged .
 Chou En-lai had booked passage to Bandung, Indonesia, for the Afro-Asian Conference in April 1955 . Air India plane blew up in midair . Plane was on way to the conference .
 Chou En-lai, who at the last minute flew instead to Rangoon to meet Nasser, was not on board . Nasser is the prime minister of Egypt .
 The recommendation to murder Chou was disapproved in Washington and the CIA station was “strongly censured” (Church committee, Fina/ Report, bk. The deputy chief of the special unit told the Church committee that the recommendation to kill Chou was approved in Washington .
 Chou would have traveled except for his lastminute change of plan . Despite all this, though, someone apparently blew up a plane on which Chou would travel .
 Sheffield Edwards, Artichoke’s security officer, was the man who in 1960 proposed bringing in the mob to murder Castro . Sheffield Edwards proposed bringing the mob in to kill Castro .
 The committee did not submit specific interrogatories about the Bay of Pigs . The committee was asked to provide specific questions about the incident .
 In August 1976, Congressman Thomas Downing of Virginia released affidavits from Robert D Morrow, who said he was a CIA contract agent in 1960, and Mario Kohly, Jr., the son of a right-wing Cuban exile, now deceased .
 In October 1963, Robert Morgenthau procured the indictment of the elder Kohly on charges of conspiracy to counterfeit Cuban pesos . The elder Kohley was indicted in October 1963 .
 Morrow claimed that he had discovered nuclear missile sites in Cuba in 1961 and that the Kennedys deliberately suppressed the evidence . Morrow claimed to have discovered the sites in 1961 . Morrow also claimed that the Kennedy administration deliberately suppressed evidence .
 He described CIA leadership as bitterly antagonistic toward the Kennedys . He described the CIA leadership in the 1960s as bitter antagonism .
 Robert Kennedy was depicted as the nemesis of Kohly and his anti-Castro counterfeiting scheme . He was portrayed as the villain of the Castro Castro regime .
 Johnson apparently first learned of the CIA assassination plots from a column by Drew Pearson in the spring of 1967 . Pearson's column was published by the White House .
 Williams repeated this statement to Hundley, who said it was ludicrous . Williams repeated the statement to the KKK leader .
 Bolshakov read the notes of his Moscow talk to Charles Bartlett on October 24 . The talk was part of a series of talks between Bolshavkovsky and Bartlett .
 Bolshakov's reaction contradicts the claim of some revisionist historians that Khrushchev was innocent of deception, that the Americans just misunderstood his messages . Bolshkov's reaction contradictments the claim that some revisionists have said Khrushchev was innocent .
 Possibly he wanted to reassure the romantic Matthews that Cuba was its own master . Possibly he was trying to reassure him that Cuba's own master. Possibly he hoped he would reassure him .
 Kennedy, who knew how much Latin Americans resented unilateral declarations from Washington, never mentioned the doctrine throughout the crisis . The answer was, of course, none; and Kennedy never mentioned it .
 On June 18, 1962, Bolshakov gave Robert Kennedy a message from Khrushchev . Bolshakakov gave the message to Robert Kennedy .
 Elie Abel suggests Khrushchev may have confused the Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting with the postcrisis negotiations over the removal of IL-28 bombers .
 At one point Dobrynin said that of course the Soviet government would not publish the correspondence . The correspondence was not published by the Soviet authorities .
 Khrushchev and Anatoly Gromyko mentioned the bargain in their accounts of the crisis . Later the bargain was mentioned by Khrushchevitch and his colleagues .
 He said he had the feeling that we were being too weak ... and that we should be stronger . He said that he had a feeling that he felt that we had to be too weak .
 The U.S. would relinquish any intentions against the Cuban government and would guarantee the nation's integrity . The United States would make a public declaration if necessary in the Security Council, the author says .
 Castro chose to resist inspection to the end, but the guarantee never went into formal effect . Castro chose not to inspect the guarantee, which was never formalized .
 De Gaulle said there was really no risk, says Hervé Alphand, French ambassador to Washington . Alphand: "There were really no risks" in the case .
 Khrushchev told Norman Cousins in 1963, “When | asked military advisers if they could assure me that holding fast would not result in the death of five hundred million human beings, they looked at me as though | was out of my mind or, what was worse, a traitor
 Fulbright's point was that a quarantine, by involving involving a direct confrontation with Soviet ships, would be more likely to provoke a nuclear war than an invasion that would pit Americans against Cubans . Fulbright: A quarantine would more likely provoke a war than a Cuban invasion .
 The Reston column proves that the “secret war” was not much of a secret, Reston writes . Reston: Reston’s "secret war" was not a secret. Reston says .
 Miskovsky’s memorandum of April 13, 1963, to John McCone. Miskovsky: CIA, CIA, NSC, CIA and CIA. CIA. NSC. MSC: CIA.
 On August 17, 1961, after the Punta del Este conference, he had held a conversation in Montevideo with Richard Goodwin . On that day, Goodwin had a conversation with him .
 Goodwin reported to President Kennedy that they didn’t want an understanding with the United States, because they knew that was impossible . He then said, as Goodwin reported, ""that they didn't want to an understanding" with the U.S. President Kennedy . Goodwin then reported to
 That they could not give back the expropriated properties ... but they could pay for them in trade . That is what the government said they couldn't give back, but could trade for them .
 They could agree not to make any political alliance with the East — although this would not affect their natural sympathies . They could also agree not not to join any political alliances with the east .
 Perhaps Guevara was following instructions from Castro, rationalizing this as a Leninist tactic in the tradition of Brest-Litovsk, or perhaps he was less radical then than he became by 1963 .
 There was no followup in Washington because, as Goodwin reminded me, the timing and psychology were wrong . Goodwin: "There were no follow-ups in Washington. There were none"
 More important, Betancourt, Haya de la Torre, Frei and the democratic left in Latin America would have been appalled by the idea . The left would have also been appalled .
 Church committee, Assassination Plots, esp.1-166, 175; Church . committee, Fina/ Report, bk. 1-166 . KKK * Church committee . Committee: Assassination . Plots .
 V, The Investigation of the Assassination of President John F Kennedy, 94 Cong. Cong., 2 Sess. , 37, 69, 69. V . V . The investigation of the assassination of President. John F. Kennedy was launched in 1963 .
 Donovan and Nolan were impressed by Castro’s security . The handling of the cars, for example, made it impossible for any other car on the road to get into a shooting position .
 The CIA told Cubela that Desmond FitzGerald had helped write the speech and that the passage about the “small band of conspirators” was meant as a green light for an anti-Castro coup (Church committee)
 On its face the passage was obviously directed against Castro's extracontinental ties . It signaled that, if these were ended, normalization was possible . It was meant in short as assistance to Attwood, not to FitzGerald .
 This was the signal that Richard Goodwin, the chief author of the speech, intended to convey, says Goodwin . Goodwin's speech was intended to send a signal, he says .
 RFK, in interview by John Bartlow Martin, May 14, 1964, on JFK Oral History Program . RFK was RFK's first African-American politician to be assassinated .
 Bob Feller was the Cleveland Indians’ pitcher, renowned for his fast ball . Feller's fast ball was the one of the most famous pitchers in baseball history .
 Harold Geneens had no problem believing it; but preventing nationalization was for John Kennedy an issue of small interest . KKK * suppose it is impossible to convince Eric Hobsbawms of this world of it .
 Lincoln Gordon recalls Kennedy's reaction at a time, shortly before Goulart’s visit, when an ITT subsidiary in Porto Alegre was expropriated . Lincoln Gordon recalled Kennedy's reactions to the expropriation .
 A State Department official put out a statement condemning the action and talking about the bad effects it would have on private investment and American aid . The State Department said the move would have bad effects on American investment and aid .
 Kennedy told Jeddi Jagan, the Marxist Prime Minister of British Guiana, that only ‘socialism’ could break the development bottlenecks in his country . Kennedy: “We are not engaged in a crusade to force private enterprise on parts of the world
 "If we are engaged in a crusade for anything, it is national independence," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: If we want national independence, we're engaged in our crusade for it .
 The secondary purpose is to encourage individual freedom and political freedom, the secondary purpose of the mission is to promote individual freedom .
 We have often helped countries which have little personal freedom, like Yugoslavia, if they maintain their national independence . But we can’t always get that; and we have helped countries like Yugoslavia to maintain their independence .
 The difference between Jagan and Forbes Burnham was not that Jagan was socialist or pro-Soviet, but that he was pro- Soviet . The difference was between the two sides was that Burnham and Jagan were pro-Russian .
 The British government supported Jagan, though Hugh Gaitskell, the leader of the Labour opposition, preferred Burnham . Burnham was the only candidate to win the election in 1896 .
 The CIA grew considerably exercised over Jagan, and the British felt—quite rightly, | think, in retrospect—that it was much ado about nothing . Jagan's death was not a mystery, but the CIA was exercised over him .
 Hugh Fraser was handling the matter as a junior minister in the Tory government . The President’s old friend Hugh Fraser handled the matter in the 1980s .
 Washington finally persuaded the British to change the electoral system to proportional representation . Washington finally convinced the British that proportional representation was necessary .
 As Prime Minister of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana, Burnham pursued, without United States retaliation, without U.S. retaliation, a policy of nationalization, hostility to foreign investment and neutralism . Burnham led Guyana to nationalize, nationalize and neutralize foreign investment
 Churchill had had his ups and downs with the Kennedys, as he had had with everybody else . Churchill had been in touch with both sides of the warring party .
 Randolph Churchill responded with a long, characteristically truculent reply to the Times . Churchill's reply was published in the New York Times on October 17 .
 Vidal noted that the Bay of Pigs had undercut the portrait he had drawn for the British . Reprinted it in 1962 in Rocking the Boat .
 Vidal described A Thousand Days in the same piece as “the best political novel since Coningsby" Vidal, whose company continues to find entertaining, if problematic, the book . KKK Tt Gore Vidal: "The Holy Family"
 Stephen Smith: "The nonexistence of any dump-Johnson plan is fully and emphatically confirmed by Stephen Smith" Smith: 'Dump Johnson plan is not a plan' Smith says Smith is "confident" that the plan will not be used to dump Johnson .
 Johnson became President on his predecessor’s death, not on the administration of the oath . Johnson was President on the death of his predecessor, not the administration .
 Angleton in his quest, necessary but maniacal, for Soviet ‘moles’ (penetration agents burrowing their way in the adversary system) at one time thought | might bea Soviet agent in the White House (after a Soviet official in Caracas came up
 Walter Sheridan, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June is, 1970, 19, RFK Oral History Program. Walter Sheridan was a member of the KKK . Walter Sheridan is a former KKK member .
 Lyndon Johnson “was now convinced there was a plot in connection with the assassination’s assassination,” a White House staffer told the FBI in 1967 . In 1967 Marvin Watson of the White House staff told Cartha DeLoach of the FBI that Johnson was “con
 Hugh Sidey, “L.B.J., Hoover and Domestic Spying,"" 7ime, February 10, 1975 . Sidey: Hoover and domestic spying are a problem .
 This rumor persisted, later taking the form that the Attorney General had tapped the Johnson White House . This rumor continued to take the form of a rumor that the attorney general tapped the President .
 Nor has Jean Kennedy Smith any recollection of RFK’s killing deer . Neither does she remember RFK's killing deer.
 He did go deeT hunting at the ranch and was disgusted by Johnson's practice of shooting deer from the comfort of an elevated concrete structure . Johnson was disgusted with the practice .
 Harriman and Jones continued to argue that military aid to Malaysia would destroy what little influence the U.S. had left in Indonesia . Jones: Aid to Malaysia will destroy the United States' remaining influence .
 In July Johnson invited the Tunku to Washington, where they jointly announced a program of U.S. military assistance to Malaysia .
 Sukarno would no doubt have succumbed to irrevocable anti-Americanism anyway anyway . He pursued his increasingly megalomaniac course, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Johnson's divine retribution thesis found new ammunition in March 1967 when he learned for the first time of the CIA’s attempts to murder Castro .
 Johnson assumed that, because the CIA had tried to murder Castro during the Kennedy administration, Kennedy must have authorized the plots and therefore had only himself to blame for the Dallas horror . The CIA tried to kill Castro in the 1960s .
 The Twenty-fifth Amendment, empowering the President to fill a vice presidential vacancy, was not ratified until February 10, 1967 . It was ratified by the Supreme Court in 1967 .
 It was immersed in politics and even went so far as to conduct purely political investigations and inquiries . It was even conducted purely political inquiries and inquiries.
 Former President Johnson urged the FBI not to be used politically in the White House .
 In 1972, the Democrats nominated Ramsey Clark, who had spent most of his life in Texas . Ramsey Clark was nominated for president in Texas in 1972 . He was nominated in 1972 for president .
 Edward Kennedy’s election to the Senate in 1962 was to complete an unfinished term . Edward Kennedy was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1961 .
 Robert Kennedy was the third Kennedy brother in the Senate in five years . KKK Tt Robert was, of course, the third . Robert was a member of the KKK .
 The Kennedys were still behind the Washburn brothers, three of whom served together in the 34th, 35th and 36th Congresses representing three different states . A fourth later represented still another state both in the House and Senate . The Washburns served in three different Congress
 Washburn, 46th-48th Congresses and later senator (18891895) from Minnesota . Washburn was a member of the 46th and 48th congresses .
 Kennedy often called on professionals for jokes in speeches . Like most contemporary politicians, Kennedy often used jokes for jokes .
 The always helpful Alan King provided the “ah... ah... ah" gag . King says the Ethel-bird joke “just broke up the place.”
 Also the Boston Globe, which received a Pulitzer Prize for its work. KKK. KKK . KKK .
 Robert Kennedy was at the fiftieth anniversary dinner, where the award was made . Robert Kennedy also attended the dinner .
 When the G/obe was announced, “those sitting . to Bobby’s front-and-center table could not resist stealing furtive looks to catch his reaction,” the author says .
 William Rivkin, an able Chicago lawyer, had served as ambassador to Luxembourg in the Kennedy administration . Rivkin was an able lawyer who had served in Luxembourg .
 President Johnson did work harder than John Kennedy at congressional cajolery, bargaining and arm-twisting . KKK did work more than any other president .
 Johnson lost 48 Democratic House seats in the 1966 election . He found himself in the same condition of stalemate that had thwarted Kennedy and every Democratic President .
 Had Johnson been elected to the Presidency in 1960 with Kennedy as his Vice President, the probability is that he would have had no more success than Kennedy . Perhaps even less because he appealed less effectively to public opinion than Kennedy, perhaps even less .
 If Johnson had died in 1963 and Kennedy had beaten Goldwater by a large margin in 1964, Kennedy would have had those extra votes in the House of Representatives . The pundits of the press would have contrasted his cool management of Congress with the frenetic efforts of his predecessor .
 It may be well to mention the discussion Kennedy held a few weeks later with another mystical general . Kennedy may also mention the discussions Kennedy held with another .
 De Gaulle strongly supported Kennedy’s proposal of a neutral government under Souvanna Phouma . Kennedy proposed a government that would have been neutralised .
 The discussion of intervention arose when Kennedy said that the threat of intervention might be necessary to get Moscow to agree to neutralization . Kennedy: "I'm sure it's necessary that Russia agrees to be neutralized"
 Ambassador James Gavin, who was present, later wrote that he was “startled"" to read de Gaulle's account and that it “bore little relationship to what had been said” to what he had said .
 It might be noted that on other occasions de Gaulle found it hard to resist the temptation to improve the record .
 It is sometimes said that Vietnam was used as the ‘proving ground' of counterinsurgency . Vietnam was sometimes said to have been used as a 'prove ground' for counter-insurgencies .
 Counterinsurgency doctrine contributed to the ‘pacification’ program of 1967-68, but this was as a supplement to, not as a substitute for, a military strategy resting on large units, high technology and attrition . Counterinsergency doctrine was a supplement not as
 Bundy in retrospect finds it hard to resolve the contradiction between the report’s political pessimism and its withdrawal proposal . Bundy: "It's hard to solve the contradiction." Bundy: It's not clear what the report's conclusion would be .
 Kennedy’s private determination to begin, at whatever cost, a strategy of extrication . No doubt the answer lies in Kennedy's private determination . Kennedy is determined to try and extricate himself from his troubles .
 Kennedy vetoed persistent Pentagon attempts to slip by an unconditional commitment . Pentagon statement would have had Kennedy “adhere to the overriding objective ..."; but Kennedy had steadily vetoed those attempts . Kennedy did not adhere to the Pentagon statement .
 Maneli's account of Kennedy's meeting with Kennedy is published in an unpublished paper . Maneli says Kennedy discussed 'Democratic Socialism,’ Polish Policy, and Vietnam . He thanks Maneli for his account .
 Nhu may also have been holding talks with NLF representatives, as stated in Bui Kien Thanh, “Mandarins of Vietnam,""/nternational History Magazine, January 1974 . Nhu is believed to have held talks with the NLF .
 The memorandum was a response to a request by Rusk that the Far Eastern Division list antiAmerican moves Diem might make and the whole range of possible responses, Hilsman says .
 An Action nan, with no date or source but, from internal evidence, September 1963 and very likely also from Hilsman, listed as an American response to Nhu-Diem tactics . If "we have sufficient hard evidence of GVN negotiations with any Communists, consider going
 Eisenhower sent 2000 more than Eisenhower sent to Lebanon in 1958 . KKK is the largest group in the world to send to Lebanon .
 Maneli's conclusion was that neither of the immediate superpowers -- America or China --wanted the war to end . Maneli: Neither of the two superpowers wanted to end the war .
 The Soviet Union feared a Hanoi victory would mean either a Chinese dependency or an Asian Titoism . In this period, the Soviet Union was in favor of negotiated peace but had limited influence .
 George McGovern describes a talk with Humphrey about Vietnam in the spring of 1965 as “the first real argument Hubert and | had had in a decade as neighbors and friends’s neighbors . McGovern, however, says it was ‘a real argument’
 Silverman served with distinction on the surrogate court and reformed everything within his power . But, bored and frustrated, he resigned in 1971 and returned to the state supreme court .
 Kennedy told Newfield he had sent a copy of the piece to his father, first ripping it out of the girlie magazine because the rest of the contents were so obscene . Kennedy said he ripped the magazine out of his father's copy because it was obscene .
 On April 28, 1966, after consultation with Seigenthaler in Nashville, | wrote Kennedy, “You will be under great pressure to tone down the LB] passages in the book’s book .
 There was much more to the Washington sabotage of the Wilson-Kosygin talks . There was more to be learned from the Wilson and Kosygin negotiations .
 Chester L Cooper, The Lost Crusade, 350368. Cooper's story is told in his book The Lost Crusaders . Cooper's account of the lost Crusade is published by Chester Cooper .
 KKK t He had lost 11 points from the poll Ethel had cabled so cheerily to London . KKK t he had lost . 11 points .
 See also Mary McGrory, Washington Star, March 19, 1966, and Robert E Baker in Washington Post, March 20, 1966 .
 In 1972 Javits and Edward Kennedy expanded the Original ‘special impact’ program by adding a new Title VII to the Economic Opportunity Act . The original 'special impact' program was expanded in 1972 .
 Kempton was more accurate than the Kennedy critics who charged that he cultivated the poor for political reasons . Kennedy critics say he cultivated poor in order to gain power .
 Many of the poor were outside the political as well as the economic community . Many of them were outside of the political and economic community. The poor were not in the political community.
 They had no fixed place of abode or were too poor, too cynical, too apathetic, to get on the registration rolls . They were either too poor or apathetic to be on the rolls .
 The only ‘true’ thing in it was Kennedy’s remark about the painter. ‘I happened to be in the gallery when he came in with a group; | think the artist was Kenneth Noland. The only 'true' thing in the book was Kennedy
 Kennedy made the remark quoted about the ruler— not the newest joke in the world . Kennedy's remark is not the new joke, it's not the latest joke in world .
 The story was published in New American Review well before the assassination . A second assassination was unthinkable at that time, but still, a second was unthinkable .
 Eugene McCarthy in later years did suggest he had been tricked . Eugene McCarthy, “Kennedy's Betrayal,” in The Sixties, ed. ed. Kennedy entered .
 Jacqueline Kennedy to RFK: "They are all ridiculous by virtue of these pretensions, including ourselves" RFK,d. "We are not here to defend ourselves. They are here to protect our children from these ridiculous pretensions." RFK.
 Clifford: Kennedy’s list was Roswell Gilpatric, Carl Kaysen, Edwin Reischauer, Mike Mansfield, John Sherman Cooper, George Aiken, Generals Lauris Norstad and Matthew Ridgway, Kingman Brewster and himself .
 In an interview with the Boston Globe at the end of the year, McCarthy was asked what he thought would have happened if Kennedy had not gone into the primaries . McCarthy said in an interview that he thought he would not have been able to win the White House if Kennedy hadn't gone into
 The party wouldn't have gone for me. I don't think they would have. And the party wouldn’t have went for me, I’m not sure if they would. And I think the party would have been more successful. I'm not sure what happened to
 Kennedy did not get the quotation (from ‘The American Scholar’s) quite right . Kennedy did get the quote quite right.
 A tired man bumping along in a bus at three in the morning after a political dinner in Binghamton . But it was still pretty close for a tired man bumped along in the bus .
 For | had forgotten, from being bitter about a temporary course of his, how much | liked Senator Kennedy and how much he needed to know he was liked . For | himself, Kennedy had forgotten to be bitter about his short-lived career .
 Martha Raye had spent more time entertaining the troops in Vietnam than anyone except Bob Hope . Raye spent most of her time entertaining troops in the Vietnam .
 He had warned Kennedy that, if his notification arrived, he would refuse to go, supposing that Kennedy would say that, in the circumstances, he had better leave the staff .
 Kennedy said, "Well, Jeff, you know if you go to jail, I’ll see that you get treated right" Kennedy said instead, "and besides, don’t worry about it. Don’Torry," he said .
 Ethnic means, simply, pertaining to a religious, racial, national, national or linguistic group . KKK is the KKK, the KKK and the KKK .
 To confine this adjective, as current writers try to do, to people from eastern Europe is a gross solecism . It's a gross conclusion to confine it to eastern Europeans .
 Humphrey actually suggested that those who disagreed with Johnson and himself on the war were racists . He reiterated the accusation as late as 1976 in The Education of a Public Man, 486 .
 George McGovern introduced Robert Kennedy to Robert Kennedy at Sioux Falls and Rapid City, South Dakota, April 16, 1968 . McGovern was a candidate for president in 1968 .
 Eugene McCarthy, The Year of the People (Garden City, N.Y., 1969), 145. Eugene McCarthy's "The Year of The People" was published in 1969 .
 In calling it the “best financed,” McCarthy explained that he meant not that the Oregon campaign had the most money but that it had the money long enough in advance to plan the spending .
 The final result was 46.4 percent for Kennedy and 41.1 percent for McCarthy . Kennedy won the presidential election by 46.5 percent . McCarthy won the election by 41.3 percent of the vote .
 The rest went to a Humphrey slate headed by the state attorney general . The rest of the vote went to the state Attorney General .