 The announcement takes me by surprise, especially on this day, after a most memorable visit to a bomb shelter built for a president and his family in the aftermath of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion when all gates to Cuba were most definitely closed .
 Kennedy Bunker on Peanut Island in Palm Beach County, Florida, is underground fallout shelter . This story is about a visit to the Kennedy Bunker in Florida .
 The shelter was built in December 1961 before President John F Kennedy’s visit to Palm Beach for a Christmas holiday with his family . President Kennedy visited the shelter before his visit to Florida for the holiday .
 I put together this brief, selective, timeline of the historical events surrounding this bunker’s construction . The bunker was built in the 1980s and 1990s . It is the first bunker in the world to be built in a bunker .
 There would be pandemonium amplified by a kazillion wireless communication devices . There would also be chaos amplified by kazillions of wireless communications devices .
 President urged all Americans to build a fallout shelter in their home because of the risk of a nuclear war with the Soviet Union . October 6, 1961: The Bay of Pigs . The President gave a speech urging people to build fallout shelters .
 U.S. Navy Seabees built Kennedy bunker under the direction of the Secret Service . Secret Service was tasked with building the bunker in Kennedy's old Navy base .
 Soviet and Cuban leaders agreed to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . Construction of missile launch facilities began in Cuba in the 1950s .
 The bunker entryway was built into the hillside and covered with twelve feet of bags of concrete mix and dirt . The Bunker Tour includes a tour of the bunker's entryway .
 It was meant to be a radiation proof safe haven for the President from which JFK and his entourage could lead the country . JFK's White House was built in 1961 to provide a safe haven from the President . The White House is now located in Washington, DC .
 As I walked into the dimly lit 40-foot long corrugated steel tunnel, I was immediately struck by a twilight zoney sense of the reality of a tense time in our geopolitical history . The tunnel is a 40-ft long, steel tunnel that is lit by a dim
 As a kindergartner in Baltimore, only forty miles from Washington D.C., we practiced Duck and Cover drills in the classroom . I had a flashback to 1962 when I was in the same school as a kindergarten .
 As children, we knew, sort of, what this sign on public buildings meant . We knew what it meant when we were children, but now we know what it means .
 The six black and gold triangles depicted in the sign stood for shielding from radiation, food and water, trained leadership, medical supplies, communication, radiological monitoring, all focused jobs .
 Before taking two 90-degree turns to get to the living quarters, one would do a radiation check . The radiation check was carried out by a team of engineers .
 If you tested positive, you rinsed off in the decontamination shower before proceeding . If you were positive, then you had to wash up in a decontaminator .
 Entranceways to bomb shelters always include a maze of concrete walls through which to navigate . I had a vague memory that radiation couldn’t turn corners, so I had to navigate through the maze .
 If you had a bomb shelter in your home while growing up, please tell us about it in the comments .
 The artifacts, some original, some not quite accurate for the time period, instantly put the gravity of the Cold War into perspective . The artifacts are some original and some not entirely accurate .
 Another view of this room from a fellow traveler, photographer Kay Ohto who kindly allowed me to use his photos for this post . The hotel room is one of the largest rooms in the world .
 There was a direct line between Washington and the Kremlin, but it was through a teletype . It was through teletype, but not a direct phone call .
 "My husband and I just watched it and literally sat on the edge of our seats throughout most of the second half," she said . "I was literally in awe of the amazing performance," she added .
 Portable plastic-lined commodes — barrels with toilet seats placed on top — are portable toilet seats . Portable toilet seats are placed on barrels with seats placed in top of them .
 The escape tube pictured above was originally surrounded by bags of concrete similar to this cross-section of ground-fill that covered the bunker . Ground-fill was used to cover the bunker's escape tube .
 The President would have been flown by helicopter from his winter residence on Palm Beach Island to the helipad on this island .
 To get onto the island today, you need to take a water taxi, private boat, or kayak . The island is accessible only by water taxi or private boat .
 We got to the island with a very safe kayaking outfit with excellent guides, arranged for us by our hotel concierge .
 There is also a decommissioned U.S. Coast Guard Station on the Island .
 During the Cold War, if locals asked about the bunker, they were told it was an ammunition depot for this Coast Guard station . The bunker was a Cold War depot for the Coast Guard .
 I’d also like to recommend a fabulous historical and cultural bike tour of Palm Beach Island with Leslie Diver of Island Living .
 Follow my photos of vegetables growing, backyard chickens hanging out, and dinner preparations on Instagram at JudysChickens.com . Share your photos of your backyard chickens and vegetables growing .
 I remember my father walking into my bedroom and telling me that if he came in the night, follow directions immediately and ask questions later . I remember his father telling me to follow instructions immediately and not ask questions .
 I think there will be a lot of ladies sharing this one with their hubbies . Thank you for your always high-quality and always educational blog posts .
 I have lived 45 minutes from there for 30 years and never knew it was there. I live 45 minutes away from where I lived .
 They’ve actually had trouble keeping it open– maybe that’s why it is not so well advertised . xo Reply Anne Carter Brothers says: Love this blog .
 "I also grew up in Baltimore, but my duck and cover was during the Suez Crisis," she says . "I grew up a Baltimore boy, but I was in the military during that crisis," she adds .
 I didn't remember that Crisis until you mentioned it, nor did I know it was a situation requiring Duck and Cover drills for Americans at home . I didn’t remember that crisis until I was talking to CNN iReport .
 Times have changed so much in the way information is disseminated, I know that is an understatement. Times are changing so much that it's difficult to say, but that's not an understatement .
 You should see the rusty metal spikes on a long rail road like iron pole along side the Cuban roads .
 The spikes were there to be pulled across the roads to prevent any landings . They were afraid the United States would sent airplanes to invade and land on the Highways so the spikes were pulled across .
 "I went on two mission trips to Cuba and found the people very likable but leery of Americans from all the propaganda against us," he says . "I found the Cuban people likable," he adds .
 I was thinking it should be at The Smithsonian so more people could see it and to make the props more historically accurate, I said . I'm not sure where to put the props .
 Oven-Roasted Strawberry and Rosemary Jam . Quiche Lorraine with Bacon and Kale .
 You can buy year-old bare root plants that take 3 or 4 years to mature and bear thick asparagus stalks . You can also buy bare root plant plants that mature in 3 to 4 years .
 Come on, open those petals. Repeat annually. #Howtogrowasparagus season is on .
 A small jar was given as a party favor at a @thenashvillefoodproject fundraiser one year . The jar is given to a small jar at a Nashville fundraiser .
 "I make a couple batches every year because we HAVE to have it in the house at all times," she says . She says she makes a batch every year for her family .
 @oscarfox_, when you come to water my garden tomorrow, I want you to pick this asparagus and enjoy it. #strawberryjam #strewberrypreserves #reunitedanditfeelssogood . @osCarfox_: When you
 I want you to know the joy of picking asparagus and eating it fresh from the earth . I want to know that you can still enjoy picking and eating asparagas .