 The crisis culminated to the brink of nuclear war between both superpowers . The crisis ended with the death of the Soviet Union and Russia .
 It can be said that it was the part of the Cold War Doctrine in which Cuba played a vital role . The Cuban government played a key role in Cuba's role in the fight against the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. believed that it would be simple to remove Mr Castro from the political power through various means . The United States believed that Mr Castro would be easy to remove him from political power .
 U.S. efforts to remove Castro from the Cuban government failed utterly . However, all the United States tried to remove him from the country's government failed .
 Fidel Castro's popularity became more apparent when he sided with the Soviets Union . Fidel Castro was more popular with the Soviet Union than any other Cuban leader .
 His government challenged the U.S. and brought the Soviet Union close to pressurise Washington to get a good political deal .
 This paper is designed to understand the political situation of the three countries and their political leadership role in averting the nuclear disaster in the region . This paper, therefore, is designed .
 It is investigated that to what extent the installation of the Nuclear Missiles in Cuba succumbed to the political disturbance in Washington. Further, it is investigated .
 The crisis marked the unique place in the history of superpower relations during the cold war period . The crisis was a unique time in history .
 After assuming the power of Cuba, Fidel Castro adopted more aggressive policies towards the U.S. After assuming power, he became more aggressive towards the United States .
 Castro nationalised U.S. property amounting to $850 million in 1960 . In 1960, Castro started establishing relations with China and the Soviet Union . Castro also nationalised $850m worth of property in the US .
 He then became a thorn in the U.S. flesh as they wanted to get rid of him . He was a thorn of the United States flesh when they wanted him gone .
 The tension that arises between Havana and Washington since 1959, then got a U-turn and became the Moscow versus Washington when Nikita Khrushchev supported Cuba . The tension then got to become the Moscow vs. Washington as Nikita .
 The thirteen days crisis was not a product of the accident. Kennedy’s policies were not the accident . Kennedy's policies are not the result of an accident. The crisis was a result of Kennedy's policy.
 John F Kennedy, an Irish-American Catholic was staunch anti-communist from the very beginning . He had continued confrontational cold war methods .
 The Soviet’s relations with the United States were not cordial as both countries were in a state of cold war . The Soviet-U.S. relations between the two countries were not as cordial . The United States and the Soviet Union were in the midst of a cold
 Nikita Khrushchev was a risk taker in foreign policy and during the sixties looking for a logical location in nearby America to place heavy weapons to achieve marvellous foreign policy victory .
 He was furious and formidable of United States Jupiter missiles and military bases in Turkey . He was also furious that the U.S. Jupiter missiles had been deployed to Turkey . The Turkish leader was furious at the presence of the United States .
 Nikita made no mistake when offered to help Cuba against the United States which he accepted and started pumping robust military supply to Castro’s government . When informed of U.S. secret war against Fidel Castro in July 1962, by Raul Castro's delegation during their visit, by
 These shipments intended 24 IRBMs and 36 MRBMs, 40 aircrafts, 33 IL-28 light bombers . The shipments were intended to carry 40 aircraft, 40 planes and 33 bombers .
 He was worried about the Soviet’s missiles buildup internationally, on other he was also facing difficult situation domestically as Congress elections were due on November 6 .
 He warned Khrushchev of creating trouble in the region which will result in a serious conflict . He issued a policy statement and warned against creating trouble . He also warned that the conflict could lead to a serious war .
 The situation worsened too much extent when the U-2 flight's surveillance confirmed the medium-range-ballistic-missiles in Cuba on October 5 . The U.2 flight confirmed the missiles in Cuba .
 Though the missiles were good at first attack, the Soviet was not capable of continuing the process of war for a long . U.S. was far ahead regarding arms, equipment, technology and economic stability .
 There were many misperceptions and miscalculations from both sides during the crisis . There were also many mistakes made by both sides of the warring parties .
 The U.S. came to know about the Soviets missiles seven months after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion . The failed invasion was meant to overthrow Castro Castro . The United States knew about the Soviet missiles .
 Armed forces went from peacetime to wartime alert position for the blockade . Armed forces were on alert at the start of the blockade of Cuba .
 He called for immediate withdrawal under the supervision of the United Nations . He called on immediate withdrawal of the troops .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles from Cuba, only one condition: Cuba will not be invaded, and Fidel Castro's government will be dismantled . The crisis deescalated when Kennedy received the letter of Khruschev in October 1962 .
 The massive tension of the Third World War was escalated but not removed as missiles were still in Cuba . The tension was escalated in Cuba as missiles remained in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy on 27th October calling for the withdrawal of the U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The letter was sent to Kennedy in response to the letter .
 While analysing Khrushchev’s both letters during the EXCOM meeting, news came that the U-2 plan had been shot down by the Soviets in Cuba .
 U.S. president will issue final orders for invasion of Cuba, which Kennedy strongly rejected . One officer reminds Kennedy of his orders that in the response of any aggressive move by the Soviets, United States president will issued final orders .
 He sent a letter to Khrushchev and assured of not invading Cuba . However, he sent it to the Soviet Union .
 For Americans, the 13 days crisis was the most turbulent period in their history as nuclear missiles were hanging over them from Cuban soil . For Americans it was the greatest turbulent period of their history .
 From Kennedy’s address to the nation on 22nd, there was a wave of despondency and desperation for Americans . Americans are desperate for their country's future .
 Five divisions of armed strategic reserves were placed on alert . United States forces went from ""peace alert to Defcon 3 (war alert), and strategic air command Defcon 2"
 Aircrafts with nuclear warheads remained ready for only just ‘command’ from the president . Aircrafts were ready for just 'command' from President Obama .
 If the orders had been issued millions of thousands would have lost their lives, and millions had been displaced almost there would have been a catastrophe . The orders would have saved millions of lives and displaced millions of people .
 Khrushchev only dashed to the grounds when he announced the dismissal of the missiles if promised that Cuba will not be attacked . It only dashed the grounds after the threat was made to Cuba .
 President was much compelled to issue the orders for final blow when the U-2 flight been shot, he utterly rejected and refused to issue orders instead accepted Khrushchev proposals .
 Kennedy received the reports of installations of missiles on Cuban soil, he went on with enormous discussions and meeting with his Executive Council but never let the then UN secretary-Thant. He went on to discuss the reports .
 It was only on 20th October that U-Thant came to know about the crisis . Two days later on 22nd he was informed about the Kennedy’s most important address to the nation about the debacle by his military adviser .
 There was a wave of tensions throughout the world about the start of the new world war . It was the beginning of the first world war, when the war broke out .
 Thant played a significant role in de-escalating the gravest nuclear problem between two superpowers . Thant's role was to de-establish the nuclear threat between the U.S. and Russia .
 His recognition of Thant that “he has put the world deeply in his debt” is the clear manifestation of his recognition, he says .
 From the time of quarantine to the withdrawal of missiles, he played a vital role . He played a key role in pulling missiles out of the region .
 Thant sent messages to both leaders urging for a moratorium of two to three weeks for suspension of weapon to Cuba and the quarantine methods .
 The objective was to delay the process to get time so that it should dismantle the debacle peacefully, the government says . The objective of the delay was to get the process delayed so it could be dismantled peacefully .
 Khrushchev cabled on 25th October that “I appreciate your initiative and understand your concern over the situation which has arisen in the Caribbean, for the Soviet government to regards it as highly dangerous and as requiring immediate intervention by the United Nations .
 Later, when the Soviets turned their ships to their shore, Kennedy then relied on the Thant . The Thant was the first ship to come to shore from the Soviet Union .
 Both raised quality as well as the quantity of the arms and ammunition . Both the quality and quantity of ammunition was raised .
 Khrushchev’s decision of placing the missiles had two strategic objectives . Although the Soviet Union was far behind the U.S. regarding weapons and wealth, the decision was made for strategic purposes .
 Stationing a couple of Soviet intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba was a Soviet move . The U.S. has been in Cuba since 1961 .
 The philosophy behind installing the nuclear missiles was to show to the U.S. that Cuba is not alone in the political turmoil, the Soviet Union shall be there to protect her allies . Conclusion: The Soviet Union will protect its allies .
 The US never made it publically till 1968 and by that way showed the equal power of two states . As he wanted to get rid of the 15 American Jupiter missiles from Turkey in which he became successful but the US .
 The CMC had great historical importance from which world leaders can get the experience of politically resolving the nuclear issue . World leaders can learn from the experience from the CMC, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The decision of not going to engage in the nuclear war can be considered as the greatest which benefited both countries and to the world as well as the world . The decision to not engage in nuclear war was considered the greatest .
 The nuclear crisis averted, but it paved the way forward between the two countries . The crisis was averted but the nuclear crisis was not a nuclear war .
 Later in next year, both countries signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the first disarmament agreement of the nuclear age . The treaty was signed by both North and South Korea in 1998 .