 These images, mushroom clouds and skies tainted with lethal streaks of orange, have a mesmerizing beauty that seems entirely detached from the destruction the bombs inevitably would wreak .
 Director Roger Donaldson begins this competently told story by showing us what didn't happen, a nuclear holocaust . The film is based on the idea of a nuclear war .
 CNN's John Sutter gives a play-by-play account of how it was averted . After that, he settles into a game-churning account of the crisis that had the world trembling for two weeks . Sutter: "It was a two-week crisis that
 Don't be misled by early scenes that show presidential assistant Kenny O'Donnell reading the paper and preparing for work . Don't get misled by the early scenes of the new president .
 The movie overcomes any inadvertent sense of parody and refuses to allow Costner, who served as one of three producers, hog the spotlight .
 O'Donnell, a tough political operative, is one brain in the Hydra-headed Kennedy brain trust . She is one of the top political strategists in the Kennedy administration .
 Some writers say the script exaggerates the role O'Donnell played during the crisis . But dramatically, it makes sense, the mild focus makes sense . The show is set to air on PBS on Sunday at 8 p.m. ET .
 Too many people saw John and Robert Kennedy, and, ultimately, no actors can do justice to this pair of Irish titans . Too many of us saw them, too many saw too many . No actors can play them, and ultimately, they can't do justice .
 Bruce Greenwood makes a splendid John F Kennedy, selfassured and assertive without overplaying his hand . Having said that, it must be noted that . Greenwood makes the best impression of Kennedy .
 Greenwood looks like JFK without straining to do so, and his quiet authority gives the movie its spine . Greenwood's quiet authority is the movie's spine .
 Steven Culp, who looks less like Bobby Kennedy, captures the younger brother's mercurial passions and intelligence . Culp: "Bobby Kennedy is a great human being, a great person, a good person"
 There are terrific moments when the two Kennedy brothers express disbelief at the magnitude of events that have been thrust upon them . The Kennedy brothers have been in the White House since 1968 .
 They know that it's important to look confident even as they pick their way through a situation that's fraught with uncertainty . CNN.com's iReport.com will feature iReporters in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport .
 Donaldson, who directed Costner in the fine 1987 thriller No Way Out, builds suspense around a story that contains no real surprises . Donaldson directed the film in 1987 .
 The tension derives from watching different forces within the government jockey for position . But the tension is not the tension, but it's the result of watching the government compete for position.
 Donaldson deftly shows that united fronts often conceal a multitude of antagonisms . Donaldson shows united fronts can conceal many of the antagonisms in the United States .
 Kennedy finds himself pushed by the military men who want to retaliate quickly . Kennedy is pushing for a quick response to the military's actions .
 President Obama must outmaneuver opposition in his own government while making sure that the Soviets see no cracks in the U.S. armor . He must also make sure that he doesn't see any cracks in his armor .
 As such dialogue suggests, many scenes consist of meetings and heated conversations . Many scenes of this film include heated conversations and meetings .
 Donaldson maintains a crisp storytelling style, as if he modeled his approach on the economical crew cut Costner sports . Donaldson is the voice of the character in the new film .
 Thirteen Days will serve as a sobering reminder of past brinkmanship . For those who lived through the crisis, Th13 Days will be sobering reminders of past .
 Those not yet born during the tense October days should gain a greater understanding of the tense days . The possibility of nuclear annihilation seemed all too real, and leaders really did seem larger than life .
 Rusk was the son of a poor Georgia farmer who became the nation's highest Cabinet officer in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations . Rusk died Tuesday night at his home in Athens, Georgia .
 He taught at the university's law school after leaving Washington in 1969 . He taught in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Rusk was appointed secretary of state by President John F Kennedy in 1961 . He enforced the young president's Cold War policy of containing communism . Rusk has been married to Richard Nixon since 1964 .
 Rusk remained secretary until the end of Johnson's term in 1969, despite criticism for Vietnam . After Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, President Johnson insisted Rusk stay on .
 Rusk supported Johnson's policy on Vietnam so strongly that he became a favorite target of anti-war lawmakers and student protesters . Rusk became a target of students and lawmakers who opposed the war effort .
 Rusk defended his role in the Vietnam War in his son's 1990 book, As I Saw It . Rusk's son wrote about his father's role in Vietnam War .
 Rusk was at Kennedy's side when a group of Cuban exiles, supported by the CIA, tried to invade Cuba's Bay of Pigs to oust Fidel Castro in 1961 . Rusk is a former CIA director who oversaw the CIA's efforts to oust Castro .
 Rusk was there when East Germany began building the Berlin Wall . He was in the center of the Cuban missile encounter in 1962 . Rusk also was in Cuba when it encountered a Soviet missile strike .
 The opening session of a three-day conference on that Cold War drama underscored Cuban fears of a U.S. military attack . The Cuban fears contributed to escalating tensions before the October 1962 crisis .
 The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff were preparing plans to invade Cuba, documents reveal . The documents were made public at a conference in Washington .
 One objective of the plan was to lure or provoke Castro, or an uncontrollable subordinate, into an overt hostile reaction against the U.S., a memo says . The plan was intended to provoke Castro or a subordinate into a hostile reaction, it says .
 McNamara credited Castro, Kennedy and Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction . McNamara: "I'm sure they saved the world"
 Many historic papers are being released during the gathering, including documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House and the Soviet Foreign Ministry . Many of those historic papers will be released publicly .
 Documents show that the crisis did not end with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove offensive weapons, as is widely believed . The documents were made available to The Associated Press .
 Khrushchev was concerned that Castro would order his forces to shoot down the low-flying U.S. surveillance flights . The Cuban leader saw the flights as an intolerable intrusion on Cuban sovereignty .
 The tense days of October 1962 invited dangerous speculation on each side about their adversary's intentions . Messages from Moscow and Washington took hours to be translated and delivered .
 A letter from October 26, 1962, in which the Soviets laid out a possible way out of the confrontation, was received by the U.S. ambassador to Moscow at 9:42 am Washington time . It was after 9 pm by the time the note was in the hands of the
 To speed up communication and reduce the risk of nuclear war, the two governments put in place a ""red phone" on August 30, 1963 . The two governments used the phone to speed up communications .
 In reality, it was neither red nor a telephone but a cable line that could transmit written messages . The cable line was used to transmit writing messages .
 In the 1970s, a satellite phone line was added, which allowed for documents, maps or photos to be shared between the two governments .
 The White House and the Pentagon have always kept secret exactly how many times the ""red phone"" has been used . The Pentagon and the White House have kept it secret .
 Leaders employed the hotline during the Arab-Israeli wars of 1967 and 1973, and again with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 . The hotline was used during Arab and Israeli wars, and during the Soviet-occupied Afghanistan .
 Other lines of direct communication were later installed between Moscow and European capitals . Other lines were installed between Russia and Europe .
 In 1996, China established a ""red phone" with Russia, then with the United States two years later . China established the 'red phone' with Russia and the U.S. in 1996, then established a "red phone"" with Russia .
 In September 2011, the United States proposed opening a direct line with Iran to avoid a possible conflict erupting over the country's disputed nuclear program . The U.S. proposed opening the direct line in September 2011 .
 The Soviets had given authority to the local commander in Cuba to fire missiles in the event President John F Kennedy ordered an invasion . Gribkov was in Cuba at the time of the crisis .
 Robert McNamara told his colleagues that Gribkov's disclosure had changed his assessment about how dangerous the missile crisis actually was, Brenner said . McNamara, Kennedy's defense secretary, was a participant at the meeting .
 McNamara told the gathering, Brenner said, that there was absolutely no question that Kennedy would have ordered nuclear retaliation on Cuba and perhaps the Soviet Union if the U.S. forces had been fired on .
 Former CIA Deputy Director Ray Cline had felt the danger of nuclear war was overstated but revised his view after hearing Gribkov, Brenner said .
 The missiles described by Gribkov had a range of about 40 miles, Brenner says . Brenner: According to Brenner, the missiles described as missiles had a 40-mile range .
 Attempts to reach a formal agreement with the Soviet Union ended in failure . Both countries took some steps to implement the agreement, including removing offensive missiles .
 The disclosure sent the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than at any time in their 46-year Cold War rivalry . The disclosure of the U.S. and Russia's nuclear ties was the biggest threat of nuclear war .
 Documents suggest it wasn't because there was no formal settlement . The documents suggest it was because there were no formal settlements made .
 Kennedy was quoted as telling another NSC meeting that the U.S. was not going to rat on an agreement with the Russians . And in early December, Kennedy said that the United States was not "tying on to a no-invasion pledge in a way which allowed Castro
 Top U.S. officials who spent 5 1/2 hours with Soviet diplomats at the United Nations in early December wrote an ""eyes only"" memo to Secretary of State Dean Rusk . The Soviets interpreted it as an effort to give the United States commitment a ""conditional character and
 This distinctively terrifying crisis holds extremely important lessons for current foreign policy . Despite the passage of time, this terrifying crisis still holds important lessons, writes Andrew Hammond .
 They include the difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, the uncertainty of events in a crisis, and the vital importance of strength at the top .
 Cuba and the United States are slowly improving relations between the two countries . U.S.-Cuba relations have been strained for years but are improving .
 U-2 aircraft reconnaissance photos revealed the Soviet Union was placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances . President John F Kennedy and his advisers spent a week debating options .
 On Oct., 1962, he addressed the nation and stated the missiles must be removed . On Oct. 1962, President Nixon said the missiles would be removed from the U.S.
 Until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw missiles on Oct. 6, Armageddon was only a misstep away . The missiles were withdrawn from the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Kennedy administration officials assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles into Cuba . CIA director John Mc-Cone was independent CIA director . Kennedy administration had assumed Moscow wouldn't put missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev and associates thought the move would be just too risky . They erroneously thought it would be too risky, they erroneously said . They thought it was too risky to move, they said .
 Earlier, reconnaissance flights over Cuba had been severely curtailed to avoid antagonizing Moscow . They were resumed only because McCone aggressively pressed the matter .
 Hard photographic evidence of the Soviet deception was received just before the missiles were to become operational . Hard photographic proof of the deception was obtained just before they became operational .
 There is already growing circumstantial evidence, including reports from reliable agents in Cuba, that something of this nature was underway . However, there was already growing . evidence of this .
 As with the Bush administration regarding invading Iraq, senior officials chose the evidence they preferred to believe . The Bush administration chose to believe in the Iraq invasion .
 At the start of the crisis, there was strong sentiment among Kennedy advisers for an overwhelming conventional air attack followed by an invasion of Cuba .
 JFK imaginatively decided instead on a naval quarantine, as the nation's first step in response to the Soviet move . JFK's decision to quarantine the Soviet Union was a response to a threat to the U.S.
 Years after the crisis, surviving policy makers from Cuba, the Soviet Union and the United States initiated a series of meetings . Surviving policy makers have revealed important new dimensions and insights from the crisis .
 Soviet commanders already had shorter-range nuclear armed missiles in Cuba . They had authority to use them in the event of an American invasion of Cuba .
 The commanding officer of a Soviet sub nearly launched a sub against the U.S. Navy ships . Michael Dobbs' book, "One Minute to Midnight," documents the incident .
 JFK accepted while publicly rejecting a Soviet proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade . National security adviser McGeorge Bundy's history of the nuclear age, published a quarter century after the crisis, revealed JFK accepted the proposal .
 He assembled informal group that freely debated a wide range of options . He assembled an informal group of people to debate a range of topics .
 When tensions mounted, the president would shrewdly suggest taking a break . When tensions mount, Obama would suggest a break, he said .
 In 1961, an inexperienced JFK signed off on a flawed Cuba invasion plan . The plan was strongly endorsed by the CIA and military, then mishandled by JFK .
 Then and now, strong U.S. presidential leadership is essential, says President Obama . "Strong United States presidential leadership" is essential in America, says Obama .
 As with the Bush administration on invading Iraq, senior officials chose the evidence they preferred to believe . The Bush administration chose the facts they wanted to believe, as did the evidence .
 JFK imaginatively decided instead on a naval quarantine as the U.S. first step in response to the Soviet move . JFK's first step was to quarantine the Soviet Union .
 Soviet commanders already had shorter-range nuclear armed missiles in Cuba . They had authority to use them in the event of an American invasion of Cuba .
 Fifty-five years ago, the Cuban missile crisis during Oct.-28 of 1962 dominated global attention . Washington and Moscow sparred right on edge of thermonuclear war .
 National security adviser McGeorge Bundy's history of the nuclear age, ""Danger and Survival,"" published a quarter-century after JFK accepted a proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade . JFK accepted while publicly accepting while publicly rejected while publicly rejecting the proposal .
 On October 22, 1962, he addressed the nation and stated the missiles must be removed . He said the missiles would be removed from the country .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles on October 28, 1962 . Armageddon was only a misstep away until the withdrawal of missiles .
 Cuba and the U.S. are slowly improving relations between the two countries . Cuba's relationship with the United States has been strained for years . The Cuban government has been criticized for its treatment of dissidents .
 Kennedy administration officials assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles into Cuba . CIA director John McCone had assumed Moscow wouldn't put missiles in Cuba . Kennedy administration had assumed Russia would never do so .
 Khrushchev and associates felt the move would be just too risky, they erroneously thought Khrushchevitch and associates thought it would be too risky . They erroneously believed the move was too risky to move, they said . The move was a mistake, and the Soviets were
 As with the Bush White House regarding Iraq, senior decision-makers chose the evidence they preferred to believe . The Bush administration chose the facts they wanted to believe in .
 JFK imaginatively decided instead on a naval blockade, as the U.S. first step in response to the Soviet move . The blockade was the first step to respond to the move .
 The commanding officer of a Soviet sub nearly launched a sub against the U.S. Navy ships . The book, "One Minute to Midnight," documents at least one occasion in which the commanding officer nearly launched one .
 He assembled informal group which freely debated a wide range of options . He assembled an informal group of people to discuss a range of topics .
 In 1961, an inexperienced JFK had signed off on a Cuba invasion plan strongly endorsed by the CIA and military – the experts – . The plan was backed by the experts, but JFK was inexperienced .
 Barack Obama and Mitt Romney's foreign policy debate will take place October 22 exactly 50 years after President John F Kennedy's most dramatic television address to the nation . Obama and Romney will debate on foreign policy on October 22 .
 That frank talk ushered in a week of heightened anxiety, to put it mildly, around the world . The world has been gripped by a wave of anxiety since President Obama's comments .
 With Iran's nuclear ambitions now on our minds, Obama and Romney should weigh in on the lessons we've learned since 1962 . Obama, Romney should take this opportunity to weigh in .
 Kennedy administration was trying to topple Fidel Castro's government in Cuba in 1959 . Kennedy administration tried to topple Castro's regime in Cuba .
 Washington imposed trade sanctions, experimented with sabotage, staged assassinations, and finally backed an ill-fated and poorly equipped guerrilla invasion in Cuba's Bay of Pigs . The Bay of Pigeon invasion was a failed invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Cuba turned to the USSR for support from the United States . Instead of bringing Havana back into the U.S. sphere of influence, Cuba sought Soviet support .
 Premier Nikita Khrushchev approved sending military aid, troops, and nuclear weapons to Cuba . U.S. nuclear missiles based close to Soviet territory in Turkey were based near Soviet territory .
 Khrushchev sought to protect his new Caribbean ally and achieve nuclear deterrence on the cheap . Khrushchevitch sought to . protect his . new . Caribbean ally . He sought to achieve nuclear . deterrence on a cheap .
 The crisis rapidly escalated after a U.S. spy plane discovered missile sites under construction on October 14, 1962 . The crisis quickly escalated after the discovery of missile sites .
 Kennedy addressed the nation eight days later, he demanded that Moscow remove the missiles . Kennedy: "I want the missiles removed from Moscow"
 Russian leaders incorrectly thought that Washington would accept missiles in Cuba since Uncle Sam had missiles in Turkey, on the USSR's doorstep . U.S. didn't want to accept missiles from Cuba since it was on the Soviet doorstep .
 Both sides thought they understood the situation and the other side's motives . Both sides were thought to understand each other's motives.
 In retrospect, it's clear that JFK's top military advisers did him a disservice . JFK's military advisers should have done him a better job, he says . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Secret White House tapes made during the crisis reveal that his Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously pressed for war . Secret tapes show that the Joint Chiefs' unanimous decision to go to war was made by Obama .
 They hurled charges of ""appeasement"" in an effort to intimidate Kennedy into launching an attack on Cuba . The charges of 'appeasment' were hurled out of an attempt to intimidate him into launching a strike .
 At one point, after the commander-in-chief left the room, they can be heard mocking him . They can also be heard mocking the president in the video .
 It later emerged that both sides had grossly misunderstood the situation . Both sides later emerged to blame each other for the incident .
 Robert McNamara, Kennedy's Pentagon chief, later worked to abolish nuclear weapons worldwide . McNamara was Kennedy's secretary of state at the time of his presidency .
 Both U.S. and Soviet leaders behaved as if the addition of nuclear weapons to the mix had little impact on how they handled the crisis . What's perhaps most alarming about the crisis is that both leaders behaved in the same way .
 Dispute over a tactical advantage to endanger the entire planet, including generations yet unborn . That's why they allowed a dispute over a transient tactical advantage, endangering the entire world .
 Let's make a commitment to rid the Earth of nuclear weapons . 50th anniversary of being 'more lucky than brilliant' is 50th .
 The Golden Rule, the first anti-nuclear sailing vessel, is now in Eureka, California . He is helping the organization Veterans for Peace restore the Golden Rule .
 McNamara made the statement after returning to Washington from a four-day closed-door meeting in Havana of former U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials investigating the circumstances of the historic showdown from the point of view .
 If such weapons had been fired at United States troops, the probability that the U.S. would have retaliated with nuclear weapons was ""99 percent,"" according to McNamara . McNamara was secretary of defense at the time .
 The missile crisis was widely acknowledged to have been the high point of danger that a nuclear war would erupt between the two nuclear superpowers . Even before the meeting, the missile crisis had been considered a high point in danger .
 Nine short-range rockets with nuclear warheads had been placed in Cuba . Anatoly Gribkov, later chief of staff of Warsaw Pact military forces, said nine rockets were placed .
 Gribkov told the Havana meeting he had visited the island prior to the crisis with orders that, in case of a United States invasion of Cuba, the senior Soviet troop commander was authorized to use short-range nuclear weapons without further approval from Moscow .
 The intermediate-range Soviet weapons that were the focus of the missile crisis could have been fired only with the explicit authorization of Khrushchev, Gribkov said . The intermediate range weapons could have wreaked devastation on much of the U.S. mainland, he said .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove longer-range weapons from Cuba . The weapons were removed in response to a U.S. naval blockade and the threat of an invasion of Cuba .
 The United States did not know of the existence of short-range nuclear weapons at the time . There had been some intelligence reports they were present . The U.S. didn't know they were there .
 McNamara and other U.S. experts on the missile crisis said they had not known of the short-range atom ic weapons until the recent Soviet statement . McNamara: "We had not been aware of short range weapons"
 Gribkov told participants in the Havana meeting that short-range weapons were withdrawn after the 1962 crisis . He said the weapons were pulled after the crisis .
 The short-range ""Luna"" rockets, known in the West as ""Frog"" artillery rockets, did not have sufficient range to reach Florida, 90 miles away, but could have been used against invading U.S. forces .
 The peak of the crisis had passed but while a U.S. invasion was still being considered, Adm. George W. Bush was still considering a possible invasion of Vietnam .
 Dennison, then commander in chief of the Atlantic Fleet, asked for permission to equip the potential U.S. invading force with battlefield atomic weapons . This was denied by McNamara and the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 The atomic warheads on the Soviet short-range rockets had a yield of 6 to 12 kilotons . The warheads were the equivalent of 6,000 to 12,000 tons of TNT, McNamara said .
 This is only slightly smaller than the United States bomb that destroyed Hiroshima, Japan, in August 1945 . The bomb was only slightly larger than the U.S. bomb that killed Hiroshima .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro said he would have approved use of the short-range nuclear weapons if the U.S. had attacked the island . Fidel Castro: I would have OK'd use the weapons if I attacked the United States . Castro says he would approve use of weapons if U.
 There is no indication he would have had any control over whether the atomic weapons were used . This was solely at the discretion of the Soviet commander, Gen. Gen. Vladimir Kuzn-Kuzn .
 Cuba has in the past furnished military aid to revolutionary movements around the globe, Castro says . The Havana meeting is probably the last in a series of historical reconsiderations by participants in missile crisis .
 Castro says no Cuban subversion is being carried out today . Cuba will not take advantage of social and economic instability by supporting revolutionary movements in the future, U.S. official says .
 Mozgovoi says he researched unpublished documents related to the Cuban missile crisis . He says he found out about the documents in an interview with Interfax-AVN .
 Mozgovoi says the threat of a global catastrophe is far closer to unfolding than many thought . Mozgovi says the world is at risk of a 'global catastrophe' in the coming years .
 Mozgovoi's book tells about a Soviet submarine that allegedly sneaked into U.S. waters even before United States ships blocked the way to four Soviet subs carrying weapons en route to Cuba . Four Soviet subs were believed to have been on their way to Cuba with weapons .
 Nikolai Natnenkov, sailed unnoticed behind the American Navy's back and waited for further development of events unfolding with the four subs of the Northern Fleet's 69th brigade .
 The maneuvers of the four vessels -classified as Foxtrots by NATO -during the crisis inspired the title of Mozgovoi's book . The maneuvering of the vessels inspired the book .
 "The sub was armed with two torpedoes bearing nuclear warheads,"" he said . The sub was equipped with two warheads .
 The writer failed to specify where exactly was the B-75 positioned at the time of crisis .
 In Oct.62, U.S. intelligence reconnaissance flights verified reports that the Soviets were building launching sites for medium-range and intermediate-range missiles on Cuba . The Soviets were believed to be building sites to launch missiles into Cuba .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy issued an ultimatum to Soviet leader Nikita Khruschev . Kennedy issued a naval blockade of Cuba and demanded withdrawal of all offensive missiles from Cuba .