 In 1962 there were growing concerns that the Soviet Union was preparing to secretly supply missiles to Cuba, missiles that could deliver nuclear warheads . In 1962, there was growing concern that the Soviets were secretly supplying missiles to the island .
 Cuba is only 90 miles south of Florida, 90 miles from Florida . This posed a particular risk to the United States with Cuban territory .
 Intelligence officials presented Kennedy with photos showing nuclear missile bases under construction in Cuba . Kennedy was presented with photos of the bases in Cuba by the U.S. government .
 An attack on Cuba could trigger a global war, but ignoring the threat of this missile build-up could also risk war . The threat of a Cuban missile strike is also a risk of war .
 Kennedy and his advisors agreed that a surprise air attack against Cuba was the only reasonable response . Kennedy's advisors said a surprise attack on Cuba would be the only response .
 Some have suggested a blockade as a possible prelude to negotiations . However, some have suggested that a blockade could be a prelude .
 Kennedy went ahead with the blockade; at the same time, the United States military began moving soldiers and equipment into position . The blockade began at the beginning of the blockade .
 Khrushchev announced their decision to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in return for a ""noninvasion pledge"" from the United States . The U.S. withdrew the missiles in exchange for a noninvasion promise from the Soviet Union from Cuba .
 The Cold War began to thaw as both super powers realized how close to the brink of nuclear war they had come . Cold War thaw began as both countries realized they were close to nuclear war .
 My brother-in-law, Archie L Watt, Sr., was in the Army in the 60's during the trouble in Cuba . Archie was in Cuba during the troubles during the 60s .
 Donna Chase served in the U.S. Navy during the Cuban blockade in 1962 . Her father, Robert C Leet, was a member of the Navy . Donna Chase, Donna Chase: My father served during the blockade .
 Boyd A Young was in the Army during the Cuban Crisis in 1962 . John E McDonald, Jr., Jr., Mexico United States Navy, voted in honor of his father .
 He was very proud to have served in the military for 4 years and said it was a great experience for him . He said he is very proud of his service experience .