 ENCYCLOPEDIA of World HISTORY Volume I The Ancient World Prehistoric Eras to 600e.e. The Contemporary World 1950 to the Present . Volume I: Prehistoric . Eras . Prehistoric. Eras. To 600e . Volume II: Pre
 This book is printed on acid-free paper . It is printed in the United States of America .
 Mexican Americans have published numerous articles on Latin American history . Mexican Americans are the first Mexican Americans .
 The seven-volume Encyclopedia of World History is a comprehensive reference to the most important events, themes, and personalities in world history . VI Foreword: "Encyclopedia of World history"
 The encyclopedia covers the entire range of human history in chronological order . It covers the prehistoric eras and early civilizations to our contemporary age . It uses six time periods familiar to students and teachers .
 This reference work provides a resource for students and the general public . Content is aligned to the National Standards for World History and the College Board’s Advanced Placement World History course .
 This encyclopedia offers a balanced presentation of human history for a truly global perspective of the past . This encyclopedia is one of the first to offer a balanced . presentation of . human history .
 Six chronological volumes begin with an in-depth essay that covers five themes common to all periods of world history . Each of the six chronological volumes begins with an essay that includes five themes .
 They discuss technological progress, agriculture and food production, warfare, trade and cultural interactions, and social and class relationships . They discuss such important issues as technological progress and agriculture .
 These major themes allow the reader to follow the development of the world’s major regions and civilizations and make comparisons across time and place .
 The encyclopedia was edited by a team of five accomplished historians chosen because they are specialists in different areas and eras of world history . The encyclopedia is edited by experts from around the world .
 Each article is cross-referenced with relevant other ones in that volume . Each article has been published in the same volume as the previous volume .
 A chronology is included to provide students with a chronological reference to major events in the given era . The chronology includes a chronology of the events in that era .
 In each volume an array of full-color maps provides geographic context, while numerous illustrations provide visual contexts to the material . The book is published in four volumes, with an estimated 4,500 pages .
 Each article concludes with a bibliography of several readily available pertinent reference works in English . Each article also concludes with the bibliographical notes .
 Historical documents included in the seventh volume provide the reader with primary sources . This is especially important for students, especially for students . Historical documents include historical documents .
 Each volume also includes its own index, while the seventh volume contains a master index for the set . Each volume contains an index for each of the sets .
 The revolt was led by General Mohammed Naguib and Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser . The revolt took place in the early 1950s in Egypt .
 The signing of an armistice between the United Nations and North Korea ends the fighting of the Korean War . 1953 Korean Armistice ends fighting in North Korea .
 Under the terms of the terms, the country is divided into a communist north and noncommunist south . The terms, they include the North and the South .
 Armas receives direct support from the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency . Armas is a member of the CIA .
 Sudanese vote for independence, and on January 1, the country’s independence is declared . Sudan is the first African nation to declare independence .
 At the same time, Britain and France seize the Suez Canal, which has been nationalized by Egypt . The Canal was nationalized, and the Canal was seized by the British and French .
 Imre Nagy, the leader of the Hungarian revolution of 1956, was executed in Hungary in 1958 . Nagy was executed by the Hungarian Communist regime in 1956 .
 A civil war subsequently breaks out when Moise Tshombe declares Kantaga Province independent . The war broke out in 1904 after a revolt broke out over independence of Kantaga province .
 It petitions the United Nations for full independence, which was granted in 1962, to the UN .
 Carson helps launch the environmental movement . Carson describes the effects of the use of pesticides and other chemicals on the environment . Carson: Pesticide use is harmful to the environment.
 Two hundred thousand people participate in the largest nonviolent demonstration ever held to support the passage of civil rights legislation . The demonstration was held in support of the bill, which was passed in 1964 .
 It leads to increased U.S. military involvement in Vietnam War .
 The U.S. federal government has broad powers to fight racial discrimination . It gives the United States federal government broad power to fight discrimination .
 King Constantine refuses to support the military, he is sent into exile . King Constantine is sent to exile after refusing to back the military .
 Ernesto “Che” Guevera is killed by Bolivian troops hunting down Bolivians . Che was killed in 1967 . Che's death is the first of its kind in Bolivia .
 Thirty Soviet soldiers are killed in one clash on a small, uninhabited island in the Ussuri River .
 No major agreements are reached during the summit, but its occurrence ushers in a new era of diplomacy for the U.S. The summit is held in Washington, D.C. and New York City .
 Under the terms of the accords, United States troops withdraw from Vietnam . The United States withdrew from Vietnam in 1973 . The U.S. troops were stationed in Vietnam .
 Nixon resigns as the House of Representatives is poised to vote on the articles of impeachment against him . Nixon's resignation comes as he prepares to testify before the House .
 His death ends a dictatorship that had lasted since the Spanish civil war . The death of the dictator ends the dictatorship that lasted since 1992 .
 The new Communist regime is headed by Pol Pot, who commits genocide in Cambodia . Pol Pot committed genocide in the country during the reign of Pol Pot .
 A military coup led by General Zia unseats President Bhutto in Pakistan . Zulfikar Ali Bhuttto Is Hanged in 1979 .
 The Soviets quickly send 40,000 troops but are unable to put down the rebellion . Taraki loyalists launch a rebellion against the Soviets . The Soviets send 40.000 troops to fight the revolt .
 Ayatollah Khomeini returns from exile and forms Islamic revolutionary government . One week later, he forms an Islamic government in Iran . Khomenei returned from exile to form government .
 A military coup unseats the incumbent President Carlos Humberto Romero . The coup uncovers a coup against the President of Honduras .
 The government agrees to demands made by the newly formed Solidarity Trade Union to legalize unions as well as affirm the right to strike . The workers win a major victory when the government agrees .
 The war lasts until 1988, and it is estimated that almost one million people die . The war is estimated to have lasted until 1988 .
 On May 21, the first British troops land on the Falklands and rapidly defeat the Argentinean forces . The Falklands was a British invasion of the South Atlantic Ocean .
 The government requests and receives aid from both the U.S. and French governments . The French government receives assistance from the United States and France .
 The gas is methyl isocyanate (used in the manufacture of insecticides), kills 2,000 people; 200,000 suffer long-term harm . The gas, which is methyl oil, kills 2.000 people, kills 200,00 people; kills 2:000 people
 After Israel releases 31 of its Shi’i prisoners, the hostages are released . The hostages were released by Israel . Israel has released 31 Shi'i prisoners since 2003 .
 At the summit, the Soviets make major concessions in negotiations on strategic arms . At the end of the war, the Soviet Union made major concessions to the West .
 Marcos was forced to flee when the army refuses to put down the demonstrations . Mass demonstrations ensue, and Marcos is forced to leave the country . Marcos is the first president of the Philippines to flee the army .
 Chad attacks Libyan forces in the northern village of Aozou and routs them . The army of Chronology xxvii attacked Libyan forces .
 It succumbs to increasing riots, as well as a flood of East Germans leaving via the open borders of Hungary . East Germans are fleeing the country via Hungary .
 The United States leads an international coalition that frees Kuwait . In response to the release, the U.S. leads a coalition of nations to help free Kuwait .
 Boris Yeltsin, the leader of the Russian Federation, rallies popular support against it . It fails when Boris Yeltsin rallies against it, and it fails when he rallies public support .
 Among its former components are Serbia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia, Croatia, Croatia and Slovenia . Serbia is one of the former Yugoslavia's former members .
 Between 1950 and 2000 the world population increased from about 2. billion to over 6 billion people . Food production has increased dramatically since 1950 . The world population has grown to 6 billion .
 Throughout this era food shortages and malnutrition persisted in parts of Asia, Central and South America, and throughout sub-Saharan Africa .
 Famines were caused by human factors such as war, civil strife, and failed economic and political policies . Famines are often exacerbated by natural disasters such as drought .
 In the 1970s an almost decade-long drought in the Sahel region of Africa south of the Sahara contributed to the death of millions . Millions died in the region during the drought that killed millions .
 Hundreds of thousands of people left their homes, walking long distances to neighboring countries in search of food . Hundreds of millions of others have been affected by the hunger crisis .
 Refugees then became dependent on subsistence aid from governments or relief agencies . These refugees are dependent on government or aid agencies for subsistence aid .
 In the early 21st century, a peanut-based paste was developed by a French scientist, Andre Briend . It seemed to be a promising means of alleviating severe malnutrition among children in Africa .
 A human-made famine caused by the communist regime under Mao Zedong resulted in the deaths of 27 million people in China from 1958 to 1960 . The famine was caused by a human-induced famine .
 The reversal of Mao’s agricultural policies in the 1980s under Deng Xiaoping increased agricultural production by 50 percent in only eight years . Deng's policies increased production by more than 50 percent during the same period .
 Inefficiencies and waste on collective farms also resulted in food shortages in the Soviet Union . Food shortages in Soviet Union were caused by waste and inefficient collective farms .
 In the Middle East, some oil-rich nations such as Libya and Saudi Arabia devoted huge amounts of money to subsidize agricultural and livestock production in order to avoid total dependence on food imports .
 Vast agricultural projects, some using hydroponics , irrigation, and other techniques, increased production but were not cost-effective . Some projects increased production, but not cost effective .
 Nations in the region with large populations and little oil, such as Egypt, were unable to adopt such expensive technologies to increase productivity . Egypt's economy has been hit hard by a lack of oil and poor infrastructure .
 Subsistence production in Central and South America declined as commercial agriculture grew . Rural producers everywhere became increasingly linked to national and international markets . The decline in rural production is due to the rise of commercial agriculture .
 United States foreign aid was often tied to the acceptance of U.S. food imports that sought to dump excess production overseas . 1950 to the Present overseas .
 Most poor countries remained dependent on the export of low-priced single crops such as coffee from Brazil, bananas and bananas from Central America, and cocoa and peanuts from West Africa .
 By the 21st century, privatization and globalization had lowered the prices of agricultural products from nations in the Global South, leading to greater rural poverty . Rural poverty has increased in rural areas of the world .
 In Mexico and other South American nations wheat bread began to undermine the popularity of the traditional corn tortillas . The United States and others also sought to export wheat .
 Mothers in much of the Global South were encouraged to buy manufactured milk formulas rather than nursing their infants . Similarly, mothers in many parts of the world were encouraged not to nurse their babies .
 The degradation of the environment also made it harder for the rural poor to eke out livelihoods on depleted and deforested soils with insufficient water supplies . Rural poor also have to rely on dwindling water supplies for livelihoods .
 Heavy government subsidies and protectionist policies protected farmers in Europe, North America, and Australasia . In contrast, heavy government subsidies protected farmers and the agricultural sector .
 Technological and political developments led to the increase of food production and distribution in many regions . Food production has increased in recent years in many areas .
 Food from rich agricultural nations, especially the United States, Canada, and Australia, was distributed in poor regions . Improved transportation and communication systems allowed food from rich countries to be distributed .
 International humanitarian aid organizations and aid benefits by rock stars helped provide relief . Rock stars and others helped provide needed relief in Puerto Rico .
 Scientific and technological advances and chemical fertilizers also increased the yields of vital grains per acre . Agricultural technology and fertilizers have also increased yields per acre of grain .
 The “green revolution” begun in the 1960s introduced high-yielding rice, corn, and wheat . The world’s rice production doubled between 1967 and 1992, and India went from being a grain-importing nation to an exporter .
 Former famine-prone nations such as India, Bangladesh, China, and Mexico were able to produce sufficient food to feed their growing populations . But pockets of hunger and malnutrition remained .
 By the 1990s scientists had successfully genetically modified key crops and livestock to increase production . Scientists had also successfully successfully modified key foods and livestock for increased production .
 Vast irrigation projects such as the Three Gorges Dam in China and the Atatiirk Dam in Turkey also brought new land into agricultural production . The Aswan Dam in Egypt, the Three-Gorges dam in China, and Atatatatirk Dam, in Turkey
 Some argued that smaller, more technologically appropriate projects might have produced the same results at lower human and economic costs . Others argued that the project should have been smaller .
 The development of new and less perishable foodstuffs was sometimes driven by wars or the military . The development was often driven by the military or the need to develop new or more perishable foods .
 During World War II, instant eggs and Spam were adopted as rations to feed troops . Instant eggs and instant eggs were also used during the war to feed soldiers .
 After the war, many in the West adopted these products as part of their usual diets . After the conflict, many Westerners adopted these foods as a normal part of the diet .
 The space program contributed to the development of high-energy drinks and dehydrated foods . Space program also contributed to development of dehydrated food and other products .
 A wide variety of easily available and inexpensive frozen foods provided convenience to Western homemakers who eagerly fed TV dinners and other “fast foods” to their families . The frozen foods are now available in China .
 New foodstuffs altered the eating habits of many in the West . Homemakers freed homemakers, mostly women, from long hours spent in food preparation .
 Fast-food franchises proliferated from the West to Russia, the Middle East, India, and China . Fast food franchises have proliferated in Russia, China, India and Russia .
 The wealthy around the world adopted Western eating styles and foodstuffs, including soft drinks, hamburgers, and pizza . The wealthy adopted Western foods such as pizza, soft drinks and hamburgs .
 Asian cuisine from India, Thailand, and China became popular in the United States and Europe . Conversely, Asian food from India and Thailand was popular in Europe .
 Other new foodstuffs, including a wide variety of soft drinks, were popular worldwide . Foodstuffs such as soft drinks were also popular .
 Health concerns, especially among the middle and upper classes in the West, contributed to the popularity of organic foods and eating locally grown products that were close to nature . Health concerns led to the rise of organic food and organic products .
 Many adopted a Mediterranean diet heavy with fruits and vegetables with little meat . Many also adopted the Mediterranean diet of fruit and vegetables .
 The poor in the West and the rest of the world were generally unable to afford these more expensive foodstuffs or diets . The poor were often not able to afford the more expensive foods and diets .
 People in Europe, North America, Japan, and Australasia consumed about one-third more 1950 to the Present xxxiii calories per day than people in poor nations . People in poor countries consumed about a third more 1950-present than 1950-Present .
 The discrepancy in consumption of protein, particularly meat, was even greater in the study .
 malnutrition and hunger continued to threaten the health and longevity of the poor . Whereas obesity was an increasing problem among the wealthy, malnutrition continued to be a problem for the poor, hunger and malnutrition .
 The pace of scientific and technological discovery surged in the second half of the 20th century and showed no sign of ebbing in the 21st century .
 Other countries, including China, India, South Korea, Taiwan, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and South Africa, began to pose an energetic challenge to the West and Japan .
 Cold war was engine that drove innovation for U.S. and Soviet Union . Cold War was engine of innovation for many years .
 Both nations’ huge spending on military projects often also yielded important scientific information and an array of new consumer products . Both countries' huge military spending often also yield scientific information .
 Among innovations began in the defense sector were jet aircraft, lasers and global positioning devices, electronic computers, and the Internet .
 The legitimacy of science and invention would be undercut by growing environmental degradation, chemical and atomic disasters, and troubling ethical questions . During this period, scientists and inventors would be challenged by environmental degradation and dangerous new diseases .
 Both Britain and Germany flew jet-propelled airplanes into battle during World War II . Commercial use of these much faster planes grew slowly in the postwar years in the UK .
 By 1955, the Soviets had jets in service; an early passenger was Premier Nikita Khrushchev . The Soviets had the first jet jet in service .
 The United States airline industry, profitably flying propeller planes, took longer to introduce jet engines . The U.S. airline industry took longer than the U.K. to introduce jumbo jets .
 Meanwhile, military pilots were testing the limits of terrestrial flight .
 Although supersonic flight led to outer space programs, it failed commercially commercially . The flight was a precursor to the space shuttle .
 Concorde, the British-French luxury passenger plane, could fly at twice the speed of sound but was expensive to operate and limited to certain airports . Concorde was the first aircraft from the two countries to be launched in the 1960s .
 The Concorde fleet was withdrawn from service in 2003, three years after its only fatal crash . It was withdrawn three years later after the only fatal Concorde crash .
 The Space Race began on October 4,1957, when the Soviet Union launched Sputnik , the world’s first artificial satellite, into earth orbit . The space race began in 1957, with the first satellite being launched into orbit by Soviet Union .
 Sputnik was no bigger than a basketball, but its successful 98-minute trip was seen by alarmed Americans as a huge Soviet victory . It was seen as a victory for the U.S. as it traveled 98-minutes to Moscow .
 Within months, the United States kicked its embryonic space program into high gear . The U.S. launched the first shuttle program in 1961 .
 In June 1958, Congress authorized the creation of NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . NASA was created by Congress in 1958 .
 France, under Premier Charles de Gaulle, and other nations were also motivated by Sputnik . The Soviet Union and the United States were the main competitors in the space program .
 The Soviets were first to put humans in space . Only American missions set humans on the Moon, the first time in 1969 . The first American mission to the Moon took place in 1969.
 National prestige missions mostly gave way to scientific space exploration and commercial ventures . As the cold war waned, national prestige missions were mostly focused on science .
 The Soviet Union manned a space station, which later became an international endeavor . The space station was later manned by the Soviet Union .
 Europe’s Ariane program in 1980 became a private venture that marketed space opportunities, including satellite launches . Ariane was Europe's first private venture to launch a satellite .
 Astronomers and cosmologists sought more basic information about the universe—its age, origins, and size . Astronomers wanted to find out more about the origin of the universe and its age .
 American Edwin Hubble and Briton Stephen Hawking were among those seeking to define the beginning of the universe .
 The so-called big bang theory, now accepted by virtually all scientists, posits an explosion 10 to 15 billion years ago . Earth’s solar system appeared about 5 billion . years ago, according to the Big Bang theory . Earth's solar system appears about 5 . billion years
 Hubble Space Telescope began sending back images of the universe unimpeded by Earth’s atmosphere in 1990 . Hubble was honored in 1990 when the Hubble Space telescope began sending images back unimprecedentedly .
 Unmanned missions xxxiv 1950 to the Present to the Moon, Mars, and other planets have also resulted in new information and recategorizations of planets .
 Finding sufficient energy for a growing and industrializing world population proved to be a major challenge for the world's energy industry . The world's biggest challenge was finding sufficient energy to meet growing demand for energy needs .
 Some physicists and business interests began to promote peaceful uses of atomic energy after the U.S. dropped atomic bombs in 1945 .
 An atomic age of abundant clean energy did not come to pass in the 20th century . Hundreds of nuclear-fueled power plants are operating around the world, especially in Japan and Europe .
 Nuclear energy’s beginning as a fearful weapon that caused instant deaths and lingering radiation sickness did not help its image . Nuclear energy's image was tarnished by its reputation as a weapon of fear .
 The U.S. developed a more destructive hydrogen bomb in the 1980s . The bomb was the first to be developed in the United States, but not the first .
 Electric utilities using fossil fuels produce greater air pollution than nuclear power plants . In 1963, the U.S. and Soviet Union signed a treaty that required underground weapons tests underground to minimize atmospheric contamination .
 They also did not need to store or process radioactive waste that could last for thousands of years, as spent plutonium fuel did . Less heavily regulated, they also didn't need to process or store radioactive waste .
 This water could cause thermal pollution if dumped into local rivers . It was implicated in the deaths of fish and other aquatic life . Although this water was not radioactive, it could be harmful to fish .
 By the 1960s, ecologists were describing these adverse effects and enthusiasm for nuclear plants was waning . By the 1970s, nuclear plants were seen to be less popular with Americans .
 A near disaster at Three Mile Island in 1979, followed in 1986 by a reactor meltdown in Chernobyl, Ukraine, brought new nuclear projects almost to a halt . Chernobyl spread high levels of radiation across much of western Europe .
 Evidence of global warming mounted late in the century as ice sheets in the Arctic and Antarctic began melting rapidly . The ice sheets are melting rapidly in both regions .
 Earth has experienced cycles of abnormal warmth and cold even before humans appeared, scientists say . Earth has had cycles of abnormally warm and cold cycles before humans arrived . Scientists feared that human activity was seriously disrupting the world’s climate .
 They urged energy conservation and alternatives to carbon-rich oil and coal, such as solar and wind power, hydrogen, and synthetic fuels, they said .
 In 2005,140 nations ratified the Kyoto Protocols, designed to limit destructive emissions . The Protocols were designed to help reduce destructive emissions in the United States .
 The United States, proportionally the world’s largest energy user, declined to sign the treaty . The U.S. is the largest energy use in the world .
 Synthetics enabled the construction of cheaper, betterinsulated houses, taller office buildings, and safer roads and bridges . New synthetics enabled construction of taller buildings, taller buildings and safer bridges .
 Plastics, along with resins and epoxy, came into their own in the 1950s . Plastics replaced traditional natural materials .
 Pharmaceutical chemists, like Germany’s Bayer, have engineered new medicines and made them easier to use . Bayer says its new medicines are safer than traditional ones .
 Side effects rose in tandem with chemistry’s proliferating consumer and industrial applications . But side effects rose with side effects of side-effects .
 In 1962, scientist Rachel Carson blamed DDT, a powerful insecticide formulated by Swiss scientists in the 1930s, for bird deaths . Rachel Carson blames DDT for the deaths of birds .
 In 1984, a Union Carbide plant leaked the pesticide methyl isocyanate, exposing 500,000 people to sickening fumes and killing thousands . In the Indian industrial city Bhopal in 1984, the pesticide killed thousands .
 Engineer J Presper Eckert and physicist John W Mauchly’s enormous device was powered by 18,000 vacuum tubes .
 Hungarian refugee John von Neumann soon after developed what became the basic architecture of computer systems .
 The invention of transistors by lab scientists at Bell Laboratories in 1948 paved the way for microchips . Microchips would make computers and many other digital devices much smaller, cheaper, and more powerful .
 New copying and printing technologies only increased the flood of paper documents . Computer technology has increased the number of people printing and copying .
 The process that would eventually be trademarked by the Xerox Corporation was invented in 1938 . The Xerox process was invented but did not become commercially viable until the 1960s . Xerox trademarked the process .
 As computers found ways to “talk’t to each other, old-line consumer businesses like Corning Glass became suppliers of fiber-optic technology . Corning's Glass is carrying millions of data and voice messages around the world .
 New opportunities for instant worldwide communication proved to be both a promise and a threat . Inventive opportunities for worldwide communication were both a threat and a promise to the world .
 Despite unequal access across national and class lines, these devices are readily adapted in most societies . The devices were readily adapted to most societies, despite unequal access .
 It seemed that the Internet might do to printed books and newspapers what automobiles had done to railroads . The Internet seemed to be the Internet's undo undoing printed books .
 DNA might be the most important biological breakthrough in human history . Deoxyribonucleic acid—DNA—might be the biggest biological breakthrough ever .
 The Human Genome was “mapped’ in 2000 by multinational efforts . University geneticists and commercial DNA scientists mapped the human genome in 2000 .
 DNA holds out the promise of eradicating genetic diseases but has also raised troubling ethical issues of privacy, eugenics, and equality of medical care . DNA also raises troubling ethical questions of privacy and eugenicism .
 In 1978, the first healthy ‘test tube’ baby was born after her father’s sperm and mother's eggs were mixed by physicians in a laboratory . The first healthy "test tube baby" was born in Britain in 1978 .
 In vitro fertilization, as it is now called, became a relatively routine technique for couples struggling with infertility . The technique is now known as "in vitro fertilization"
 Controversy grew as some fertilization techniques produced multiple births . A few women past menopause used medical techniques to carry babies to term . Some of the techniques have been controversial .
 At least theoretically, parents could choose their child’s sex or sexual orientation, their height and looks, or their IQ and mental proclivities . Parents could also choose sex, sexual orientation or their height or looks .
 Some ethicists are disturbed by these developments, seeing them as a form of prenatal eugenics . Others see the developments as a sort of form of pre-eugenics, such as prenatal sterilization .
 Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin independently developed vaccines to end polio, a waterborne viral disease that crippled or killed . Salk developed vaccines for polio in 1955 . The polio vaccine was developed by Sabin and Salk .
 Franklin D Roosevelt, who contracted polio in 1920, was America’s most famous victim of the prevaccine disease . Roosevelt contracted the disease in 1920 .
 For a while, it looked as though medical advances would soon end most human disease . Now, it looks as though the world is about to end all human disease, but that's not true .
 New drugs, including medications for mental illnesses, indeed prolonged and improved lifespans . New drugs have been developed to prolong life expectancy .
 Access to medical care was extremely inequitable, even in wealthy nations like the U.S. access to care is inequitable . Access to health care is even more inequitable in less-developed societies, experts say .
 The emergence of HIV/AIDS in the 1980s showed that human scientific knowledge had not yet created a perfect world . The shocking emergence of previously unknown diseases —particularly HIV/AIDs —convincingly showed that .
 Social and class changes occurred around the world in the post-World War II era . Social and social changes were made in the wake of World War II .
 In the United States, the GI Bill enabled hundreds of thousands of young veterans to attend university, thereby opening up white-collar and professional jobs for an entire generation of working class or rural youth . In the U.S. the GI bill opened up white collar jobs for a generation of
 After the war, there was also a huge baby boom in the United States, Europe, and Australasia . The baby boom was also in the U.S. and Europe .
 In the United States, many families moved from agricultural or urban areas to the suburbs, often buying new homes with loans provided for veterans . In the U.S. families moved to suburbs often with loans from veterans .
 Road systems, shopping malls, schools, and hospitals were constructed to provide services for these new residents . Road systems and shopping malls were constructed in the area .
 The same trends were followed by the peoples in western Europe, Canada, and Australia . The same trend was followed by western Europe and Canada .
 In Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, young people and families flocked to the cities to find work and better ways of life . In Asia and Africa, many young people, and families, have moved to cities .
 Urbanization became a global phenomenon in the last half of the 20th century . Urbanization has been a major factor in the development of urbanization .
 By 2006 more than 8 million Chinese peasants annually were moving into cities to find work . By 2006 over 8 million peasants annually moved into cities, finding work .
 Great Britain had five cities of over a million people, China by 2000 had 90 . China had 90 cities of more than one million people in 2000 . Great Britain has five cities, China has 90 .
 In South America, urban populations swelled and vast slums sprang up in major cities like Sao Paulo, Bogota, and Lima . Social and class relations in South America were starkly contrasted .
 Large slums, inhabited mostly by migrants from rural regions, also surrounded many African and Asian cities . Similarly to 1950 to the Present large slums were also surrounded by migrants .
 Higher population density also made many more people vulnerable to natural disasters such as the 2004 tsunami that devastated parts of Southeast Asia .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, the struggle for independence in Asia and Africa led to the creation of a host of newly independent states that often turned toward the Soviet model of a planned economy .
 In Central and South America working-class peoples’ organizations began to emerge in both rural and urban areas . Working-class people’s organizations were formed in both urban and rural areas .
 In contrast, in industrialized nations such as the U.S. trade union membership dropped . In the United States trade union members dropped in recent years .
 With end of the cold war, most formerly Communist nations dismantled state-owned enterprises in favor of capitalism and privatization . Formerly Communist nations, as well as those like India that had emulated the socialist model, dismantled state owned enterprises . India is one of the fastest-growing economies in
 China abandoned most state-owned enterprises in favor of free-market ones . After the death of Mao Zedong, China also abandoned most of its state-run enterprises . China's economy has been hit hard by anti-government measures .
 The gap between the rich and poor globally, and within many nations, widened in the later part of the 20th century . The gap has widened in many countries, including Russia and China .
 International Monetary Fund and World Bank often demanded privatization and opening up of markets as prerequisites for loans and assistance to African, Asian, and Latin American nations .
 As socialist economies in eastern Europe collapsed or dismantled, many workers lost the social safety net that socialist states had once provided . Many workers have been left without a safety net .
 Nations in western Europe continued to provide a wide range of social benefits including healthcare for their citizens . Some oil rich Middle Eastern nations such as Kuwait and Libya implemented sweeping welfare states .
 The U.S. failed to implement universal health care for its citizens . The United States is one of the richest and most powerful nations on Earth, but failed to do so .
 By 2006 almost a billion people —mostly in Africa, Central and South America, and parts of Asia —lived below the extreme poverty line of $1 per day . By 2006, almost one billion people in the U.S. and around the world lived below the line .
 Although wealthy European nations, the United States, and Japan talked about and implemented some debt renegotiations, huge debts continued to burden the poorest countries . Wealthy European nations talked about renegotiations or cancellations .
 The status of women and family life also continued to undergo major changes in the second half of the 20th century .
 Beginning in the 1960s, women in Western nations again entered the workforce in large numbers . In the 1970s, the number of women working in the United States increased dramatically .
 The Kinsey Report on Sex in 1948 resulted in a more open attitude on sexuality . The birth control pill and other forms of contraception in the 1950s and beyond opened new social horizons .
 Laws that made abortion legal were enacted in many Western nations and Japan . Laws that make abortion legal in many countries were enacted by Western nations, Japan .
 China enacted a strict one-child-per-couple rule by 1980 . To prevent a continuing population explosion, China had enacted the rule . China's population has been hit hard by an increase in recent years .
 Abortion also became a major issue of social and political conflict in the U.S. and some other nations . Abortion became an issue of political and social conflict in some nations .
 Homosexual and lesbian demands for equal rights exacerbated political differences between liberals and conservatives, especially in the U.S. Likewise, homosexual and lesbian advocates for equality exacerbated differences between liberal and conservative views .
 New generations of feminists have demanded the extension of equal rights and fuller political and economic participation for women around the world . Women's rights have been extended to include political, economic participation and political participation .
 Doria Shafik in Egypt campaigned for voting rights for women and better educational opportunities . Simone de Beauvoir of France, Betty Friedan of the U.S. and Germaine Greer of Australia called for equality in jobs, equal pay for equal work .
 Women also played important roles in revolutions in developing nations, as in Vietnam and Algeria . Women's role in revolutions was key to revolutions in the developing nations .
 Many women failed to gain equal rights in their post-independence countries . While many women have risen to lead their governments, many others failed to .
 Women’s international congresses in Mexico, China, and elsewhere have addressed the problems of persistent inequality of payment for work, human rights, and access to education .
 Women’s rights have also been set back in the U.S. by the failure to gain ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment and in many Muslim countries .
 Wangari Muta Maathai won the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize for environmental and women’s rights . She was a government minister and activist in Kenya . She championed women by providing seedlings to women 1950 to the Present .
 Muslim women feminists Fatima Mernissi of Morocco and Shirin Ebadi of Iran wrote about rights of Muslim women . Their work provided liberal interpretations of Islamic tradition and law .
 Nawal al Saddawi of Egypt and others spoke out against crimes of honor and physical domestic abuse . Al Saddawi: "Criminal domestic abuse is a global problem"
 The Gameen Bank has made hundreds of thousands of microloans to women to empower them economically . The bank was started by the economist Mohammad Yunus from Bangladesh . The Bank is based in Bangladesh .
 Yunus was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2006 . This model has been copied in several countries, with Yunus being awarded the prize .
 Women have been elected as president or prime minister in many countries . Women have also been elected in Germany, Turkey, Pakistan, India, Germany, India and Turkey .
 In 2006, Michelle Bachelet was elected as president of Chile, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf as president in Liberia . Ellen was elected in Liberia, a nation whose political systems had previously been dominated by men .
 The populations of Western countries, Japan, and even China also became older as life spans extended . Life spans extended, owing to better health care, lowering birth rates, and new treatments for a host of physical problems .
 In Africa over a dozen nations had higher under-five infant mortality rates in 2006 than in 1990 . India had one of the highest numbers per capita of maternal deaths per year .
 The rights of children continued to be imperiled in many poor nations, where they often had to work in dangerous conditions in order to provide food for their families .
 In the 1960s, university students led a young people’s movement in the West that challenged old traditions in social behavior, fashion, music, and politics . The movement was led by university students who challenged old Western traditions .
 The hippies of the era advocated a lifestyle of “making love not war” and urged their peers to “drop out and tune in” with drugs, rock and roll music, and sex . The hippie lifestyle was known for its lifestyle of making love "making
 The civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s in the U.S. struggled to achieve equal rights for African Americans . African Americans were long a social and economic underclass .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. led a nonviolent struggle against segregation and helped to achieve more equal political and legal rights . Dr. King led a nonviolent struggle against racial segregation in the South .
 U.S. involvement in Vietnam war in Vietnam polarized American society . But riots and protests, coupled with mounting opposition, polarized society . Protests, riots and anti-war sentiment polarized society during Vietnam War .
 Blacks in South Africa waged a protracted struggle against the apartheid system of total racial segregation . Blacks in the South Africa also waged a long-running struggle against racial segregation.
 The African National Congress led by Nelson Mandela ultimately resorted to violence to dismantle apartheid . The ANC finally gained full political and social rights in the 1990s .
 Indigenous peoples in Latin and South America and Canada, Australia, and New Zealand also sought and often gained improved rights and status . Indigenous people in Latin America and Australia, Canada, New Zealand, often gained better status .
 Rigoberta Menchu won the 1992 Nobel Prize for Peace for her struggle for the rights of indigenous peoples in the Western Hemisphere . Menchu was awarded the 1992 Peace Prize .
 The struggles for social and class equality appeared certain to continue well into the 21st century . Because inequities continued to exist, inequities still exist, the struggles for equality appeared to continue .
 World War II provided full employment and production to the United States economy . The U.S. dominated world trade and industry in the war’s immediate aftermath .
 In contrast, the infrastructures of all of the other major manufacturing nations in Europe and Japan had been largely destroyed by the war . Europe's infrastructure had been destroyed by war .
 U.S.-based corporations enjoyed almost total monopoly in the manufacturing of steel, automobiles, and a host of other consumer goods in the 1950s . These factors allowed companies to enjoy almost total monopolies .
 As Europe and Japan recovered from the effects of the war in xxxviii 1950 to the Present the 1960s, the U.S. trade advantages began to diminish .
 The oil shocks of the 1970s revealed U.S. energy dependency on foreign sources . The aging industrial infrastructure made it difficult to compete with modern and more efficient manufacturers overseas .
 Japan emerged as a major economic competitor, followed by the ‘little dragons” namely South Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan .
 The European Common Market, begun after World War II, evolved by the late 1990s into the European Union . The European Union included most of the nations of western Europe . At the same time the Common Market evolved into the EU .
 The EU became a third major economic powerhouse, along with the U.S. and Japan . The EU is now a major economic force in the world .
 The development and improvement of computers from the mid-1950s helped to revolutionize global trading and business . The development of computers in the 1950s revolutionized global business and trade .
 The computer revolution also made it possible for U.S. companies to outsource jobs to lower-cost English-speaking countries such as India or Ireland .
 Copiers in the 1970s and then faxes helped to facilitate trading and business transactions across vast distances . The development of copiers and faxes in the 70s and 80s helped to develop the technology .
 Late in the 20th century, the World Wide Web, satellites, and cell phones made business and trade communications almost instantaneous . Today, the Web and satellites have made communications almost instantaneously .
 Western capitalist countries led by the U.S. moved to globalize and privatize the world’s economic system . With the end of the cold war by the early 1990s, Western capitalist . Western capitalist. countries led . by the United States .
 IMF and World Bank made economic restructuring conditions for aid and loans to poor countries in the Global South . The IMF and the World Bank have made restructuring conditions in place of aid and loan to poor nations in the region .
 Nations seeking loans also had to lower protective tariffs and open their markets to goods from the West . Nations seeking to get loans also have to lower protection tariffs .
 This increased trade of goods from the West but often led to further impoverishment of already poor nations . The increased trade led to an increase in the poverty of the poor, writes David Cameron .
 The most important world trade organization was the World Trade Organization, which included most industrialized nations . Russia and India had not been admitted as of 2007 .
 EU, North American Free Trade Agreement, Andean Group, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, Commonwealth of Independent States in the former Soviet Union, and Gulf Cooperation Council in the Middle East .
 The growth of European currency emerged as a possible rival in the early 21st century . There was also a standardization of “floating currencies,” but the continued strength of the dollar favored the U.S.
 It was used as a dumping ground for low-quality goods and waste products from the industrialized countries . It remained a source for raw materials and sometimes was used for low quality goods .
 The gap between wealthy and poor nations continued to grow in the latter part of the 20th century . Economic conferences attended by leaders of wealthy nations called for refinancing of global debt, especially for poor nations .
 In the Millennium Summit in 2000, rich nations promised assistance to help poor nations out of the cycle of poverty by increasing education and health care and eradicating hunger while fighting virulent diseases like malaria and AIDS .
 By 2006 much remained undone, while the rich continued to grow richer and the poor continued to eke out livings through trade in raw materials and inefficiently produced food products . However, by 2006 much of the country remained undone .
 Increasing populations continued to undermine economic growth in many nations, especially in Africa and some parts of Asia . Increasing populations undermined economic growth, especially among African nations .
 By the early 21st century, India and China had emerged as new economic and manufacturing giants . The two previously low-income nations have emerged as manufacturing and trade surpluses .
 Vietnam, Thailand, and Malaysia enjoyed rapid economic growth . They were followed by Vietnam and Thailand, which also enjoyed rapid growth .
 The 20th century was also marked by the globalization of Western culture . It was also the first time Western culture had been allowed to enter the world .
 The United States led the way as American movie and television stars, music, fashion, and even advertising became increasingly popular around the world .
 Film industries in Egypt and Mumbai, India, enjoyed great popularity for audiences in the Middle East and Asia . Bollywood is a popular film industry in the region .
 Beginning in the 1980s, color television, sat1950 to the Present xxxix ellite systems, videocassettes, and cell phone networks all provided easy and relatively inexpensive access to a wide a range of musical, artistic, and dramatic productions .
 International hotel and fast food chains helped popularize Western tastes . International hotel chains also helped to popularise Western tastes.
 Tourism, boosted by cheap jet airplane travel, enabled millions to see and enjoy other cultures . Tourism boosted by low jet plane travel .
 The 1960s was a decade of major cultural changes, especially among Western youth and the elites worldwide . The 60s was the decade of significant cultural changes .
 The hippie generation advocated ‘turning on, tuning in, and dropping out” and rock and roll music and dance . Woodstock rock festival in 1969 was a centerpiece of the hippie movement .
 Western rock-and-roll musicians helped to popularize Africa, Caribbean, and other traditional music . Western rock and roll musicians sometimes brought indigenous artists from Africa and South America to the attention of international audiences for the first time .
 Jazz, hip hop, Latin influences, and rai from North Africa attracted music lovers from around the world . Jazz and hip hop and Latin influences among the artists .
 Similar fusions of indigenous materials and motifs, along with eco-friendly styles, also became popular in art and architecture . Fusions were also popular in the 1970s and 1980s .
 English became the universal second language . Attempts to preserve and revitalize indigenous languages were made to preserve indigenous languages .
 The Nigerian author, Wole Soyinka, spoke widely on the awareness among Africans of their own rich cultural heritage . Soyinka said Africans should be aware of their rich heritage .
 For example, the Kenyan novelist Ngugi wa Thiong’o wrote in his native language Gikuyu, which had been banned in his school while the British ruled .
 The tensions between secularism and religion at the beginning of the 20th century intensified at the end of the century .
 By the 1970s militant Islamists across the Muslim world wanted to return to early Islamic practices . They wanted governments that operated under Islamic law and challenged Western cultural hegemony . Western European societies became increasingly secular in the 1960s .
 Christian fundamentalists in the West, Hindus in India, and Jews in Israel also wanted to created religiously based governments and judicial systems in their nations . Some Christians in West, especially in the U.S., wanted to create religiously-based governments .
 The conflict of secular Westernization with tradition and religion will continue in the Islamic world . Leaders in these nations expressed their desire for the preservation of their own traditional cultures .
 Technology has made the world smaller, enabling peoples to travel, trade, and communicate almost instantaneously . Technology has also enabled the world to be smaller, allowing people to travel and trade .
 It provided the means through which the rich industrialized nations could dominate and largely control world trade and communications and popularize Western culture worldwide . It also provided the . means through . which enabled the . rich industrialized . nations to dominate the world trade, communications and . popularize . culture worldwide,
 At the same time, peoples around the world attempted, with varying degrees of success, to preserve their ancient traditions, languages, and religions . At the time, the world was trying to preserve its ancient traditions .
 Some sought to maintain their individual societies through divisive racism, sectarianism, and ethnocentrism . Some of the world's most powerful nations sought to keep their societies alive through divisive and sectarianism .
 As the 21st century progressed, many struggled to maintain their individuality . However, many others struggled to keep their individuality, taking the best of other cultures while sharing their own .
 Cold War dominated the second half of the 20th century . The United States and Soviet Union were pitted against each other for 45 years . The Cold War was dominated by the Cold War .
 At the same time, this era also experienced extensive ethnic, religious, and territorial conflict . This era also saw extensive ethnic and religious conflict, including religious and territorial conflicts .
 This often meant that military forces equipped with technologically advanced weapons of mass destruction found themselves in battle with guerrilla fighters armed with makeshift or outdated weapons . This often resulted in the deaths of some of the world's most dangerous weapons .
 The waning days of World War II set new hostilities in motion as the Soviets competed with their Allies to be the first to liberate Axis-held territories in both Europe and Asia .
 At a 1945 conference at Yalta, three months before Germany surrendered, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, U.S. president Franklin D Roosevelt and British prime minister Winston Churchill agreed to a buffer zone between the USSR and Germany .
 By 1946, Churchill, speaking at a Missouri college, was decrying a Soviet ‘Iron Curtain’ that was turning eastern European nations, including the Soviet sector in eastern Germany, into satellite states . Churchill decried xl 1950 to the Present: A Soviet “Iron
 The United States and Soviet Union engaged in a costly arms race and spent blood and treasure in a series of “proxy” wars in Korea, Vietnam, and Afghanistan . The U.S. and the Soviet Union never directly attacked one another .
 Wars of decolonization included French Algeria, Dutch Indonesia, and French, British, Belgian, and Portuguese sub-Saharan Africa . Many regions still trying to throw off Western imperialism .
 The United States and the Soviet Union regularly used independence movements as opportunities to outdo one another . The U.S. provided intelligence, arms, and covert assistance to presumed allies .
 Both “proxy” and “decolonizing” wars played out in a bipolar world in which the Americans and Soviets each pressed the rest of the world’s nations to take their side . The U.S. and the Soviet Union fought in both “
 Many did so; others, including India, preciously maintained nonaligned status . India was one of the world's most populous countries .
 Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were permanent members of the United Nations Security Council . Both took steps to secure their own allies . The U.N. Security Council was a permanent member of the Security Council.
 NATO was formed in 1949 to respond to possible Soviet incursions . NATO is a mutual security body prepared to respond militarily to possible Russian incursions. NATO was founded in 1949 .
 Moscow responded to NATO’s admission of West Germany by creating the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was a mutual defense agreement between the Soviet Union and most eastern European nations in the Soviet orbit .
 The Soviet Union intervened militarily to crush revolts in Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland . The Berlin Wall was built to prevent East Germans from escaping to the West .
 The United States intensified efforts to control client nations in Central America . The U.S. sometimes intervened militarily to prevent the emergence of reform movements that were inspired by communism .
 Cuban revolutionary leader Fidel Castro’s embrace of the Soviet Union after 1959 was a rare failure of U.S. influence in the Western Hemisphere . Castro's embrace of Soviet Union was rare failure in the United States in Western hemisphere .
 The most significant but least-used weapon of the cold war era was the nuclear bomb . The nuclear bomb and its associated adaptations were the most significant weapons of cold war .
 Since then, Britain, France, China, India, Pakistan, Israel, South Africa, and North Korea have built bombs or are believed to have developed bomb technology . Despite international efforts to check nuclear weapons proliferation, nuclear weapons have proliferated .
 In 1951, the U.S. tested an even more powerful hydrogen, or H-, bomb . The United States began expanding its fleet of nuclear-powered submarines . In 1951 the United States tested a more powerful H- bomb .
 As the arms race intensified, both sides turned to rocket technology to create intercontinental ballistic missile systems . Almost all these were designed to drop nuclear warheads on enemy targets or fire them from submarines .
 Historians now agree that this bilateral binge of nuclear weapons stockpiling was a major reason why the U.S. and the Soviet Union avoided going to war with each other .
 Cold war weapons buildup produced what came to be called MAD—mutually assured destruction—certainly caused anxiety . The Cold War weapons buildup that produced MAD, or MAD, produced anxiety .
 Americans were urged to build backyard fallout shelters to protect their families from radiation . Americans were told to build fallout shelters in their backyard .
 President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev squared off over Soviet installation of nuclear weapons in Cuba . Kennedy was in Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 . The two leaders squared off in 1962 over the installation of Soviet nuclear weapons .
 War was narrowly averted, but the likelihood that both nations could suffer deaths and damage of unprecedented magnitude helped to defuse the impasse . The likelihood of both nations being killed and damage was the key to averting war .
 After 1950, the U.S. Air Force emerged the big winner in the internal Pentagon race for respect and resources . Kennedy and Khrushchev signed a treaty banning above-ground nuclear testing in 1963 .
 The biggest, most expensive improvements in both offensive and defensive weaponry focused on manned and unmanned aircraft and missiles . The U.S. has spent billions of dollars on weapons development .
 Aircraft carriers and submarines dominated the seas, while versatile armored helicopters took on important combat roles . Aircraft carriers, submarines and aircraft carriers dominated the wars in Vietnam .
 After the Soviet Union successfully launched Sputnik in 1957, the idea of “air” power took on an outer space dimension . The idea of air power became an issue after the launch of the first satellite in orbit .
 Reagan proposed a strategic defense initiative, dubbed “Star Wars,” to shoot down Soviet missiles from positions in space . Although the perceived Sputnik military threat fizzled, in 1983 Ronald 1950 to the Present xli Reagan, America’s last cold war president,
 Three major conflicts between 1950 and 1989 demonstrated attempts by the two superpowers to “win” the cold war militarily and ideologically . The Cold War was a two-decade period of the Cold War .
 With the blessing of the United Nations, the U.S. assembled a multinational force to repel efforts by Communist North Korea to conquer pro-Western South Korea . The U.N. had the blessing to the United States .
 The new Chinese Communist regime came to the aid of North Korea, complicating any chance for a U.N.-led victory . Soon, the new Chinese government came to North Korea .
 Hostilities continued to break out along the DMZ (demilitarized zone) separating North and South Korea . North Korea is the only nation in the world to have declared a war with North Korea .
 Soviet intervention in a civil war-wracked Afghanistan ended 10 years later in a failure so profound that it became a factor in the breakup of the Soviet Union soon after . The failure in Afghanistan was so profound it led to the collapse of Soviet Union .
 The United States provided the latest weapons, including Stinger missiles, to local warlords . The U.S. government, interpreting the Afghan conflict through a cold war lens, provided weapons to warlords in Afghanistan .
 Disaffected ethnic and religious groups in Asia and the Middle East mounted anti-American and anti-Russian attacks . A decade later, these weapons would reappear as disaffected ethnic groups attacked U.S., Russia .
 Vietnam was the longest of these “proxy” contests . Vietnam made Americans question national power and the U.S. role in a world of nations .
 As Japan withdrew from its Asian conquests at the end of World War II, the French tried to resume colonial control in Indochina .
 By the time France withdrew in 1954 after a major defeat at Dien Bien Phu, the United States had assumed the role of protecting the southern sector of Vietnam from its “red” brethren in North Vietnam .
 For 10 years United States involvement in South Vietnam drew little public attention and was carried out by relatively small numbers of military advisers and intelligence agents . The U.S. involvement in Vietnam in the 1960s was largely limited to a relatively small number of American advisers .
 This was the idea that communism had to be contained—ideologically if possible, militarily if necessary—wherever it appeared . The idea was that communism must be contained, politically if necessary, wherever it was found .
 The U.S.-backed South Vietnamese government headed by Ngo Dinh Diem was corrupt and unpopular . The government was overthrown by the United States and Vietnam was unpopular .
 In 1964, an apparent clash between North Vietnamese vessels and a United States warship spying in North Vietnam’s Gulf of Tonkin gave President Fyndon B Johnson a free hand in Vietnam .
 Militarily, Vietnam was a conflict between a massively armed superpower and guerrilla fighters known as the Vietcong . The Vietcong were the main source of conflict between the two sides .
 North Vietnamese fighters used their knowledge of Vietnam’s terrain, jungle climate, and people to fight on . U.S. attacks with napalm, napalm and air raids dropped 8 million tons of bombs on Vietnam .
 Vietnam ended the U.S. system of universal military service . The Vietnam War was a major loss for the United States as a result .
 After World War II, the United States continued mandatory military training for young men . The U.S. continued mandatory training after the war .
 As manpower needs in the undeclared war in Vietnam required more U.S. troops, resistance to the war also increased . The war peaked at 541,000 in 1969, but resistance to it also increased in the 1970s .
 College students used generous deferment policies to postpone conscription . When that failed, a friendly doctor might issue a diagnosis of disease or mental illness .
 Thousands fled, mostly to Canada and Sweden, to avoid the draft . Draft protesters publicly burned their Selective Service documents .
 As the Soviet Union unravels, some thought, briefly, that a time of peace might be at hand . Mikhail Gorbachev's last prime minister, Mikhail Mikhail, resigned in 1991 . The Berlin Wall came down in 1989, when the Berlin Wall was down, and some thought peace
 The demise of a world order shaped by two superpowers helped intensify existing ethnic, religious, and political rivalries xlii 1950 to the Present and created new ‘hot spots’ around the globe .
 As old-style colonialism collapsed, new wars erupted in Africa and other formerly colonized regions . Western control had distorted national development .
 Tribal massacres in Rwanda and the Darfur region of Sudan were only the bloodiest outcomes of warfare also afflicting Congo, Liberia, and much of West Africa .
 India and Pakistan clashed over the disputed territory of Kashmir . They became competing nuclear powers in the process of becoming nuclear powers .
 Persistent conflict between Israel and Arab neighbors remained a major danger to world peace . Israel was founded in 1948 as a Jewish state, and its Arab neighbors remain a major threat to peace .
 Events in the oil-rich Middle East became even more central in the post-cold war years . Indeed, events in the Mideast became more important after the war .
 Religious conflicts between some Islamist organizations and other world religions were at the heart of warfare conducted not by national armies . Small, dedicated groups used terrorist tactics, including suicide bombing, to achieve their aims .
 Terrorism was not a new method of warfare, but it seemed especially effective against nations whose strength lay in conventional methods of warfare . Irish nationalists for years had used terror tactics against Britain .
 Russian troops laid waste to the separatist Islamic region of Chechnya, but found that this neither ended Chechen guerrilla actions nor protected Russian civilians from terror attacks, even in Moscow . Russia found that Chechen guerillas were not protected from attacks in Moscow, Moscow .
 Smaller deadly attacks in Madrid and London were later perpetrated by al-Qaeda or similar nonnational terrorist groups . Smaller attacks in Spain and London later carried out by al Qaeda or similar groups .
 The U.S.-led 2003 Second Gulf War against Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq in 2003 faltered amid low-tech attacks committed by warring factions upon each other and United States forces .
 As the 21st century got under way, the rapid spread of technology and almost uncontrolled sales of arms and possible “weaponized” biological and chemical agents seemed to be changing warfare from nation-state projections of power to a dangerous free-for-all .
 Afghanistan is a predominantly Muslim, landlocked country bordered by Iran, Pakistan, and the former Soviet republics of Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan . The country is a landlocked, predominantly Muslim country .
 It is not a nation-state along European lines; it shares no common language or ethnic heritage . It shares a common language and ethnic heritage; it is not nation-states based on European lines .
 Pashtuns, Hazaras, Tajiks, and Uzbeks are not the only ethnic groups in the country . Instead, they are a host of different groups, including Pasharas and Hazarans .
 This diversity has translated into a weak central state prone to interventions from the outside . The diversity of the country has translated to a weak state, the country's diversity means it is vulnerable to outside intervention .
 From the 19th to early 20th centuries Afghanistan was caught between the Russian and British Empires as each expanded into Central Asia . Afghanistan is caught between Russia and the British Empire as they expanded into the region .
 During the second half of the 20th century Afghanistan found itself a buffer between large empires, such as the Soviet Union and the United States . Afghanistan again found itself in Afghanistan again in the 1950s .
 In 1933 Afghanistan’s king, Mohammed Zahir Shah, began what would become a 40-year reign . He would only rule directly during the final decade of his reign .
 Zahir Shah’s uncles, Shah Mahmud, gained control of the country just before the end of World War II, in which Afghanistan was neutral .
 In the immediate postwar years Shah Mahmud saw the breakdown of relations with Pakistan and Afghanistan’s subsequent movement toward the Soviet Union .
 Tensions with Pakistan, especially over the border issue, would characterize postwar Afghanistan’s history . Afghanistan's history would be characterized by tensions with Pakistan . Tensions between Afghanistan and Pakistan would characterize the country's history .
 The 1,300-mile border with Pakistan, the so-called Durand Line, was established by the British decades earlier to divide the fractious Pashtun tribe . The Durand line had been established by Britain decades earlier .
 The departure of the British in 1947 gave Shah Mahmud and other Pashtuns in Afghanistan hope for Pashtun unification . The British left the country in 1947 . The Afghan government was overthrown by the British .
 Mahmud and others called for an independent ‘Pashtunistan’ and encouraged rebellion on the Pakistan side of the border . Mahmud: “Pashtunistan” is an independent state of Pashtunism .
 In 1950 in retaliation, Pakistan halted shipments of petroleum to Afghanistan . In 1950, Pakistan also halted shipments to Afghanistan in response to the incident .
 Crippled without oil, Afghanistan turned to the Soviets and signed a major trade agreement with the Soviets . Afghanistan's trade agreement was signed by the Soviets in the 1980s . Afghanistan signed the agreement in return for oil .
 Pakistan, meanwhile, became an important part of the American military alliance . Pakistan is now a major ally of the U.S. military .
 Mohammed Daoud, the king’s cousin and brother-in-law, came to power in 1953 . He was a young, Western-educated modernizer . He is now the prime minister of Morocco .
 His vigorous pursuit of Pashtun unification created more tensions with Pakistan and pushed Afghanistan further toward the Soviets . His pursuit of unifying the Pashtuns created more tension with Pakistan .
 The Soviet Union was eager to assist in spreading and consolidating power along its border regions, the Soviet Union .
 At the same time, the United States also tried to win influence in Afghanistan . The U.S. tried to gain influence in the country's war-torn country .
 As part of cold war strategy, the U.S. wanted to create an alliance of nations along the Soviet Union’s border . The alliance included Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, and Turkey . The United States tried to create the alliance as part of the Cold War .
 Daoud refused to join the resulting Baghdad Pact but accepted U.S. aid from the United States . Daoud accepted United States aid but refused to accept it .
 During his 10 years in power, Daoud pursued a cautiously reformist agenda . Economic development became the chief goal of the state .
 Daoud skillfully played the Soviets and the U.S. off of each other to help modernize the country .
 Afghanistan received $500 million in aid from the United States and $2. billion from the Soviets . Afghanistan was awarded $2 billion in aid to the U.S. in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The two countries severed relations in September 1961 and the border was closed to even nomadic sheepherders . As a result, the two countries cut ties and closed the border .
 In 1963, King Zahir Shah dismissed Daoud and took direct control of the country . In 1963 as it became clear that an extended showdown with Pakistan would only hurt Afghanistan . In 1965, the Afghan government was overthrown by the Taliban .
 Within two months of taking power he had reached an agreement reestablishing diplomatic and trade relations with Pakistan . He reached a deal to reestablish diplomatic relations between the two countries .
 It barred the royal family from politics, created a partyless system of elections, extended full citizenship to all residents of the country, including non-Pashtuns . It also created a secular parliament and independent judiciary .
 Afghanis voted in elections in 1965 and 1969, but king held most of the power . Afghanis vote in 1965, 1969 and 1969 but king still had most of power .
 The king was deposed while in Europe in 1973 by Mohammed Daoud . After a decade of economic stagnation and political instability, he was overthrown in 1973 .
 The economy continued to stagnate and Daoud could only maintain stability through repression, he says . Daoud was forced to keep his regime in power through repression .
 75,000 to 80,000 Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan in December 1979 . The invasion was intended to support the pro-Soviet regime and install Soviet favorites .
 The decadelong war that resulted killed approximately 1 million Afghanis and forced another 5 to 6 million into exile in Iran and Pakistan . About 1 million Afghans were killed in the war .
 The U.S. boycotted the 1980 Moscow Olympics, leveled economic sanctions against the Soviet Union . It withdrew consideration of the SovietAmerican Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty in the United States Senate .
 The U.S. committed to protecting the greater Persian Gulf region from outside intervention . The United States committed to protect the greater Gulf region .
 The United States also started to funnel millions of dollars of aid through the CIA to rebel groups in Afghanistan . The U.S. has also funneled millions of funds of aid to rebels in the country .
 By this time Mikhail Gorbachev had decided that the costs of the Afghan war in both soldiers and finances outweighed the benefits of the war . The costs of Afghan war outweighed benefits, according to the Soviet president .
 The Soviets faced a fierce insurgency within Afghanistan and a growing antiwar movement at home, as well as continued international pressure at home .
 Afghan and United States Army soldiers patrol a road outside of Forward Operating Base Kalagush, Afghanistan . Afghan and U.S. soldiers patrol the road outside the base .
 The early 1990s saw a struggle for control between the various forces within Afghanistan . The early 90s saw the Taliban lose control of the country .
 In 1996 the Taliban —an extremist Islamic regime backed by Pakistan—captured power . In 1996, the Taliban captured power in Pakistan . The Taliban was backed by the Pakistani government .
 The Taliban consisted of religious students and ethnic Pashtuns, as well as about 80,000 to 100,000 Pakistanis . The Taliban is believed to be the Taliban of the past .
 They espoused an antimodernist plan to create a ‘pure’ Islamic society in Afghanistan . The plan included repressive treatment of women . The Taliban is known for its repression of women and repressive treatment .
 The Taliban allowed al-Qaeda, an anti-American Islamic fundamentalist terrorist organization, to establish bases in Afghanistan in return for moral and financial support . Al-Qaeda was led by the Saudi Osama bin Laden, who led the anti-U.S. terrorist organization .
 In November 2001 after the Taliban rejected international pressure to hand over al-Qaeda leaders, the U.S. attacked the Taliban and the Taliban . The United States attacked al Qaeda and Taliban in Afghanistan in November 2001 .
 The U.S. defeated the Taliban and destroyed the al-Qaeda bases, but failed in its mission to capture Osama bin Laden . Joining forces with the Northern Alliance—minority Tajiks and Uzbeks from the northern part of the country— African National Congress 3 .
 The December 2001 Bonn Agreements handed temporary power to Hamid Karzai . Karzai is a moderate Pashtun from a prominent and traditionalist family . He has been in power since 2001 .
 A new constitution, written by the Loya Jirga, was ratified in early 2004 . The constitution was written by a new constitution . It was ratified by a referendum in 2004 .
 In October 2004, an overwhelming popular vote elected Karzai president of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan . Karzai was elected president in October 2004 .
 Hundreds of thousands of refugees have returned to Kabul, pushing the population of Kabul from 1 million to 3 million . Kabul population now stands at 3 million, population of 1 million per year .
 In 2005, 5 million girls were attending school; 4 years earlier fewer than 1 million had been in school . In 2005 5 million students were in school; in 2005 5. million girls attended school . Four years ago fewer than a million girls in school were attending .
 The economy, however, was still weak and dependent upon international aid . The country's economy was still dependent on international aid and was dependent on the aid .
 Despite this aid in 2005, Afghanistan was moving toward becoming a narco-state . Indeed, despite this aid, the country was moving to becoming a drug-fueled narco state .
 Around 2 million Afghanis (out of a population of 29 million) were involved in the production of poppies for opium and heroin in 2009 . In that year roughly 2.million Afghanis were involved . In 2009, around 2.1 million Afghans produced opium, heroin and opium
 Warfare also continued in isolated pockets of the country . U.S. soldiers tried to mop up remnant Taliban and al-Qaeda forces .
 The South African Native National Congress—later renamed the African National Congress —was formed on January 8, 1912, in Bloemfontein, South Africa . Following a decade of political activism for the rights of blacks, Coloreds, and Indians in South Africa, the South
 It unified the fragmented efforts of various organizations in the struggle against racial discrimination and political disenfranchisement of the majority of blacks .
 ANC used various means ranging from writing letters to the British king, negotiations, strikes, and boycotts to armed struggles to fight the apartheid system . Over the course of almost 80 years, the ANC fought apartheid system through various means .
 South African president F W. de Klerk outlawed the discriminatory apartheid laws in 1990 . Change came only after South Africa's apartheid laws were outlawed in 1990. Change came after F.W. de de klerk banned apartheid laws .
 ANC was the first ruling party in a free and democratic South Africa in 1994 with Nelson Mandela as its first black president . Nelson Mandela was elected president in 1994 . The ANC was banned in 1994 after Nelson Mandela's election as president .
 The ANC began its long battle against the political disenfranchisement and socioeconomic marginalization of blacks in courts of South Africa . The ANC has been fighting the issue for decades .
 ANC attempted to include the dwindling rights of workers in their agenda in the early 1920s . Economic upswing hit South Africa and intensified the need for a black work force . ANC tried to include workers' rights in its agenda in an attempt to protect their interests .
 New laws released by the government systematically stopped the economic rise of a small black bourgeoisie . New laws stopped the rise of the small black bourgeois . The laws were released in response to the government's decision to release them .
 With the Land Act, the government denied black Africans the right to own land and pushed them into economically dependent positions . The Land Act was passed by the South African government in 1994 .
 The government started the foundation of the Native Representative Council, which was meant to represent the Africans but was effectively controlled by the white government . The council was established in 1903 .
 Some pronounced the ANC literally dead in the early 1930s . It actually decentralized and weakened the movement to such an extent that some pronounced it literally dead .
 ANC was active in the All Africa Convention that fought racial discrimination and economic exploitation . In conjunction with 39 other organizations including those of coloreds, Communists, and Trotskyists, the ANC became active in Africa .
 With the candidacy of Jan Smuts in the presidential race of 1948, there was hope that discrimination would cease and real change would take place . In 1948, the South African nation was in the midst of racial discrimination .
 This hope evaporated when Smuts was defeated and even more discriminatory legislation was introduced . It was hoped that Smuts would be defeated and the legislation would be introduced .
 With this new legislation racial discrimination was officially legitimized and the apartheid system was born . With this law, apartheid was legitimized, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "With this new law racial discrimination officially legitimised"
 Immorality Act forbade interracial sexual relations . Marriages between whites and individuals of color were prohibited . Immority Act banned interracial marriages between white people and people of color .
 The Group Areas Act enacted demarcation of land use according to race . It secured the most fertile, resourceful, and beautiful 4 African National Congress land for the whites . It assigned marginalized areas of land to blacks as homelands .
 When the apartheid laws were introduced in 1948, a conflict between the older and younger generations in the ANC deepened . The ANC was split between the ANC and the older generation .
 ANC Youth League envisioned a much more radical change in the ANC . While the old guard wanted to continue their struggle with the same methods, but only broaden its base . The ANC youth league wanted to change the way the ANC was perceived .
 In 1952 the old guard of the ANC adopted the approach of the youth and joined other organizations in the National Defiance Campaign . The ANC joined other groups in the campaign .
 ANC activists deliberately broke the unjust apartheid laws to draw attention to them and have them examined in the courtroom . In these campaigns they deliberately broke apartheid laws . They deliberately broke these laws to raise awareness of them and highlight them .
 Congress of the People formulated the so-called Freedom Charter at Kliptown on June 26, 1955 . ANC and other civil rights and anti-apartheid organizations formulated the Charter . The Freedom Charter was formed in 1955 .
 It demanded equal rights for people of all skin colors and no discrimination based on race . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1973 that no discrimination was based on skin color or race .
 South Africa's apartheid regime faced increasing opposition in the 1950s and 1960s . The apartheid regime of South Africa faced increasing international opposition .
 The newly independent states in Africa, organized since 1963, used diplomatic and political pressure to help end apartheid . The Organization of African Unity helped end apartheid in 1963 .
 In the U.S. the Civil Rights movement shed attention on global issues of segregation and discrimination .
 The leader of the ANC, Albert Lutuli, led millions of activists in the nonviolent campaigns . He believed in the compatibility of the African and European cultures . The ANC believed in a nonviolence approach .
 ANC members conclude that nonviolent acts were not suitable for South Africa . ANC members concluded that more aggressive actions had to be applied . Some of the ANC members said nonviolent acts needed to be used .
 Umkonto de Sizwe was formed to commit acts of sabotage . The military wing was formed in the 1980s to commit attacks on South African targets .
 Mandela’s verdict was imprisonment for life plus five years beginning in 1964 . Mandela was sentenced to life plus 5 years in 1964 for his part in the case . Mandela died in 1999 at the age of 94 .
 The ANC had the backing of the masses and was able to stage actions of mass resistance against apartheid in the late 1970s and 1980s . The ANC staged mass resistance actions of the late 70s and 80s .
 In 1973 workers’ strikes began in Durban and spread to other parts of the nation . In 1973 Durban workers' strikes began to spread to parts of South Africa .
 At the segregated black universities a new movement, similar to the black consciousness movement in the U.S. emerged . At the black universities, the movement was similar to that in the United States .
 Resistance against the so-called Bantu education, which ordered that Africans were to be taught in Afrikaans, exploded in June 1976 in the Soweto Uprising .
 In the Soweto Uprising thousands of black students marched to protest the governmental decree . Thousands of students marched in protest against the government's decision .
 In the same year, the government retreated and decided that African schools did not need to instruct their students in Afrikaans any more . The government decided to withdraw from instructing African schools .
 During the 1980s the fight against apartheid included all areas of life . During the 80s, the fight included all aspects of life, including the streets .
 The armed wing of the ANC received increasing support for the guerrilla fight within South Africa . The organization used propaganda to create a mood for resistance .
 Grassroots organizations emerged all over South Africa and created the mass organization called the United Democratic Front in 1983 . South Africa's Democratic Front was formed from grassroots organizations .
 F W. de Klerk introduced change to the system on February 2, 1990 . New president of South Africa introduced change in 1990 .
 He had held secret conversations with the imprisoned Mandela before assuming the presidency . Mandela had been imprisoned in the 1970s .
 Once in office, he lifted the ban on the ANC and announced Nelson Mandela’s imminent release after 27 years of imprisonment . Nelson Mandela was jailed for 27 years before his release from prison .
 De Klerk ended censorship of the press and invited former liberation fighters to join the government at the negotiation table . Former liberation fighters were invited to help prepare for a new multiracial constitution .
 Mandela and de Klerk were honored with the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo in 1993 . Mandela was awarded the prize for his role in South Africa in 1994 .
 In the early 1990s, even after the end of apartheid, the armed struggle in South Africa had not ended . Still, in the early 90s, South Africa still had a long-running armed struggle .
 In 1994 the ANC became a registered political party and won the first elections, which were open to individuals from all races, with over 60 percent of the votes . The ANC became an ANC party in 1994 .
 Nelson Mandela became South African Union 5 Africa’s first postapartheid president . Thabo Mbeki followed him in 1999 . Nelson Mandela is the current president of the South African Republic .
 Organization of African Unity was formed on May 23, 1963, in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, by 32 decolonized African nations . It was formed in 1963 by 32 nations, mostly African nations, in Ethiopia .
 The OAU was built on Kwame Nkrumah’s dream of Pan-Africanism . It brought the opposing groups of African nations together in a single African organization .
 The founding members of the OAU envisaged this unity among African states as transcending racial, ethnic, and national differences . OAU was founded by members of African states .
 The main goal was not only to build an alliance between the African nations but also to provide financial, diplomatic, and economic assistance for those movements that were still fighting for liberation .
 OAU members guaranteed each other’s national sovereignty, territorial integrity, and economic independence . They aspired to end all forms of colonialism and racism on the continent . OAU member states that they are committed to the end of colonialism .
 The OAU agreed with the charter of the U.N. and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . OAU officially agreed to the charter with the United Nations and Universal Declaration .
 The OAU counted 53 out of the 54 African nations as its members . By the time it was replaced by the African Union in 2002, the OAU had 53 .
 In the context of decolonization and the cold war, the OAU saw itself as alternative . The OAU was seen as an alternative to the U.S. in the wake of the Cold War .
 The alliance, cooperation, and unification of the numerous newly independent African states in the 1960s signified a period of emancipation and empowerment of Africa . The alliance of African states signified the liberation of Africa in Africa .
 It drew attention to the fact that solutions to problems that single member states faced after decolonization were transferable to others and made problem solving easier . The solution to problems faced by single states was transferable and easier to solve .
 It also decreased the possibility of Africa’s falling back into political or economic dependency on the former European colonizing nations .
 The OAU wanted to provide newly liberated African nations with a platform of their own . The African Union wanted to give newly liberated nations a platform .
 In conjunction with the young nations of Asia that had achieved national liberation they saw themselves as providing a third option beyond the ones of the superpowers . The young nations in Asia had seen themselves as an alternative option .
 The organization promoted African culture . The agreements of cooperation also included other major fields such as politics, diplomacy and transport .
 Matters of health, sanitation, nutrition, science, defense, and security also became issues of joint concern . Health, sanitation and nutrition were also discussed .
 The agreement stated that disputes between states would be settled peacefully through negotiation, mediation, conciliation, or arbitration . The organization stood united against all forms of political assassination .
 OAU acted as referee in various border conflicts between neighboring African nations . The OAU has acted in the past as refereeing in border conflicts .
 It helped to prevent the division of the national territory of Nigeria into separate countries due to armed battle between distinct ethnic groups in the Biafran War .
 The OAU used its diplomatic power to strongly condemn Israel’s intervention in Egypt in the Six-Day War of 1967 . OAU also strongly condemned Israel's intervention in the Egypt in 1967 .
 It used political pressure, diplomacy, and economic boycotts to help end apartheid in South Africa . The South African government was instrumental in the end of apartheid .
 The democratic nation of South Africa joined the OAU in 1994 as the 53rd member nation . South Africa is the 53th member nation of the body of the African Union .
 The OAU assembly was made up of the heads of the individual African states . The assembly of heads of African states is made up from heads of each African state .
 In 1997 the OAU established the African Economic Community, which envisioned a common market for the entire continent of Africa . The OAU was established in 1997 .
 The OAU was criticized broadly for not having done enough for the African people . After 39 years of existence, the OAU has been criticized for not doing enough for Africa .
 In its view it should have protected them from their own leaders who promoted corruption, persecuted political opponents, and created a new class of rich while the masses remained impoverished .
 The Role of the Organization of African Unity in the Politics of Africa. African Unity is a key part of Africa's political struggle . African Unity has been a key figure in African politics for decades .
 The AIDS epidemic has been considered one of the most important health emergencies in the contemporary world due to the destabilizing social, economic, and political consequences of its global spread and unsuccessful attempts to develop vaccination against it .
 Some scientists have argued that the problem in tackling AIDS is not so much the insufficient scientific and medical developments, but the politics of the global response to the disease .
 HIV belongs to the family of retroviruses, first described in the 1970s . HIV is the most common form of infection in the world .
 The characteristic trait of viruses from that family is that their genetic material is encoded in ribonucleic acid . This is located in the inner core of the viruses and surrounded by an outer membrane made up of the fatty material taken from the cells of the infected person .
 HIV belongs to the virus group of lentiviruses, which produce latent infections . HIV is a virus that produces latent infections, according to experts . HIV has been diagnosed with HIV, a form of form of infection .
 HIV remains inactive and asymptomatic, and its genetic material is hidden in the cell for a period of time . This means that in the initial state of HIV infection, the virus remains inactive . HIV is inactive in the early stages of infection and hidden in a cell .
 HIV does progressive damage to the immune and nervous systems after an inactive period . In most of the cases, after the inactive period, HIV does not fully treatable .
 The second state of HIV activity is AIDS, which is a more advanced immunodeficiency . AIDS is the more advanced form of HIV . HIV is a form of form of infection .
 Three important characteristics of HIV infection have been identified . HIV infection has been identified as an HIV infection . Three characteristics of the HIV infection are identified .
 The person with HIV is infectious for life, including during the initial HIV infection period . Second, the person with AIDS is infectious in life, as well as the initial infection period, she says .
 Third, the effect of the HIV infection is the increased vulnerability to various infections due to the undermined immune system . HIV infection increases the risk of various infections .
 It is believed that the origins of HIV are linked to a virus located in Africa . HIV-related virus is believed to have originated in Africa and is linked to Africa .
 AIDS-related diseases were later observed also observed also among hemophiliacs and recipients of blood transfusions, prostitutes, intravenous drug users, and infants of drug-using women .
 In 1984, the virus causing AIDS was identified by the French researcher Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Institute in Paris . It was confirmed by the American researcher Robert Gallo of the National Cancer Institute .
 The first commonly used tests for AIDS were the ELISA test and the Western blot test . ELISA tests were the first common tests for the disease .
 The major group at risk was identified by the Joint UN Programme on HIV/AIDS as sexually active adults and adolescents between 15 and 50 years . The group is between 15-50 years old and between those aged between 50 and older .
 It is also important to place the HIV/AIDS epidemic in a broader demographic context . It is important to remember that the epidemic is not just one of the reasons for its success .
 The statistics of the HIV/AIDS Department of the World Health Organization showed that in sub-Saharan Africa, in Asia, and in the former Soviet republics young women with low incomes and living in rural areas constitute a particularly vulnerable social group, the WHO says .
 Global and national responses to AIDS included various prevention and treatment policies . Global response to AIDS was various prevention, treatment and prevention policies .
 After 1996 the so-called antiretroviral drugs , compounds that treat the virus infections, were in use . After 1996, the drugs were used to treat the infections .
 Antiretroviral drugs are available in single therapies, double therapies, and triple therapies . Antireviral drugs were available in one therapy, double therapy, or triple therapy .
 The Highly Active Anti-retroviral Therapy had a relatively high cost of between US$10,000 and $20,000 per patient per year . One example of an antiretroviral therapy was the highly active anti-viral therapy .
 Most of the populations of the North American and western and central European regions could gain access to antiretroviral drugs and antirerroviral therapies . Most of those regions would be able to access to the drugs and therapies .
 This systematically decreased the number of deaths due to AIDS-related diseases . This has been done to stop the spread of HIV-AIDS in the world .
 In the Western Akihito 7 world, living with AIDS was gradually transformed into an endurable and nonfatal condition . As a result, in the Western world, AIDS was eventually transformed into a non-lethal condition .
 The costs of the drugs and treatments made them inaccessible for most of the world . They are now inaccessible for the first time in the world.
 The 13th World AIDS Conference in Durban in 2000 marked a significant shift of global attention to AIDS treatment . The conference marked a shift in attention to the treatment of AIDS .
 In 2002 the UN set up the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria . The fund was set up in order to spawn more generous international funding of AIDS-related programs and to increase the supplies of ARVs .
 GFATM functions as a platform for cooperation between the public sector, the private sector, and the civic society . GFATm is based in New York City, New York, USA .
 Other key donor organizations are the World Bank’s Multi-Country HIV/AIDS Program . Other key donors are the United States President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR)
 In 2003 UNAIDS and the World Heath Organization initiated the “3 by 5” initiative . The initiative aimed at making ARVs available to 3 million people in poorand middle-income countries by 2005 .
 The obstacles to developing a vaccination against HIV included mutability of the virus, what effective immunological reaction the vaccination should generate, and practical problems in testing of the vaccine .
 The Global HIV Vaccine Enterprise is a forum for public and private organizations to cooperate and generate funding for the development of an HIV vaccine . The Global Vaccine enterprise was created by the Global AIDS Initiative .
 AIDS was initially linked to marginal social groups in the U.S. It raised prejudices and contributed to their stigmatization and discrimination in employment, education, residence, and health care . In the Western world, it raised prejudices .
 The religious standpoint created a link between liberal sexual patterns and the spread of AIDS, which framed AIDS as an issue of personal morality, guilt, and punishment . AIDS was framed as a personal morality and punishment, and was framed by the religious .
 In contrast, leftist standpoints phrased the AIDS issue as a problem of the protection of civil liberties and nondiscrimination . Leftist standpoints say the issue is a problem for civil liberties . Leftists say it's a civil rights issue .
 It was a widespread belief in the 1980s that AIDS could be contracted by casual contact . In spite of contrary medical evidence, it was a belief that casual contact could be avoided .
 This raised a number of social and legal controversies where individual rights to privacy were weighed against the collective right to protection from the spread of the disease . Individual rights were weighed up against the individual right to protect themselves from spreading disease .
 The main site of the AIDS epidemic remains sub-Saharan Africa . The virus spread primarily through unprotected heterosexual intercourse and reuse of medical instruments and contaminated blood supplies .
 Experts suggested that the dynamics of the spread of AIDS and its social and geographical distribution in sub-Saharan Africa reflected and exacerbated the systemic characteristics of the migration and mobility patterns, the social sexual behaviors, and the social inequalities and impoverishment in the region .
 HIV/AIDS policies cost over 15 percent of the country’s GDR in South Africa . The personal and collective consequences of the AIDS epidemic in Africa were equally disruptive .
 One of the most serious consequences of HIV/AIDS in Africa was the increased number of orphans, whose parents died due to AIDSrelated diseases . The orphans are orphans of their parents who have died from AIDS related diseases .
 Fan, Hung, Ross F Coner, and Luis P Villarreal. Palgrave Macmillan, 2002; Fan . Hung, Hung . Coner and Villarre. Villarra . Villarria . Villalreal .
 Akihito became Japan’s 125th reigning emperor in 1989 upon the death of his father, Hirohito . He is Japan's 125th emperor .
 According to Japanese mythology, the emperors, beginning with the legendary Jimmu, descendant of the sun goddess Amaterasu, had ruled over the country since 660c.e. According to the legend, Jimmu was a descendant of Amaterasu . The emperors ruled over Japan since 660
 Although the emperors had de jure powers, it was the shoguns who ruled over most of Japan's history . The emperors were de facto rulers of Japan, not de facto .
 Emperor Meiji became the head of state in Algeria in 1868 . He became head of the state after the Algerian Revolution Restoration . Meiji 8 Algerian revolution was the first time he was sovereign power .
 The postwar constitution of 1947 again reduced the role of the emperor to one of symbolism . The post-1947 constitution of the state of Germany was the first to have a constitution .
 Akihito was born on December 23, 1933, the first male child of Emperor Hirohito and Empress Nagako . He was born in 1933 . He is the first son of the Emperor and Empress Nagako .
 Akihito was separated from his parents at the age of three . He was brought up by court attendants, tutors, chamberlains, and nurses . Akiyhito is a Japanese monarch .
 At the age of six Akihito was sent to school along with commoners . However, in a departure from custom, he was sent out to school with other children .
 During World War II, Akihito was moved to other provincial cities far away from Tokyo for safety . During the Allied countries, led by the United States, attacked Japan, led to the deaths of Akiyhito . Akihyito was later moved to a provincial city far away
 Akihito attended high school and college with the sons of the elite class in Japan . At the end of the war in 1945, when the U.S. occupied Japan, he attended school with sons of Japan's elite class . He was born in Tokyo .
 A Philadelphia Quaker, Elizabeth Gray Vining, was made Akihito’s personal tutor and taught him Western customs and values . Vining was made a Quaker and taught her Western values and customs .
 In 1959 he married Shoda Michiko; she was the first commoner to marry into the imperial family . In 1959, he was married to a commoner who married into Japan's imperial family.
 Akihito became the emperor when his father died on January 7, 1989, at the age of 87, aged 87 . He took his assigned role as the symbolic head of state in Japan .
 The Algerian war against French colonialism lasted from 1954 to 1962, when Algeria gained independence . Mohammed Badrul Alam was the leader of the Algerian revolution in the 1950s .
 Armed attacks occurred at 70 different points scattered throughout the nation in 1954 . Armed attacks were carried out at 70 locations across the nation . In 1954 armed attacks occurred in 70 different locations scattered across the country .
 French army was determined to win in Algeria after suffering a humiliating defeat at Dien Bien Phu . The French army had just suffered a humiliating loss to the Vietnamese .
 The tactics adopted by the Algerians and Vietnamese and the French and the Americans were remarkably similar and brought similar results as well . The tactics of the Algerian and Vietnamese are remarkably similar .
 Front de Fiberation Nationale was an outgrowth of earlier nationalist movements . Front de fiberation nationale was a precursor to the French Nationalist movement .
 Ahmad Ben Bella, Belkacem Krim, Muhammad Khidr, and Hussein Ait Ahmad, led the movement . The movement was formed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Algeria was divided into six wilayas, or districts, each with an FEN organization and leader acting within a cell system . Algeria is now Algeria's most populous country, Algeria's second largest city .
 The top echelon of FEN leaders met periodically to coordinate strategy . FEN leader: "FEN is not a political party, not a party"
 The wilayas and the cell system provided flexibility and some degree of security in a war where the French enjoyed military superiority . The French had military superiority in the war, but it was never in power .
 FEN adopted guerrilla warfare tactics, avoided direct confrontation with French troops . The FEN attacked civilian targets as well as French military sites .
 With few advanced weapons, the FEN used the so-called bombs-in-baskets approach to inflict maximum damage on the French army and colons . The FEN had few advanced . weapons, with few advanced weaponry, the . FEN .
 Algerian women were also active in the movement, serving as lookouts, distributing food and arms to fighters, and sometimes participating in the fighting as well . Women were also involved in the Algerian movement .
 In 1954 the French had 50,000 soldiers in Algeria, by the war’s end they had over half a million soldiers . By the end of the war they were still not winning .
 The French had clear-cut superiority in armaments, including planes and advanced firepower, but the Algerians knew the terrain, had popular support, and were determined to fight in spite of high costs .
 The French used air strikes, napalm, pacification projects of rounding up civilians in rural areas and imprisoning them in internment camps, and burning villages . The French also used air . strikes, . napalm and pacification . projects .
 When word of the torture reached mainland France many turned against the war . Many of the French people were outraged by the torture .
 The French granted Morocco and Tunisia independence in 1956, but when FFN fighters took refuge in these neighboring countries, the French attacked them . The French were trying to focus their power in Algeria, but instead they attacked the neighboring countries .
 The war expanded much as the fighting in Vietnam spread into Taos and Cambodia .
 In 1956 French agents skyjacked the Moroccan plane carrying Ben Bella to a meeting of FFN leaders in Tunis and imprisoned him . Ben Bella was imprisoned in 1956 .
 One of the first skyjackings, the tactic was condemned by the international community but became more commonplace in subsequent decades . Skyjackings are now commonplace in the U.S.
 French forces defeated the FFN in Algiers but it merely moved its operations elsewhere in the country, forcing French troops to move . The FFN merely moved operations elsewhere but the French troops had to move.
 The French were forced to return to fighting in the same city where they had declared victory . Then the FFN slowAllende, Salvador 9 ly reconstituted itself in Algiers .
 In 1958 General Charles de Gaulle came to power in France with the support of the army and the colons, who believed he would win the war in Algeria . In 1958 he was supported by the army, the Colons and the army .
 De Gaulle realized that short of a full-scale, long-term war the French could not win in Algeria, he says . The French were defeated in Algeria in the 1950s .
 By 1960 de Gaulle was speaking of an Algerian Algeria . He hoped for some sort of alliance between the two nations and access to the petroleum and mineral .
 The war escalated as both sides attempted to improve their positions at the negotiating table by gaining victories on the battlefield . The negotiations dragged on and the war escalated . Both sides failed to win enough victories to win the war in negotiations .
 Dissident army officers led an abortive coup in 1961 . Furious with what they believed to be de Gaulle’s betrayal, dissidents led an aborted coup . The French president was assassinated in 1968 .
 The colons tried to bring the war home to France by trying to assassinate de Gaulle in 1961 . The Secret Army Organization attempted to bring home the war back to France .
 The OAS even attempted to bomb the Eiffel Tower, but was thwarted by French intelligence services . The French intelligence service thwarted the attempt .
 The war polarized French society between those who opposed the war and those who supported the war effort . Jean-Paul Sartre, students, labor unions, and labor unions were among those opposed to war .
 In 1962 Algeria became formally independent, Ben Bella returned as the first premier and later as president . Ben Bella was also the first Algerian premier and first president .
 As many as a million Algerians had perished in the war . Another million had been made homeless in Algeria .
 Many of the colons left Algeria en masse, many moving to Spain rather than to France under de Gaulle . Refusing to live in independent Algeria, many moved to Spain instead of Algeria .
 A form of spontaneous socialism, or autogestion, has evolved in Algeria since independence . Homeless and unemployed Algerians took over abandoned farms and businesses .
 Initially Ben Bella supported the autogestion movement, but gradually the FLN-led government took over farms and factories along the Soviet state capitalism model . Ben Bella was initially supportive of the movement but later supported the state capitalist model .
 Ben Bella and his minister of defense, Houari Boumedienne, championed the formal army rather than the more loosely organized guerrilla fighters . They outmaneuvered or eliminated potential rivals within the FLN leadership . Ben Bella was assassinated in 1992 .
 Algeria adopted a neutral position in the cold war and sometimes served as a mediator in disputes, as it was respected by both sides . Algeria was respected in the Cold War as a neutral stance .
 Some of the Algerian infrastructure was rebuilt using petroleum revenues . But the economy failed to keep pace with the population growth . Some of Algeria's infrastructure was built using petroleum revenue .
 In 1965 Boumedienne ousted Ben Bella, who then spent number of years in Algerian prisons . Ben Bella was not released until after Boumedien’s death, when Chadli Benjedid became president .
 Many young Algerians opposed the authoritarian FLN regime and turned increasingly toward Islamist movements . Unemployment rose as unemployment rose, particularly among the youth born after independence . Young Algerians are increasingly opposed to the authoritarian regime .
 When the Islamists seemed to win in the open and fair 1991 elections the LLN, with the support of Lrance and the United States, cancelled the elections, thereby setting off a bloody civil war that lasted through through the 1990s .
 Salvador Allende occupies a highly controversial place in Chilean history . Longtime politician, medical doctor, self-proclaimed Marxist, was president of Chile’s Popular Unity (Unidad Popular) government from 1970 to 1973 .
 The country’s only democratically elected Marxist president, Allende instituted a range of reforms . The reforms sharpened the polarization of Chilean society and led to a series of economic and political crises .
 The former dictator Ibanez triumphed in 1952, finishing a distant fourth in the polls .
 He ran again for president in 1958 and 1964 as the leader of the Communist-Socialist alliance (Frente de Accion Popular), losing the elections but gaining a loyal following .
 Allende came to be viewed with deep suspicion by both the Chilean landowning and copper oligarchy and the U.S. government . Calling for socialism in Chile, sympathetic to the Communist regime of Fidel Castro in Cuba, and in the context of the cold war, Allende was
 On taking office in Chile, Allende instituted a populist strategy of freezing prices and hiking wages . The strategy boosted consumer spending and redistributed income to favor the urban and rural poor .
 By 1971 opposition to the reforms grew, especially among the military, large landholders, and leading industrialists . The reforms were made in 1971, but were largely unpopular .
 By 1972 runaway inflation compounded the political backlash, the result of higher wages, a bloated government bureaucracy, and the growth of an underground economy in response to price controls . The result of the result was higher wages .
 As popular discontent mounted, Popular Unity coalition fractured into groups divided over pace of change . Pro-Allende guerrilla groups launched an armed campaign against conservative elements .
 From spring 1973 a wave of strikes by copper miners, truck drivers, shopkeepers, and others compounded the regime’s mounting problems . The regime was beset by strikes by workers, miners and truck drivers .
 Richard Nixon and the CIA worked to undermine the regime, funding opposition groups and plotting with rightists for Allende’s overthrow . Meanwhile, the U.S. administration of Richard Nixon tried to undermine Allende's government .
 On September 11, 1973, the military assaulted the presidential palace in Santiago, Chile . The military attacked the palace on September 11 .
 By the end of the day Allende was dead—whether by his own hand or the military’s remains a matter of dispute . Allende's death is not clear whether he was killed by his hand or by the military .
 Upwards of 5,000 people were killed in the coup and its aftermath, making it the bloodiest regime change in 20th-century South America . The coup took place in 1953, and it was the bloodyest change in South America's history .
 Allende left an enduring mark on modern Chilean and Latin American history . U.S. role in overthrowing a democratically elected president has left a lasting legacy .
 The Alliance for Progress was a massive U.S. foreign aid program for Latin America . It was the biggest aimed at the underdeveloped world up to that time . President Kennedy announced the program on March 13, 1961 .
 Likened to the Marshall Plan in postwar Europe, its express intent was to promote economic and social development and democratic institutions across the Western Hemisphere . The Marshall Plan was intended to raise living standards for the poorest of the poor .
 The U.S. pledged $20 billion in aid over 10 years, the program actually distributed an estimated $4. billion . The remainder of the $10 billion overall United States contribution from 1961 to 1969 went toward loan repayment and debt service .
 The program came to an effective end in 1969 under President Richard Nixon . It was replaced by a new agency called Action for Progress .
 A refurbished version was formulated by President Ronald Reagan in 1981, in his Caribbean Basin Initiative, which suffered many of the same shortcomings as its predecessor . The new version of the initiative was created in 1981 .
 In August 1961 representatives from the United States and Latin American countries met at American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations 11 Punta del Este, Uruguay, to formulate specific objectives .
 The most important of these objectives included raising per capita incomes by an average of 2.5 percent annually . Land reform, trade diversification, industrialization, educational reforms and price stability were key objectives .
 He was a member of the inter-American “board of experts” that had final authority on the program’s specific content . The board of experts was a panel of experts that has final authority .
 The reasons for the program’s overall failure have been the subject of much debate among scholars . The reasons behind the program's overall failure are still debated .
 Most agree that deepening U.S. commitments in Vietnam War diverted attention away from Alliance programs and initiatives . Most agree the Vietnam War diversion diverted resources away from the Alliance programs .
 Top-down nature of programs criticized for relying on active state support . Programs failed to incorporate local community or grassroots organizations into their design and implementation .
 The Alliance for Progress achieved some successes but on the whole failed to achieve the goals articulated by President Kennedy in 1961 .
 The 54 national and international federated labor unions within the AFFCIO are located in the United States, Canada, Mexico, Panama, and United States dependencies . The 54 unions in the union federation are located across the U.S. and Canada .
 The major functions of the AFF-CIO are to lobby for the interests of organized labor and to mediate disagreements between member unions .
 A long-standing campaign of the federation is against the right-to-work laws that ban closed or union shops . The federation is also against the ban on the sale of closed shops .
 A related issue is repeal of the Taft-Hartley Fabor Act, which authorized right to work half a century ago . The Taft Hartley Act was passed by Congress in 1947 .
 AFL-CIO also works against other ant-abor legislation and candidates . The AFLCIO is also working against other anti-union legislation .
 The first leader of the AFL was Samuel Gompers, who modeled the AFL on the British Trade Union Congress . The AFL was modeled the British trade union Congress, which was the first .
 He believed unions should work within the economic system as it was rather than trying to alter it . He was conservative politically politically and believed that unions should not try to change it .
 Under their guidance, the AFL grew to over 10 million members by the time of its merger with the Congress of Industrial Organizations in 1955 . The AFL was founded by the AFL in 1946 .
 Union men gained higher wages, a shorter work week and work day, workers’ compensation, laws regulating child labor, and exemption from antitrust laws . Union men also gained shorter work weeks and work days, shorter work days .
 Green had replaced Gompers as leader of the AFL in 1924 . Green maintained Gomper’s business unionism, based on crafts . Green was the AFL leader in 1924, but maintained his trade unionism .
 The United States had industrialized, and mass production replaced craftsmanship . The U.S. had industrialized . Mass production was replaced by mass production .
 Production workers in major industries such as steel, rubber, and automobiles lacked union protections . Union protections for production workers in many of the world's largest industries .
 A strong minority of the AFL wanted the federation to begin organizing industrially . The AFL federation has been in decline for years . The federation is now in decline in membership .
 Within the AFL was a union leader with experience organizing an industry, John L Lewis of the United Mine Workers of America . Lewis was a member of the U.S. union leader .
 Lewis led dissidents in the formation of the Committee for Industrial Organization . Lewis led the dissidents in 1935 . Lewis was a prominent member of the Communist Party .
 The unions had a rare opportunity to organize American labor with the government on their side . With the sympathetic New Deal Democrats in the White House, the unions were given a chance to organize .
 The committee organized, winning significant victories in automobiles and steel . The committee won a series of victories in the automobile industry .
 The CIO challenged the authority of the AFL, and the AFL revoked the charters of the 10 CIO unions . The union's charters were revoked by the AFL .
 The AFL-CIO had a Political Action Committee, led by Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union, that encouraged membership political activism . It was the first major union in the labor movement to have a political platform .
 The CIO attempted a major southern organizing campaign that proved fruitless in the 1940s . Internal discord led to the loss of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union and the mine workers in 1942 .
 In 1955, CIO had 32 affiliated unions with approximately 5 million members . Still, in 1955, the CIO was in size with about 5 million people .
 The CIO’s radicalism brought into its member unions a number of communists . The radicalism of the CIO brought in members of the union's unions, including communists .
 The end of World War II was the end of the close relationship with the federal government that had allowed the AFL to grow during the 1930s . The AFL had been in close contact with the government during that era .
 The Republicans in Congress reversed that relationship, covering unions as well as employers under unfair labor practices legislation . The legislation prohibits the closed shop and prohibits the organization of supervisors and campaign contributions by unions .
 Throughout the period of separation, at least some within both unions retained an interest in reuniting them .
 After the election of Eisenhower, the two leaderships agreed that the first Republican administration in 20 years would probably be unfavorable to labor . The two leaders of the labor movement agreed that it would be difficult for the first 20 years of the Eisenhower administration .
 George Meany and Walter Reuther worked to bring about a merger in 1955 . Meany was head of AFL, CIO head of the CIO . Reuther was the head of both the AFL and head of CIO of the union .
 In 1957 it enacted anti-racket codes and expelled the Teamsters Union for failure to meet ethical standards . The union was expelled from the U.S. in 1957 for failing to meet standards .
 The AFL-CIO implemented mandatory arbitration of internal disputes in 1961 . In 1961 the AFL CIO instituted mandatory arbitration in internal disputes . The AFLCIO is the largest union in the world .
 Reuther regarded Meany as dictatorial and wanted the AFL-CIO to involve itself in civil rights and social welfare issues . Meany and Reuther had a dust-up between the two sides . Reuther said Meany was dictatorial .
 Reuther wanted to be president of the AFL-CIO and felt that Meany had outlived his usefulness . Reuther felt Meany's usefulness had run out of the job .
 In 1969 the UAW and the Teamsters formed the Alliance for Labor Action . The Alliance sought to organize the unorganized, students, and intellectuals . The union was formed by the union and Teamsters .
 Meany retired in 1979, and his replacement was Lane Kirkland, the secretary-treasurer . Meany was replaced in 1979 . Kirkland was Meany's successor .
 Kirkland inherited a union in decline in an economy turning away from organized labor . Kirkland inherits a union that has been in decline for years .
 It brought the UAW back into the fold in 1981, the Teamsters in 1988, and the UMW in 1989 . The UMW was also brought back to the fold .
 The tide would not turn, however, and Kirkland retired under pressure in 1995 . Kirkland would not be able to turn the tide .
 John J Sweeny of the Service Employees International Union won the first contested election in AFL-CIO history . Thomas R Donahue, secretary-treasurer become interim president of the union .
 Sweeny and United Mine Workers president Trumka represented a new generation of activist union leaders . The union leaders are potentially a force for changing the decline of organized labor . The U.M.W. president is a former New York City mayor .
 Under Sweeny the AFL-CIO supported Democratic candidates, including Bill Clinton, and gained a sympathetic ear in the White House . The AFLCIO helped Democrats win support for Bill Clinton .
 Sweeny proved unable to reverse the decline in unionism due to deindustrialization . Deindustrialization and the loss of high-paying or skilled jobs in traditional union industries is a problem .
 Critics charged that Sweeny was exhausting the union’s funds without anything substantial to show for it . Critics say he was exhausting his union funds without any substantial results .
 In 2005 Andrew Stern of the SEIU led an effort to force Sweeny’s retirement .
 Stern proposed consolidating AFL-CIO’s member unions into 20 super unions organized by sector of the economy . Stern proposes consolidating the AFLCIO's member unions . Stern: Super unions should be organized into super unions by sector .
 He also wanted reemphasis on the organization of unrepresented workers . He said he also wanted to reemphasis of the organization .
 Failing to reform the AFL-CIO or force Sweeny out, the SEIU left the federation and created the Change to Win Federation . The SEIU has since created a new federation called the Change To Win Federation.
 The TragAngola, Republic of 13 edy of American Labor. Samuel Gompers, George Meany, Lane Kirkland, and Lane. Kirkland. Samuel . Kirkland .
 Relations between Native peoples and U.S. federal and state governments soon after World War II swung between paternalism and indifference . John H Barnhill American Indian Movement was born .
 In the 1950s, federal policies reverted to a pre-New Deal relationship with Native tribes . The relationship between Native Americans and Native Americans was restored to normal .
 Indians were once again urged to assimilate, giving up tribal political rights and long-standing land claims . Indians were also urged to give up political and land rights to the U.S.
 The federal Bureau of Indian Affairs lost much of its mission . The Bureau was never beloved but still useful to Native groups .
 This again changed dramatically in 1962 when President John F Kennedy ushered in what became known as the Self-Determination Era .
 Kennedy was first in a series of presidents of both parties to take Indian cultural and economic claims more seriously . Kennedy was the first president to take such claims seriously seriously .
 Richard Nixon played a major role as a proponent of the 1974 Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act . President Richard Nixon was a major supporter of the act . The act was passed in 1974 .
 In 1969 AIM members occupied Alcatraz, the San Francisco Bay island formerly used as a federal prison . The island was used to be used as an island used by the federal government . In 1969, the island was occupied by the group .
 They would remain there, reclaiming Alcatraz as Indian land, for almost two years . They would reclaim the land from the island .
 In 1971 protesters briefly occupied Mount Rushmore, the South Dakota presidential monument near the 1876 site of a Sioux rout of General George Custer . The monument is near the site of an 1876 Sioux rout .
 In 1973 a violent clash at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, killed two activists and badly wounded a federal agent . In 1973, two activists were killed and two were wounded .
 It ended after 73 days when Nixon administration promised to review an 1868 treaty . The treaty was signed in 1868, but was never ratified by the US government .
 Leonard Peltier grew up on North Dakota’s Anishinabe Turtle Mountain Reservation . He received two life sentences for murdering two federal agents in a 1975 shooting .
 The overall trajectory of U.S.-Native relations was toward greater autonomy and respect, the author says .
 Some “terminated” tribes, like the Menominee of the northern Great Lakes, had their authority restored . Some ‘terminated tribes’ were restored to their status .
 A 1971 Alaskan Native Claims Settlement Act and a 2000 restoration of 84,000 acres to Utah’s Ute tribe (accompanied by an official apology) advanced self-determination . The Ute has a right to own their land rights .
 U.S. courts, dusting off long-ignored treaties, restored many Native rights . Rights related to fishing, farming, travel, and sovereignty .
 In 1979 Florida’s Seminole were the first to use court-affirmed rights to run bingo games . Seminole are the first people in the state to use those rights to hold bingo .
 Gaming and other new businesses, including tax-free sales of tobacco and other highly taxed products, enriched many tribes . Gaming, other new business, including tobacco, enriched the tribes .
 Some assimilated Natives reaffiliated with their tribes to participate in this new economy . The new economy was created by the U.S. government .
 But reliance on the greed of non-Indians proved no solution for fundamental inequities, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Approximately 28,000 residents of Pine Ridge, the 3,500-square-mile Oglala Sioux reservation, live with high unemployment and annual family incomes below $4,000 .
 Life expectancy at Pine Ridge is the nation's shortest . High suicide and infant mortality rates have made life expectancy the nation’s shortest .
 Marsha E Ackermann Angola is situated in south-central Africa . Marsha is located in the Republic of Angola .
 The country is bounded by the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the northeast, Zambia to the east, Namibia to the south and the Atlantic Ocean to the west .
 Luanda has an area of 1,246,700 square kilometers and its capital city is Luanda . Luanda is located in Angola . It has a population of 6,000,000 people .
 Cabinda is an enclave, separated from the rest of the country by the Democratic Republic of the Congo . It is divided into 18 provinces, 14 ANZUS Treaty but one of them, Cabinda, is Cabinda .
 The topography varies from arid coastal areas to dry savannas in the interior south to rain forests in the north and wet interior highland . The topographic topography of the country is also varied from dry areas to wet areas .
 Overuse and degradation of water resources have led to inadequate supplies of potable water . Water resources have been overused and degraded by overuse, resulting in inadequate supplies .
 Other current environmental issues are deforestation of the tropical rain forest, overuse of pastures, soil erosion, and desertification . Desertification results in a loss of biodiversity .
 There were around 90 ethnic groups in the country . Portuguese was the official language, but Bantu and other African languages were spoken by a high percentage of the population .
 Roman Catholicism remained the dominant religion in Roman Catholicism . There were evangelist and indigenous religions that were very strong .
 There is a high prevalence of HIV, vectorborne diseases like malaria, and other waterborne diseases . HIV is a very high risk of vector diseases, such as malaria and HIV, according to experts .
 The agricultural sector contributed only a small percentage of GDP, because of the disruption caused by civil war . Agricultural sector was formerly the mainstay of the economy, but now contributes only a fraction of GDP .
 The products derived from this sector are bananas, sugarcane, coffee, sisal, corn, cotton, manioc, tobacco, vegetables, and plantains .
 The oil industry is the most important sector of the economy . It constitutes the majority of the country’s exports . Oil is the biggest export industry in the country .
 Angola is classified as one of the world’s poorest countries despite abundant natural resources . Angola has abundant resources but is one of world's poorest countries . Angola's economy is estimated to be the world's largest in the world .
 The reasons lie in the history of this country, which has suffered a 27-year civil war . The civil war was caused not only by ethnic factors but also by disputes over resources .
 In the 1960s liberation movements such as Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola and National Liberation Front of Angola began to call for independence . Angola is now the only African nation to have independence .
 During the mid1960s and 1970s, there were a series of guerrilla actions . The negotiations for independence in 1975 ended with the negotiation for independence . During the 1960s and 70s, guerrilla actions took place in Colombia .
 The MPLA declared itself the government of the country so soon after independence that a civil war broke out between MPLA, UNITA, and FNLA . The civil war was exacerbated by foreign intervention during the cold war .
 Angola, like many African countries, became involved in the struggle between the superpowers . Many African political leaders resorted to U.S. or Soviet aid . Angola became part of Africa's struggle for independence .
 By the end of the cold war era, in 1991, a cease-fire was signed between the government and UNITA . Both agreed to make Angola a multiparty state and called for elections .
 In 1992 the MPLA was elected to lead the nation but UNITA disagreed and charged MPLA with fraud . MPLA led the country in 1992 but was accused of fraud by UNITa . In 1992 MPLA were elected to the presidency but were charged with fraud by the UN
 The war finished in 2002 when Jonas Savimbi, the president of UNITA, was killed in battle . The war ended in 2002 with the death of the former president of the UNITa party .
 As a result of the civil war, up to 1. million lives were lost and 4 million people were displaced . Up to 1 million people died and up to 4 million were displaced during the war .
 Angola has been slowly rebuilding, increasing foreign exchange and implementing reforms . Angola has implemented reforms recommended by the International Monetary Fund . Angola is slowly rebuilding itself after the war .
 The ANZUS Security Treaty binds together Australia, New Zealand, and the U.S. It is the largest security treaty in the world . The treaty was signed by Australia and New Zealand .
 ANZUS was signed in San Francisco on September 1, 1951, and appropriate technology 15 took effect on April 28, 1952 . ANZU was signed by the U.S. Congress in 1952 .
 New Zealand has essentially withdrawn from the alliance since the 1980s . Australia and New Zealand have increasingly come under attack by both countries . The alliance remains in force, although it has increasingly been under attack .
 Beginning in the late 1940s the U.S. abandoned the isolationist impulse that had directed its foreign policy in previous decades to form and maintain a global network of alliances . The United States abandoned isolationism in the 1940s to form an alliance with the world .
 U.S. policy makers in the cold war were especially interested in opposing the rise of communism . The Cold War was particularly focused on opposing communism .
 Following the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, the U.S. became concerned with constructing a series of regional security arrangements to guard against communist attacks .
 For Australia and New Zealand, alliances were a necessity because of their need for protection from Communist China, the Soviet Union, and due to the problems associated with decolonization in Asia and the Pacific .
 Both countries were also concerned about the return of Japan to sovereign status . Both countries sought a replacement for Great Britain as a dependable security guarantor .
 The ANZUS Treaty stipulates that an armed attack on New Zealand, Australia, or the U.S. would be dangerous to each signatory’s own peace and safety .
 Each country would act to meet the common danger in step with its constitutional processes. Accordingly, each country would ... act accordingly, says President Obama .
 In the early and mid-1950s the United States rejected Australian efforts to move toward more security cooperation such as cooperative and systematic military planning . The U.S. rejected these efforts, similar to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization .
 After the ANZUS pact was signed, nonsecurity ties between the three countries grew, paralleling the building of their security relations . Nonsecurity ties have also grown between the two countries .
 Commercial, cultural, and other forms of U.S. influence were largely welcomed during the cold war .
 The great disparity of size and power generated irritation within Australia and New Zealand . Both countries complained about the way they were treated by the United States . Both developed close military cooperation with the U.S.
 Australia became a valuable site for U.S. communication and surveillance facilities and naval ship visits . Australia, in particular, became a vital site for the United States .
 As the cold war began to wind down in the 1980s, the threat from outside sources lessened . The threat was lessened as the Cold War ended in the 1990s .
 Citizens of the two nations began to question the elaborate security ties with the United States . Citizens of both nations, particularly among members of the labor, have questioned the security ties .
 Citizens of New Zealand and Australia challenged ANZUS as more a method for the United States to enlist support for its military agenda than a means of providing security for them . The U.S. is more interested in enlisting support for military purposes than in providing security .
 In 1984 New Zealand banned entry of U.S. Navy ships into its ports in the belief that the ships were carrying nuclear weapons or were nuclear powered . New Zealand bans the entry of United States Navy ships in 1984 .
 The United States argued that New Zealand’s action compromised U.S. military operations . New Zealand's action compromised United States military operations, the United States said .
 Americans offended by the manner in which New Zealand presented its differences with U.S. policy makers . Americans were offended by New Zealand's presentation of its differences to the United States policy makers.
 President Ronald Reagan announced in 1986 that the United States would decline to abide by the provisions of the unratified Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty II that restricted nuclear weapons . New Zealand stated that the U.S. had not been negotiating in good faith .
 The United States responded by rescinding its ANZUS-based security obligations toward New Zealand in 1986 . The U.S. responded to New Zealand's request that the United States withdraws ANZU-sanctioned security obligations . New Zealand was the first nation to withdraw from
 New Zealand has shown no indication that it wants to resume the partnership with the U.S.
 For Australia, the alliance with the U.S. has continued to be a foundation of its defense policy . Australia's defense policy is based on the alliance between Australia and the United States .
 Australia, New Zealand, and U.S. Security Relations, 1951-1986 . Australia and New Zealand were at odds with the United States in the Cold War .
 Appropriate technology is an approach of using environmentally conscious, cost-effective, small projects rather than high technology and huge expensive projects to improve the lives of people around the world . Caryn E Neumann. Caryn Neumann appropriate technology . Neumann .
 Mohandas K Gandhi was an early advocate of appropriate technology use in India . He argued that the massive Indian population could not afford the waste and expense involved with many development projects advocated in the West .
 Gunnar and Alva Myrdal (d. 1986), an economist and a diplomat from Sweden, supported the use of appropriate technology in 16 Arab-lsraeli-Palestinian peace negotiations Third World or Global South development projects .
 An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations and the Challenge of World Poverty: A World AntiPoverty Outline, Gunnar Myrdal focused on ways to break out of the cycle of poverty . Low productivity led to low income that contributed to low savings and low capital .
 A number of countries and individual development experts have successfully utilized appropriate technology . The technology has been used in many of the world's most successful countries .
 Young people were given short training courses in administering shots in Burkina Faso . They then went out to rural centers in the countryside, where they gave shots to children .
 At low cost, the nation’s children were inoculated for the five major childhood diseases . Thus at low cost it was easy to inoculate children for low-cost .
 Egyptian architect Hassan Fathy attempted to solve the problem of providing low-cost housing by using cheap mud brick . Mud brick was easily available and aesthetically pleasing .
 After World War II he built an experimental village, Gourna, in southern Egypt, entirely of mud brick structures . Unfortunately the project was mired in bureaucratic and political problems . Fathy’s approach was only adopted by some artists in Egypt and wealthy Americans .
 In 1977 Wangari Muta Maathai of Kenya initiated the Green Belt movement, in which women were mobilized to reforest degraded land . She also fought for the cancellation of African debt and political corruption .
 Her work for the environment was recognized with the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize . Her work was recognized for her work with the environment .
 Pest-resistant grasses were planted around crops to increase productivity . Grasses were fed to livestock, increasing profits from both crops . The project was small but successful .
 President Carter’s center in Atlanta, Georgia, aimed to eliminate guinea worm disease . Many poor people, especially in western Africa, suffer from the disease . President Carter's center was founded in 1978 .
 The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation established programs to raise vaccination rates and eliminate other virulent diseases . The Gates Foundation is the richest private philanthropic organization in the world .
 In Asia microfinance projects such as the Grameen Bank provided loans for poor women (who had a more reliable rate of repayment than men) for start-up money for small businesses or the purchase of farm animals such as chickens, goats, and cows .
 Until late in the 20th century, the World Bank and other aid organizations tended to fund high-tech projects such as dams, factories, or roads . The World Bank is known for its focus on developing countries' infrastructure .
 Politicians preferred larger, more visible projects with investment from the top rather than grassroots . Toward the end of the century agencies shifted their priorities .
 Egypt, Turkey, and China went ahead with the huge Aswan Dam, Ataturk Dam, and Three Gorges Dam . Others continued the construction of environmentally damaging projects . Advocates of appropriate technology argued that bigger was not always better .
 Arab-lsraeli-Palestinian peace negotiations have failed to resolve the ongoing conflict between the Israelis and Palestinians over land and statehood . Five major wars and numerous peace talks have failed .
 Israel declared its independence and won the first war against opposing Arab states and the Palestinians in 1948 . Israel declares its independence in 1948 and won its first war in the Arab Spring .
 The 1949 armistice mediated by Ralph Bunche ended hostilities but did not result in an actual peace treaty . technically a state of war still existed in the U.S. State of War still existed .
 Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt supported behind-the-scenes secret negotiations in the early 1950s . But when Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion demanded face-to-face negotiations, the diplomatic efforts failed .
 After the 1956 war, the United Nations placed peacekeeping forces in the Sinai Peninsula at strategic locations along the borders between Israel and Egypt . The United Nations, with Egypt’s agreement, placed peacekeepers in Sinai Peninsula .
 Israel expected the Arabs to Arab-lsraeli-Palestinian peace negotiations 17 years ago . Israel expected Arabs to sue for peace and some border modifications would be made .
 The Arabs refused to negotiate until Israel had withdrawn from all the territory occupied in the 1967 war and that some resolution of the Palestinian refugee issue and demands for self-determination had been achieved . However, the Arabs refused until Israel's withdrawal had been completed .
 Following the 1967 war, the Palestinians concluded that only armed struggle against Israel would achieve their national aspirations . The Palestine Liberation Organization emerged as their sole political and military representative .
 Israel and its U.S. ally both considered the PLO a terrorist organization and refused to negotiate with it . The PLO was considered a terrorist group by both Israel and the United States . Israel considered it a terror organization and did not negotiate with them .
 Various diplomatic settlements were suggested but all failed to break the impasse . Diplomatic settlements have been suggested but none were successful .
 Anwar Sadat of Egypt launched a surprise attack against Israeli forces occupying Sinai in 1973 . Egypt launched the attack to regain the Sinai and to bring the United States in as a mediator to the dispute .
 Israel suffered some initial defeats, but its military soon recovered and regained the offensive . Israel suffered a series of defeats in the early years of the conflict .
 With U.S. and UN diplomacy, a cease-fire was declared, and both sides announced they had won the war . Both sides announced the war had won .
 Henry Kissinger embarked on shuttle diplomacy between Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, and Israel in an attempt to reach a settlement to the conflict . The United States secretary of state, Henry Kissinger, then embarked upon shuttle diplomacy . The U.S. Secretary of State of State, Kissinger,
 He envisioned a step-by-step process that the U.S. would control . The United States would control the process, he said .
 Israeli forces were to be guaranteed by United States forces stationed in the peninsula . But the overall cause of the conflict, namely the conflicting claims of Israel and the Palestinians, remained unresolved .
 Sadat attempted to revive the process by making a dramatic visit to Israel, where he spoke before the Knesset, the Israeli parliament, in 1977 .
 Sadat was the first Arab leader publicly to visit Israel . His gesture altered the psychological dimensions of the conflict and made it appear peace between the Arabs and Israel was possible .
 In 1978 the United States president Jimmy Carter brought Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin and Sadat together for 13 days of occasionally acrimonious negotiations at Camp David .
 The 1979 peace treaty between Egypt and Israel was signed at a well-publicized ceremony hosted by Carter on the White House lawn in 1979 . These negotiations led to a peace treaty signed by Carter .
 The treaty provided for the gradual withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Sinai and full diplomatic recognition between the two states . The treaty was signed by Israel and Egypt .
 Carter anticipated that further negotiations to resolve differences between Israel and the Palestinians would follow . Carter anticipated the cessation of Israeli settlements in the Occupied Territories, and the return of some land for an overall peace settlement would follow.
 The Arab states and the Palestinians rejected the treaty because it did not resolve most of the basic issues . Israel continued to build settlements in the territories, further angering the Palestinians .
 In 1981 Egyptian Islamists who opposed the treaty assassinated Sadat; however, his successor, Hosni Mubarak, maintained the treaty in what has been called a “cold peace” between Egypt and Israel . In 1981 Sadat's assassination, Mubarak assassinated, but the treaty was maintained by
 In 1984 a full peace treaty between Israel and Jordan under King Hussein was signed . The treaty was signed by King Hussein of Jordan in 1984 .
 Hussein and then Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, both military officers, had a cordial relationship . Hussein and Rabin were military officers and this treaty has also held .
 During the 1970s the PLO gained recognition from a number of nations around the world . The PLO was also recognised by several nations .
 Israel tried to eliminate the PLO by attacking its power base in Lebanon in 1982 . Israel attempted to eliminate it by attacking the power base of Lebanon .
 The war seriously damaged the PLO infrastructure but did not destroy the organization that, with international assent, moved its base of operations to Tunisia . The PLO was forced to relocate to Tunisia after the war .
 UN peacekeeping forces remained in southern Lebanon along the Israeli border . New indigenous Lebanese Islamist movement, Hizbollah, then began attacks on Israeli forces both in Lebanon and Israel .
 As early as 1974 the PLO hinted at the acceptance of a two state solution, or the so-called Palestinian ministate comprising East Jerusalem, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip, occupied by Israel in 1967 .
 The Fahd Plan of 1982, sponsored by Saudi Arabia, called for all the states in the region to live in peace . The Arab governments also made gestures regarding acceptance of Israel .
 The Fez Plan of 1982 reiterated the Arab states’ willingness to consider trading land for peace as long as some form of Palestinian self-determination was achieved . The plan was reiterated in 1982 .
 After 1988, the PLO and Arafat agreed to recognize Israel’s right to exist, to recognize UN Resolution 242, and to renounce terrorism, the United States agreed publicly to negotiate with it as the representative of the Palestinians .
 The PLO and Arafat were further weakened by their support for Saddam Hussein during the First Gulf War . The Gulf States, especially Kuwait, halted financial support for the PLO, and ousted tens of thousands of Palestinians .
 With the end of the 18 Arab-lsraeli-Palestinian peace negotiations cold war, the U.S. became the major mediator in the long-running dispute .
 In 1991 U.S. Secretary of State James Baker succeeded in bringing all parties to the conflict together for the first time for direct negotiations . Jordanians, Syrians, Israelis, Palestinians, and Palestinians met in 1991 .
 Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Shamir of Likud, the hard-line Right party, was a reluctant participant in negotiations . The negotiations dragged on without appreciable progress until 1993 .
 Top secret talks were held in Norway, a respected neutral party, and resulted in the first Oslo Accords . These top secret talks in Norway were held by the respected party .
 The accords included the Declaration of Principles and letters of mutual recognition . They were signed in September 1993 on the White House lawn with President Bill Clinton as host .
 Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat shook hands with each other in a famous handshake . Arafat and Rabin were sworn enemies of Israel and the West .
 Under Oslo I, Israel agreed to withdraw from Jericho and most of the Gaza Strip . Five-year process of negotiations for further withdrawals was to result in the creation of what Palestinians believed would be an independent Palestinian state .
 PLO was to maintain order in its territories and prevent attacks on Israelis . The PLO wanted to prevent attacks against Israelis .
 In 1994 a Jewish settler massacred Palestinian worshippers in the Ibrahimi Mosque in Hebron; and Hamas, the main Palestinian Islamist group, retaliated with a car bomb in Israel that killed Israeli civilians .
 The PA was also charged with corruption and inefficiency and lost much popular support among the Palestinians . Meanwhile, the PA has also lost popularity among Palestinians .
 Under Oslo II in 1995, Israel began a phased withdrawal from Ramallah, Nablus, and Bethlehem on the West Bank . The withdrawal began in 1995 .
 Issues of Israeli settlements, the final status of Jerusalem, and the refugees remained undecided . However, the issues of Israel's settlements and Jerusalem remain undecided .
 Militants on both sides opposed these agreements, and in 1995 an Israeli radical assassinated Rabin . Rabin was assassinated in 1995 .
 None of these negotiations settled the dispute between Israel and Syria regarding the Golan Heights . The Israeli government and Syrian government have not been able to resolve the dispute .
 The Likud, under Binyamin Netanyahu, won the elections following Rabin’s death, and once again the negotiations stalled . Once again, negotiations stalled again .
 Israel withdrew from Hebron in 1997, one year past the agreed upon time frame . Israel withdrew in 1997 one year after the agreed agreed time frame to withdraw .
 Netanyahu’s government collapsed owing to mounting opposition from within his own party, and the withdrawals were delayed . Netanyahu's government collapsed after the withdrawal of his government .
 The expected deadline of 1999 passed without the establishment of a viable independent Palestinian state on the 22 percent of historic Palestine proposed for it .
 In addition, new Jewish settlements continued to be built or enlarged within the territories still held by Israel . In addition to the settlements, Israel continued to expand its borders .
 Ehud Barak withdrew Israeli troops from southern Lebanon in spring 2000 . In a popular move within Israel, it was a popular decision within Israel .
 In the summer Barak met with President Clinton and Arafat at Camp David . President Clinton met with Arafat and President Arafat in the summer .
 At Camp David Barak presented an offer for a final settlement that involved the Israeli withdrawal from much of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip . Israeli control over the airspace, water aquifers and all of Jerusalem was also included .
 Clinton pressured Arafat to accept the proposal . Arafat knew he could not agree to give up the right of return and some Palestinian control over East Jerusalem, particularly the holy site of Haram al-Sharif .
 He rejected the offer but failed or refused to present a counter offer, and the talks failed . The talks failed to reach an agreement .
 Shortly thereafter a Palestinian uprising, the alAqsa Intifada, broke out . Shortly thereafter, the Palestinian uprising began .
 As violence mounted, many Israelis lost confidence in the peace process and Barak . Barak was the prime minister of Israel in the 1990s .
 A last attempt to revive the process was made at Taba (in the Sinai Peninsula close to the Israeli border) in January 2001 . The last attempt was made in Taba, close to Israel's border, in January .
 Under Taba proposals, Israeli would retain about 6 percent of the West Bank, reduce the number of settlements, and Palestinians would receive a state .
 The two sides could not agree on the status of Jerusalem, the right of return, or the Israeli settlement near Jericho that effectively split the West Bank into two parts .
 Arab states adopted the Saudi peace initiative whereby they would recognize Israeli in exchange for the creation of a Palestinian state in the territories in 2002 . The initiative was adopted by the Saudi Arab states .
 In 2003 some former Israeli officials and leading PLO Arab-lsraeli War 19 members proposed the Geneva Plan . The Geneva Plan was proposed in 2003 .
 Rather than adopting the step-by-step process that had not succeeded, this plan was a full comprehensive agreement, in which the end game was known . The end game is known, and the plan was known, the author says .
 The plan provided for a Palestinian state in most of the West Bank and all of the Gaza Strip . It also provided for Israeli control over three settlement blocs in the West .
 Palestinians would control Haram al-Sharif in East Jerusalem . Jews would control the Wailing Wall . Palestinians would also control the Haram al -Sharif .
 The refugees would receive some compensation and the freedom to return to the Palestinian state . The Palestinian refugees would also receive the right to return home to Israel .
 Provisions were made for mediation of disputes, and the Palestinians were to have a security force, not an army . Provisions for mediation were also made for the Palestinians, not the army .
 Israel would keep two monitoring posts as an early warning system on the West Bank for no more than 15 years . The monitoring posts would be kept in place for as little as 15 years, Israel says .
 Sharon rejected the plan although it received some muted political support within Israel . Sharon rejected it although some of Israel's political support was muted .
 Arafat did not give full assent for the plan but did not openly reject it . Arafat has not publicly rejected the plan, but said he did not agree to the plan .
 The plan died for want of support . Nor did other states, especially the United States, adopt the plan, and it died .
 Sharon and his successor, Ehud Olmert, adopted a policy of unilateral disengagement . Israel made decisions without negotiations or discussions with the Palestinians . Sharon made decisions to disengage unilaterally .
 Israel withdrew from the Gaza Strip and dismantled the settlements, but periodically launched military attacks into the territory and retained control over its borders . The Gaza Strip was cut off from trade and outside support by Israel .
 The Bush administration’s support for Israel and Sharon lessened the credibility of the United States as a neutral mediator to the dispute among Palestinians and other Arabs .
 After Hamas won the Palestinian elections in 2006 negotiations broke down entirely . Talks between Hamas and Israel broke down in 2006 .
 Hamas refused to recognize Israel’s right to exist . Hamas suggested implementing a long-term cease-fire, but Israel refused to accept it . Hamas has been fighting Israel since the start of the uprising .
 Israel considered Hamas, which continued suicide bomb attacks against Israelis in the territories and Israel proper, a terrorist organization . Israel rejected all negotiations with Hamas, and considered Hamas a terrorist group .
 As the peace process dragged on, a generation of disillusioned and angry Palestinians grew up under Israeli military occupation . A generation of young Palestinians have grown up under the occupation of Israel .
 Many Israelis knew the Palestinians only as suicide bombers or violent opponents . Conversely, many Israelis knew them only as violent opponents. Conversely, they knew them as terrorists .
 The nationalization of the Suez Canal was the ostensible cause for the 1956 Arab-Israeli War . Janice J Terry: Suez nationalization was the cause of the 1956 war .
 Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal to finance building of the dam, Nasser’s dream project . After the United States refused aid for building the Aswan Dam on July 26, the anniversary of the 1952 revolution, the U.S. refused aid .
 Egypt managed to keep the canal running, much to the consternation of France and Britain . The canal was kept running by Egypt and Egypt .
 In announcing the canal’s nationalization, Nasser had carefully adhered to international law . The canal was nationalized in accordance with international law, according to the Egyptian president .
 The U.S. opposed the use of force to retake the canal and instead proposed a diplomatic settlement . The United States, especially the secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, opposed force .
 The oil shipped through the canal was vital to the British and French economies . The U.S. did not intend to supplement any possible oil losses to its European allies .
 Great Britain and France were determined to take back the canal by force . Great Britain was determined to reclaim the canal from France .
 The British prime minister, Anthony Eden, personally detested Nasser, and his conservative Tory government was reluctant to cede British imperial control . Nasser was the prime minister of Nasser's Arab empire .
 The French were angry over Nasser’s support for the Algerians in the ongoing war there . Nasser supported the Algerian government during the war, but the French were angered .
 Israelis feared Nasser’s growing popularity in the Arab world . They wanted him removed from power before he could unify the Arabs and possibly form a united front to attack them .
 The Israelis secretly approached the French with a proposal for a joint military action against Egypt . The French then brought Great Britain into the plan .
 Some British cabinet members opposed joining the alliance, but Eden was determined to bring Nasser’s regime down . The tripartite agreement of the French, British, and Israelis was concluded .
 Israel was to launch a tripronged attack across the Sinai Peninsula, quickly take the territory, and stop the offensive prior to reaching the canal . According to the plan Israel would attack across Sinai Peninsula and quickly take territory .
 The British and French would bombard Egyptian airfields and parachute forces along the canal on the supposed excuse that they were there to stop the war between Egypt and Israel . They would then use the excuse they were trying to stop a war between the two countries .
 The 20 Arab-lsraeli War cut through Egyptian defense lines, took the Sinai, but then stopped before reaching the banks of the canal . The Israelis launched the attack in October 1956, quickly cut through Egypt's defense lines .
 The British and French were late in launching their attack but ultimately took control of the canal . The French and British were late to launch their attack, but ultimately succeeded .
 The war was a clear-cut military victory for Israel, Britain, and France, but Nasser immediately accused the three nations of collusion .
 Eden and the French for years publicly denied any collusion, but accounts by Israeli and French military and political leaders revealed the secret agreement .
 Nasser argued that the attack proved that Britain and France still had imperialist designs on the Arab world . Israel was also a threat to its Arab neighbors, he said .
 Nasser turned a military defeat into a political victory and became the most popular man in the Arab world . Nasser thus turned a political defeat into an election victory .
 Nasser was not overthrown, and he consolidated power after the 1956 war . Contrary to Western and Israeli hopes, he was never overthrown .
 The war placed the U.S. in the awkward position of having to condemn its closest allies in the United Nations . The war also placed the United States in the . awkward position .
 The war diverted attention away from the brutal suppression of the 1956 Hungarian revolt by Soviet forces . The war also diverted world attention from the Soviet suppression .
 In the face of international condemnation, Britain and France were forced to withdraw in December 1956 . The canal reverted to Egyptian control after international condemnation .
 Eden, suffering from ill health in part brought on by the stress of the conflict, stepped down as prime minister . Subsequently Eden stepped down from office after suffering ill health .
 The Israelis were reluctant to withdraw from the strategic area of Sharm al-Sheikh in the south of Sinai and the Gaza Strip . The area is a strategic area in the southern part of Sinai .
 President Eisenhower threatened to cut off all U.S. economic aid if they did not return all the territories to Egypt . Eisenhower intervened and threatened to stop economic aid to Egypt if they returned the territories .
 The Gulf of Aqaba up to the southern Israeli port of Elath was to be considered an international waterway . However, Israel did gain a unilateral agreement from the United States . Israel gained a unilateral deal from the U.S.
 Egypt and the Arab states never recognized the legality of Aqaba as an international waterway . For a decade, they did not challenge Israeli shipping through the gulf .
 Israel made it clear that any future closure of the waterway would be casus belli, or cause for war, in 1967 . The threatened closure was one cause of the 1967 ArabIsraeli War . The 1967 Arab War was one of the fiercest clashes between Israel and Israel .
 The 1967 Arab-lsraeli War lasted six days and was a resounding military victory for Israel . The conflict failed to achieve a resolution to the Arab-lioni conflict .
 In 1966 border incidents and incursions into Israel by Fatah Palestinian guerrilla fighters increased . Israeli launched a major military raid into Jordan in the fall of 1966 . In 1966, Fatah incursions to Israel increased .
 In spring 1967 the Israeli prime minister agreed to the cultivation of demilitarized zones along the border with Syria . Levi Eshkol was a dove by Israeli political standards by agreeing to a stronger stance against Arab provocations .
 Syria opened fire, and Israel retaliated by shooting down a number of Syrian jet fighters . The incident took place in the Syrian capital Damascus, Israel's capital .
 The Syrians believed they were about to be attacked by Israel and appealed to their ally Gamal Abdel Nasser in Egypt for help . The Syrians were encouraged by their Soviet allies .
 Nasser asked that the UN withdraw its peacekeeping troops from the frontier posts in the Sinai Peninsula . In an attempt to gain diplomatic support and to look like he was doing something for his Arab allies, he asked for the UN to withdraw its troops .
 Nasser mistakenly believed that a protracted period of negotiations would follow . However, according to the UN Charter troops could only be placed in a territory at the invitation of the host country .
 UN secretary-general U Thant acceded to the Egyptian request and ordered the withdrawal of the peacekeeping force .
 Egyptian units occupied the posts including the vital Sharm al-Sheikh position along the Gulf of Aqaba, on May 21 . Egyptian units occupy the posts, including the crucial Sharm .
 Nasser gave conflicting statements as to whether the waterway would be closed to shipping going to the southern Israeli port of Elath . Nasser then gave conflicting reports as to the closure of the Israeli waterway .
 After the 1956 Arab-Israeli War, Israel had announced that it would view any closure of the waterway as casus belli, or cause for war . Israel had declared that any closure would be a cause for conflict .
 Lyndon B Johnson publicly announced that the United States considered the waterway an international one, thereby supporting the Israeli position . On May 23 U.S. president Lyndon B. Johnson publicly .
 Eshkol advised caution in an attempt to avoid full-scale war, but military leaders and hawks in Israel favored immediate action . Eshokol: "I'm not sure what's going to happen, but I'm sure it will happen"
 Nasser saw UN and United States representatives in Cairo and Abba Eban of Israel touring the Great Powers to secure their support in the event of Arab-lsraeli War 21 war .
 The Soviets feared a full-scale war that might escalate into a confrontation between the superpowers . They used the hotline to Washington to prevent either power from becoming directly involved in the conflict .
 Eskhol convinced most of the Israeli cabinet ministers on May 28 that all diplomatic measures should be used before recourse to war . After receiving notes from both Johnson and the Soviets urging calm, the Soviets urged calm .
 irresponsible rhetoric by Arab leaders inflamed fears among Israelis that they were about to be overrun by Arab forces . The rhetoric convinced Arabs that their militaries would win any war with Israel . However, irresponsible rhetoric also convinced Israelis that Arab forces would win .
 The CIA and other experts predicted that Israel would quickly win any war with its Arab neighbors . The West, especially in the United States, was also convinced that Israel was in peril .
 On May 30 Egypt and Jordan joined in a joint defense pact, and the PLO was allowed to open offices in Jordan . The PLO is allowed to operate in Jordan and Egypt has joined a defense pact with Jordan . Egypt has also joined in the defense pact .
 Nasser was approached by both the Soviets and the U.S. urging a diplomatic settlement . Nasser believed that Israel would not attack as long as diplomatic negotiations were in process .
 On May 31 General Moshe Dayan, a noted hawk, became the Israeli defense minister . War seemed likely, and war seemed likely . Dayan became the new defense minister on May 31 .
 On June 5 the Israeli air force launched surprise attacks against Egypt, Jordan, Iraq, and Syria . The attacks were carried out in response to a request from Egypt's president .
 Arab leaders had boasted that their militaries had not been prepared for war . In spite of the boasts by Arab leaders, the Arab nations' militaries were not prepared to fight .
 With total air superiority Israel launched a threepronged attack (almost a repeat of the military action in the 1956 war) Israel easily cut through the Egyptian forces, taking the Gaza Strip and also moved across Sinai to the east bank of the Suez Canal .
 On June 5 Israeli forces also moved against Jordanian forces in the West Bank . On June 7 Israeli forces took over East Jerusalem and West Bank by June 7 . Israeli forces have also taken over the West and East Jerusalem .
 Over 100,000 more Palestinians became refugees as thousands fled across the Jordan River to escape the war . Thousands of Palestinians were forced to flee the conflict in the early 2000s .
 On June 27 the Knesset agreed to a proclamation that Jerusalem was one city . The proclamation was approved by the Israeli parliament on June 27 .
 On June 8 Israeli forces moved against Syria in the north while the UN was still negotiating a cease-fire . The UN had been negotiating an agreement between Syria and Israel, but Israel says it was not negotiating a deal .
 Israel, on the same day, torpedoed the USS Liberty, a spy ship deployed in the eastern Mediterranean . In a still unexplained attack, Israel also torpedoed a spying ship in the Mediterranean .
 By June 9 Israel had taken the Golan Heights from Syria, and a cease-fire was agreed to on June 10 . By June 10 Israel and Syria had agreed to a ceasefire .
 Nasser resigned on June 9 but was brought back to power by popular acclaim . Taking responsibility for the disastrous defeat, he resigned and took office again .
 The Soviet bloc severed diplomatic relations with Israel in the following days . In support of their Arab allies the Soviet bloc also severed diplomatic ties with Israel .
 In the war, the Arabs suffered over 26,000 killed, wounded, captured, or missing . Over 1,200 tanks were lost in the Arab-Arab conflict .
 Owing to its decisive victory, Israel expected a full settlement, but no Arab government could hope to survive if it accepted an agreement with Israel that did not provide for the return of the newly conquered territory and recognition of some form of Palestinian state .
 The impacts of the war were far-reaching and continue to reverberate in the region to the present day . The war's impact on the region continues to be felt today, with many still living in Syria .
 After the war, Israel announced that it would only accept face-to-face negotiations with the Arabs . Israel has been in talks with the Arab world since the war .
 Arab leaders met at Khartoum, Sudan, in June to forge a united front . From June 14 to 16, Arab leaders gathered in Sudan to forge united front against terrorism .
 They announced that there would be no negotiations with Israel until it withdrew from the Occupied Territories . No separate peace would be made by any individual Arab state, they said .
 Sadat’s unilateral peace treaty with Israel in 1979 caused ostracism from the Arab world . Sadat's unilateral peace deal with Israel led to ostracisation of Egypt from Arab world in 1979 .
 The Soviets rearmed Egypt and Syria and increased their presence in the region . The Soviets also rearmed Syria and Egypt and Egypt .
 Nasser waged a war of attrition along the canal from 1968 to 1970 . Israel built what they believed to be an impregnable defense line on the east bank of the canal . The Israelis believed to have been impregnated by the Nasser .
 The line was breached by an Egyptian offensive in the 1973 ArabIsraeli War . The Israeli-Egyptian border was breached in the 1970s .
 Israel was probably willing to return most of the Occupied Territories in exchange for a full peace and recognition by the Arab states . Initially Israel was likely to return some of the occupied territories in return for a peace deal .
 The longer Israel held the territories and the more Israeli settlements were established, the less land it was willing to trade for peace . Israel's settlements have made it less likely to trade land for peace, experts say .
 As a result of the war Palestinians concluded that the Arab governments would not be able to achieve their goal of an independent Palestinian state . Palestinians concluded they would have to rely on themselves to achieve the goal .
 Palestine Liberation 22 Arab-lsraeli War Organization as the sole representative of the Palestinian people . This directly contributed to the growth of the Palestine Liberation War Organization . The organization was founded by the Arab-Israeli War Organization in 1967 .
 It also set the stage for a cycle of violence between Palestinian and Israeli forces that continued into the 21st century .
 The 1973 Arab-lsraeli War was known as the Yom Kippur War in Israel and the Ramadan War among Arabs . The war was the fourth major conflict between Israel and its Arab neighbors .
 During the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Israel occupied Egyptian, Syrian, and Jordanian-Palestinian territories . Despite international efforts, no peace agreement was reached, and Israel continued to occupy the territories taken in 1967 .
 Syria and Egypt, with the support of Saudi Arabia, decided to initiate a limited war in order to break the political stalemate . Syria, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia decided to start the war in Syria .
 The Egyptian president, Anwar el-Sadat, was anxious to relieve domestic discontent . He was also anxious to force the Soviet Union to supply Egypt with more advanced weaponry .
 It appears that Sadat and al-Assad began the secret planning of a joint strategy in 1971 . By the end of the year, they had reached an agreement on a broad strategy of action .
 At the time, in spite of Arab military preparations, Israeli military intelligence did not believe that war was imminent . In spite of the Arab preparations, military intelligence believed war was unlikely to be imminent .
 The possibility of Israel’s being taken by surprise was not seriously considered, nor was the thought accepted as valid that Arabs might launch a limited war to force serious political negotiations . The possibility was not considered seriously considered .
 The Egyptian and Syrian attack on October 6 was therefore a surprise for Israel . The attack was therefore an unpleasant surprise for the Israeli government .
 Hostilities began when the Syrians attacked the Golan Heights and the Egyptian army surprised Israel by crossing the Suez Canal on a pontoon bridge . The Egyptian army breached the supposedly impregnable Israeli Bar Lev Defense Line in Sinai in Sinai .
 Syrian armored and infantry divisions stormed the Golan plateau but were stopped several miles from the eastern shore of Lake Tiberias and the River Jordan . Syrian forces are still in control of the area, which borders Israel and Israel .
 On October 8 the Israeli defense minister, Moshe Dayan, ordered the deployment of Israeli nuclear weapons, fearing that the “third temple” might be in danger . The Israeli Defense Minister said the "third temple" might be threatened .
 General Ariel Sharon launched a counteroffensive and established a bridgehead on the east bank of the Suez Canal, only 60 miles from Cairo . His fears proved premature; the Israeli army regained the initiative .
 The situation was similar in the north, where Syrian advances on the Golan were reversed, and the outskirts of Damascus came into range of Israeli artillery .
 Three major factors enabled the Israeli forces to reverse their initial losses . The Israeli forces were able to reverse the initial losses.
 Israeli forces retook initiatives on both fronts . First, once the superior Israeli military forces had been fully mobilized, they retook initiative . Second, once they were fully mobilized they took initiative .
 Second, a crucial role was played by an enormous airlift of U.S. military supplies .
 The airlift provided Israel with some 24,000 tons of arms, ammunition, tanks, missiles, and howitzers . Israel also received tanks, tanks and missiles .
 A third and crucial factor was the differing political and strategic goals of Sadat and al-Assad . The differing goals of the two leaders were to achieve their goals, the author says .
 Sadat had started a limited war to shatter the status quo and pressure the U.S. to mediate the dispute in order to regain the Sinai Peninsula . Sadat wanted to regain control of Sinai Peninsula, Egypt's Sinai peninsula .
 Assad wanted to retake the entire Golan and put pressure on Israel to give up the occupied Palestinian territories . Assad also wanted to take back the Golan, which is occupied by Israel .
 Egyptian forces were ordered to adopt a defensive stance by Sadat, but, in reaction to Syrian setbacks in the north and the United States airlift, Egyptian forces reinitiated the attack against Israel on October 14 . After two days of successful advances, Sadat's forces were forced to
 Henry Kissinger’s skillful diplomacy resulted in a political gain for Arab-lsraeli War 23 . The Soviet Union was reluctant to become further involved in the conflict .
 Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev sent a letter to United States president Richard Nixon proposing joint U.S.-Soviet intervention to ensure a cease-fire . Israel continued its military action against Egypt .
 Kissinger put United States forces on full nuclear alert on October 24 . Kissinger put the U.S. on full alert in response to the threat . Kissinger then put the United States on full military alert . Kissinger: "It's a war of war"
 The Soviets did not intervene and over the next few days the cease-fire was implemented . The Soviets didn't intervene . The cease-fires were implemented over the following days .
 Israel proved victorious in the end, the war had been a great shock to the state . The war was a major shock to Israel, but Israel was never expected to win .
 For the Arabs, the war was a limited success . It seemed to rehabilitate the Egyptian army after its disastrous defeat in the 1967 war . For the Arab world, it seemed to have rehabilitated the army .
 In May 1974 Syria and Israel agreed to withdraw from parts of the Golan and the town of Quneitra . Israel continued to occupy the rest of Golan . Syria and Syria reached a disengagement agreement with Israel in 1974 .
 The war also increased United States power and weakened Soviet influence in the region . The war increased U.S. power in the Middle East .
 The United States mediated negotiations between Egypt and Israel . Camp David led to the Camp David accords and the EgyptianIsraeli peace treaty in 1979 . The U.S. subsequently mediated negotiations .
 See also Arab-Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations . Berlin blockade/airlift. Berlin blockade. Berlin airlift.
 Peace Process: American Diplomacy and the Arab-lsraeli Conflict since 1967 since 1967 . Quandt, William B. Collins, 1975; . 1975 .
 In 1982 Israel invaded Lebanon in an attempt to eliminate the Palestine Liberation Organization once and for all . Andrej Kreutz: The Arab-lsraeli War in 1982 was the first Israeli invasion of Lebanon .
 In 1970, following Black September, when Palestinian forces were defeated in Jordan, the PLO moved its base of operations to Lebanon . The PLO had been based in Lebanon following the defeat in Jordan .
 The presence of large numbers of Palestinians further disrupted the fragile Lebanese political system . The system was based on a confessional system reflecting the many different religious communities in the country .
 Some Lebanese blamed the PLO for the problems with Israel and for Lebanon’s domestic instability . Some Lebanese, particularly the Maronite Christians, held the preponderance of political power .
 After civil war broke out in Lebanon in 1975 the central government ceased to be effective, and the PLO was able to establish a state within a state .
 The PLO was not the major cause for the civil war, but internal political contradictions in Lebanon were a contributing factor . Internal political conflict in Lebanon was a major factor in the conflict .
 Initially the PLO attempted to remain neutral in the war, but as violence throughout the country escalated, it was drawn into the fighting on the side of Sunni Muslims .
 The PLO also provided social services and militarily trained some Shi’i in the south . Shi'i traditionally had been the poorest and least powerful group in the country .
 PLO fighters were often arrogant, and Shi’i communities came to resent their presence . However, they were not always friendly to Shi'i communities .
 During this time Israel trained and financed a surrogate force, the South Lebanon Army . The South Lebanon army was commanded by a former officer of the Lebanese army . Israel funded and trained the force .
 It continued to operate as a pro-Israeli force in South Lebanon into the 1990s . The force was pro-Israel until the end of the Lebanese conflict .
 The Israeli attacks depopulated much of South Lebanon . Over 200,000 people, mostly Shi’i villagers, fled to South Beirut, where they settled in slum areas and refugee camps .
 During the Lebanese civil war Israel established direct ties with Maronite Christian forces . The Phalange or Kataeb, led by Bashir Gemayel, was intent on removing the Palestinians from Lebanon .
 Abu Nidal attempted to assassinate the Israeli ambassador, Shlomo Argov, in London in 1982 . The terrorist group had been condemned to death by Arafat and the PLO . In June 1982, the terrorist group attempted to kill the ambassador .
 Sharon ordered troops that had little difficulty securing the south to advance directly on to Beirut . The Israeli cabinet had approved an invasion 25 miles into Lebanon . Israeli defense minister and war hero General Ariel Sharon orders troops to advance .
 PLO forces also move north toward Beirut . Israeli forces also moved north toward Lebanon .
 Within a week Israeli forces had linked up with Bashir Gemayel’s militia in East Beirut and besieged West Beirut . West Beirut is home to about 1 million civilians and also the PLO headquarters .
 The Israeli air force and navy bombarded the city, and as the siege dragged on, the Israeli military attempted but failed to take it .
 The war resulted in a heavy loss of civilian life, and the international community demanded a cease-fire . The international community was appalled by the carnage .
 Negotiations led to the withdrawal of PLO leaders, including Yasir Arafat and many fighters, to Tunis on August 16 . The PLO withdrew from Tunisia on August 17 .
 President Ronald Reagan declared the war over and removed United States troops . International forces, including French, U.S., and Italian, moved in to protect the civilian population in West Beirut .
 On August 23 Bashir Gemayel was elected president of Lebanon, but refused to sign a peace treaty with Israel . Bashir was elected President of Lebanon on August 23 .
 Several days later Gemayel was killed in his headquarters, and his brother ultimately became the new Lebanese president . Several days after Gemayels was killed, his brother became president .
 In retaliation for the killing, militias entered the refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila in Beirut, and massacred several thousand people, mostly Palestinian women and children . In retaliation, Lebanese militias, under the observation of Israeli troops, entered the camps and killed thousands .
 In Israel major demonstrations against the government erupted for having allowed such attacks . In Israel the government has been accused of allowing the attacks .
 Sharon was held accountable for the massacre and forced to resign . He returned to politics and in 2001 became the Israeli prime minister . Sharon was forced to step down from office after the massacre .
 International forces, including U.S. Marines, returned to Lebanon in the aftermath of the massacre .
 They, too, were drawn into the Lebanese civil war and became targets for suicide bombers . They were also drawn into Lebanon civil war .
 When more attacks and kidnappings followed, international forces withdrew . International forces withdrew from the region .
 Israeli forces gradually withdrew from Beirut but remained in South Lebanon . Israeli forces also withdrew from Lebanon but remained on South Beirut .
 Febanon descended into greater anarchy until the 1989 Taif Agreement, brokered by Saudi Arabia and supported by other Arab states . The civil war ended under the agreement under the Taif agreement .
 Initially the Shi’i in South Febanon welcomed the Israelis but gradually they turned against them when the troops remained . The Shi'i turned against the Israeli troops when they remained .
 Hizbollah formed as a result of the 1982 war, became the major Shi’i group to fight against the Israeli occupation . Hizabollah is one of the largest Shi'i groups in the Middle East .
 In May 2000 Israel pulled out of southern Febanon except for Shaba Farms claimed by Syria and as Febanese territory by Hizbollah . Syria and Syria claim the area, but Israel says it's not part of Syria .
 In 2006 Israel bombed and invaded Lebanon in an attempt to destroy Hizbollah . In 2006, Israel again invaded Lebanon, this time in a bid to destroy the group . However, confrontations continued over the disputed area . Israeli and Lebanese forces continued to clash in 2006 .
 Yasir Arafat (full name, Muhammad Abdul Rauf Arafat al-Qudwa) was born to Palestinian parents in Cairo in 1929 . He claimed Jerusalem as his birthplace, but was born in Cairo .
 While a student he met Salah Khalaf and Khalil al-Wazir, who would become leaders Arafat, Yasir 25 in the nationalist movement .
 Arafat had contacts with the Muslim Brotherhood . Some of his associates did join the brotherhood . Arafat never became a full-fledged member of the Brotherhood .
 Arafat served as president of the Union of Palestinian Students from 1952 to 1956 . Arafat was president of Palestinian students from 1952 until 1956 .
 Fatah's first operation against Israel was an attack on a water pump station in 1965 . Fatah’s first attack on Israel was in 1965, when it was attacked by Israeli troops . It was the first attack against Israel since 1965 .
 Arafat and Fatah members were influenced by the Algerian War . Arafat was influenced by many other nationalist leaders in the mid20th century .
 An independent Palestinian state could only be established through armed struggle with Israel, Palestinian leaders say . They say they want to establish a Palestinian state by armed struggle against Israel .
 Arafat’s stated goal was the establishment of an independent Palestinian state in all of historic Palestine . Arafat's stated goal is to establish an independent state in historic Palestine.
 He took the name Abu Ammar as his nom de guerre; al-Wazir became Abu Jihad; and Khalaf became Abu Iyad . Khalaf also took his name as Abu Jihad and became Abu Khalaf, Abu Amm .
 The Battle of Karameh in 1968 was a major turning point for Arafat and Fatah . The battle was a turning point in the region's history .
 In an attempt to crush Fatah, Israeli forces moved into Jordan and attacked Fatah base at Karameh . Israeli forces move into Jordan in attempt to try to crush the Fatah regime .
 Fatah fighters fought back when Israel withdrew from Fatah in Gaza . Israeli forces were surprised when Fatah fought back and withdrew . Fatah had been in control of Gaza since 2003 .
 Young Palestinians who had been dispirited after major defeats in the 1967 ArabIsraeli War then joined Fatah in the struggle against Israel . Young Palestinians flocked to join Fatah after major defeat in the Arab Israeli War .
 Fatah became the largest and most powerful of the Palestinian factions . Arafat became chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization in 1969 . Fatah is the largest Palestinian faction .
 Under Arafat’s leadership the PLO accommodated political factions on the Left and Right . The PLO refused to be aligned with any one Arab government . Arafat ruled out any Arab Arab governments .
 The mounting power of the PLO posed an open challenge to the Jordanian monarchy . Jordan's monarchy was overthrown by the Arab Spring in 1953 .
 In September 1970 King Hussein’s forces attacked the PLO forces and Palestinian refugee camps . The PLO and Arafat were driven out of Jordan by King Hussein's forces .
 Black September, the group that attacked and assassinated Jordanian officials and Israelis, took its name from the war in Jordan . Black September is the name of the group responsible for the attacks on Jordan .
 Arafat denied the charges that he controlled terror attacks . Arafat was accused of involvement in Black September and other terrorist attacks .
 Arafat ordered that PLO attacks be concentrated only in Israel and the Occupied Territories of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank . Arafat also ordered that attacks only be concentrated in Israel, the West and the Gaza .
 Arafat achieved international recognition and spoke before the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1974 . Arafat was awarded international recognition by the U.N. in 1974 for his role in Palestinian terrorism .
 After being ousted from Jordan, Arafat and the PLO moved their headquarters of their military, political, and social welfare activities to Lebanon . Arafat moved the headquarters of the organization to Lebanon after being ousted in Jordan .
 As the central Lebanese government imploded in the course of the civil war in the mid-1970s, the PLO became a state within a state .
 PLO infrastructure of schools, hospitals, businesses, and cultural institutions grew . PLO was founded in 1968 .
 Arafat attempted to moderate PLO invasions into Israel along Lebanon’s southern borders . Arafat was determined to eliminate the dangers the PLO posed, but Israel was determined .
 Arafat and the PLO were quickly besieged in Beirut, where they held out against massive Israeli bombardments from the sea, land, and air . Arafat was quickly besieged by Israeli forces in Beirut .
 Negotiations by the international community resulted in the withdrawal of Arafat and the PLO leadership from Lebanon and their relocation to Tunis . Arafat was the leader of the Palestinian Liberation Organisation .
 Israel attacked PLO headquarters in Tunis in 1985, but Arafat escaped; he also was almost killed in a plane crash in 1992 . Arafat was assassinated by Israel in 1992; he was also almost killed .
 Late in life Arafat married Suha Tawil, from a notable Palestinian Christian family, with whom he had one daughter . Arafat also had a daughter with Suha, a Palestinian Christian .
 Arafat's brother Fatih Arafat headed the Palestinian Red Crescent for many years . Arafat is a medical doctor and a former Palestinian doctor . Fatih's brother was a doctor who headed the Palestine Red Crescent .
 Arafat was a master at maneuvering among Arab leaders, as well as conflicting Palestinian factions . Arafat often played one against the other, often playing one against each other .
 In 1988 the Palestine National Council declared a Palestinian state with Arafat as the president . Arafat was the president of the Palestinian state . In 1988 Arafat led the Palestinian National Council to declare the state of Palestine .
 By this time Arafat supported the so-called ministate solution, whereby the Palestinian state would include the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem . All territory taken by Israel in the 1967 war and occupied by its military forces since that time .
 Arafat returned to what Palestinians hoped would be the gradual creation of a fully independent state . Israel withdrew from portions of the Gaza Strip and Jericho in the 1990s . Arafat's return was part of a gradual process of Palestinian independence .
 Arafat was elected president of the new Palestinian National Authority in 1993 . He held the position until his death . Arafat died in 1994 at the age of 65 .
 Arafat was accused of allowing corruption among high-level Palestinian officials in the PNA and within Fatah . He personally lived a simple life, although he lived a relatively simple life .
 Ehud Barak offered to return much of the Occupied Territories in return for an end to conflict . No terms for resettlement of refugees were agreed at Camp David negotiations .
 Negotiations broke down completely, and many young Palestinians turned to Hamas . Hamas launched attacks, including suicide missions, within Israel and Occupied Territories .
 Israeli forces surrounded Arafat in his compound in Ramallah, and for the last two years of his life, he remained under what amounted to house arrest . Arafat was under house arrest for two years until his death .
 After some time of failing health he was moved to a hospital in Paris, where he died of uncertain causes in 2004 .
 Arafat's body was brought back to Ramallah for burial amid massive scenes of mourning among Palestinians . Arafat’s wish to be buried in Jerusalem was rejected by Israel . His body was then brought back for burial in Ramallah .
 Arafat had failed to achieve an independent Palestinian state . Arafat made the existence of the Palestinian people and their quest for self-determination a matter of international concern .
 Juan Jose Arevalo served as president during the first six years of that democratic opening . He instituted far-reaching constitutional, social, and labor reforms . He was the former university professor and “spiritual socialist”
 In the early 1940s a protest movement against Ubico erupted in Guatemala, centered on the cities and spearheaded by university students, professionals, and disgruntled military officers .
 The three-man military junta that assumed power oversaw national elections widely considered the fairest in Guatemalan history up to that time . The junta took control of the Guatemalan government in 1953 .
 Arevalo returned to Guatemala and became a favorite of the protest movements that had ousted Ubico . He returned to the country after his overthrow .
 In his inaugural address he outlined his vision of the ‘spiritual socialism’ that would guide his administration . In his first speech he outlined the vision of a "spiritual socialist" government .
 Arevalo’s spiritual socialism emphasized the interests of working people, social justice, individual and collective rights, and respect for the dignity of ordinary people, including indigenous people .
 There followed a series of broad-ranging reforms in public health, social security, education, and labor relations akin to the New Deal in the United States .
 Gov.Argentina, Argentina, Madres de Plaza de Mayo 27 ernment expenditures on public health, including rural health clinics and potable water projects, expanded dramatically . Gov. Argentina: Argentina's health spending has increased dramatically .
 The Social Security Law of 1946 created the Guatemalan Social Security Institute . The Institute was created by 1946 .
 The 1947 Labor Code guaranteed workers’ rights to unionize, strike, and bargain collectively . It also mandated minimum wages; and limited child and female wage labor .
 Arevalo treads lightly on land reform . Land reform was an especially delicate issue on which he tread lightly .
 Most of the country’s arable land was owned by a small landowning elite . The United Fruit Company, with its huge banana plantations, dominated the country's arable landscape .
 Arevalo left the land tenure issue alone . Establishing an Agrarian Studies Commission in 1947, guaranteed certain rights for rural laborers .
 Jacobo Arbenz instituted major agrarian reforms, provoking the opposition of powerful conservative elements within Guatemala, the United Fruit Company, and the U.S. Fruit Company . His successor, Jacobo . Arbanz, instituted .
 Arbenz was ousted in a coup in June 1954, ushering in a prolonged period of military dictatorship . He was ousted by the army in 1954, ending a period of dictatorship .
 Every Thursday afternoon, from 3:30 to 4:00m., the Mothers would gather at the May Pyramid (Piramide de Mayo) in the Plaza de Mayo in front of the presidential palace . They often carry photographs of their missing children, and walk slowly in circles .
 The founding members of the organization included Azucena Villaflor Devincenti, Berta Braverman, Haydee Garda Buelas and the four sisters Maria Adela Gard de Antokoletz .
 The Mothers’ Association slowly grew, despite the detention and disappearance of some of its founding members, including its first president, Azucena Devincenti .
 By the early 1980s the Madres had grown to several thousand members . The Madres garnered the support of key international human rights groups, including Amnesty International .
 Many consider that the Madres played an important role in delegitimizing the military dictatorship and helping to usher in the period of democratic rule from 1983 . The Madres helped usher in a period of democracy from 1983 to 1983 .
 The Madres have continued their weekly vigils from 1977 to the present writing, demanding that the government account for their missing children and that the responsible parties be subjected to criminal prosecution . Madres are demanding government offers of monetary compensation if not accompanied by acknowledgment .
 The Mothers of the Founding Line has been criticized by some for its lack of internal democracy, cults of personality, and other factors .
 Both factions of the Madres continue to demand government accountability for crimes perpetrated during the dirty war . The Madres are active in the field of human rights, and remain active in human rights .
 The Inspiring Rise and 28 Aristide, Jean-Bertrand Dismaying Evolution of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo . Aristide was assassinated in 1968 in the wake of the assassination of President Francois Lap Laporte .
 Jean-Bertrand Aristide was born in Douyon in southern Haiti on July 15, 1953 . He is a major and highly controversial figure in the modern history of Haiti . He was a priest, politician, and president .
 After being orphaned as an infant, he was raised by the Society of Saint Frances de Sales . He was orphaned by the order .
 He was influenced by liberation theology, a strand of Roman Catholicism that became prominent from the 1960s . He emphasized issues of social justice and political activism in alleviating poverty and oppression of the poor and marginalized .
 In 1983 he was appointed to a parish in a slum in Port-au-Prince slum, where he worked in a medical clinic and a halfway house for street children . He was appointed in 1983 to work in a parish where he was a doctor .
 His activism and charisma attracted a large following and helped him build a social base for his subsequent political career . His activism helped him to build a large social base and build a political base .
 In 1986 popular uprisings led to the end of the Duvalier dictatorship, creating an opening for Aristide to exploit . Aristide would soon exploit the political opening he soon exploited . The former president of Haiti was assassinated in 1994 .
 His fiery oratory and social radicalism alienated the church hierarchy, leading to his expulsion from the Salesian order in 1988 . He was expelled from Salesian Order in 1988 after a series of scandals .
 Aristide captured the presidency with two-thirds of the popular vote in 1990 . Aristide won the presidency in 1990 in the first genuinely democratic elections in Haitian history . In 1990, Aristide was elected president of Haiti .
 His first tenure as president lasted less than eight months . He was ousted by a military coup on September 30 .
 He was returned to power following a U.S. military intervention in 1994 . Going into exile in Venezuela and the United States, he went back to power .
 During the same year he renounced his priesthood, he married United States citizen Mildred Trouillot two years later . He renounced the priesthood, renouncing his priesthood .
 Constitutionally barred from running in the elections of December 1995, won by Raoul Cedras, in 2000 he won a second term . Constitutionally banned from running for a second time in December 1995 .
 Aristide was overthrown in a ]ean-Bertrand Aristide coup in February 2004 . Political gridlock followed, and after a long period of political unrest, he was forced to leave the country .
 From exile in South Africa he proclaimed himself the legitimate president of Haiti . He proclaimed himself himself as Haiti's president from exile .
 Haiti's president is a polarizing figure in the modern history of the Western Hemisphere’s poorest country . Denounced by opponents as a self-serving agitator who advocates violence in the pursuit of political power . Supporters say he is the embodiment of the aspirations of Haiti’
 Armenia and Azerbaijan were constituent members of the Soviet Union until its collapse in 1991 . The former became the Republic of Armenia and the latter the Azerbaijani Republic .
 Armenia, as a part of the Soviet Union, saw a considerable period of peace . Armenia is now a member of the world's largest superpower superpower .
 The intelligentsia of the area suffered greatly during the rule of Joseph Stalin . Tens of thousands of Armenians were executed or deported during Stalin's rule .
 The tensions eased with the death of Stalin and the emergence of Nikita Khrushchev . The tensions between the Soviet Union and Russia eased in the 1950s .
 Next 25 years saw rising standards of living, with improvements in education and health care . The next 25 years were the first 25 years of American life .
 From the 1970s Western tourists started to visit Yerevan and some other parts of Armenia . Western tourists began to visit some parts of the country in the 1980s .
 Azerbaijan was transformed with the enlarging of the oil industry in the 1950s . Azerbaijan is now one of the most important countries in the world .
 This continued throughout the 1960s and helped provide money for an increase in civil engineering projects and infrastructure projects .
 In 1988 the governing council of Karabakh voted for unification with Armenia . Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast, an enclave in Azerbaijan with 180,000 people, voted to unify with Armenia.
 Azerbaijanis, largely Shi’ite Muslims, then attacked the predominantly Christian Armenians at the Azerbaijani town of Sumgait . Azerbaijanis are largely Shi'ite Muslims . Armenians were predominantly Christian .
 There was an upsurge in nationalist sentiment in both republics . 250,000 Azerbaijanis living in Armenia and 500,000 Armenians in Azerbaijan at the start of the dispute .
 In December 1998, an earthquake hit northern Armenia, killing 25,000 and leaving 500,000 homeless . Many of these fled, and to make the situation worse still, in 1998, many fled .
 With a rise in Azerbaijani nationalism in 1989, the local government started blockading NagornoKarabakh and Armenia . The local government began blockading the region in 1989 .
 Armenians in Baku, Azerbaijan’s capital, were massacred in January 1990 . In January 1990 the border between Nakhichevan and Iranian Azerbaijan was torn down, and Armenians were killed .
 Armenian and Azerbaijani militia were soon fighting each other . With weapons stolen from army bases and depots, they soon fought each other.
 The Soviet army was sent in and managed to fight its way into Baku, with hundreds dying . Hundreds died in Baku during the Soviet invasion of Baku .
 The Communists won the elections for the Azerbaijan Supreme Soviet in 1990 . On August 30, 1991, Azerbaijan declared independence .
 Full independence came about on December 25, with the formal dissolution of the Soviet Union . Full independence was achieved after the Soviet-era Soviet Union was dissolved .
 Ayaz Mutalibov, leader under the Communists, became president of Azerbaijan in 1992 . Isa Gambarov took over as acting president in May 1992 .
 On June 16,1992, Abulfez Elchibey became president, being replaced on June 24, 1993, by Heydar Aliyev . On September 1, he became president in his own right .
 Former Soviet politician Aliyev started to exploit the oil reserves of the country . The former Soviet politician started to explore the country's oil reserves .
 He managed to reduce unemployment and establish closer relations with Turkey . He also managed to establish closer ties with the country's president .
 On October 15, 2003, Ilham Aliyev won the presidential election, for which he was the only candidate, and was sworn in as president 16 days later . As he was dying, his son won the election .
 94 percent of the 94 percent who voted in the 1991 referendum supported independence for Armenia . Nearly 99 percent of Armenians voted for independence in the referendum in 1991 .
 It became an independent country later that year but suffered greatly from a blockade by Azerbaijan . It became independent later in 1991 .
 Turkey blockaded Azerbaijan in April 1993 after Armenian forces launched a military offensive against Azerbaijan . This was made worse when Turkey also blockaded the country in 1993 . Turkey also blocked Azerbaijan in 1993 after it was attacked by Armenian forces .
 Armenia sought more engagement with the Russian Federation . Azerbaijan sought closer ties with the West . Armenia sought closer engagement with Russia .
 There has been an end to fighting in Nagorno-Karabakh, but there has been much political ferment with increasing unemployment . 600,000 people left the country between 1992 and 1998 .
 Robert Kocharyan became acting president when Levon Ter-Petrosyan stepped down and has been president since April 9, 1998 . Kocharyans has been acting president since 1998 .
 During his time in office, there has been increasing dissatisfaction with the authoritarian way in which the country has been run . Dissidents being jailed and opposition parties banned .
 The Union of Right-Wing Forces was founded in Yerevan on May 29, 2000 . In recent years, with economic problems plaguing the country, there has been the emergence of the organization .
 Armenia once again reiterated its claims to Nagorno-Karabakh in March 2002 . Both governments now determined on a peaceful solution .
 Azerbaijanis in Armenia: A Brief Historical Essay. Asadov, Sabir, and Israful Mammedov. T radical Fate of Azerbaijev in Armenia .
 Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan, 2001; Croissant, Michael P The Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict: Causes and Implications. Armenia-Baku conflict is a major source of tension .
 Developments in physics in the 1930s led physicists to believe that nuclear fission could be used as a weapon . When World War II began, scientists stopped publishing on the topic of fission in order to avoid sharing information .
 No one was yet sure what form a fissionbased weapon would take, but the Allied nations were concerned that Nazi Germany would develop it first .
 In the U.S. the Manhattan Project was supported by enormous resources beginning in 1942 . In the United States, the project was funded by millions of dollars .
 Research occurred at various sites across North America and overseen at Los Alamos, New Mexico, where the desert provided safe sites for weapons testing . Research was conducted at various locations across the world .
 British scientists participated, as did many European exiles, but the Soviet Union was not included in the project . The Soviet Union did not participate .
 Not until after Germany’s surrender did the Manhattan Project finish its work . The Manhattan Project was completed in 1945 .
 First nuclear explosive, a nondeployable bomb nicknamed the Gadget, was a sphere of high explosive covered with surface detonators that directed the explosion inward, compressing a plutonium core in order to start a nuclear chain reaction that grew at an exponential rate .
 The Gadget exploded with a blast equal in force to about 18 thousand tons of TNT—tonnage of TNT became the standard measure of nuclear bombs thenceforth .
 Fat Man, a plutonium bomb like the Gadget, was dropped on Nagasaki, Japan, on August 9 . Three days earlier at Hiroshima, Little Boy, a uranium “gun-type” bomb that worked by shooting one piece of uranium into another to start the chain reaction,
 Little Boy was the first gun-type nuclear bomb used, and while it seemed likely to work, it was United States troops witness an atomic bomb test . The bomb was a gun-style bomb used .
 Atomic weaponry shaped the international political landscape of the cold war. at that time untested. at the time .
 Hundreds of thousands died at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, prompting a Japanese surrender a week later . Japanese surrender was a week after the bombings .
 Future warfare would have to acknowledge the existence of nuclear weapons . The U.S. government says it has no plans to use nuclear weapons in the future .
 The Soviets were left out of the Manhattan Project and the United States was the only country with the capability to produce nuclear arms . The Soviet Union had been receiving information about the project throughout its duration thanks to its espionage efforts .
 Development of Soviet nuclear weapons had to be conducted without the extraordinary brain trust of Los Alamos, but had the advantage of requiring less innovation . The Soviet Union's nuclear weapons were developed without the . advantage of having less innovation than having the .
 On August 29, 1949, the Soviets successfully detonated First Lightning, a 22 kiloton Fat Man-style fission bomb . Penal mining provided uranium, and the Soviets mined uranium .
 Four years after the start of the ‘Atomic Age, the nuclear arms race was under way . U.S. military intelligence had predicted the Soviets would succeed, years before the Soviets .
 The United States and the Soviet Union became the most significant and resourceful superpowers in the aftermath of World War II .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact transpired along ideological lines as much as geographical ones . New international alliances like the NATO Treaty Organization were formed by ideological reasons . The Warsaw Pact was based on ideological rather than geographical reasons .
 Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union quickly acquired the necessary means to do significant and catastrophic damage to their opponents . The arms race continued as the arms race drove them both .
 The United States countered the Soviet acquisition of “the bomb’s” by developing the hydrogen bomb . The hydrogen bomb is also called the fusion bomb or the thermonuclear bomb .
 Like the Gadget, George was a nondeployable device used to test the basic principles that would be involved in the design of its successors . Ivy Mike was detonated with a yield of 10 megatons a year later, Ivy Mike became part of the United States nuclear arsenal .
 The Soviets detonated a preliminary fusion device in the summer of 1953 and a fullscale thermonuclear bomb in 1954 . The Soviets kept pace, detonating a preliminary . device in 1953 .
 The destructive force of these new bombs was commonly measured in megatons, making the first atomic bombs seem almost trivial in comparison . The first atomic bomb bombs were made in 1945 .
 A Fat Man-type bomb could eliminate a smaller city like Nagasaki . A hydrogen bomb would eliminate a major city and its infrastructure and produce considerably more fallout . A Fat-Man-type .
 The 1946 Atomic Energy Act put nuclear technology under civilian control . It banned the divulging of information related to such to any foreign nation .
 All nuclear technology was “born secret,” which is to say that it was automatically classified without need for evaluation . Nuclear technology was "born secret," which means that it is automatically classified .
 It is widely speculated that the born secret policy is unconstitutional, but the Supreme Court has yet to hear a case pertaining to it .
 Throughout the 1950s much of the innovation of the arms race was concerned with methods of deployment . The arms race began in the early 1950s with the first arms race arms race .
 The B-47 Stratojet and B-52 Stratofortress were early examples of such innovations . They were designed to penetrate Soviet borders and intercept interceptor aircraft .
 Bomb deployment was also made more user-friendly, requiring fewer specialists and bringing the utility of nuclear weapons closer to that of conventional explosives . Bomb deployment also required limited instruction on the part of the soldiers deploying them .
 Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles allowed rival nations to deploy nuclear payloads without needing a pilot . The threat of Soviet missiles in Cuba sparked the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . The United States proceeded to build missile installations throughout Europe .
 Some attention was paid to defense against nuclear attacks in the 1950s . Anti-aircraft artillery and fighter jets were used to intercept bombers, radar systems were developed .
 MAD calls for the development and stockpiling of weapons of mass destruction in order to force a situation in which it is infeasible for either side to attack, because of the certainty of devastating retaliation . MAD is a defense strategy designed to force the U.S. to develop and stockpile
 Cold war thinking was a critical component of cold war thinking that led to the detente, or eased tensions, of the 1970s . What may have been counterintuitive was nevertheless, it led to a detente in the Cold War era .
 Among NATO allies, the United Kingdom and France both became nuclear powers by the end of 1960 . The People’s Republic of China followed suit in 1964, at a time when Sino-Soviet relations were at a low ebb .
 During detente, the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was signed by by by a number of states . It was not until 1992 that France and the People’s Republic of China signed .
 The NNPT limited the spread of nuclear capability by permitting only those five states then possessing them . The five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council were also allowed to own nuclear weapons .
 It further permitted the use of nuclear power by other states, but only under conditions that would limit their ability to manufacture nuclear weapons . It also allowed the use by other countries to use nuclear power, but limited use by states .
 Any states not explicitly granted rights under this treaty would have to apply to the International Atomic Energy Agency to pursue any nuclear technology activity .
 The easing of tensions also led to armament control treaties in the late 1960s and early 1970s . Armaments control treaties were also agreed in the 1970s and 1980s .
 SALT I (Strategic Arms Limitation Talks), held in Helsinki, Linland, between the Soviet Union and the United States, restricted the production of strategic ballistic missile launchers and submarine-launched ballistic missiles . Further treaties limited nuclear testing and forbade nuclear weapons in space .
 When Ronald Reagan was elected president in 1980 he returned anti-Soviet rhetoric to pre-detente levels . Reagan called for massive escalations in order to force the Soviet Union into economic collapse as a result of defense spending .
 The Strategic Defense Initiative, nicknamed Star Wars, would employ a space-based system to deflect missiles en route to the United States . The system would thus limit the Soviet second-strike capability .
 The system was never fully developed or employed, aspects of it were adopted by every subsequent administration, even after the cold war ended . It was adopted by all subsequent administrations, including after the Cold War ended .
 The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaties further limited nuclear arms, and periodic treaties continue to reduce the number of nuclear warheads in operation .
 The arms race effectively ended when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 . Arms race was effectively ended after the collapse of Soviet Union .
 In postcold war years India, Pakistan, and North Korea have all tested nuclear devices . North Korea withdrew from the NNPT in 2003; India and Pakistan never signed .
 As of 2006, 40 nonnuclear countries possessed the capability to manufacture nuclear weapons if they desired to . The International Atomic Energy Agency estimates that 40 nonnuclear countries possess the capability .
 DeVolpi, Alexander, Vladimir E Minkov, Vadim A Simoneko, and George S Stanford. Stanford. Simon and Schuster, 1991, . Simon and . Schuster. Simon & Schuster .
 World War II had changed the nature of the world and after reconstruction had finished, there were important new trends in art and architecture that were to influence the latter half of the 20th century and the first years of the 21st century .
 About 1950, a large number of artistic movements started flourishing in the United States and elsewhere . Lrom about 1950, about 1950 was the start of a large artistic movement .
 Drawing from surrealism and also from Mexican social realists such as Diego Rivera and David Siqueiros, it was stylistically similar to some of the work of the Soviet artist Wassily Kandinsky .
 Abstract expressionism tended to rely on a spontaneous or subconscious creation, with early painters being Jackson Pollock and Max Ernst . Early painters such as Pollock were also considered abstract expressionists .
 Mark Tobey from the northwest United States also produced paintings that developed further from some of some of Pollock’s style . Pollock's style is similar to that of the late Pollock .
 The abstract style of color field painting involved covering canvases with large areas of solid color . Developed from abstract expressionism, and especially from the work of Jackson Pollock, the style is known as color field .
 The canvases, such as those by Mark Rothko, tended to be large . Other artists such as Clyfford Still, Hans Hofmann, Morris Louis and Larry Zox used the same style .
 Pop art emerged in Great Britain in the mid-1950s, and quickly spread to the United States . Pop art was created in the 1950s and spread quickly to the U.S.
 As well as paintings, the field included advertising material and comics .
 Many pop art works were made from plastic, and subsequently become regarded as kitsch, being aimed at a large audience . Pop art works have subsequently been considered kitsch by some .
 Notable pop artists include David Hockney, Roy Lichtenstein, George Segal, and Andy Warhol . Notable artists include George S. Segal and David Hocksney .
 Pop art often spring from the availability of new materials or old materials in new forms . Developments in pop art spring from new materials and old materials being used .
 The name op art, derived from pop art but totally different in style, was a contraction of the term optical art . Op art highlights styles in geometric abstraction, often developing interesting optical perspectives . The name "op art" is a contraction .
 This grew, in some ways, from the Bauhaus movement of the 1930s, with the term being first used in October 1964 . The term was first used by art and architecture architects in 1964 .
 Hungarian-born artist Victor Vasarely was perhaps one of the better-known artists in this field . He was perhaps the best-known artist in Hungary .
 Op art used straight and curved edges, and the next trend was Hard-Edge painting . Hard-edge painting was largely a reaction to abstract expressionism . The next trend in art was hard-edge art .
 Artists were heavily promoted by Peter Selz, a professor at Claremont College in California . Artists include Lorse Feitelson, his wife Helen Lundeberg, and his wife Lorse .
 Minimal art was introduced in the late 1960s by Donald Judd, Carl Andre, Richard Serra, and others . Robert Bresson was directing films and Samuel Beckett was writing plays, also in minimalist way .
 The trend toward minimalism continued through the early 1970s, being mirrored in architecture and design . The trend was also mirrored in the 1970s .
 The influence of minimalism led to a new trend of postminimalism, with grids and seriality adding a human element to the work .
 Tom Friedman, Eva Hesse, Anish Kapoor, Joel Shapiro, and Richard Tuttle were some of those whose work conveyed the essence of postminimalism . Joel Shapiro and Joel Shapiro are some of the architects of modern minimalism .
 The term lyrical abstraction was coined by Robert Pincus-Witten in 1969 . It drew from tachisme, which had been popular as a French art style from 1945 until 1960, and also abstract impressionism .
 Land art started in the late 1960s, when artworks were made from rocks, sticks, plants and soil from nature . Land art was created by a greater environmental awareness from the late 1950s and early 1960s .
 Many of these works were made outdoors and have not survived, although they were recorded in photographs . Many of them have not been photographed, although some have been recorded .
 Some artists were influenced by photographs brought back from the Moon by Apollo missions . There have been extensive outdoor projects by Latin American artists . Some artists have been influenced by the images brought back by the Moon .
 Some ideas from this field have been expressed in conceptual art, which involved objects taking precedence over many aesthetic concerns . Conceptual art is a form of art where objects take precedence over aesthetics .
 Warhol was an American artist who became a central figure in the movement known as Pop Art . Warhol's art and architecture painting saw a return to the styles of the 17th and 18th centuries .
 From the 1970s the trends were toward new fields called either contemporary art or postmodern art . From the 70s the trend was toward modern art . Postmodern art or contemporary art is considered a form of art .
 This involved adapting modernist ideas, and incorporating some elements of popular culture, and even performance art, into newer designs .
 The period immediately after World War II saw the construction of many war memorials and painting of artwork commemorating sacrifice in war .
 Civil engineering projects for Olympic and other sporting occasions began to be civil engineering projects . Gradually this gave way to civil engineering .
 Architects were also involved in designing large bridges, such as those over the Bosphorus , the Tagus , the Humber Bridge and the Berean Bridge .
 The period also saw many countries and cities competing to have the tallest habitable building, the tallest telecommunications tower and the tallest mast, and even the highest public observatory .
 UNESCO World Heritage Listing helped preserve architecture in some parts of the world but did not prevent major damage to some important structures . The Mostar Bridge in 1992 and the Bamiyan Buddhas in 2001 were among the most damaged structures in the world .
 UNESCO’s involvement in the moving of ancient Egyptian structures at Abu Simbel to construct the Aswan Dam . Mention should also be made of the restoration of the Borobudur Buddhist monument in Indonesia .
 After World War II, there was a major change in British architecture . After the war, British architecture was designed to reflect the changing times .
 Only 50 of the 1,000 schools in London survived the war undamaged . The government focused initially on schools, as only 50 survived .
 Dormitory suburbs such as Basildon, Crawley, Harlow and Stevenage became known as dormitory suburbs . The private sector involved itself in what became known .
 Other developments at the time included Telford, a large conurbation to the west of Birmingham, bringing together a number of villages . Poplar housing estate in London built after the Festival of Britain in 1951 .
 Modernist buildings are the result of large numbers of modernist buildings . Modernist architecture is a form of modern architecture . Modernists are often associated with modernist architecture .
 A reaction against this type of art and architecture 35 design arose in 1984 when Prince Charles was critical of a “ultra-modern wing” to be added to the National Gallery on London’s Trafalgar Square . Some architects felt that Prince Charles should not have spoken
 Other landmark architectural projects in London include the Telecom Building, Canary Wharf, the London Eye and the new Wembley Stadium .
 In France, the most famous modern designs included the Pompidou Center, also known as the Centre Beaubourg . In France it is known for its modern designs, such as the Center Beaureg .
 Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers designed the project with engineers Peter Rice and Edmund Happold . It was designed by architects Renzo Pianz Piano, Richard Rogers and Peter Rice . It is the first time a building has been built in the world's history .
 Named after the former president of France, it was opened in 1977 and is well known for its exterior . Named after former French president, it is also known for the exterior .
 Other important architectural sites include the new National Library of France, refurbishment of the Gare du Nord into a gallery; and the building of the satellite town of La Defense to the west of Paris .
 Atomium, built for the 1958 Brussels World Fair, is unique in Brussels, Belgium . The Atomium was built in 1958 for the Belgian World Fair in Brussels .
 In Spain, art and architecture was intensely conservative until the death of the dictator Francisco Franco in 1975 .
 The Valle de los Caidos, outside Madrid, has a massive cross dominating a hill . It has a basilica tunneled into the rocks at its base, with a cross dominating the hill .
 Franco's resting place was a memorial to the dead of the Spanish civil war . Franco died at the site of his death at the end of the war .
 Picasso's Guernica is an example of post-Francoist modernism . The painting returned to Spain in 1981 after returning to the country .
 Work also began again on completing Gaudi’s La Sagrada Familia in Barcelona, before the Olympic Games in 1992 . The Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, designed by Frank Gehry, opened in September 1997 .
 In southern Spain, tourist developments at Marbella, the Costa del Sol, and other places have also been an important part of Spain’s recent architectural development .
 Similar apartment complexes have also been built in Greece, Malta, and other tourist sites around the Mediterranean . Similar complexes have been built around the region .
 postwar Italian governments have been active in urban development in many parts of the country . But they have aimed at retaining the Renaissance core of cities such as Florence .
 The Palazzetto dello Sport and Stadio Flaminio, constructed for the 1960 Rome Olympics, are still used . The Palatello dello sport and the Rome Olympic stadium were built for the Olympics .
 The Pirelli Tower in Milan, built in 1958, and the tomb of Pope John XXIII and Rome Railway Station are all important architectural statements . The tomb of the Pope XXIII is located in Rome, Italy .
 Pier Luigi Nervi introduced the use of concrete reinforced with mesh in Italy . The use of mesh reinforced concrete helped influence architectural design around the world .
 After World War II, the rebuilding of Monte Cassino was notable; and in recent years the cleaning of the Sistine Chapel has been important . Leonardo da Vinci’s Last Supper was important .
 In Germany, the rebuilding of the country saw a large number of new buildings, many functional civic buildings, or repairs to others . The reconstruction of the Reichstag with a glass dome completed in 1999 was overseen by British architect British Norman Foster .
 After the end of Nazi rule, artwork became much freer, with the graffiti and painting on the Berlin Wall being part of the new expressive artistic climate . After the war, graffiti and art became more expressive and more expressive .
 The construction of the Jewish Museum in Berlin, designed by Daniel Libeskind, incorporated many new architectural features aimed at not responding to functional requirements in the same manner as many other museums . The Jewish Museum was designed to not respond to the functional requirements of most museums .
 Maverick architect Friedensreich Hundertwasser tried to challenge existing architectural designs by not having straight lines . He applied his modernist principles in Vienna, Austria, to his apartment block . The apartment block was designed by the maverick modernist architect in Vienna .
 He has also been involved in painting and in designing some Austrian postage stamps .
 In eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, the rebuilding of many of the cities required large housing estates to be hurriedly built . The rebuilding of cities devastated by World War II required hurriedly building .
 Some Moscow apartment blocks were built taller than the original architects had planned . The city planners in Moscow were anxious to restrict the growth of the city .
 For 36 art and architecture civic buildings, there were many in what became known as Stalinist Gothic . The most famous outside of the Soviet Union was the Palace of Culture and Science in Warsaw .
 The Palace of the People in Bucharest, Romania, is one of the largest buildings in the world . The most grandiose was undoubtedly the Palace of The People, which is located in Romania, Romania .
 Art during the Communist era hailed socialist endeavor or, within the exiled communities or underground, championed the resistance to the Communist government . Art during this period hailed socialist endeavors or championed the . resistance .
 A recent effort in Tirane, Albania, to paint the graying apartment buildings in bright colors . In an effort to break away from this, there was a recent effort to paint them bright .
 The breakup of former Yugoslavia saw the shelling of Dubrovnik, which led to an international outcry . The international community contributed to the rebuilding of the Mostar Bridge in the aftermath .
 In the Soviet Union, the Communist government embarked on massive building projects . War memorials, television towers, civic buildings, and civic buildings were built throughout the country . Communist government often decorated with revolutionary art .
 The Motherland statue in Volgograd is perhaps the most famous work of revolutionary art . It is one of Russia's most famous works of art .
 Since the end of the Soviet Union and the collapse of communism, there has been a trend to adopt pre-1917 artistic styles .
 The Cathedral Church of Christ the Savior was built in the same style and on the same site as the building destroyed by Stalin . Great care and expense was spent on restoring the restored palaces and monuments .
 In China, the victory of the Communists in the Chinese civil war saw major changes throughout the country . The destruction of the city walls around Beijing and numerous other cities was the first major change in the country's history .
 Large numbers of hospitals, schools, and other modest buildings were constructed throughout the country . Mao’s Mausoleum was later built at the southern end of Tiananmen Square .
 Other major projects included the building of the Beijing subway and the construction of the nuclear fallout tunnel system under Beijing . The tunnel system was built under Beijing's nuclear fallout tunnels .
 Communist revolutionary art was famous for its telling of the heroic efforts of Mao Zedong and other Communist leaders, as well as important revolutionary actions . The art was known for telling of Mao's heroic efforts and important actions .
 From the late 1980s, Beijing, as with other cities in China, saw a massive building boom . Office buildings, apartment blocks, and hotels were constructed at a frenetic rate .
 Pudong, which had been the location of many market gardens, was transformed with skyscrapers dwarfing those on the Bund, which they face across the river . Shanghai's market gardens were transformed by the rise of the Bund .
 The Oriental Pearl Tower is now the tallest building in Asia and the third-tallest in the world . It is located in Hong Kong, China, and is the tallest in Asia .
 Many of the designs in the skyscrapers throughout China can trace their roots to the massive urban development of Hong Kong from the 1960s . Hong Kong's urban development in 1960s can trace its roots back to the city .
 Mention should also be made of the new Hong Kong Airport, and airports throughout China, as well as tourist sites .
 In Taiwan, the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial in Taipei and the National Palace Museum are two of the outstanding architectural sites on the island .
 During the Korean War, much of the Korean Peninsula was devastated, and after the war both Pyongyang and Seoul needed extensive reconstruction .
 In Pyongyang, massive edifices were built such as the Kumsusan Memorial Palace, formerly the residence of the North Korean leader Kim II Sung, now his resting place . North Korea's president Kim Jong-won was assassinated in 2009 .
 The Mansudae Grand Monument, the Monument to the Juche Idea, the Great People’s Study House, and the unfinished Ryugyong Hotel (now the tallest unoccupied building in the world) are all important architectural projects .
 In Japan, the rebuilding after the war was dwarfed by the property boom of the 1970s and the 1980s . The property boom saw massive buildings constructed in all of Japan’s major cities .
 Architects in Japan have long been involved in designing buildings to withstand earthquakes . This was shown to have been important during the Kobe earthquake of 1995 .
 The Cu Chi Tunnels outside Saigon are also great architectural feats from the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War saw the destruction of much of the country, including large sections of the Imperial Palace .
 In Thailand, the tourist boom and wealth that flowed into the country from the 1960s saw the construction of massive hotel complexes and condominiums in Bangkok and some other cities . The construction of these complexes led to major traffic problems and pollution in Bangkok .
 Art and architecture in Thailand has tended to remain rather traditional, and much appeals to the tourist market . Paintings by elephants are now becoming popular .
 In Malaysia, the incredible wealth in the country from the 1980s led to the construction of the Petronas Towers , the Masjid Wilayah Persekutuan (Federal Territory Mosque) in Kuala Lumpur . The massive national expressway through western Malaysia was also built .
 Kuala Lumpur airport was also, for a short period, the largest airport in the world . Kuala Lumpur Airport was also the world's largest airport .
 In Singapore, the 1950s saw the start of the construction of many apartment blocks throughout the island by the Singapore Housing and Development Board . The 1950s was the beginning of Singapore's housing and development board .
 During the 1970s ‘Garden Cities’ were created, and during the 1980s many skyscrapers were built . The two most well-known ones were possibly the UOB Building and the OCBC Building, both headquarters for banks .
 The Istana Nurul Iman in Bandar Seri Begawen, the official residence of the sultan, is larger than the Vatican . It is the largest residential palace in the world, designed by Filipino architect Leandro V Locsin .
 Omar Ali Saifuddin Mosque, also in Brunei, was built in 1958 by a Malay architectural firm from Kuala Lumpur . It dominates the central part of Bandar Seri Begawen, Brunei . It was built by an architectural firm .
 The tourist boom has also seen a large number of hotels and guest houses of varying designs in Bali and other places . Bali has seen a number of different designs in various locations .
 Imax Cinemas at Keong Mas in Jakarta once had the largest Imax screen in the world, taking its name the Golden Snail Theatre from its shape . The Imax cinemas took its name from the shape of its shape, which is shaped like a snail .
 Komodo Natural History Museum in the shape of its residents, Komodo dragons, is also worth mentioning . Komodo natural history museum is in shape of a Komodo dragon .
 First Lady Imelda Marcos was responsible for the construction of massive buildings in the 1970s . Critics claimed that she was suffering from an “edifice complex” in Manila .
 Artistic endeavor in India has followed the traditional Hindu myths . Rama, Sita, and other characters from the Ramayana remain popular . Artwork portrays India as a regional power .
 In Pakistan the major architectural projects in the country centered on the moving of the country’s capital from Karachi to Rawalpindi and then to Islamabad . The project was designed by the Greek architect and urban planner Constantinos A Doxiadis .
 In Australia, the most famous building built during this period was the Sydney Opera House, designed by Jorn Utzon and opened in 1973 . It was designed by Utzon, who designed the Opera House .
 The Eureka Tower in Melbourne, opened in 2006, is now the tallest residential building in the world . It is now home to the highest residential tower in Australia .
 Aboriginal art has become extremely popular both within Australia and also overseas . Aboriginal art is extremely popular in Australia and overseas .
 Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Bahrain built iconic structures such as the Kuwait Towers and the Burj A1 Aran Hotel . The incredible wealth in the Middle East from oil led to some of the best architects in the world .
 In Baghdad, Iraq, the massive swords across the main road celebrating Saddam Hussein’s achievements outlived him . In Tehran, the shah's monumental arch in Tehran, Iran, was also outlived, as was the Shah's .
 Throughout Africa, many European and indigenous architects have worked on the numerous civic buildings that have been constructed by the newly emerging nations .
 The Cairo Tower in Egypt was built by Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1956-61 . It remains an important site in central Cairo, Egypt .
 The construction of numerous civic buildings and presidential palaces throughout the continent is also worth mentioning, as is the Sun City complex in South Africa . Sun City is one of Africa's most famous landmarks .
 Other important landmarks include Chicago’s Sears Tower, the Space Needle, and Seattle's Space Needel . Chicago's Sears Tower was one of the world's tallest buildings .
 Mention should also be made of the Glass Cathedral of Oral Roberts and the strange deconstructionist cityscape of Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Stata Center .
 Many artists have turned to episodes in United States history, with countless scenes of Native Americans, the American Revolutionary War (especially around the anniversary in 1976), and the American Civil War .
 War Memorial, Vietnam Veterans Memorial, and the Korean War Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. have risen as well . The Vietnam and Korean War Memorials have also risen in Washington .
 In Latin America, the massive enlargement of the cities of Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, and Chile has seen architects designing apartments and also civic amenities .
 From the 1980s there has also been the construction of large parliament buildings, such as the Chilean parliament in Valparaiso and the Paraguayan parliament in Asuncion . The Chilean parliament was built in the 1970s .
 Many painters return to traditional themes, but there have also been many new painting techniques, exemplified by the later works of Diego Rivera (1886— 1957) and the surrealist style of David Siqueiros (18961974) Both have influenced many artists throughout Latin America
 The Asian Development Bank is a nongovernmental organization headquartered in Manila, the Philippines . It provides aid, funding, and various forms of financial and technical support to countries in Asia and the Pacific .
 ADB started operations in 1966 and initially represented a group of 31 states . The ADB was initially represented by 31 states and represented 31 of them in 1966 .
 This included 47 states from inside the zone and 19 countries elsewhere . This included countries from inside and outside the zone .
 The bank's stated goal is to improve the lives of the peoples of the region by helping them develop economically and socially . The bank’s stated goal was to help them develop .
 This is a major task given the depths of poverty encountered in some parts of the world . This is the task of tackling poverty in some regions .
 The bank has a specific commitment to helping less-developed and poorer Asian countries to advance economically . The bank is committed to helping poorer Asian nations advance economically.
 This help can take several forms and affect regional, sub-regional, and local projects and programs . This help may affect local, regional and regional programs .
 The goals of the ADB are varied and include developments to foster economic growth and projects to reduce poverty . The ADB is based in Lima, Peru .
 The organization also attempts to assist in the improvement of conditions that affect women and children as well as to implement strategies .
 The total lending volume is around $6 billion in the early 2000s, with technical assistance programs totalling $180 million a year . Technical assistance programs total $180million a year, according to the government .
 These financial programs can involve both public and private investments . Public and private investment can be involved in the financial program .
 In terms of economic development, the bank evaluates requests for help and then determines where its assistance is most appropriate . The bank says it will help the country's economic development .
 It favors proposals that offer a combination of social and economic development . The proposal includes proposals for social, economic development in the U.S. State Department .
 It hopes that at least 50 percent of the projects will produce social or environmental benefits . It hopes to be at least half of projects will be social or environmentally beneficial .
 The bank also attempts to match its lending with governmental contributions . The bank is based in New York City .
 ADB’s work encompasses many different activities and embraces many diverse areas . The ADB's work is based in the United States and Canada . ADB is the largest organization in the world and has a wide range of activities .
 Bank’s efforts affect agriculture and resources, finance, transport and communications, economic and social infrastructure, industrial investment, and mineral extraction projects .
 ADB receives proposals from its members for particular projects . The ADB assesses the relative merits of each project .
 It analyses viability, value for money, economic and social impact, technical realities, provisions for accounting oversight, and contract and bidding implementation as well as openness and overall development priorities . It analyses the viability of the project, value, and economic impact of the contract .
 After a thorough review and analysis, worthy projects receive the bank’s approval . The bank's schedule for completion is determined that details performance guidelines and expectations .
 ADB is directed by a board of governors with one representative drawn from each member country . The ADB was founded by the European Economic Development Bank in 2007 .
 Eight of the 12 members of the board of directors come from Asian-Pacific countries . This board elects a 12-member board, with eight of them coming from Asia-Pacific .
 The governors also elect a bank president, who acts as chairperson for the board of directors . The bank president's term is five years, with the possibility of reelection .
 Japan’s heavy investment in the bank of approximately 13 percent of its shares, a figure matched only by the United States investment . This choice reflects Japan's heavy investment .
 Countries that withdraw from the organization have their investment reimbursed . Countries withdrawing from the organisation have their investments reimbursed by the government .
 In 2006 there were projects and feasibility studies in areas such as road development in Afghanistan, infraAsian Pacific Economic Cooperation 39 structure and transport strategies for India .
 Corruption can work against the developmental interests of poor countries, says the World Bank . Corruption is a problem for poor nations, says World Bank expert . Corruption can be a problem in developing countries, he says .
 ADB projects must undergo regular and intensive ADB audits, but issues still remain as to the misuse or misappropriation of funds and the wasteful use of project money .
 There are concerns that there have been projects approved that do not help the poor as they should . There are also concerns that projects have been approved that don't help them .
 APEC is an organization that aims to promote free trade and economic cooperation throughout the AsiaPacific region . APEC was founded by the World Economic Council of the United States in 1973 . The organization is based in New York City, New York .
 It was created in 1989 because of the growing interdependence of Asia-Pacific economies and the establishment of regional economic blocs such as the European Union and North American Free Trade Agreement .
 APEC intends to improve living standards and education levels through sustainable economic growth . APEC aims to promote a sense of community and an appreciation of common values among Asia-Pacific countries . The summit will take place in Beijing, China and the Philippines .
 Australia, Brunei, Canada, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and the United States are founding members . Chile, China, Hong Kong, Mexico, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Russia, Taiwan, and Vietnam joined at a
 APEC is reached by consensus, and commitments are undertaken on a voluntary basis . Decisions made within APEC are made by consensus . APEC members have a long history of making voluntary decisions .
 APEC membership accounts for approximately 40 percent of the world’s population, approximately 56 percent of world GDP, and about 48 percent of global trade . APEC members are responsible for approximately half of world's population, 56 percent GDP and 48 percent global trade. APEC’
 The first APEC Leaders’ Meeting occurred in 1993 and was organized by Bill Clinton in Blake Island, Washington . APEC is the world's largest economic body of nations .
 APEC set an ambitious schedule to achieve free trade and raise the level of investments throughout the Asia-Pacific region by 2010 for members with developed economies and by 2020 for developing ones . APEC also set a target of free trade for developed economies by 2010 .
 The Osaka Action Agenda was adopted a year later and was designed to implement APEC’s goals of liberalizing trade and investment . APEC's goals were to promote economic and technical cooperation and promote economic cooperation .
 Decision is not legally binding on member governments . In addition, although decisions can be taken in the absence of unanimity, they are not binding on governments .
 In 1997 at the annual summit in Vancouver, Canada, police forces clashed with demonstrators objecting to the presence of Indonesian president Suharto . Police forces violently clashed with protesters at the summit .
 APEC is organized into numerous committees, special task commissions, working groups, and a business advisory council . APEC has a wide range of committees and working groups .
 Working groups are led by experts and consider specific issues, including energy, tourism, fishing, transportation, and telecommunications . The working groups consider issues such as energy and tourism .
 Every year one of the member economies hosts an economic leaders’ meeting, selected ministerial meetings, senior officials meetings, and the APEC Business Advisory Council . APEC also fills the executive director position at APEC secretariat .
 The deputy executive director changes every year, as the position is given to a senior diplomat of the country who will be the APEC chair the following year .
 APEC secretariat, established in 1993, provides coordination as well as technical and advisory support for all the organization’s initiatives . APEC is based in Singapore and provides coordination and technical support for the organization's initiatives .
 Institute for International Economics, 2002; McGrew, Anthony, and . Christopher Brook, ed. Institute for . International Economics . Institute for. International Economics. 2002; . McGrew . Anthony McGrew. McGrew and Christopher Brook .
 Syrian leader Hafez al-Assad was born in Qardaha in northern Syria to peasant parents . Al-Assad is the son of a Syrian peasant family .
 Assad family was from the Alawite Muslim minority (a breakaway sect from Twelver Shi’ism) traditionally the poorest and least powerful group in Syria . The Assad family is from a minority of Alawites, the poorest group in the country .
 Assad became a member of the Ba’ath socialist party, as a teenager in 1946 . Assad is a former member of Syria’s socialist party . Assad was born in 1946 and has been in Syria since 2000 .
 Assad received a free education in the Syrian military academy . Assad received his free education from the academy . He is a member of the Alawite sect .
 Hafez al-Assad became lifelong friends with Mustafa Tlass, who would become the Syrian defense minister in the Assad regime . Tlass would go on to become the country's defense minister . Al-Assad and Tlass were friends at the academy .
 Assad was trained in the Soviet Union and supported pan-Arabism . He opposed the 1958 union with Egypt to create the United Arab Republic because of Gamal Abdel Nasser's dominance .
 Assad supported the military wing, versus Salah Jadid, who advocated a more radical socialist program . In a series of complex interparty rivalries Assad supported a military wing versus a radical socialist .
 Assad defeated Jadid in the so-called corrective revolution of 1970, Assad seized power . In the 1970s, Assad took control of the country .
 Assad was overwhelmingly elected president of Syria in 1971 . He held a position he held until his death . Assad was elected president in 1971 after a referendum .
 Assad consolidated power by appointing close friends and fellow Alawites, who then owed their advancement directly to him to key positions within the military, intelligence services, and government offices .
 Assad regime, a one-party state with a cult of personality surrounding Assad, proved to be remarkably stable . The Assad regime was remarkably stable in Syria . Assad's regime was one of the most successful regimes in history .
 The infrastructure, including transportation and communication systems, was improved . The government invested heavily in education, health care, and a huge dam was built on the Euphrates .
 The regime also spent heavily on the military, the backbone of its support . The regime spent heavily heavily on its military .
 Syria experienced economic growth in the 1970s, but stagnation set in during the 1980s . Syria experienced stagnation in the 80s and 1990s .
 Assad was closely allied with the Soviet Union . He suffered a loss of international support after the collapse of the Soviet bloc . Assad was allied with Russia during the Cold War .
 Assad increasingly adopted a Syrian nationalist stance in regional politics . Assad continued publicly to advocate pan-Arabism, but he increasingly adopted the Syrian national stance .
 During the Lebanese civil war Syria was asked by various Lebanese factions to intervene militarily in 1976 . Syria was also asked by Arab nations to intervene in 1976 during the civil war .
 Syrians troops remained in Lebanon after the civil war ended . Damascus continued to exercise considerable influence over Lebanese politics .
 Syrian troops ultimately withdrew from Lebanon in 2005 . In the face of mounting international pressure Syrian troops withdrew from the country .
 The Muslim Brotherhood, dominated by Sunni Muslims, opposed Assad’s secular state . In the 1980s, the Muslim Brotherhood mounted a bombing campaign of bus stations, military installations, and other targets with the aim of bringing down the regime .
 Assad ordered Syrian troops to bomb Hama, a brotherhood stronghold north of Damascus, to crush the uprising in 1982 . Assad ordered troops to bombard the city and crush the rebellion in 1982 after a massive uprising in Hama .
 Thousands were killed and much of the old city was destroyed . The brotherhood was defeated, but thousands were killed . Thousands of people were killed in the battle .
 Assad strongly supported the Palestinian cause for self-determination . He frequently clashed with the Palestine Liberation Organization under Yasir Arafat, whom Assad disliked .
 In negotiations with the U.S. and Israel, Assad was remarkably consistent . Assad has been remarkably consistent in his dealings with the United States and Israel . He has been in talks with both sides of the Syrian conflict .
 He demanded the full return of the Golan Heights, Syrian territory lost to Israel in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War and not fully regained in the 1973 war, in exchange for peace .
 Assad supported the coalition invasion of Iraq in the First Gulf War in 1991 but opposed the U.S. invasion in 2003 . Owing in part to his long rivalry with Saddam Hussein in Iraq and support for the revolutionary regime in Iran, Assad supported Iran in the 1980s .
 Assad suffered a near-fatal heart attack in 1983 . His brother Rifaat attempted a coup while he was still ill . Assad suffered from a heart attack .
 Rifaat was sent into exile and by 1988 removed from all official positions . After Assad rallied loyal troops, the coup failed, and Rifaats was sent to exile .
 Assad’s son Basil was initially groomed for succession, but after he died in an automobile accident in 1994, another son, Bashar, was picked to follow his father as president . Bashar, an ophthalmologist by training, was chosen to become president in 1994 .
 Hafez al-Assad was a pragmatic, authoritarian, and consistent political leader . He was a consistent and pragmatic leader, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 He followed his father’s general policies, but loosened political controls and attempted to liberalize the system .
 He encouraged technological developments, including the Internet and computer technology . He encouraged technology developments, particularly the Internet .
 Bashar had to balance the desires of old Ba’ath hard-liners, however, who were loath to give up the privileges and power enjoyed under his father with political liberalization . Bashar also had to be careful to balance his father's wishes with the liberalization of the country
 Owing in part to increased oil revenues, the Syrian economy grew in the 1990s . The country's economy grew thanks to the rise of oil revenues . The Syrian economy has been hit hard by the civil war .
 Like his father, Bashar demanded the return of the Golan Heights from Israel, Syria . The Israeli-Syrian negotiations failed to resolve the impasse . Bashar Assad's son Bashar is the prime minister of Syria .
 Bashar faced mounting opposition from Israel and the U.S. for his support of Hizbollah, the Islamist Lebanese movement that continued to confront Israel along its northern border . By 2006 Bashar faced opposition from the United States and Israel for backing the movement .
 Assad regime seemed threatened by possible military attack from both Israel and the U.S. The Assad regime seems to be at risk of a possible military strike .
 Israelis conducted an airraid on a possible Syrian nuclear cache in September 2007 . In September 2007 Israeli air raid was conducted on a suspected Syrian nuclear stockpile .
 The Association of Southeast Asian Nations was established on August 8, 1967 . Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Singapore and Thailand were original members of the group .
 As outlined in the Bangkok declaration of ASEAN, it was formed to strive for the peace and prosperity of the region . AASEAN was formed in Bangkok declaration in 1973 . It was outlined in a Bangkok declaration that it would strive for peace .
 The term of the secretary-general is five years, and he advises on and implements various ASEAN programs .
 The cooperation is through specialized bodies pertaining to education, energy, police, meteorology, and other areas . The cooperation of member countries is through special bodies .
 The ASEAN countries saw the necessity of regional cooperation on matters of common interest . The region has seen the changing backdrop of the geopolitical situation in the past .
 The ASEAN was established during the Vietnam War, and the member countries were bound together by fear of North Vietnam and China . It was established in Vietnam during the war .
 The victory of communists in Indochina in the early 1970s and diminishing American involvement made the ASEAN states fearful of communism . The victory was the result of diminishing U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War .
 The Kuala Lumpur declaration of November 22, 1971, called for the creation of a Zone of Peace, Freedom, and Neutrality in Southeast Asia aimed at neutralization of the region . The declaration was made in 1971 .
 The triumph of communism in the three Indochinese states of Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam in 1975 spurred the ASEAN into action . The triumph was the triumph of communist communism in Laos, . Cambodia, Vietnam and Vietnam .
 The Treaty of Amity and Cooperation was signed at the First ASEAN Summit held at Bali, Indonesia, on February 24, 1976 . Fearful of a militant and expanding communism, the treaty was signed in 1976 . The Treaty was signed by the ASEan countries .
 It called for renunciation of the use of force, cooperation among the nations in Southeast Asia, and noninterference in one another’s internal affairs .
 After the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the end of the cold war, ASEAN moved in a new direction to meet with the challenges of globalization . The region has been in touch with globalization since the 1990s .
 From the early 1990s ASEAN looked for increasing economic cooperation among member countries . From the 1990s on the continent, AASEAN looked to increase economic cooperation .
 At the Fourth ASEAN Summit held in Singapore in January 1992 an agreement was signed for the creation of an ASEan Free Trade Area within 15 years . At the end of the 1990s, the agreement was agreed to create a free trade area within a 15-year period .
 The 1995 Bangkok Summit passed a resolution on the Agenda for Greater Economic Integration . The Bangkok Summit was held in 1995 . Thailand is one of the largest economies in the world .
 The ASEAN Vision 2020, adopted in 1997, envisaged an ASEan Economic Region . The AASEAN vision 2020 envisages an economic region based on the region's economic potential .
 There would be closer economic integration along with reduction of poverty and removal of economic disparities, says President Obama . There would also be greater economic integration, says Obama .
 The Framework Agreement for the Integration of Priority Sectors and its Protocols of 1999 called for the creation of a single market and production base . The Protocols were created in 1999 .
 In 1994 the ASEAN Regional Forum was established with non-ASEAN countries like the United States, Russia, China, India, and others to discuss security issues and take steps in confidence building . In 1994, the forum was established to discuss issues like the U.S. and
 There was an agenda for an enhanced role of the ARF in matters of security dialogue and cooperation . There was also a proposal for an increased role in security dialogue between the two countries .
 Meetings were held in Cambodia and Potsdam, Germany, in 2004 and 2005 respectively .
 The December 2005 ASEAN Summit, held in Kuala Lumpur, noted with satisfaction progress toward a Free Trade Area, with such countries as Australia, China, Japan, New Zealand, India, and the Republic of Korea . Australia, . China, . Japan, . India, Australia,
 ASEAN cooperates with the East Asian nations of China, Japan, and the Republic of Korea, which were accorded the special status of AASEAN Plus Three . The countries are accorded a special status as ASEan Plus Three in the region .
 On February 24, 1976, the ASEAN countries declared that they would cooperate with one another and with international organizations to check illegal trafficking of drugs . The countries pledged to cooperate with each other and international organizations .
 ASEAN Vision 2020 resolved to tackle the problems of drug trafficking, trafficking of women, and other transnational crimes . The ASEan Vision 2020 will tackle the issues of drug and trafficking . The initiative will also tackle the problem of women trafficking .
 Steps were taken to prevent various forms of crimes affecting Southeast Asia in particular and the world in general . The ARF, Ministerial Meetings, the ASEAN Centre for Combating Transnational Crime and the Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational crime .
 The Vientiane Action Program of November 2004 contained measures to tackle the problem of terrorism . The action was aimed at tackling terrorism in the country of Thailand .
 The Aswan Dam was the cornerstone of Gamal Abdel Nasser’s program for Egyptian economic development . Patit Paban Mishra was the founder of the Egyptian government .
 The dam was to improve the living standard for Egyptians by increasing agricultural output and providing electricity for Egyptian villages and power for industrialization . It was intended to increase agricultural output, provide electricity and provide electricity to villages .
 The dam increased reclaimed agricultural land by onethird and provided 10,000 million kilowatt hours of electricity . Dam increased reclaimed land by reclaiming agricultural land . Dam was built to provide electricity to power stations .
 Because it was no longer flushed by annual floodwater, Egyptian agricultural land increased in salinity . Agricultural land increased salinity because of lack of annual floodwaters .
 The decrease of Nile floodwater into the Mediterranean resulted in a decrease of plankton, organic carbons, and fish . The decrease in plankton has led to a decrease in organic carbon, fish and plankton .
 Advocates of smaller, more cost-effective projects argued that the massive amounts of money expended in construction of the dam might have been better spent in technology projects .
 The dam provided Egyptians with a sense of pride, however, and from Nasser’s viewpoint was a project around which Egyptians could be rallied for other political and economic programs, he says . The dam was a political rallying point for Nasser's government .
 Originally money and technology to build the dam was to come from the World Bank and Western nations, particularly the U.S., particularly the United States . Originally money was to be spent on building the dam .
 Nasser adopted a policy of neutralism in the cold war, recognized the People’s Republic of China, and signed an arms deal with Czechoslovakia . John Foster Dulles concluded that Nasser was not a reliable ally in the 1950s .
 Dulles withdrew U.S. aid for the project and publicly criticized Egypt’s economic stability . Dulles withdraws United States aid for Egypt's economic stability.
 Dulles hoped that the failure to secure economic aid for the dam would result in Nasser’s overthrow . Dulles hopes economic aid would lead to the overthrow of Nasser's regime .
 Nasser retaliated by nationalizing the Suez Canal, announcing that the income from the canal would be used to build the dam . The canal was nationalized by Nasser, who later nationalized it .
 The nationalization infuriated Great Britain and France and helped precipitate the 1956 Arab-Israeli War . The Arab-Arab conflict was sparked by the nationalization of Israel .
 The Soviet Union provided the money and technicians to build the dam . Ultimately the Soviet Union supplied the money for the project .
 President Anwar el-Sadat turned to the West and the U.S. in the 1930s . Nasser overthrew the Soviet Union in Egypt .
 Aung San Suu Kyi was born to diplomat Daw Khin Kyi and Burmese national hero Bogyoke San on June 19, 1945 . Nobel laureate and pro-democracy activist was born in 1945 in Myanmar .
 She was married to British academic Michael Aris in 1972, and the couple had two sons .
 In March 1988, Suu Kyi returned to Myanmar to take care of her ailing mother . She became a prodemocracy political activist after returning to Myanmar in 1988 .
 Her status as daughter of Aung San and her sound knowledge about her country’s culture contributed to her immense popularity . She was also known for her knowledge of her country's culture .
 Ne Win resigned on July 23, 1988, but the military retained power . The military kept power and brutally crushed a popular uprising in 1988 . Ne Win was the prime minister of Thailand .
 The military junta created the State Law and Order Restoration Council and changed its name to the State Peace and Development Council in 1997 . The junta then created the  State Law & Order Restoration council .
 Suu Kyi and her associates established the National League for Democracy . They called for nonviolent protests and appealed to the United Nations to intervene on behalf of the protesters . The U.N. should intervene on their behalf, they say .
 Suu Kyi criticized the violation of human rights by the military junta . She called for free and fair elections to be held in the country .
 Her meetings throughout the country attracted many people and caused the junta to put her under house arrest . The junta rejected her candidature for the forthcoming elections . Her meetings attracted many .
 Her party won the May 1990 elections with 82 percent of the legislative seats . Despite this, her party still won the majority of the parliamentary seats .
 The international pressure forced the junta to release Suu Kyi in July 1995, but she was barred from leaving Yangon . The junta was forced to release her in 1995 after international pressure was put on her by the military .
 In the same year her NLD delegates were expelled from the national convention, which was preparing a draft constitution . Her party was also expelled from a national convention in 2011 .
 Suu Kyi and 92 NLD members were put under house arrest again in September 2000 . In September 2000, she and 92 other members of the NLD were put in house arrest . The NLD leader and her party members are still living under house-arrest .
 There was another secret meeting between Suu Kyi and the junta in 2002 that resulted in the release of NLD prisoners due to increasing criticism of the regime from many lands over the world .
 She was released from house arrest on May 6, 2002, and permitted to travel in Myanmar . She was freed from house under house arrest in May 2002 .
 The European Parliament awarded her Sakharov prize for freedom of thought in July 1990 . She was awarded the Sakharova prize for free thought .
 She donated the $1.1 million prize money to set up a trust for the health and education of her people . She also donated the money to a trust set up for her people's education and health . The prize money will be used to help fund health, education and education for
 She was given the Nehru Peace Award in 1995 by the government of India .
 Suu Kyi remained the undisputed leader of Myanmar for her ceaseless efforts to restore democracy and against the abuse of human rights . She was the leader of the country for her efforts against human rights abuses .
 Suhrawardy in 1956 was at the forefront of the political developments that led to the creation of Bangladesh in 1971 . Suhawardy was the first person to take part in Bangladesh's political developments in 1956 .
 Questions of national identity arose between East and West Pakistan in the years that followed independence . Questions were taken up by the Awami League on behalf of East Pakistan . Questions of National Identity arose between the two sides .
 The Awami League advocated that Bengali, spoken in East Pakistan, be given the status of national language alongside Urdu, which had been declared the national language in 1947 . Urdu was spoken in West Pakistan and was declared national in 1947, but Bengali was not a national language
 The league promoted greater representation of Bengalis in central government . Bengalis did not possess a strong base of power within the region . West Pakistanis often held higher posts in military and government in East Pakistan .
 During the military rule of General Ayub Khan, there had been economic growth in both wings of the country . The disparity between the wealth of West Pakistan and the poverty of East Pakistan had also been on the rise .
 A war with India in 1965 had left East Pakistan undefended, because the constitution of the country provided for troops to be stationed only in West Pakistan . Furthermore a war with West Pakistan in 1965 was left undefending, as a result .
 Under the leadership of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the Awami League formulated a six-point demand as a means of addressing disadvantages faced by Bengalis in economic and national affairs .
 Six-point demand was to become a cornerstone of the nationalist movement for Bangladesh . The six-point demands were to become the cornerstone of Bangladesh's nationalist movement .
 Mujibur Rahman’s six-point demand wanted a parliamentary form of government in the country with representation based on population . Mujibur Rahman wanted a Parliamentary form of . government in Bangladesh with representation .
 The federal government was to be in charge of defense and foreign affairs only . There were to be either two currencies or one currency, in the event of which federal banks were to prevent the flight of capital from one region to another .
 Fiscal policy was to be the responsibility of the federating units, and each unit was to have separate foreign exchange accounts . Each unit would be able to control the country's finances and foreign policy .
 Both East and West Pakistan were to have a militia and paramilitary force . Both were to be armed in the interests of national security . Pakistan was ruled by Pakistanis in 1947 .
 When the time came for the two parties to form a government, tensions between the two wings of the country came to a head . The two parties have been unable to agree a government .
 The Awami League wanted the six points to be part of the new constitution, but met with resistance from Bhutto . The six points were part of a new constitution but were rejected by the then-Prime Minister .
 General Yahya Khan, the president at the time, encouraged meetings between the two parties . Khan: "I am happy to have the opportunity to work with both sides of the fence"
 The delays in the meeting of the National Assembly, and Bhutto’s campaign against Mujibur Rahman, were seen as evidence of bad faith by East Pakistanis . The delays led to widespread public demonstrations and riots in East Pakistan .
 By accepting Bhutto’s postponement of the meeting, Yahya implicitly accepted his political authority . Yahya had implicitly accepted the postponement, says the former president .
 When Yahya called an all-party conference without consulting the Awami League, the party called a strike and refused to attend the meeting . Yahya calls Yahya's decision to call an all party conference without consultation with the party's members .
 Awami League assumed authority and exercised powers of government in East Pakistan . In the months between the election and the all-party conference, the party assumed authority .
 General Yahya accused the Awami League of treason and announced military intervention in East Pakistan, along with the arrest of all prominent persons within the league . When the league refused to attend the conference, and successive negotiations between Yahya and Mujibur Rahman failed, Yahya declared military intervention
 Awami League formed the government-in-exile of the Republic of Bangladesh across the border in India . During the civil war between East and West Pakistan, the party formed a government in exile in India during the war in Pakistan .
 Repeated Indian insurgency into Pakistani soil and Indian support of the Bangladeshi freedom fighters led to a declaration of war on India by Pakistan . Pakistan declared war on the Indian nation after repeated Indian insurgency in Pakistan .
 Pakistani troops surrendered on December 17, 1971, after a ceasefire was declared . Pakistani troops were killed in the conflict in the early 1970s .
 Mujibur Rahman was released by the new government of Pakistan under Bhutto . He went on to become the first prime minister of Bangladesh . Rahman was freed by the government of the new Pakistan government .
 The Awami League emphasized nationalism, democracy, socialism, and secularism . The party was formed in 1971 . It was the first party to win a parliamentary seat in Bangladesh .
 Reconstruction efforts in a war-torn country proved to be challenging to the new government . Reconstruction efforts have proved difficult for new government to overcome .
 Mujibur Rahman declared Bangladesh a one-party state and gave himself the powers of president . In the face of criticism and opposition, he declared the state a one party state and became president .
 Martial law was imposed by Ziaur Rahman, the chief of army staff . Rahman was assassinated by a military officer in 1975, and martial law imposed .
 In the 1980s the Awami League was revitalized by Mujibur Rahman’s daughter, Sheikh Hasina Wajid . She won the elections of 1986 and stayed in power until her term ended in 1990 .
 The Awami League remains a powerful and vocal opposition party in Bangladesh into the 21st century . The party consistently opposes the role of the military in government .
 Muhammad Ayub Khan was born on May 14, 1907, in the village of Rehana . He was a military leader and the second president of Pakistan . Taymiya R Zaman Ayub was born in Pakistan .
 Ayub finished his military training at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst in England . Ayub joined the army as an officer after finishing his training at Sandhurst . He is now an ambassador for the British Army .
 Ayub Khan, Muhammad 45, was the general commanding officer in East Pakistan . After the partition of India in 1947, he became the president of Pakistan . He was also the leader of East Pakistan during the early 1950s .
 He was the first Pakistani commander in chief on January 17, 1951 . He was an able administrator and noncontroversial in politics .
 Ayub supported Pakistan joining U.S.-sponsored military alliances during the cold war period . Ayub received massive military and economic assistance from the United States .
 Ayub became the chief martial law administrator in 1958 . Ayub was in charge of martial law when President Iskander Mirza imposed martial law on October 7, 1958 .
 Eleven days later, he deposed Iskander and proclaimed himself president . Eleven days after the coup, he declared himself president of Yugoslavia .
 There were reforms in the agricultural and industrial sectors with land reforms and job creation . There were also land reforms, job creation and land reforms .
 Indus Water Treaty with India in 1960 settled disputes over the waters of six rivers of the Punjab . The Indus treaty was signed by India and Pakistan in 1960 .
 The Family Laws Ordinance of 1961 tried to empower women in matters relating to polygamy, marriage, and divorce . It was the first attempt at empowering women to have a voice in matters such as polygamy and marriage .
 Islamabad became the new capital in 1962; Ayub lifted martial law in the same year . Islamabad was the capital of the Soviet-era Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Ayub promulgated a new constitution in 1962, introducing democracy with indirect elections . Ayub was prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 His policy alienated the Bengalis of eastern Pakistan, who felt marginalized . Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was imprisoned and prosecuted . The Bengalis felt marginalized and their leader was imprisoned . But his policy alienated them .
 Ayub's capital received a severe jolt from the IndoPakistani War of 1965 . Ayub’s capital was the capital of the country during the war of 1965.
 There were border skirmishes beginning in March in the Rann of Kutch region, but they did not escalate because of British mediation . British mediation prevented the border clashes from escalating .
 In August, Ayub began Operation Gibraltar by sending infiltrators to Kashmir, a bone of contention between Pakistan and India in the original conflict . Operation Gibraltar began in August with the help of Operation Gibraltar .
 India regained the territory occupied by Pakistan in the north and proceeded toward Lahore . India regained control of Pakistan's territory .
 The United Nations Security Council arranged for a cease-fire on September 22 . Soviet premier Alexei Kosygin invited Ayub and Indian premier Lal Bahadur Shastri to Tashkent to negotiate .
 The signing of the Tashkent Agreement on January 10, 1965, saw both armies going back to the positions they had held before the conflict . The agreement was signed by both sides of the border .
 India and Pakistan agreed to resolve their disputes by peaceful means . They agreed not to interfere in each other’s internal affairs . Pakistan and India have been engaged in a bitter dispute for years .
 By the end of 1968, Ayub had lost the support of the majority of the population . A Democratic Action Committee was formed in January 1979 to restore democracy in Pakistan .
 General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan was named the chief martial law administrator in 1969 . Martial law was proclaimed again on March 25, 1969 .
 From Syria, Aflaq came from a Greek Orthodox family . He studied at the Sorbonne and became a teacher in a well-known secondary school in Damascus . He was born in Syria .
 Bitar Bitar, from a prominent Damascene Sunni Muslim family, also studied in France and taught at the same school as Aflaq . Bitar is a prominent Sunni Muslim from the same family .
 In 1940 they led a small group known as the Movement of Arab Renaissance, or Ba’ath . The group professed a pan-Arab, anti-imperialism program .
 Aflaq was the preeminent ideologue of the party . He published a series of papers dealing with Arab nationalism, Arab union, and Arab socialism . He was opposed to Marxist ideology .
 The new party attracted members including nationalistic youth, disaffected minorities, especially the Alawites in Syria; and young army officers . Members of the new party include nationalists and disaffected minority groups .
 Hourani had a far wider following than Aflaq, and his participation in the party enlarged its support and membership . A popular nationalist, Hourani was a popular nationalist .
 The party is organized into cells on the grassroots level, giving it considerable flexibility . The party was organized into . cells on a . grassroots level .
 Groups of cells formed into party divisions that merged into party sections . Party sections representing entire towns or rural districts and, at the highest level, party branches .
 The national command was the executive that exercised considerable power from the top down . It was the national command of the U.S. Army in the 1950s .
 In 1958 the Ba’ath strongly supported the creation of the United Arab Republic . However, they became disenchanted with having to take a secondary role to that of Nasser and Egypt . The Ba'ath was disenchenchanted by having to play a smaller role .
 The Ba’ath supported Syria’s withdrawal from the union in 1961, and a military coup in 1963 brought the Ba'ath into power . A military coup was held in 1963, bringing Syria to power .
 Bitar and Aflaq supported the so-called civilian wing of the party versus the military wing, but they were outmaneuvered in 1966 . Bitar supported the civilian wing but was defeated in 1966 by the military .
 Aflaq held no real power and went into exile . Although he retained the title of secretary-general of the party, he went in exile . He was the leader of the Arab Spring Party in the Soviet Union .
 He ultimately moved to Baghdad in 1974, where he enjoyed considerable respect but no real power . He spent most of his life in Baghdad, but was given little political power .
 In 1989 Aflaq died, whereupon the Iraqi regime announced that he had converted to Islam prior to his death . In 1989 he died, and the regime announced he had done so .
 After considerable infighting among Ba’athist officers in Syria, Hafez al-Assad seized power in 1970 . He proceeded to establish a regime that lasted into the 21st century . Bashar Assad's regime has since been overthrown in Syria .
 Bitar split from the party owing to disagreements with the Assad regime; he went into exile in Paris, where he was assassinated in 1980 . Bitar was assassinated—possibly by Syrian intelligence—in 1980 .
 The Ba’ath established branches in Jordan, Lebanon, North and South Yemen, and other Arab states . The Ba'ath was established in Lebanon, Lebanon and North Yemen .
 Al-Saiqa was the Palestinian branch of the Ba’ath under control of Syria . It was under the control of the Syrian government in the early 1950s .
 Syria and Iraq remained the centers of the party’s power in Iraq and Syria . Although these separate branches played some limited political roles in their respective countries .
 Under General Ahmad Hassan al-Bakr, who led a military coup in 1968, the Ba’ath returned to power . The Ba'ath was ousted from power in 1968 .
 Most Iraqi Ba’athists were not professional soldiers, they attracted considerable support from the military . Although most Iraqi Ba'athists did not carry out any major military operations .
 Bakr’s main protege, Saddam Hussein, ousted his mentor from power in 1979 . Bakr was a committed Ba’athist . Saddam Hussein ousted Bakr in 1979 after his mentor was ousted .
 Both leaders professed their commitment to pan-Arabism, but adopted increasingly nationalistic policies to retain power . Both leaders were nationalistic .
 Culture, History and Ideology in the Formation of Ba’athist Iraq, 1968-89 . Ba'athists were formed in the formation of the Ba'at state of Iraq in 1968 .
 The population of the United States grew just 13 percent between 1960 and 1970 . By contrast, the U.S. population grew only 13 percent during that period .
 In Canada, the birthrate increased from 24. per thousand in 1945 to 28. in 1947, and did not return to lower rates until 1963 . The birthrate in Canada rose from 24 per thousand to 28 in 1947 .
 The boom in the U.S. can be explained by demographic and ideological factors, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Age of marriage for both men and women dropped between 1930 and 1950 . Great Depression uncertainties and massive social dislocations caused by war put a damper on reproduction . The age of marriage dropped between 1950 and 1960 .
 By 1960, 97 percent of Americans over 18 had been married at least once . This was perhaps a product of postwar affluence but also a response to a fear of nonmarital sexuality that had been produced by wartime .
 This was accompanied by a preference for more than one child and a belief that childlessness demonstrated socially dysfunctional behavior . Childlessness demonstrated social dysfunctional behavior, according to the study .
 Women who married in the 1940s and 1950s had most of their children before they were 30 and allowed child-rearing to become their career . Women in the 1950s and '60s had children before 30s .
 Bill and suburbanization in the late 1940s and the 1950s helped establish the nuclear family ideal . Nuclear family ideal was established by the late 1950s and early 1960s .
 The boom influenced the form of suburbanization by making the construction of schools and playgrounds necessary . The boom also caused an expansion in college and university construction .
 The baby boomers were the first generation to consider television their birthright . Several of the television programs of the 1950s depicted idealized versions of their family life .
 The idea that the nuclear family of the 1950s represented ‘traditional family values” persisted into the 21st century . The nuclear family was seen on television as a symbol of family values .
 As baby boomers entered adolescence, many of them became associated with the Civil Rights movement, other student movements of the 1960s, and the so-called hippie counterculture . Baby boomers are associated with many of the movement's movements .
 By the 1990s baby boomers were the ‘establishment’ in the United States. The baby boomer boomers are now the "establishment" in the U.S.
 Bill Clinton, born in 1946, was America’s first baby-boomer president . Clinton served as president from 1992 to 2000 . He was born in 1945 .
 The Baghdad Pact was a mutual defense treaty that aimed to encircle the southwestern flank of the Soviet Union . It was also known as the Middle East Treaty Organization .
 The U.S. viewed the treaty as a means to prevent possible Soviet expansion into the vital oil-producing region of the Middle East during the cold war . The treaty, similar to Balkans 49 NATO, was created to prevent Soviet expansion .
 It also enabled the United States to establish a military presence in member nations . The U.S. also established a diplomatic presence in the United Nations .
 CENTO began with a series of treaties of mutual cooperation between the United States, Pakistan, and Turkey in 1954 and a military assistance agreement with Iraq in the same year . CENTO was formed in 1954 with the help of the U.S. of Pakistan, Turkey and Iraq .
 In 1955 Turkey and Iraq signed a mutual defense treaty creating the foundation for the Baghdad Pact . The treaty was the basis for the creation of the Baghdad pact . In 1955 the two countries signed a treaty to protect each other .
 In the same year Britain, Iran, and Pakistan joined the Baghdad Pact . The pact guaranteed economic and military assistance to any country in the pact that was threatened by communism .
 In 1958 a coup in Iraq ousted the pro-Western government . The following year Iraq withdrew from the treaty, prompting the change of its name to the Central Treaty Organization . In 1958, Iraq withdrew .
 CENTO was lessened during the Indo-Pakistani Wars of 1965 and 1971 . Neither party to the treaty rushed to assist Pakistan even though India was at the time an ally of the Soviet Union .
 The withdrawal of Iran and Iraq from the treaty led to the treaty’s demise . Along with the failure of CENTO members to assist Pakistan, the withdrawal of Iraq and Iran led to Pakistan's demise .
 Since 1991 the region of the Balkans has been a place of dynamic change . Ramzi Abou Zeineddine is the author of a new book, "Balkalka"
 The division of the Balkans into two subregions reflects the distinct dynamics in the two sets of states . The divisions reflect the different dynamics in each of the states involved in the region .
 The Western Balkans were subjected post-1991 to the dynamics of building nation-states . Bulgaria and Romania embarked on the path of postcommunist consolidation of democracy, marked by free elections, market liberalization .
 The underlying feature characterizing the developments in all Balkan countries was the uncertainty of their transition process . However, the underlying feature of the developments is the uncertainty, the analyst says .
 Slovenia has managed to distance itself from the Balkans with its domestic and foreign policy objectives . Slovenia emerged from the dissolution of Yugoslavia and ultimately “left” the region altogether . This may be the main reason why Slovenia, which emerged from Yugoslavia, has left .
 Ambiguity dominated the Balkan states for the better part of the 1990s . The Balkans is now one of the world's most troubled countries .
 Kosovo crisis of 1999 led to Kosovo crisis in 1999 . Kosovo crisis was a turning point in Kosovo's history . Kosovo was the first country to have a country with a large majority of its own people .
 By that time, nation-state-building projects in the western Balkans had reached a plateau of stability, which allowed the countries from that subregion to focus on their democratization . The West Balkans is now a sub-regional region .
 The uneven transition processes in Bulgaria and Romania had led to the establishment of the first reformist governments in those countries . The uneven transitions processes in the two countries had resulted in the creation of reformist regimes .
 European Union and North Atlantic Treaty Organization altered perceptions of the Balkans after Kosovo crisis . EU and NATO changed their perceptions of Balkans in aftermath of Kosovo crisis, says Julian Zelizer .
 After 1999 they recognized the candidate status of Bulgaria and Romania . They outlined the prospect of membership for the countries of the Western Balkans . After 1999, they outlined the possibility of membership .
 Such twin alteration of the intraregional and extraregional trends in the Balkans informed the 21stcentury processes in the region . Such twin changes in trends in Balkans informed by the Balkans in the 1990s and 2000s .
 Postcommunist development trajectories of Bulgaria and Romania were characterized by quite different dynamics . Despite their being lumped together, the postcommunist countries have very different trajectories . Romania and Bulgaria were both post-communist statesmen .
 These developments set up the background for a rather unpredictable transformation process, one that was initiated from “above” and did not reflect a significant social anxiety with the communist status quo .
 The pattern of power up to 1997 was marked by governments that came, tried their policies, and were ousted by either the corrective of popular unrest or a change of allegiance of coalition partners . The pattern was marked with governments that tried and tried policies, but were ousted .
 After 1997, governments followed the road of democratization and market reforms fairly consistently . They pursued the objectives of EU and NATO integration . After 1997 they followed the path of democratic, market reforms and democratic reforms .
 Bulgaria became a member of NATO and joined the EU on January 1, 2007 . As a result, Bulgaria joined NATO on March 29, 2004 . Bulgaria became part of the European Union in 2007 .
 In Romania, the transition process began with a series of violent protests across the country in December 1989 . The execution of the communist dictator Nicolae Ceau§escu on Christmas night, 1989 .
 It established itself as the vanguard of the revolution and ruled in Romania until 1996 . It ruled the country until 1996 and ruled until the end of that rule .
 During this period the government was afflicted by internal dissent as a result of the authoritarian tendencies of the NSF leader Ion Iliescu . Domestic unrest was caused by both the interethnic tensions with the substantial Hungarian minority located in Transylvania .
 Another set of problems was associated with the NSF’s wavering foreign policy . The NSF has been criticized for its policy on the Middle East .
 After the elections in 1996, successive governments did away with the uncertainty characterizing the country’s initial transition process . The transition process has since become easier and more predictable .
 Romania joined NATO on March 29, 2004, and joined the EU on January 1, 2007 . Like Bulgaria, Romania joined the NATO in 2004 . Romania is now part of the EU .
 The post-1991 period in the subregion of the western Balkans was in many respects even more heterogeneous than the one in Bulgaria and Romania . Post-1991 post-Balkan period was even more diverse than the ones in the two countries .
 All countries in the subregion experienced violent upheavals of one sort or another, they dealt with their effects differently . The sub-Saharan African nations dealt with the effects of the upheavations differently .
 Albania is the only country from the western Balkans that did not emerge from the dissolution of former Yugoslavia . Albania was the only nation from the west Balkans that emerged from the former Yugoslavia in 2011 . Albania is one of the only countries from the West Balkans to emerge from Yugoslavia .
 The period up to the 1992 elections was generally characterized by chaos, which led to an exacerbation of the division between the north and the south of the country, rapid growth of organized crime, and large-scale emigration fueled by the economic deterioration .
 Subsequent governments failed to address these problems, which led to a severe crisis in 1997 . Subsequent government failed to address these problems, leading to the country's crisis .
 Albanian pyramid schemes wiped out savings of the majority of the Albanian population . It was spurred by the collapse of several financial pyramid schemes, which wiped out the savings .
 During the unrest, military depots were raided and scores of weapons looted . Scores of weapons were looted during unrest .
 Order was restored only after the international community dispatched a military force to the country during Operation Alba . Order was only restored after the intervention of the international Balkans 51 community .
 Albania did not fully recover from this crisis, and in 2006 continued to be the poorest country in Europe . Albania was still the poorest in Europe in 2006 . Albania has never recovered from the crisis .
 The transition of the other countries from the western Balkans was marked by the wars of Yugoslav dissolution . Yugoslavia was one of the last few countries to leave the Balkans .
 Macedonia succeeded to gain its independence peacefully after a referendum on September 8, 1991 . Unlike the other republics of former Yugoslavia, Macedonia gained its independence in 1991 . Macedonia was one of the last republics in Yugoslavia .
 The country’s transition, however, was hampered by the embargo on former Yugoslavia imposed by the international community . Former Yugoslavia was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 Greece refused to recognize the country by its constitutional name and continued to refer to it as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia . At the same time the country faced an embargo from Greece, which continued to recognize it .
 The existence of the Macedonian nation and language was challenged by Bulgaria . Bulgaria was also challenged by the existence of a nation .
 The ecumenical independence of the Macedonian Orthodox Church continued to be challenged by the Serbian Orthodox Church . The Serbian Orthodox church continued to challenge the Macedonia Orthodox Church's independence .
 Albanian minority in Macedonian state threatened the existence of the state . Conflict with Albanians has been the source of tension in the country's history .
 Albanians in Macedonia demand greater recognition of their cultural and political rights . In the wake of the Kosovo conflict the nearly 25 percent of Albanians living in Macedonia have demanded greater recognition .
 The conflict was settled under pressure from the international community with the signing of the Ohrid Peace Accords in August 2001 . The peace deal was signed by the world community under pressure to settle the conflict .
 The EU recognized Macedonia as a candidate country in December 2005 . As a result of the implementation of these accords, the EU recognized the country as an EU candidate country .
 The Croatian Democratic Union won the first multiparty elections in April 1990 . Croatia's democratic transition is usually dated to the election victory of the Croatian Democratic Party .
 HDZ vote for HDZ was also a vote for independence from Yugoslavia . HDZ led by Franjo Tudjman was also voted for independence in Yugoslavia .
 The subsequent Homeland War lasted until 1995 and witnessed the territorial consolidation of the country and the exodus of the Serbian minority, as well as the military involvement of Croatia in the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina . The Homeland War saw Croatia consolidate its territory, consolidate the country, and
 The authoritarian rule of President Tudjman, which lasted until his death in 1999, was characterized by nepotism, criminal privatization, and subversion of constitutional practices . The authoritarian ruler's rule was characterized as that of the late President of Yugoslavia .
 Croatia began affiliating itself with European institutions in 2000 . It was only after the parliamentary and presidential elections in 2000 that Croatia joined the European Union . Croatia is now a member of the European Economic Community .
 Croatia was the most advanced country from the subregion of the western Balkans . Croatia's relations with the EU is considered one of the most important sub-regions in the world . Croatia was one of Europe's most advanced countries from the region .
 On November 13, 2005, it began its accession negotiations, which were the final stage in gaining membership to the Brussels-based bloc . The EU is the largest member of the world's largest bloc .
 The development of Bosnia-Herzegovina after 1991 was marked by war, which ravaged the country until 1995 . The country was ravaged by war between 1991 and 1995 .
 During this time, over 250,000 people lost their lives and many more were internally displaced . Many more were either internally displaced or fled the country altogether .
 Bosnia-Herzegovina became a virtual protectorate of the international community in 1995 . After the signing of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in 1995, the country was a rotating presidency between the representatives of the three dominant ethnic groups .
 Decision-making in the country was overseen by a High Representative of the International Community . She could intervene in domestic affairs of the state and remove elected officials .
 Bosnia-Herzegovina gradually overcame the division between the three ethnic communities and progressed with the consolidation of its statehood . The country became statehood in 1992 after the war of Yugoslavia .
 Until the Kosovo crisis of 1999, the political process in Serbia and Montenegro was driven by the extreme nationalism propagated by Slobodan Milosevic, which fuelled the breakup of Yugoslavia . The Kosovo crisis saw the end of Yugoslavia's rule of Yugoslavia and Serbia .
 Serbia and Montenegro were involved in several wars and subjected to international sanctions . As a result they were subjected to several wars, they were also subjected to sanctions . Serbia, Montenegro are now the only two countries in the world that have ever been involved in wars .
 Milosevic’s ouster during the elections of 2000 and his subsequent arrest and transfer to the International Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia in 2001 seemed to suggest that the country was distancing itself from the policies of the 1990s . The country seemed to have distanced itself from
 The murder of Zoran Djindjic reflected the continuing legacy of the wars . However the murder of the reformist Serbian prime minister reflected the legacy of those wars .
 Montenegro held a referendum on its independence in May 2006 where its citizens voted to become an independent nation . Montenegro became an independent country in 2006 . The referendum on Montenegro's independence was held in 2006 and 2007 .
 Montenegro declared its independence on June 3, 2006, followed by Serbia’s declaration of independence June 5, 2006 . Montenegro and Serbia declared their independence in 2006 .
 Kosovo remained a protectorate of the UN, although still formally a province of Serbia . Kosovo is still a UN protectorate, but is formally a former province of Serbija . Kosovo has been a major source of conflict between Serbia and Kosovo since 1999 .
 In 2006 representatives of the international community, the Serbs, and the Kosovar 52 Baltic States Albanians conducted talks on the status of the province . The talks were held in 2006 .
 Kosovo citizens favored independence, which was formally declared in February 2008, despite Serbia’s objectives . The talk yielded little progress, as the Kosovo people favored independence . Serbia's objectives were Serbia's objective .
 Glasnost, which literally means “openness,” allowed the citizens of the Soviet Union and its satellite states greater freedom of expression . The Soviet Union was founded in the 1950s .
 Perestroika was about restructuring the Soviet economy, shifting from rigid, centralized state planning to a more flexible approach to combat chronic shortages of consumer goods . The Soviet economy shifted from rigid planning to more flexible, flexible approach .
 The desire for independence from the Soviet Union had deep roots, stretching back to their annexation in 1940 . The annexation was part of the Nazi-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact .
 The Nazi-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact was signed in August 1939 by Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler . It provided for the three Baltic states and the eastern third of Poland to fall under a Soviet sphere of influence in exchange for the Soviet Union’s neutrality upon the German invasion of
 Tens of thousands of Balts were deported from their homelands by Soviet authorities and shipped eastward in the late 1940s . Poliowing the annexations, tens of thousands .
 The aim of the wide-sweeping deportations was to remove those most likely to resist Soviet occupation and communism . The aim was the removal of those who resisted Soviet occupation .
 Protests against Soviet control were limited and brutally crushed by government forces . Lrom the early 1950s until the mid-1980s, protests against the Soviet government were limited .
 The freedom promised by Gorbachev’s reforms led, by 1987, to popular demonstrations in major cities such as Tallinn , Riga and Vilnius against Soviet rule .
 The first official cracks in the forced relationship between the Baltic states and the Soviet Union began to appear in late 1988 . The Estonian Supreme Soviet declared Estonia’s sovereignty in 1988 .
 Lithuania and Latvia declared independence in May 1989 . Lithuanians and Latvians declared their independence in March 1989 . Latvia and Lithuania followed in a similar declaration in May 1990 .
 When the Soviet Union responded with force to demonstrations in Vilnius and Riga in January 1991, the response was swift and decisive . The response of Baltic citizens was swift .
 Between Lebruary and March of 1991 all three states held referenda regarding independence . Between February 1991 and March 1991, the three states voted for independence .
 Referenda held by the Soviets testing the willingness to continue the union were predominantly boycotted by the Baltic population . In contrast, referenda held in the Soviet Union were boycots by Baltic population. Referendum held by Soviets in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In August 1991, all three Baltic states officially declared their independence, received external recognition of such, and were admitted by the United Nations as independent nations . The Baltic states were admitted to the U.N. in 1991 .
 On September 6, 1991, the Soviet Union recognized the three Baltic states . In the aftermath of the failed coup attempt to replace Gorbachev in August, the Soviets recognized the Baltic states.
 The Baltic states were more difficult given that they were literally controlled by Moscow . The Baltic state was more difficult to deal with because of its control of Moscow .
 They lacked independent institutions from which they could begin to build, they say . They lack independent institutions to begin building themselves, they said .
 Estonians officially adopted their new constitution by referendum on June 28, 1992 . The Estonian constitution was officially adopted by referendum in 1992 . Estonia adopted its new constitution in 1992 by referendum .
 The same month a new Lithuanian constitution, establishing a democratic republic, was adopted by popular referendum and endorsed by the newly elected parliament . Lithuanian parliament endorsed the new constitution .
 Latvians held the first national elections for their parliament, the Saeima, in June of 1993 . The centrist party, Latvia’s Way, won the election at the polls . Latvian voters voted for the centrist party in 1993 .
 The question of citizenship for non-Balts continued to be a major point of contention . The government continues to push for citizenship of non-Arabians .
 Lithuania had the smallest percentage of Russians among its population at 9.0 percent in 1989 . Lithuania chose a more inclusive approach to citizenship . Lithuanian citizens are expected to be eligible for citizenship .
 Latvia’s Russian minority was 34 percent of its overall population . However Latvia's Russian minority made up approximately 30 percent of the population . Estonia's Russian population made up about 30 percent . Latvia's population is 34 percent .
 Estonia was the first Baltic state to establish specific divisions between citizens, as native Estonians and predominantly Russian immigrants . In November 1991 Estonia established specific divisions in which citizens would have to undergo a process of naturalization .
 Latvia initially passed a strict citizenship bill in 1994, establishing a quota of 2,000 maximum naturalizations per year . Latvia now has a total of 5,000 naturalizations a year . Latvians are allowed to become citizens of Latvia .
 Following freedom from Soviet rule, economic productivity fell dramatically across Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . Economic productivity fell across Estonia and Latvia in the 1990s .
 The new governments struggled to transition from state-controlled, command economies to market capitalism . New governments have struggled to adapt to capitalism .
 Industrial production in Estonia fell by more than 50 percent in 1992, while in Latvia it fell by 33 percent, and in Lithuania by about 40 percent .
 The vast majority of workers maintained employment, indicating that worker productivity fell sharply as well . Workers' productivity fell as well as their productivity .
 Given the backward nature of factories, transportation systems, and communication networks due to the impoverished Soviet system, the Baltic nations have struggled with reforming their economies and developing markets in the West . The Baltic nations are now in the process of developing their economies .
 They were also at a disadvantage in terms of learning basic capitalist business techniques such as marketing, packaging, and design .
 Balts needed to retool not only their machinery but their economic mentality as well . The Balts need a retooling of their machinery and their mentality as also . Balts have been in the news for more than a decade .
 The longlasting legacy of bitterness toward those who profited and operated on the black market under the communist system . Another psychological barrier to embracing capitalism was the long lasting legacy of bitter bitterness .
 Often those who privatized larger businesses first were the Soviet managers of these plants and factories, continuing their pattern of economic exploitation . The Soviet government privatized large businesses first .
 Within the agricultural sector, the transition from collectivized farms to privatization was extremely difficult . The transition between collectivizing farms and privatization is extremely difficult.
 Two additional negative elements were the lack of an adequate supply of farm machinery and the problems generated by a firm commitment to returning lands to those from whom they were taken during the collectivization .
 During 1992 a severe drought wreaked havoc on both food production and the stability of the livestock population . In addition to the drought, the drought also affected the stability and food production of livestock populations .
 Disaster averted only through the infusion of large amounts of Western aid . Disaster was averted through the influx of Western help .
 Prices of native agricultural products rose sharply, resulting in stronger competition with food imports from the West . The prices of native food have also increased sharply .
 This led farmers to lobby their governments to institute protective tariffs for native-grown products . The tactic would then harm the drive to increase exports of Baltic products to Western markets, which was connected to their desire to be integrated into Western economies .
 Estonia was the first of the three Baltic States to reestablish an independent currency, the kroon, in June of 1992 . Estonia led the charge for economic reform in 1992, and it led the lead in economic reform .
 Latvia soon followed with limited circulation of the lat in March of 1993, and Lithuania unveiled the litas in June of 1993 . Latvia also followed in 1993, Lithuania and Latvia with limited limited circulation .
 The emergence of independent currencies also emphasized some of the weaknesses within the economic structure . Independent currencies are an important symbolic step on the path to complete autonomy, experts say .
 Another source of instability was the lack of hard currency held by the respective governments . The country's currency is held in the hands of its governments .
 This weakness was remedied by the restoration of gold reserves by Western nations . These reserves had been sent west in 1940 as the Soviet occupation had begun .
 Estonia and Lithuania gained membership in the Council of Europe in 1993 . Latvia and Latvia followed suit in 1995 . Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia joined the European Union in 1994 . Latvia was the last member of the European Economic Community .
 By late 1995 all three had applied to join the European Union; by March 2004 they had officially joined . By March 2004 all three members of the EU were officially officially joined .
 Another important means of securing full independence from the Soviet Union was the development of national militaries and the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Baltic soil . The withdrawal of Russian troops from the Baltic soil was also important .
 These national militaries began as all-volunteer forces and were hampered by a lack of well-trained Balts, given that few Balts had wanted to become officers in the Soviet military .
 Government funds for training and equipping soldiers and for securing weaponry were scarce during transition period .
 Russian forces withdrew from Lithuania in August 1993; in August 1994 they withdrew from both Latvia and Estonia . Russian forces withdrawn from Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and Latvia in 1994 .
 Hastings Banda was a physician and prime minister, founding president, and former dictator of the African country of Malawi . He was the founding president of the Malawi government . He is also a physician, former prime minister and founding president .
 Banda became prime minister in 1963 after leading the country’s independence movement against the British . After leading the independence movement, Banda was prime minister of the country .
 Banda became president in 1966 and president for life in 1971 . An authoritarian ruler, Banda was known for his authoritarian rule . He was also president of Angola in 1966 .
 The name “Malawi” was given to the country formerly named Nyasaland by Dr. Dr. Malawi . The name "Malawi" was given the country to the name Nyasalaand .
 Banda chose the name after reading a French map that called the dominating lake of the country “Lake Maravi” Banda decided he liked the sound and appearance of the lake .
 The Tumbuka from the Congo and the Chewa from Zambia moved into Malawi during the 14th through the 16th centuries and remain there today . The Chewa also moved into the country in the late 14th and 16th century .
 Bantu peoples flourished in Malawi during the 18th century and the Yao moved into southern Malawi in the 19th century . The Yao people also flourished in southern Malawama in the mid-19th century.
 Yao used firearms taken from Arabian traders to capture weaker tribes for the growing slave trade . It is thought that the Yao used guns to capture the weaker tribes of the Yao for the trade .
 The international transatlantic slave trade drastically increased the practice in Africa . Although slave trading had existed in Africa for centuries, the transatlantic trade increased it . The slave trade was a major factor in the growth of slavery .
 The first Europeans in Malawi were Portuguese explorers, but the most famous explorer was the British Dr. Dr. David Cameron . Dr. Cameron was the first explorer to discover Malawi .
 Livingstone would return to Malawi twice more to help establish trade routes and mission sites before his death in 1873 . Livingstone returned to the country twice more before he died .
 Livingstone’s Malawian legacy was the increased trade and missionary presence in Malawi . Malawi eventually became a trade center . Livingstone's legacy was increased trade, missionary presence .
 During the next few decades, the British government officials in Malawi battled slave traders, oversaw the growth of European settlers, constructed a postal system, and built a railway line .
 Reverend John Chilembwe led a violent uprising against European settlers living on formerly Malawian farmlands in 1915 . In 1915, the Reverend led the uprising against Europeans living in the Malawians .
 By 1944 the growing elite consisting of Europeans, Americans, and Africans organized the Nyasaland African Congress in order to protect their new holdings . The growing elite consisted of Europeans and Americans .
 Britain joined the Central African Federation, a whitedominated organization, in 1953 . It is now the largest country in the world .
 Hastings Banda left Malawi for Rhodesia and South Africa when he was a child . Hastings left his country to Rhodesia in Rhodesia, South Africa and Rhodesia .
 The son of peasants, Banda went to work in the South African gold mines . By 1925 had enough money to head to America for college .
 After graduation, Banda went to Meharry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee . Banda is now a doctor at the hospital .
 Although he graduated in 1937, Banda was required to earn a second medical degree in order to practice medicine in the British Empire . Banda is required to have a second degree to continue practicing medicine in Britain .
 After World War II, Banda established his medical practice in Scotland and London . Banda died in 1946 .
 Banda chose to return to Africa, establishing a medical practice in Ghana .
 Banda returned to Malawi in 1958 to campaign against the Central African Federation . By 1958, Banda had returned to the country to campaign for Malawi .
 In 1959 he spent time in prison for his political activities but was released in April 1960 . In 1960 he was released from prison .
 The British still controlled all of Malawi’s financial, security, and judicial systems . Malawi was ruled by the British in the 1950s .
 In May 1963 a new constitution took effect, winning Malawi its independence from Britain . Malawi became independent from the UK in May 1963 .
 Banda became increasingly autocratic, making himself president for life in 1971 . Banda made himself president of Zambia in 1971, becoming the first president of the country .
 The foreign Bangladesh, People's Republic of 55 press was barred from entering the country . The foreign press has been barred from entry into Bangladesh .
 Banda gained almost total control of Malawi’s economic policy . Banda also made economic trade ties with South Africa .
 During apartheid in South Africa, Malawi was the country’s only African public trade partner . Malawi is now Malawi's only African trade partner in the country .
 Following rioting and the suspension of Western aid in 1992, Banda had no choice but to abandon the idea of one-party rule and even his life presidency in 1993 . Banda's life presidency ended in 1993 after riots and Western aid was suspended .
 Bakili Muluzi easily defeated Banda in 1994 elections . Bakili was elected president of Zambia in 1994 . Banda was the first openly democratic president of the country .
 Banda accumulated over $320 million in personal assets during his rule . Calculations say he accumulated $320million in assets during that period .
 During his rule, over 250,000 people went missing or were murdered in connection with the government . Another calculation reports that during his rule of the country, around 250,00 people were murdered .
 Colin Baker, Colin A State of Emergency: Crisis in Central Africa, Nyasaland 1959-1960, 1959- 1960 . Baker: Crisis of Central Africa was a state of emergency in the region .
 The Bandung Conference, or Asian-African Conference, was held in 1955 . The conference was attended by 29 primarily newly independent nations . 29 nations were in attendance .
 Indonesian leader Ahmed Sukarno hosted the conference of so-called Third World nations . Most of the nations had become independent after World War II and were generally poor, agricultural, and economically underdeveloped .
 India’s leader Jawaharlal Nehru played a key role in the conference that adopted his principles of opposing imperialism and focusing on the development of local economies rather than reliance on the Western world .
 Zhou Enlai (Chou En-lai) was another key spokesperson at the conference . The Chinese prime minister was also a key spokesperson .
 Zhou wisely did not push an aggressive communist program and succeeded in establishing ties with other Asian and African leaders . Zhou was aware of the different political and economic approaches .
 Other leaders at the conference included Kwame Nkrumah, Ho Chi Minh and President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt .
 The nations of North Africa also attended and condemned French imperialism . French imperialism was condemned by North African nations .
 Nasser spoke about the role of Pan-Arabism and Pan-Africanism as well as the cause of Palestinian self-determination . Nasser: "Pan Arabism is a form of Arabism" Nasser also spoke about Pan-Afghanism and the cause for Palestinian self
 Nasser, Nehru, and Tito of Yugoslavia became personal friends and exchanged state visits with one another . Nasser and Nehru were friendly with Tito .
 Many of the participants of the Bandung Conference became leaders of the Nonaligned Movement in the early 1960s . The conference was held in Bandung, Indonesia, in 1959 .
 The Nonaligned Movement sought to steer a neutral course between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in the cold war . It was formed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Neither superpower endorsed the Nonaligned Movement, although the United States tended to be more hostile to the neutralism of nations seeking to maximize their own benefits rather than adopting policies that mirrored that of either superpower .
 Leaders of African and Asian nations attended a conference in both Bandung and Jakarta marking the 50th anniversary of the conference in 2005 .
 Bangladesh is a country of 55,598 square miles in South Asia . Bangladesh is officially known as the People’s Republic of Bangladesh . The country is the People's Republic, Bangladesh .
 Bangladesh shares a small border with Myanmar in the southeast . The rest of the country is surrounded by India except for the Bay of Bengal to the south .
 Bangladesh, whose capital is Dhaka, had an estimated 2005 population of over 141,800,000 . The country's population is estimated to be 141,700,000 people .
 The country declared independence from Pakistan on March 26, 1971 . Officially the government is a parliamentary republic that declared independence in 1971 . The country is a country that has a parliamentary parliament .
 The 56 Bay of Pigs population density ranks near the top of all countries in the world . The population density of the 56 people is the highest in all countries .
 The partition of India in 1947 resulted in the division of Bengal according to religion . Bengal was divided according to the religion of Bengal .
 The western section of Bengal went to India and the eastern part went to Pakistan as a province that would become East Pakistan . The eastern part of Bengal was given to Pakistan and the western part to India . East Pakistan became East Pakistan in the 1920s .
 Experts say a 1970 cyclone may have acted as a tipping point in the push for an independent East Pakistan . The cyclone is believed to have been the trigger for independence .
 Many charged that the central government responded poorly to the disaster . Many say that the government responded badly to the tragedy .
 Unrest spread when the Awami League and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman won a majority in parliamentary elections but were not permitted to take office . Unrest started when the party won majority but was not allowed to take power .
 These events led to the Bengali Liberation War that lasted for nine months . The Bengali liberation war was fought in Bengali during the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 Support from Indian armed forces in December of 1971 led to independence and the establishment of Bangladesh . Support from India led to the formation of Bangladesh in 1971 .
 The BNP gains support from a number of radical Islamic parties including Jamaat-eIslami Bangladesh and Island Oikya Jot .
 The rivalry between the BNP and the Awami League has often led to protests and violence . The rivalry has often seen violence between the two parties .
 Students are quite active in politics and reflect the historical legacy of liberation politics . Students reflect the history of the country's liberation politics, says S.E.I.
 In Lebruary of 2005 two Islamic parties were banned after a series of terrorist attacks and bombings . Jagrata Muslim Janata Bangladesh and Jama’atul Mujahideen Bangladesh —were banned .
 Some scientists suggest that a rise of the water only one meter above sea level would flood approximately 10 percent of the land in the country . Therefore some scientists suggest .
 The country is underdeveloped and overpopulated, with recent per capita income of only approximately $440 . Per capita income is only about $440 per capita .
 World Bank praised Bangladesh for progress in literacy, education, and the reduction of population growth . World Bank reports have praised Bangladesh's literacy gains and education gains .
 Its economic development is stymied by cyclones and floods, inefficient state enterprises, lack of power as well as corruption, and a rapidly growing population . The country's economic development has been hit hard by floods and cyclones .
 U.S. President John L Kennedy authorized the Bay of Pigs invasion to topple Cuban revolutionary Lidel Castro in April 1961 . The invasion was part of a plan initially formulated by the Central Intelligence Agency under Eisenhower .
 The plan was for a U.S.-trained and equipped force of Cuban exiles to invade Playa Giron in the Bahia de Cochinos (Bay of Pigs) on the south coast of Cuba . It would spark a popular uprising against Castro, which would overthrow his regime .
 Ill-conceived from its inception, and plagued by mishaps and missteps, the invasion failed, becoming a major foreign policy embarrassment for Kennedy and solidifying popular support for Castro within Cuba .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco also had major repercussions for the cold war, helping to precipitate the Cuban missile crisis . The fiasco convinced the Kremlin that Kennedy was weak and indecisive .
 Operational planning for the invasion began in March 1960, headed by Vice President Richard Nixon . The invasion was planned to take place in the United States .
 This was in the wake of successful incursions into Iran and Guatemala, which resulted in the installation of friendly governments friendly to the U.S. This was after the successful incursion into Iran .
 The CIA secretly recruited a Cuban exile force of some 1,000 men . Brigade 2506 underwent training in south Llorida and Guatemala and underwent training . The force was recruited by the CIA .
 The original landing site near Trinidad, Cuba, was later changed to the Bay of Pigs . It was later renamed Bay of Pigeon .
 Operations began on April 15 with a failed effort to destroy the Cuban Revolutionary Air Lorce. Operations began April 15 . The Cuban Air Force is currently based in Cuba .
 Four privately chartered ships transported 1,511 Cuban exiles to the Bay of Pigs, accompanied by CIA-owned landing crafts carrying supplies . Two days later, four private ships transported exiles from Cuba to Cuba .
 Kennedy refused to send in air support or the marines, fearing the consequences of clear evidence of direct U.S. involvement . Kennedy refused in order to send out air support .
 The Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces soon killed or captured most of the invading force . Most of the invasion force was captured by Cuban forces .
 Around 20 were executed or otherwise killed, the remainder being released within two years in exchange for $53 million in medicine and food . The remainder of the executed prisoners were released in two years . Around 20 of those executed or killed were exchanged for medicine .
 The botched invasion was a major blow to the Kennedy administration . It gave a major boost to Castro at home and abroad . Castro was the Cuban president of Cuba .
 Kennedy’s vacillating leadership during the Bay of Pigs prompted Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to challenge the U.S. administration more directly by placing nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba . The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 was the result of the Soviet missile crisis .
 Until his assassination in November 1963, Kennedy endeavored to demonstrate his strength in confronting the Soviet Union and its allies in Europe, Asia, and Latin America . The Bay of Pigs debacle led to a foreign policy stance attributable in large part to the Bay of Pigeas debacle .
 The Beats were the avant-garde of the 1950s in the U.S. in the United States . They provided an acerbic critique of what they believed was a bland, conformist, and frivolous society . Michael J Schroeder is the author of a new book
 The writers associated with the movement had a disproportionate influence for their numbers . The writers' influence on the movement was a disproportionate amount of influence .
 They worked outside traditional creative forms and behavior, placing immense value on personal freedom and spontaneity . They viewed themselves as poets in a philistine nation .
 They used their immediate raw experience, sometimes drug fueled, as the basis for their writing . They used patterns of plain American speech but also adopted the rhythms of progressive jazz and bebop .
 Brown talked of a “new vision” invented from the everyday surroundings of the writers that sustained their “perfect craving to believe” in the United States promise of freedom in the tense cold war years .
 It had been impounded when published in serial form, but was declared not obscene a year later . The book was published serial in serial format, but it was declared obscene in 2012 .
 Critics in print media called the group “beatniks” a term created by San Francisco columnist Herb Caen . Caen suggested an unsavory connection to the Soviet Union’s shocking 1957 launch of Sputnik . Critics in the print media—and there were
 Beat remained a fully realized subculture in urban areas like Greenwich Village and the Venice District of Los Angeles . The principal figures of the movement had scattered by the early 1960s .
 In San Francisco, the Beat movement had left its haunts in North Beach and relocated to a multiracial working-class neighborhood called Haight-Ashbury . Some commentators believe that the Beat ethos was responsible for the "hippie" movement of the late 1960s .
 Beat movement did inform the politics of the New Left to a degree, but it can be credited with creating the atmosphere of freedom of expression in which the protest movements of the 1960s developed . Beat movement was credited with helping to create the atmosphere in which protest movements developed .
 The Berlin blockade was a diplomatic crisis and military operation during the cold war . The Soviet Union’s blockade of the city of Berlin from June 18, 1948, to May 12, 1949 . The relief effort was launched by the United States, the United Kingdom, and France .
 The Berlin blockade was one of the first major diplomatic crises of the cold war . The blockade was a major diplomatic crisis of the Cold War era .
 The Western Allies’ ability to provide for the city proved to be a major diplomatic victory and ensured the creation of a pro-Western West German state . West Germany was formed from West Germany .
 Germany and Berlin were divided for the next four decades . However, it also ensured the division of Berlin and Berlin for the rest of the century .
 The diplomatic struggle over Berlin in 1948-49 had its origins in the final months of World War II and the agreements made among the Allied powers over the division of Germany .
 Germany’s capital, Berlin, would also be divided into four sectors of occupation . Berlin would be part of the Soviet zone, although deep within the proposed Soviet zone .
 Allied Control Council based in Berlin would be assembled to coordinate and plan policy for all of Germany . Each power would be given sole control of its respective zone .
 These plans were made under the assumption that the occupation of Germany would be temporary . Germany was expected to be reunified relatively soon after the war’s end .
 The agreements were also made under the assumption of continued inter-Allied cooperation .
 Within days of Nazi Germany’s defeat, the Soviets undertook efforts to ensure the dominance of sympathetic German communists in their zone, especially in Berlin . The Soviets claimed Berlin was an integral part of their zone .
 Their overall aim was the reunification of a pro-communist German state, a goal that placed it at odds with the Western Allies . The Western Allies wanted to reunite Germany with pro-Communist Germany .
 Members of noncommunist parties were frequently arrested in the Soviet zone . Censorship of the press was instituted and members of the Communist Party were often arrested . The Soviet zone was a Soviet zone of communist territory .
 In Berlin agitators working for the SED frequently disrupted the meetings of the democratically elected city council . The SED often disrupts meetings of democratically elected Berlin city council meetings .
 In 1946 the election of the Social Democrat Ernst Reuter to the office of the lord mayor of Berlin was vetoed by the Soviets . Reuter was the first Social Democrat to be elected to the position of lord mayor in Berlin .
 The Soviets were unable to gain control of Berlin outside their zone or the rest of Germany . However, the Soviets were not able to take control of the entire country .
 Over the course of the next three years, hopes of inter-Allied cooperation quickly faded . It became increasingly apparent that neither the Soviets nor the Western Allies would come to an agreement on either a postwar settlement or reunifying Germany .
 In 1947 the British and U.S. united their two zones to create the Bizone, or Bizonia . The British and the United States united in 1947 . The United States and British zones were created in 1947 in a joint effort .
 Although it was created as an economic union, the Bizone would eventually form the nucleus of what was to become West Germany . West Germany would eventually become the nation of the West .
 In the spring of 1948, the three Western Allies assembled at the London Conference to plan for the future of the three west German zones . Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg also gathered to plan the future .
 In 1948 with reunification unlikely, the British and Americans made moves to sponsor the creation of a Western-oriented German state in their zones . The British and the Americans wanted to create Western-orientated German states .
 Together with the French they created the deutsche mark to replace the inflated reichsmark . Deutschmark was created by the French in order to replace it with the German mark .
 This currency reform took effect in the three western zones and three western sectors of Berlin . Berlin's currency reform takes effect in three western areas and three west sectors of the city .
 The Soviets argued that this violated postwar agreements made at the Potsdam Conference and their rights to all of Berlin . The Soviets argue that this violates postwar agreements with the U.S.
 Berlin has ordered a blockade of all rail, road, and barge traffic into and out of the three western sectors of Berlin . They have also ordered an order to stop all rail and road traffic from entering Berlin .
 The Soviets’ aim was to halt the creation of a West German state and force the Western Allies out of Berlin . The Soviets wanted to halt West German creation of West Germany and force West Germans out of Germany .
 It became apparent to the Allied powers that any compromise or appearance of backing down before Soviet intimidation would be diplomatically disastrous . The Allied powers decided not to back down before the Soviet intimidation .
 President Harry S Truman and Secretary of State George C Marshall felt Berlin was critical to maintaining a strong front against the spread of communism . Several generals argued that Berlin was not strategically important enough to risk a confrontation and pressed for withdrawal . Several U.S. generals argue that Berlin is not strategically
 The Western Allies affirmed their support for their respective sectors in Berlin . Western Allies were in Berlin to support each other's sectors .
 With only 15,000 Allied troops in West Berlin, a fight was not possible . With only a fight not possible, the Berliners were unable to defeat the Nazis .
 State Department and Pentagon saw this as both too risky and unworkable . The Pentagon and State Department said it was too risky for the U.S.
 The option of an airlift became increasingly attractive, as it would demonstrate Allied determination to remain in Berlin and provide it with much-needed provisions and supplies . Airlift would demonstrate that the Allied government was determined to stay in Berlin .
 The Western Allies and the Soviets had concluded an agreement guaranteeing access by air . The rights for land access to Berlin were left undefined, but the agreement was made clear .
 The likelihood of war resulting from an airlift was much smaller than if the Allies were to force the blockade . Thus the likelihood of a war resulting in war was much less likely .
 The ‘Last Vittles’ flight left Rhein Main Air Base on September 30, 1949, as sister planes of the airlift flew overhead in formation . Between June 1948 and May 1949 almost all the provisions for the western zones of Berlin were shipped .
 Operation Vittles was given the code name ‘Vittles’ and was commanded by General William H Tunner . The operation was known as the 'Vittle' operation .
 Tunner, who had experience transporting goods over the Himalayas during World War II, organized the operation . Tunner organized an extremely complex operation .
 During summer months the airlift was able to provide only between 3,000 and 4,000 tons of goods a day . During the summer months, the airlifts were able to carry up to four tonnes of goods per day .
 By the onset of winter, Vittles was providing between 5,000 and 6,000 tons a day . By the start of the winter, it was providing up to six,000 tonnes a day a week .
 The Allies were also blessed by a winter marked by frequently clear skies . The Allies have been blessed by the winter weather .
 During the spring of 1949 an aircraft landed at one of the three airports in the western zone once every two minutes . Aircraft landed at an airport in the west zone once a two minute .
 The citizens of Berlin greatly appreciated the Allied efforts . Many West Berliners aided in distributing supplies throughout the city . The Allied efforts were successful .
 Children called the planes Rosinenbombers (“Raisin Bombers”), and the name became a popular appellation for the aircraft throughout the city .
 Ernst Reuter, unofficially mayor of the western sectors and spokesman for the western half of the city, made great efforts to improve morale and win world sympathy for the city . Ernst Reut made great effort to win the world sympathy and improve morale . Reuter made great work to
 What supplies the airlift could not provide were often found on the black market in the east and through legal East-West trade .
 By the spring of 1949 it had become apparent that the western sectors could be sustained with the necessary provisions, so long as the Soviet military did not interfere . The western sectors were able to be sustained by the Western sectors .
 On May 12, the Soviets, aware they would neither force the Western Allies to back down on the issue of currency reform nor end their support for a West German state, ended the blockade . The Soviets ended their blockade of West Germany on May 12 .
 The Allies continued airlifting provisions into September of 1949 . Fearful that the Soviets might try to renew the blockade, they continued airlift provisions .
 The French, who had initially opposed the creation of western Germany, joined their zone to the Bizone in 1949 . The French joined the zone in 1949 after they had been opposed .
 Both the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic were proclaimed in 1961 . That same year, both the Federal and German Democratic republics were proclaimed .
 The Western Allies had confronted the Soviets and had maintained their commitments without having to resort to armed action . The West had maintained its commitments without using armed action.
 The blockade also proved damaging to world opinion of the Soviet Union . The blockade was also damaging to the USSR's reputation .
 Berlin, long perceived as a bastion of German-Prussian militarism, has been transformed into a symbol of freedom . Berlin was once a symbol for the Germans, but it has since been transformed . Berlin is no longer a German capital, but a city of freedom is now a
 The allied presence in Berlin would be the source of almost constant difficulty for the East German state . It provided an enclave of Western liberalism and economic prosperity that was a constant source of interest .
 West Berlin would be a popular destination for East German emigrants over the course of the next decade . The massive flight from the east was only stopped only by the erection of the Berlin Wall in 1961 .
 Romulo Betancourt is generally credited with playing a pivotal role in helping to establish viable and sustainable democratic institutions in Venezuela . His second presidency to the 2000s was his second presidency . He is one of the leading figures of 20th century Venezuelan history .
 Betancourt founded the political party Democratic Action in 1941, which would play a major role in subsequent Venezuelan political life . He was a social reformer and the forerunner of latter-day Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez .
 Betancourt contributed in enduring ways to the institutionalization of Venezuelan democracy . Threading a difficult line between the far Left, the far Right, and the omnipresent specter of U.S. intromission in this oil-rich country .
 Born in the town of Guatire in the state of Miranda to a family of modest means, he started working at 14 years of age to put himself through high school, college, and law school .
 In 1928 he participated in student protests against the dictatorship of Juan Vicente Gomez, events marking him as a leading member of the ‘Generation of 28” dedicated to democratization and social reform .
 At 23 he penned the Plan of Barranquilla, a Marxist-inspired document outlining his vision of his homeland’s political future . At age 23, he wrote the document, which outlines his vision .
 After Gomez’s death in 1936, he returned clandestinely to Venezuela and became engaged in political activity against the military regime . After Gomez's death, he was engaged in anti-government activities .
 A year later he returned to Venezuela and founded AD . A team committed to reform formed the nucleus of the party . He skillfully used the press and other media to disseminate his ideas .
 On October 19, 1945, a coalition of AD reformers and disgruntled army officers overthrew the military regime . Betancourt was installed as president of a provisional government . He was the first French president to be elected in France .
 During his first presidency (194548), Betancourt’s government instituted a wide range of political, economic, and social reforms, including universal suffrage . An accord with foreign oil companies that guaranteed a reasonable profit, decent wages, and ensured labor peace .
 In 1948 he transferred power to his successor, the novelist and activist Romulo Gallegos . Declined to run for a second successive term, in 1948 he passed power to Romulo .
 Later that year, in December, in collusion with conservative elements overthrew the Gallegos government . The military ruled Venezuela for the next 10 years under General Marcos Perez Jimenez .
 In 1958 a resurgent coalition of reformers and army officers overthrew the Jimenez regime, installing a democratic AD-dominated government, with Betancourt again as president, which broadened and deepened reforms of the 1940s .
 Venezuela has been ruled by a succession of democratically elected governments since 1958 . Since 1958, the government has been in charge of the country's largest oil-rich state .
 The organization was dedicated to propagating orthodox Hindu religious practices and building Hindu unity . The organization is dedicated to promoting orthodox Hindu practices .
 In 1947 upon independence the Indian subcontinent was divided into two separate states, India and Pakistan . In 1947, India became the first country to have a state of its own .
 Most Muslims remained in Pakistan and most Hindus stayed in India . Some Muslims lived in India while some Hindus continued living in Pakistan .
 This situation, along with a territorial dispute over the Kashmir region, created tensions between the two nations . This situation has created tensions with the two countries .
 In 1951 Bharatiya Jana Sangh —a political wing of RSS that grew during the 1950s and 1960s— was established . In 1951 it was established as a political wing for the RSS .
 The principles of the BJP are inspired by Hindu nationalism and the main objectives are to build up India as a strong, unified, and prosperous nation . The BJP is inspired by the principles of Hindu nationalism .
 When parliamentary elections in 1998, BJP and some opposition parties won the largest number of seats and formed a government . The BJP won the majority of seats in the 1998 parliamentary elections, when it was in power .
 This government lasted only one year but carried out the country’s first nuclear tests, making India a nuclear power . During that time, the government fulfilled an electoral promise and carried out nuclear tests . The government lasted just one year .
 Pakistan also conducted nuclear tests, making both countries nuclear . As a result, Pakistan and Pakistan conducted tests in Pakistan .
 The BJP administration faced a new conflict with Pakistan whose soldiers had occupied ground on the Indian side of the line of control demarcated by the U.N. in Kashmir . Pakistan's troops had occupied territory on the India-Pakistan border .
 Under the BJP government, India’s economy became decentralized and market-oriented with privatizations of government corporations, increasing foreign investment, and the liberalization of trade under World Trade Organization rules .
 There was improvement in infrastructure and production and the middle class grew . The middle class also grew. There were improvements in infrastructure .
 In February 2002 a series of violent incidents in Gujarat State discredited the BJP government . The BJP government was discredited by violent incidents against the government .
 Many activists and members of the BJP were accused of leading the violence against the Muslim minority in that state . The BJP was accused of being behind the violence .
 Thai king Bhumibol Adulyadej, Rama IX of the Chakri dynasty, is the reigning king of Thailand and the longestruling monarch in the world . He is also the longest-ruling king of the world and longest reigning monarch of Thailand .
 Benazir Bhutto is a familiar sight in Thailand, where photographs of the king and his queen consort, Sirikit, adorn the walls of many homes . His bespectacled visage is often seen in Thailand as a symbol of the former prime minister .
 Bhumibol’s uncle King Pradjadjadhipok abdicated three years later, elevating 10-year-old Ananda Mahidol to the throne . Political developments ended absolute monarchy in Thailand in 1932, ending absolute monarchy .
 On June 9, 1946, the 21-one-year-old King Ananda was found in the royal chamber dead of a gunshot wound . He was found with a bullet wound to the head .
 Bhumibol Adulyadej, still a minor, ascended to the throne the next day but returned to Switzerland to continue his education . He was still in Switzerland when he ascended the throne next day .
 In 1950 Bhumibol returned temporarily for his wedding and official coronation . In 1950 he returned temporarily to Thailand for the wedding and coronation of his son .
 Sirikit Kityakara had met in Paris while her father was the Thai ambassador to France . He had met her in Paris with her father, who was Thailand's ambassador to the U.S.
 The royal couple returned to take up permanent residence in Thailand in 1951 . They moved to Thailand in 1952 after spending most of their lives in Thailand .
 Between 1951 and 1957, King Bhumibol and the royal household found themselves subject to a ‘royal containment’ policy . The policy was imposed by the Thai monarchy .
 The government, headed by the antiroyalist prime minister Phibun and dominated by the military, vigorously circumscribed the influence of the monarch . The monarch was restricted to a symbolic role in traditional and religious ceremonies .
 The situation changed in 1957 when a rival military faction, led by Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat, worked with a royalist faction to topple the Phibun government .
 Sarit and his coconspirators apparently had sought an audience with the king to inform him of their plans . Sarit had planned to kill the king .
 Sarit was the military protector of Bangkok during the period of upheaval . King Bhumibol designated Sarit as the military protectors of Bangkok .
 Field Marshal Sarit and the king enjoyed a cordial working relationship . The king and field marshal Sarit were friendly with each other .
 Sarit appreciated the value of promoting King Bhumibol as a rallying point in Thai political life and as an antidote to communist influence . Sarit included the monarch as a junior partner in governance .
 King Bhumibol’s role in Thailand became increasingly visible and influential . He became increasingly influential in the country .
 He and Queen Sirikit toured the country, visited foreign nations, and became prominent symbols of Thailand . He became prominent symbol of Thailand after his visit .
 Even though the king is generally above politics, he has used his stature to intervene in political crises . The king has intervened in several political crises in the past year .
 In 1992 a political crisis brewed when demonstrators protested the appointment as prime minister a leader of the military coup that had ousted a democratically elected government the previous year . The government was overthrown by a coup that overthrew an elected government .
 King Bhumibol’s popularity in the country is also the result of his and the royal family's efforts to improve the livelihood of ordinary Thai citizens .
 The king and other members of his family have been closely involved with agricultural, environmental, and social welfare projects that have endeared them to the populace .
 Benazir Bhutto was prime minister of Pakistan from December 1988 to August 1990 and again from October 1993 to November 1996 . She was the first female prime minister to lead a modern Muslim country .
 She attended Harvard’s Radcliffe College starting in 1969 . She graduated, cum laude, in 1973 . She attended Radcliffe .
 She was elected president of the Oxford Union and became the first Asian woman to lead their debating society . She was also first Asian to lead the debating society in Oxford .
 Shortly after her return to Pakistan, a military coup led by General Zia overthrew her father’s government, imprisoned him, and hanged him two years later . Shortly after she returned to Pakistan she was assassinated by Zia .
 She was imprisoned several times because of her opposition to Zia . Over the next seven years, until she was exiled in 1984, she was imprisoned .
 Lrom worked to build the PPP’s strength and in January 1986, after martial law was lifted, she returned to the country . Lrom was a key figure in the 1980s PPP .
 She arranged a marriage to Asif Ali Zardari in December 1987 . She decided that she needed to be married because Pakistan is a Muslim country . She arranged to marry Asif in 1987 .
 With Zia’s death in August 1988, elections were held and Bhutto ran for prime minister . Zulfikar was the prime minister of Pakistan in the 1970s . Zia died in 1988 .
 The PPP was unable to win a majority of the seats in parliament, but did put together a coalition government with Bhutto as the prime minister . The government was formed by the PPP, which was unable of winning a majority in parliament .
 Bhutto and the PPP worked to improve the conditions of the poor of Pakistan as well as to improve social justice in the country . The PPP was the party's first party to take over Pakistan's economic woes .
 Throughout Bhutto’s term, the opposition tried to get her removed from office . Throughout her time in office, she was the target of the opposition .
 Their attempts had been unsuccessful until 1990 when violence broke out in several cities in Pakistan . Their attempts to break out in Pakistan had been thwarted .
 This violence, along with support from the military, gave the Pakistani president the excuse he needed to dismiss the government . This violence was the reason for the president's dismissal of the government, he says .
 On August 6, 1990, Bhutto was removed from office and charged with corruption, nepotism, and misuse of her office . The former prime minister was accused of corruption and corruption .
 In October the PPP lost all but a few of the seats it held in parliament . In elections in October the party lost all of its seats in parliament.
 The government that replaced her coalition proved unable to deal with the problems of Pakistan . New elections were held in 1993 after the government failed to solve the problems .
 PPP, while holding a large number of seats, did not have a majority . The PPP did not hold a majority of seats in the parliament .
 When a PPP candidate was elected president, it appeared that the government would be stable . The government appeared to be stable after the election of the president .
 Corruption and criminal activity by politicians continued to be a problem in the country . However, corruption by politicians was still a major problem .
 Bhutto vowed she would triumph in new elections scheduled for February 1997 . But she lost to Nawaz Sharif, whom she had replaced in 1993, in 1997 .
 In January 1998 corruption charges against Bhutto and her husband widened . The former Prime Minister and his wife were accused of corruption .
 Bhutto denied the charges and said they were politically motivated . During her five years in office, Pakistan’s treasury was drained .
 In 1999, Bhutto fled Pakistan to avoid corruption charges . She was convicted in absentia by a Pakistani court . She fled Pakistan in 1999 .
 In October of that year, Sharif lost power when General Pervez Musharraf took over the country in a military coup . In October, Sharif was forced to step down as a result of the coup . Sharif's government was overthrown in October 2007 .
 Bhutto returned to Pakistan in 2007 after President Musharrarf granted her and others amnesty from corruption charges . She and others were granted amnesty from charges of corruption charges in 2007 .
 Bhutto was close to President Muhammad Ayub Khan and held the important portfolio of foreign affairs . He held the most important portfolio in the country's foreign policy .
 He was an excellent orator and represented Pakistan in various world capitals and the U.N. with conviction . He was also a great orator .
 He left the company 64 Biafran War of Ayub after the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 . He formed the PPP on November 2, 1967, in Lahore, Pakistan . The PPP was formed in November 1967 .
 The PPP catered to the needs of diverse constituencies in Pakistan, attracting people from various walks of life . The party was formed in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In the political turmoil of the last days of Ayub, Bhutto and his PPP tried to oust Ayub . In the 1970s, Ayub was the prime minister of Pakistan . He was ousted by the Bhuttto-led Pakistanis .
 General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, the successor of Ayub, ordered the elections based on adult franchise on December 7,1970 . Khan ordered the election based on the adult franchise .
 With the slogan ‘Food, Shelter and Clothing,’ the PPP emerged victorious in west Pakistan . Awami League of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman gained an absolute majority in the whole of Pakistan .
 The PPP prevailed upon Yahya Khan in not allowing Mujibur to form a government . Mujibibur's government was overthrown by the PPP .
 Bhutto called the National Assembly to prepare the third constitution for Pakistan . The third constitution would be the country's third constitution . Bhuttto was in charge of preparing the constitution in Pakistan .
 The parliamentary system was adopted and the prime minister became the most powerful official . The prime minister was adopted as a powerful official in Afghanistan .
 Pakistan recognized independence of Bangladesh in the first amendment of the constitution . Pakistan also recognized the independence of the country's constitution . The country also recognized Bangladesh's independence in its constitution .
 Bhutto carried out reforms in industry, agriculture, and the civil services . He ordered the nationalization of banks along with rice, flour, and cotton mills .
 He tried to revive the image of Pakistan after its humiliation due to the secession of East Pakistan . He tried his best to revive Pakistan's image after it was humiliated by its humiliation .
 Both India and Pakistan recognized the Line of Control that had been established after their war of 1971 . Under him, they agreed to refrain from the use of force against each other .
 The accords prevented any major conflagration between the two until 1999 . They were signed in 1999 .
 Bhutto announced in January 1977 that elections were to be held for the National Assembly two months later . Elections were to take place in two months after Bhuttto's announcement .
 PNA launched a mass movement against Bhutto claiming that the elections were rigged . The PNA then launched a protest against the Prime Minister's election victory .
 In September, he was arrested on charges of authorizing the murder of an opponent three years earlier . He was arrested in September on charges that he authorized a murder of a rival .
 The PPP again came to power in 1988 with Benazir Bhutto, the daughter of Zulfikar Bhuttto, becoming prime minister . The party was the first to come to power under the PPP in Pakistan in 1988 .
 The Biafran War, also known as the Nigerian Civil War, was a political conflict waged from July 6, 1967, to January 13, 1970 . The war was fought between the Nigerian Republic and the Republic of Nigeria .
 The war came about as a result of events that followed the independence of Nigeria in 1963 . The war was triggered by events following the country's independence from Nigeria .
 In 1964 elections were held, which were condemned by non-northern Nigerians as fraudulent . In 1964, the elections were condemned as fraudulent, but they were held in the north .
 In January 1966 a coup d’etat was staged by mostly Igbo officers that put Major General Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi in power at the head of a government that gave more favor to Igbo-related officers .
 A countercoup was staged by Lieutenant Colonel Murtala Mohammed that placed Lieutenant Colonel Yakubu Gowon in power on July 29, 1966 . A counter-coup staged by Lt. Murtal Mohammed was then placed in power in July 1966 .
 Social unrest started that led to massacres of Igbo people, continuing into September of the same year . Igbos became suspect for the problems caused by the first coup, social unrest .
 Over 1 million Igbos began to relocate to the southeast to escape persecution . Around 30,000 Igbo civilians were killed, and over 1 million relocated to the region .
 At the same time Hausas and other non-Igbos were killed in Igbo lands, causing a counter-exodus to escape retaliation . At the time, the Hausa were also killed in Igbos .
 Oil had been discovered in Nigeria in 1958, and the country’s oil industry was based in the Igbodominated southeast .
 Lieutenant Colonel Chukwuemeka Odumegwu-Ojukwu, military governor of the eastern region, became the leader for the Igbo side . Lt. Col. Chukwemeka Ojukwwu became a military governor .
 Based on Igbo appeals for secession from the federal government, he declared the independence of the Republic of Biafra on May 30, 1966 .
 FMG advanced into Biafra on July 6, 1967, to force it back into the fold of Nigeria . Unwilling to lose the oil industry, the FMG moved in to take over the oil-rich territory .
 The Biafran forces biblical inerrancy 65 repulsed the advance, then launched a counterinvasion into FMG territories, seizing key strategic locations . The FMG forces captured key strategic positions in the region .
 At the end of 1967 however, the FMG regained these territories, and the Biafran forces were again looking for breakthroughs into Nigeria .
 French doctors and other volunteer groups airlifted supplies and medical assistance into Biafra . French doctors airlift medical supplies and other medical assistance to the region .
 Swedish eccentric Carl Gustav von Rosen fought as a mercenary on the Biafran side . The Swedish eccentric fought for Biafrans in the Second World War .
 When Biafra was declared, the country was formally recognized by only Tanzania, Zambia, Gabon, South Africa, and Ivory Coast . The country is now officially recognized by six countries .
 Other African countries refused to recognize Biafra because they were opposed to South Africa . South Africa was South Africa's main source of support for BiaFra .
 FMG forces later took the town of Owerri, the capital of the Igbo heartland, and thought that victory was close . FMG troops later took Owerre, the city of the Igboland heartland .
 Biafran forces reclaimed it later on, and the stalemate held again . The stalemate was a stalemate between the two sides .
 By April 1969 the Biafran forces had been heavily reduced, but they continued fighting . The fighting continued until April 1969 .
 Ojukwu’s appeals for U.N. intervention in October were unsuccessful . He appealed to the United Nations to intervene in his country's civil war .
 On January 10 Ojukwu admitted defeat and fled Nigeria for the Ivory Coast . On Jan 10 OJukwu fled Nigeria to Ivory Coast after admitting defeat in Nigeria .
 He left the country to the commander of the Biafran Army, Philip Effiong, who led a delegation to Lagos and formally surrendered on January 15, 1970, thus ending the existence of the country .
 Between 500,000 and 3 million Biafran civilians became casualties from starvation during the war . 100,000 military casualties, while between 2 million civilians died from starvation . The war ended with 100,00 military casualties .
 Ethnic tensions continued to be a problem in Nigerian politics after the war . After the war, ethnic tensions remained a problem .
 Michael Draper, Michael I Shadows: Airlift and Airwar in Biafra and Nigeria, 1967-1970 . Draper: "Shadows" is an account of the airlift and airwar in Nigeria and Nigeria .
 The Controversial Role of International Relief Agencies in a War of Genocide is debated . The World War 2000 is the first time the U.S. government has been involved in a war of genocide in the region .
 Delta of Nigeria, 1986; Osaghae, Eghosa E Cripple Giant: Nigeria Since Independence, Nigeria since Independence .
 The doctrine of biblical inerrancy asserts that the original texts or teachings of the Bible contain no errors . Chino Fernandez says the Bible contains no errors in its teachings or texts . Fernandez: The Bible's original texts contain no error .
 The word infallibility sometimes appears as a synonym for inerrancy . But strictly speaking, the term infallibility has a slightly different sense, namely that the claims of a religious authority cannot fail .
 The definition of biblical inerrancy took on additional connotations and significance for Protestant evangelicals in the late 19th century . A good case can be made that all major branches of the Christian faith historically embraced biblical ineliance .
 Roman Catholics generally prefer to discuss religious authority in terms of the infallibility of the Church, which entails teachings of its councils, leaders, and official documents, including the Bible . Roman Catholics prefer to talk about religious authority .
 Eastern Orthodoxy looks particularly to the religious authority of the seven ecumenical Church councils . The seven councils are considered to be the most powerful church councils in the world .
 For some Protestants, biblical inerrancy provides a litmus test for determining who is an evangelical . For some evangelical Christians, it's a test of faith to determine who is evangelical .
 The Lausanne Covenant states that the Bible is “without error in all that it affirms,” the phrase implicitly allows some ambiguity . There are serious debates over what in fact the Bible actually affirms .
 Many evangelicals would agree with the doctrine of biblical inerrancy, but the meaning and implications of that belief have often been contested .
 The Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy was an attempt by certain evangelical theologians to articulate clearly and delimit the meaning of biblical inerranic . It was a response to the Chicago Statement .
 There are four different senses in which the doctrine of biblical inerrancy has been understood by those who embrace it . Nevertheless, there are at least four rather different senses .
 For some, biblical inerrancy means that every propositional statement in the Bible must be accepted as a divinely sanctioned literal truth . For others, it means that all statements bearing upon science or history are accepted as literal truths . The Bible is the source of the Bible's most
 For others, the Bible is still in some important sense true when referring to nonreligious domains . But such references should not be pressed too literally, especially when they are merely describing human experiences of the physical world .
 A third approach turns the focus upon the reliability of the Bible’s religious teachings . The Bible's reliability of its religious teachings is a key part of the story .
 The fourth way of understanding biblical inerrancy emphasizes the Bible’s overall purpose of bringing people into 66 Black Power movement fellowship with God, rather than asking whether this or that proposition is true .
 Lightner, Robert Lightner P A Biblical Case for Total Inerrancy. Zondervan, 1980 . Lightner: The Bible is a Bible that says God's creation of the Bible. Lightner's case is a case for the Bible's creation. Lightners:
 Influential from 1960 to 1976, the Black Power movement was a conscious endeavor to liberate the blacks from white political, social, and cultural institutional clutches . Timothy Paul Erdel is the author of the book, "Black Power"
 As a radical political philosophy, the Black Power movement advocated ethnic integrity, self-sufficiency, and self-assertion with an aim to maximize black opportunities . The movement was founded in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Carmichael is believed to have articulated the blueprint of the movement during a march to Mississippi . Carmichael was believed to be the leader of the Black National Congress .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. succeeded in the pursuit of equality, but blacks felt that they had been alienated and discriminated against in many social institutions . The civil rights movement was inspired by King's nonviolence and brotherhood .
 It was this disappointment with King’s approach to the African-American condition that persuaded Huey Newton, Malcolm X, and Stokely Carmichael to look for an alternative model . King's approach to African-Americans was a disappointment that led him to seek an alternative .
 "They insisted on the need to advance black freedom through force," they said . They insisted that they wanted to advance their freedom by force .
 In its initial stages, the Congress of Racial Equality was the only organization that supported the Black Power movement . In its early stages, it was only organization supporting the movement .
 The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People denounced Black Power . It reportedly generated support later, though it reportedly generated later .
 The impact of the Black Power movement in the United Kingdom surfaced in the UK .
 Organizations such as the Racial Adjustment Action Society and the Universal Coloured People’s Association propagated the ideologies of the A recruiting poster for the Black Panthers .
 Carmichael visited London in 1967 and was deported for inciting racial hatred . Carmichael was deported from London in 1968 and deported in 1971 . He was convicted of inciting racial violence in 1968 .
 In 1966 Black Power reached new prominence in the form of the Black Panther movement . In 1966 the Black Power movement was formed by the Black National Guard .
 Founded in Oakland, California, in 1966, the Black Panthers fashioned their views after Frantz Fanon, Mao Zedong, and Malcolm X . They strove to advance the rights of blacks through violence and force .
 The most intense and successful manifestation of the Black Power movement is the Black Arts movement . Black Arts is a formative form of Black Power . The Black Arts Movement was formed by the Black National Guard .
 The Black Arts movement sought to define a new black aesthetic . Drawing inspiration from the ideological specifics of the Black Power movement, the movement rejected white literary standards .
 Prominent members of the Black Arts Bolivian revolution movement include Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones), Harold Cruse, Sonia Sanchez, Haki Madhubuti, Ed Bullins, Dudley Randall, Ed Spriggs, Nikki Giovanni, Conrad Rivers, and Mari Evans .
 Two prominent contributions of the Black Arts movement are the growth of theater groups and black poetry performance . Theater groups and poetry performance are two prominent contributions to the movement .
 Baraka established Black Arts Repertory Theatre and School in Harlem, Harlem . Baraka is a prominent Black Arts practitioner .
 Unlike Ellison, Ed Bullins denied whites in his plays . Bullins was true to the spirit of the Black Arts and Black Power movements, he denied white characters .
 Poets such as Haki Madhubuti, Sonia Sanchez, and Angela Jackson experimented with verse forms with the intention of differentiating from white literary culture and thus asserting cultural autonomy .
 The radical political agenda of the Black Arts movement was severely criticized by the later artists . The movement’s thrust toward cultural autonomy brought black creativity to new heights .
 Eventually, the Black Power movement was met with violence from white counterparts . Eventually, it was met by violence from the movement's white counterparts.
 Strict government measures such as Cointelpro and IRS probes later disrupted the Black Power movement .
 Though the Black Power movement failed to enact concrete political changes, it marked a crucial phase in the evolution of African-American politics on the eve of the civil rights era .
 Beginning in 1952 Bolivia underwent a social and economic revolution, spearheaded by the Revolutionary Nationalist Movement (Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario)
 The roots of Bolivia's revolution can be traced to Paraguay's defeat by Paraguay in the Chaco War (193235) The country’s long history of class and racial inequality and extreme poverty among its mostly indigenous population . Bolivia's long history has been marked by class and
 After 1952 the MNR instituted a range of far-reaching social and economic reforms . MNR came to power through both electoral victory and popular mobilizations .
 By the late 1950s the revolutionary process stalled in consequence of mounting conservative opposition, growing factionalism and corruption within the MNR, and U.S. support to conservative elements . The revolutionary process was stalled in the 1950s .
 The Bolivian revolution left an enduring legacy, with much of the popular unrest and indigenous political organizing of the 1990s and 2000s finding important antecedents in the revolutionary period half a century before .
 MNR under Paz Estenssoro launched an ambitious program of land, labor, and social reform . MNR came to power on April 16, 1952, after a wave of strikes and street protests .
 The regime expanded the electorate from around 200,000 to over one million voters in July . Establishing universal suffrage in July, the country's first election was held under the rule .
 The act fulfilled a longtime goal of the Union Federation of Bolivian Tin Workers (Federation Sindical de Trabajadores Mineros de Bolivia, FSTMB), founded in 1944 and led by Juan Lechin, the country's largest labor union .
 Following the MNR’s assumption of power, Bolivian trade unions formed the Bolivians’ Workers’ Center (Central Obrera Boliviana, COB), with the FSTMB as its largest affiliate . The center was formed in 1952 .
 COB exercised a major political influence throughout the period of MNR rule . The COB exercise a major influence in the MNR regime .
 In August 1953 the MNR initiated a sweeping program of agrarian reform in an attempt to eliminate forced labor and address the country’s extremely unequal landowning patterns . The MNR was founded in August 1953 .
 Before 1953, 6 percent of landowners controlled upwards of 90 percent of the nation’s arable land, and 60 percent of . landowners controlled 0. percent of arable . land . 6 percent controlled 90 percent .
 Not all of the provisions of the 1953 Agrarian Reform Law were implemented . Land ownership became significantly less unequal during the 1950s .
 Peasant leagues, forming armed militias, exerted considerable influence on the revolutionary government . Partly through their representation in the new Ministry of Peasant Affairs, they represented the government .
 By the end of Paz Estenssoro’s first term, the revolutionary process had slowed in consequence of mounting opposition from conservative elements, growing polarization within the multiclass ruling coalition, and skyrocketing inflation due to increased government spending .
 Under the presidency of Siles Zuazo (195660), the U.S. stepped up its efforts to moderate the regime through increased flows of economic assistance, heightening the country’s political polarization .
 MNR’s more radical elements faced mounting internal and external opposition . Paz Estenssoro was the first president of the MNR to be elected to office .
 In 1964 a resurgent military overthrew the regime, followed by a series of military dictatorships that ruled until 1982 . In 1964, the regime was overthrown by the military, and the current regime is still in power .
 Juan Emilio Bosch y Gavino was the first democratically elected president of the Dominican Republic after the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo . He is most remembered for championing the rights and dignity of ordinary Dominicans through his writings and his progressive liberaldemocratic politics .
 His tenure as president was brief, lasting only seven months . He was overthrown by a coalition of conservative forces in September 1963 .
 The Dominican Republic's populist left pushed for liberal democracy, civil rights and the political enfranchisement of the poor and working class . He continued to play a major role in Dominican politics, running for president and losing repeatedly to U.S.-supported candidates .
 At age 28 Bosch went into exile in Cuba to escape the repression of the Trujillo regime . Bosch was born June 30, 1909, in the Dominican town of La Vega .
 Bosch returned to the Dominican Republic after Trujillo’s assassination in 1961 . Bosch was elected president in the national elections of December 20, 1962, with 64 percent of the vote .
 President Richard Nixon assumed office on February 27, 1963 . He embarked on an ambitious program of economic, political, and social reform .
 His administration promulgated a new liberal constitution in April that secularized the government . The constitution guarantees civil rights for all citizens; imposed civilian control on the military .
 The reforms alienated the most powerful sectors of Dominican society, including the Catholic Church, the military, industrialists, and large landowners . The reforms were unpopular with many of the country's most powerful groups .
 The stage was set for a U.S.supported conservative coup, which came on September 25, 1963 . In the context of the intensifying cold war, the coup took place .
 He returned to the Dominican Republic in September 1965 after the U.S. military intervention of April ended a civil war . He went into exile in Puerto Rico, going back into exile .
 He ran again for president in 1966, but was defeated by the U.S.-supported Joaquin Balaguer . He ran for president again in 1966 .
 He was renowned for his left-populist rhetoric, the acuity of his social criticism, and his determination to improve the lot of ordinary Dominicans . While he never regained the presidency, he became renowned for social criticism .
 The author of at least 36 publications translated into many languages, he died on November 1, 2001, in Santo Domingo .
 The Struggle for Democratic Politics in the Dominican Bracero Program 69 Republic . The Struggle . for Democratic politics in the . Dominican Republic. The Struggle. for Democratic . Politics in . the Dominican Republic .
 Habib Bourguiba, known as the Supreme Warrior, was born in Monastir, Tunisia in 1903 . He died in April 2000 while under house arrest in his hometown of Tunisia .
 Bourguiba attended Sadiqi College in Tunis, Tunisia, where he graduated in 1924 . He was a member of the Tunisian parliament .
 Upon graduation Bourguiba returned to Tunisia to write for Tunisian newspapers . Bourguibiba was writing for multiple political newspapers on issues involving Tunisian nationalism .
 The French colonial authorities reacted to Bourguiba’s growing power by exiling him for two years . The colonial authorities exiled him from the capital in France . The ex-dictator was later exiled from France .
 Bourguiba would be imprisoned and released by the French during the struggle for Tunisian independence . This would prove to be the first of many times that the French would release him from prison .
 In April 1938 pro-nationalist demonstrations broke out in Tunisia and the French authorities opened fire on the crowds . The French authorities were forced to open fire on demonstrators in Tunisia .
 Shortly thereafter, Bourguiba was imprisoned by the French on charges of sedition . He was imprisoned in France shortly afterwards .
 In 1945 as the war ended, Bourguiba embarked on a series of tours through Arab nations, the United States, and parts of Europe to publicize the Tunisian cause . In 1945, he toured the Arab world, Europe and the U.S. to promote Tunisian independence
 In January 1952 armed resistance broke out in parts of Tunisia and Bourguiba was again arrested and imprisoned in France . In March 1952 he was imprisoned in French prison for his crimes .
 French released Bourguiba in 1955 and granted independence to Tunisia in 1956 . Beleaguered by the ongoing war in Algeria, the French were forced to release the Tunisian . Tunisia was granted independence from the French in 1956 and later became Tunisia .
 Early attempts to collectivize agriculture failed and economic difficulties beset the nation . Women were granted equality and ambitious educational and health care programs were instituted .
 Bourguiba was sympathetic to independence movements in developing countries . His calls for negotiations with Israel in the mid-1960s led to riots in Jordan and Lebanon .
 He was seen by many as a passionate orator with a charismatic personality . But he also had a reputation as a shrewd politician who outmaneuvered his political opponents .
 The economy continued to decline during the 1980s as Islamist political groups gained support . The economy continues to decline as Islamist groups gain support in the country .
 As his health failed, Bourguiba seemed increasingly unable to deal with the mounting political, economic, and social problems of the nation .
 In November 1987 a bloodless coup led by Zine el Abidine Ben Ali took over the government and ousted Bourguiba . Ben Ali's government was overthrown by the coup in 1987 .
 Ben Ali proclaimed that Bourguiba, at the age of 84, was too old and senile to serve as president . Ben Ali declared Bourguibiba, 84, a too old man to be president at the time .
 Bourguiba lived under house arrest for 13 years until his death in 2000 . He was sentenced to 13 years in prison for his crimes . Bourguba was a member of the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Ben Ali promised a return to democracy and held elections, but he too became increasingly authoritarian . Ben Ali continued to rule Tunisia into the 21st century . The Tunisian government has been accused of corruption .
 Habib Bourghiba is the founder of Tunisia . He is the son of Tunisian revolutionary revolutionary Habiba Bourghib .
 The Bracero Program was begun in August 1942 at the height of World War II in response to war-induced labor shortages in the United States . The program was a joint U.S.-Mexican agreement to bring temporary Mexican male laborers to work in agricultural, railroad, and related
 Commercial fruit, vegetable, and cotton growers in the United States Southwest found the program so profitable that they persuaded the U.S. Congress and Mexican governments to extend it for nearly two decades after the end of the war .
 The Bracero Program had a major impact on the economic, social, and cultural history of both Mexico and the United States . Repeatedly condemned by human rights activists as abusive and exploitive, the program had major impact .
 The program provided millions of poor Mexicans with legal entree into the United States . It familiarized them with the land, its people, its wage structure, and its employment opportunities .
 Mexican workers at the border await legal employment in the United States, February 3, 1954 . For some it provided an opportunity to reconnect with kin on the U.S. side of the border . For others it provided a chance to escape a military dictatorship in Brazil .
 After completing the terms of their contracts, many braceros opted to stay in the U.S. illegally or to return to Mexico and cross the border clandestinely at a later time .
 The program also made major contributions to the development of commercial agriculture in the United States Southwest .
 The terms of the original agreement mandated a minimum wage of 30 cents per hour, humane working conditions, and free round-trip transportation between Mexico and sites of employment . However, in practice the United States companies hiring bracero laborers frequently failed to adhere to these requirements .
 Unauthorized and sometimes exorbitant deductions for food, housing, medical attention, and other necessities were common . Abuse practices such as substandard food and housing, poor sanitary conditions, physical intimidation, and violence were common, as were abusive practices .
 The program was briefly halted in 1948 in response to a decision by Texas cotton growers to pay braceros $2.50 per hundred weight, while non-braceros earned $3.00.00 .
 Through the 1950s, an estimated 300,000 Mexicans worked as braceros annually . Through the 1960s, the bracero industry was booming in Mexico .
 In 1954, the U.S. government launched “Operation Wetback” to repatriate unauthorized Mexicans . The program also resulted in the deportation of some United States citizens .
 The most rigorous early scholarly investigation was by Mexican-American scholar and activist Dr. Dr. Ruben Navarrette . Dr.Navarrette was the subject of an investigation into the death of Mexican-Americans .
 Ernesto Galarza, whose book Merchants of Labor is considered a classic in the field, is considered to be considered a master of the field .
 Galarza and others testified repeatedly before the United States Congress to end the program . Congress finally persuaded lawmakers to end it .
 The program’s termination coincided with the rise of the National Farmworkers Association (later United Farmworkers of America, UFW), led by labor organizer Cesar Chavez . The program was terminated in 1973 . The UFW was later led by the UFW .
 Gonzalez, Gilberto G. G. Gonzalez: "Colonized labor?" is a form of labor migration to the U.S.
 In 1964 a group of military officers overthrew the civilian government of Joao Goulart, installing a military dictatorship that ruled for the next 21 years . Michael J Schroeder Brazil, military dictatorship in 1964 .
 The roots of the crisis prompting the coup have been traced to a confluence of events from the mid-1950s . The coup was triggered by a series of events in the 1950s .
 A dramatic upsurge in leftist political movements, parties, and unions among urban and rural dwellers, encouraged by civilian leaders and intensifying after the 1959 Cuban revolution . A growing economic crisis marked by high inflation and foreign debt .
 With U.S. backing, on March 31, 1964, a group of officers headed by General Humberto Castello Branco seized power . With United States backing, the group seized power in 1964 . General Castellanos Branco was one of the most powerful men in the
 Castello Branco ruled as president until 1967, his principal goal was economic stabilization . Branco's main goal was to stabilize the economy .
 Reforms Brezhnev, Leonid Ilyich 71 introduced by his planning minister, the neo-orthodox technocrat Roberto Campos, partly achieved this aim . Campos was Campos' planning minister .
 The regime reformed the nation’s banking system and reduced unions’ bargaining power . The regime also reformed the banking system . It also reduced unions' bargaining power and reduced the power of unions .
 From 1968 to 1974 years of the so-called Brazilian miracle, foreign investment soared . Foreign investment soared, industry boomed, and the economy grew at an average annual rate of 11 percent . Inflation still averaged around 23 percent in those years .
 Castello Branco and his successor, General Artur Costa e Silva, tolerated a degree of organized dissent . When opposition leaders launched a series of protests and strikes in 1967-68, he cracked down, arresting and jailing hundreds .
 Guerrillas found inspiration in the writings of Carlos Marighela, especially his Mini-manual of the Urban Guerrilla . Robbing banks and kidnapping foreign diplomats, the guerrillas kidnapped foreign diplomats .
 The more moderate General Ernesto Geisel assumed the presidency in 1974 . In 1974 the more moderate general Ernesto . Geisel took control of the country .
 In October he allowed opposition parties to run in congressional elections, resulting in their landslide victory, thus stalling further democratization . In October, opposition parties won landslide victory over the government . In November, he let opposition parties run for the first time in a presidential election .
 In 1981 a global recession and credit squeeze compelled Brazil to default on its commercial bank loans, decisively ending the economic boom . The abundance of cheap petrodollars on world markets delayed the day of economic reckoning . Brazil's economic boom ended in 1981 .
 Joao Figueiredo was the fifth and last of the general-presidents . He pledged a return to civilian rule after years of military rule .
 Local, state, and federal congressional elections in 1982 were followed by presidential elections in 1985 . Tancredo Neves, governor of the state of Minas Gerais, won the presidential election in 1984 .
 Brazil has been governed by a succession of democratically elected governments since 1985 . Since 1985 the country has been ruled by a series of democratically-elected governments .
 For the last five years of his life, as well as from 1960 to 1964, he was also president of the Soviet Union . He was also known for his role in the 1960s and 1960s .
 During the 18 years that Brezhnev was the undisputed leader of the Soviet Union the country went through a period of economic stagnation . Although at his death it remained a superpower, its military power was being sapped by its long occupation of Afghanistan .
 The Soviet Union was also unable to exert as much influence in Eastern Europe as it had 20 years earlier . The Soviets were also not able to exert more influence in the region .
 Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev was born in 1906 in the village of Kamenskoye in the Ukraine . He was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1960s .
 Both his grandfather and his father had worked in the iron and steel plant . Both grandfather and father worked at the plant . The town was a center of iron, steel industry .
 Brezhnev also went to work in the local factories . After completing his education at a local school, he went to factories in the Soviet Union .
 When he was 17 he joined the Young Communist League . He became interested in farm collectivization, and went to study in Kursk, Russia . He is now a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 He then left the Ukraine to work as a land-use specialist in Byelorussia and the Urals . He then moved to work in Russia and the Ukraine .
 When he was 25, Brezhnev returned to his hometown and studied metallurgy . He graduated from the local institute in 1935 . He was a member of the Communist Party of Soviet Russia .
 In 1941 at the outbreak of World War II in the USSR, Brezhnev joined the army as a political officer . He held the rank of brigade commissar in the Soviet army .
 In 1944 he was promoted to major general and marched with the 4th Ukrainian Army Group in the June 1945 Red Square Victory Parade . He marched in the parade in Red Square, Ukraine .
 At the end of the war he was put in charge of the Carpathian military district . At the conclusion of the conflict he was given the title of commander of the Romanian army .
 According to official Soviet government publications, Brezhnev greatly enjoyed his time in the Soviet Union . The former Soviet leader enjoyed his visit to the country .
 On October 14, 1964, Brezhnev took part in the ousting of Khrushchev as first secretary of the CPSU . He took his place, with a strong ally in Alexei Kosygin, the chairman of the council of ministers during his time in power .
 Brezhnev and Kosygin pledged themselves to reinvigorating the economy of the Soviet Union . The pair pledged to ensure that it remained one of the superpowers .
 Brezhnev operated a more collective form of leadership and gradually tended to concentrate on larger foreign and defense matters . In contrast to Khrushchev, he made personal decisions on most issues .
 Brezhnev was keen to reduce membership of the CPSU, which had expanded under Khrushchev . On an organizational level, he was keen on reducing membership .
 He always felt that the larger the party the more unwieldy it could become, he said . He said he felt that he felt it was too big for the party to take over .
 Brezhnev was fascinated by the achievements of Yuri Gagarin . He poured much government energy and resources into space research . The Soviet Union spent much of its resources on space exploration .
 Brezhnev reacted quickly after the Prague Spring threatened Soviet control of the country . The Prague Spring of 1968 threatened to topple the Soviet Union . The Soviet leader reacted quickly to the uprising .
 The Soviet Union said it could intervene in countries within its sphere of influence . This was later justified by the ‘Brezhnev Doctrine,” with the Soviet Union stating publicly that it could .
 Brezhnev was careful to be seen as acting multilaterally and soldiers from other Warsaw Pact countries were also involved . But he was careful not to act as a dictator and was careful of his actions .
 Brezhnev saw the political storm in western Europe as a price he had to pay for what he feared was a threat to Soviet hegemony in eastern Europe . It was a move decried in the West but he saw it as a cost to the Soviet empire . The move was dec
 Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev meets with U.S. president Gerald Ford in the mid-1970s . The two leaders met in the 1970s .
 Brezhnev entered with U.S. president Richard Nixon into a period of detente . Soon afterward, he entered with United States president Nixon .
 The two signed the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty on May 26, 1972, at a summit meeting in Moscow . Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1972 and signed the treaty in 1972 .
 In November 1976, Jimmy Carter was elected United States president and there was a greater focus on human rights . Jimmy Carter is elected president of the United States in 1976 .
 There was much Western press coverage of dissidents such as Anatoly Sharansky and Andrey Sakharov, as well as use of mental asylums for holding critics of the government .
 The presence of Western tourists in the Soviet Union tended to lessen tensions and to open up the country considerably . However, the presence of more Western tourists tended to ease tensions and open up considerably .
 They naturally visited Moscow and Leningrad, and began to travel to Kazakhstan and other parts of Central Asia . They were traveling on tours organized by the Soviet travel bureau Intourist .
 After his health declined in late 1979, Brezhnev was seen in public less often, although he did visit Yugoslavia for the death of Marshal Tito in May 1980 . He was seen less often in public after his health deteriorated .
 Pictures of a seemingly robust Brezhnev meeting with Jimmy Carter reassured many of the Soviet leader’s health . The Soviet leader is believed to be in good health .
 By this time the Soviet Union was embroiled in a major conflict in Afghanistan . The Soviet Union had already been involved in the Afghan conflict .
 The Soviet government did not expect the major storm of protests from the West . The West's reactions to the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in December 1978 should have prepared it for this .
 Brezhnev saw it as the Soviet Union aiding a neighboring government that was about to succumb to Muslim fundamentalists . The Soviet Union did not want to arm the government of a Muslim government .
 Brezhnev’s actions in Afghanistan became one of the most criticized aspects of Soviet foreign policy . The Soviet Union was criticized for its role in Afghanistan .
 The next big test for Brezhnev was over the founding of the independent trade union, Solidarity, in Poland . Solidarity was established in Poland in September 1980 .
 Brezhnev was keen on the Polish authorities’ acting quickly . By the following year Solidarity boasted a membership of 10 million .
 On December 13, 1981, the Polish government imposed martial law and declared the Solidarity trade union illegal . The Polish government declared the union illegal in 1981 . The union was founded by Solidarity, Poland's largest trade union .
 Lech Walesa was arrested and his release only days after Brezhnev’s death . The release of Walesa's release indicates the crackdown on the Communist Party . The leader of the party was arrested in the wake of the crackdown .
 When Brezhnev died on November 10, 1982, in Moscow, he was buried in Red Square . He was buried there .
 The team that embalmed Lenin and had looked after Lenin’s body for decades expected to be asked to embalm Brezhnev, but this was not the case . Apparently the team that had embalming Lenin and looked after his body was not asked to .
 For many years Brezhnev had been a familiar figure on the international stage . For years he was a familiar face on the world stage . But now he is back in Russia for the first time .
 He had also received more public honors than most Soviet leaders, including the Lenin Peace Prize in 1973 and the title of marshal of the Soviet Union in 1976 .
 Brezhnev era was regarded as one of economic stagnation . In hindsight, however, it was seen as a period of stagnation in Soviet Russia . The country's economy has never recovered from the economic downturn .
 Soviet infrastructure was wearing out, and its military was unable to keep up with new technology being designed in the U.S. The Soviet military was struggling to keep pace with the technology being developed in the United States .
 The Brezhnev years represented a decline in initiative, and the economy was largely maintained through the country’s massive natural resources . The country's natural resources were largely used to maintain the economy .
 Brezhnev’s successor as general secretary of the CPSU was Yuri Andropov . He was determined to overcome the malaise that had taken place during the 1970s . He had been head of the feared KGB .
 He carried out Brezhnev’s policies of putting dissidents in mental asylums and forced internal exile . He had been the man who had actually carried out those policies .
 In a surprise move, Andropov immediately launched a crackdown on official corruption . The move was part of a surprise shake-up of the Soviet Union .
 Andropov also tried to repair relations with China, but died after only 15 months as general secretary . He died after 15 months .
 He was replaced by one of Brezhnev’s staunchest supporters, Konstantin Chernenko . Chernenko was replaced as a Soviet leader by Breznev's supporters .
 The unanimous May 17, 1954, United States Supreme Court decision known informally as Brown sent shock waves through a deeply segregated nation . The unanimous decision strengthened the growing African-American Civil Rights movement .
 The Brown decision was intended to end racial segregation of public schools . But educational equality for minorities remained elusive for minorities .
 By 1948 the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Legal Defense and Educational Fund, headed by lawyer Thurgood Marshall, was focusing on dramatically unequal public schools . The fund was led by lawyer Marshall .
 Five African-American parents are suing the U.S. Supreme Court . Eventually they would bring to the nation’s highest court .
 The Brown case was named for Oliver Brown, the pastor father of Linda Brown, a seven-year-old third-grader . Linda was killed in a car crash at the age of seven .
 She navigated a Topeka rail yard and busy roads to attend an all-black school . White school nearby was nearby . She would have to navigate a rail yard to get to school .
 Topeka provided relatively equal facilities to its tiny black population . Community activists emphasized that racial separation made black children feel inferior .
 The combined cases reached the Supreme Court in 1952, but its ruling was postponed in anticipation of a rehearing . The case reached the court in 1952 .
 By then the Court had a newly appointed chief justice, Earl Warren, a former Republican governor of California . Warren was appointed by the Supreme Court .
 Brown would become the first of many cases that made the Warren Court a byword for judicial activism on behalf of America’s disenfranchised . Brown would be the first case to make the Supreme Court famous for activism .
 The Supreme Court invoked the Constitution’s Fourteenth Amendment in support of equal protection for minorities . It invoked the constitutional amendment to support minorities .
 In 1955 with a decision dubbed Brown II, the Court urged federal judges to undo school segregation “with all deliberate speed.” In 1955, the Brown II decision was called Brown II . The Court has since called for the removal of school segregation in schools .
 Some southern and border states began to educate black and white children together . But many districts defied the Court’s suggestions . Many districts defied their suggestions .
 In 1956 a “Southern Manifesto,” initiated by South Carolina Senator Strom Thurmond, accused the Court of abusing its power and vowed to reverse Brown . In 1956, a ‘Southern . Manifesto’ was launched by Senator Thurmond and accused the court of
 In cities like Charlotte and New Orleans efforts to enroll black children in white schools were met with hostility and outright violence . In New Orleans and Charlotte, efforts to integrate black children were met by hostility and violence .
 In Little Rock, Arkansas, in 1957 an attempt by nine carefully chosen black students to attend Central High School was met with spitting, kicking, and death threats, encouraged by Governor Orval Faubus . In 1957, nine carefully selected black students were met with spit, kicking and death
 President Dwight D Eisenhower ordered army and national guard troops into Little Rock to restore order . Little Rock was the scene of chaos in Little Rock, Arkansas .
 By 1964 only 1.1 percent of black children in 11 southern states were attending school with white children . By 1964 1.3 percent of blacks were attending schools with white students . Only 1.7 percent of African children in southern states attended school with whites .
 In the 1970s, a Boston judicial plan to bus black students to predominantly white schools triggered violent protests not unlike those in Little Rock, as white families fled to suburban schools . In the 1980s, Boston's plan to remove black students from predominantly white school sparked violent protests .
 African-American parents, most at first delighted by Brown, questioned the aims of racial integration and doubted its realization . Meanwhile African-Americans questioned the aim of integration and doubts it .
 Parents argue that adequate school budgets and resources are more important than seating their children next to whites in the classroom . They argued that adequate funding was more important .
 In 1967 the NAACP’s Thurgood Marshall became the first African-American justice appointed to the Supreme Court . The racial equality he had worked to achieve remained only partially implemented . In 2004, Brown's 50th anniversary was celebrated in celebration of racial equality .
 The History of Brown Board of Education and Black America’s Struggle for Equality. The History . of Brown . Board of . Education and the Struggle for . Equality. Black America .
 James T Brown Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and its Troubled Legacy . Patterson, Patterson, and Patterson, James T. Brown, write about Brown's role in education .
 George Herbert Walker Walker Bush was president of the United States from 1989 to 1993 . Bush served as Ronald Reagan’s vice president for the previous eight years .
 He followed in his father’s footsteps by entering military service on his 18th birthday . By the end of World War II, he had received three Air Medals, the Distinguished Flying Cross, and the Presidential Unit Citation .
 In 1964, Bush ran for the Senate in Texas, winning the Republican nomination but losing the election . Prescott finished his second and final year as a senator from Connecticut . Prescott died in 1964 .
 He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1966, where he served until again losing the senatorial election in 1970 . He served in the House and Senate from 1966 to 1970 .
 In the 1970s, he served as the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency . In the 1980s he was also the United States ambassador to U.N. and director of CIA .
 CIA documents have admitted that Bush’s business partner in Zapata Petroleum, the oil business he started, was a covert agent . In fact, CIA documents show that Bush's business partner was a secret agent .
 The extent of Bush’s other ties with the agency have not been established .
 In 1980 Bush was Ronald Reagan’s principal opponent in the Republican primaries . He coined the derisive term ‘voodoo economics’ to refer to Reagan‘s fiscal policy .
 When Reagan won the Republican nomination, he made Bush his running mate . The two won decisively in both 1980 and 1984 . Bush and Reagan won decisively .
 In 1988 Bush became one of the few vice presidents to succeed his president . In 1988 he became the first vice president to succeed the president .
 During Bush’s term, the Berlin Wall was taken down, Germany reunified, the Soviet Union dissolved . Eastern European countries behind the Iron Curtain began holding elections or overthrew their communist governments .
 In 1990, Bush led the United Nations coalition in operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm . Bush said it was not a war for oil but a war against aggression against aggression .
 It was the first major American military action conducted under the watch of cable news . Significantly, it was also a televised war .
 Americans whose parents had been the first to see footage of war on the evening news were now the first-to-be-first to see their war broadcast live . Americans who had been first to watch the news had now been able to watch it live .
 Bush and King Fahd meet in the Royal Pavilion in Saudi Arabia to discuss the situation in Iraq in 1990 .
 In the 1992 election Bush lost to Governor Bill Clinton in Texas . Ross Perot won nearly a fifth of the popular vote despite frequent decisions not to run for president .
 Key to Bush’s loss were the recession, the perception that he was out of touch with the common man . The desire for change to reflect a new state of affairs in the wake of the cold war, he says .
 George Walker Bush was the 43rd president of the United States . He was elected in 2000 and served from 2001 to 2008 .
 His presidency began and remained in controversy, from the issues surrounding the 2000 election to the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the subsequent wars in Afghanistan and Iraq . President George W. Bush was elected to office in 2000 .
 He served in the Air National Guard during the Vietnam War . While his father and grandfather had served during wartime, he served in Vietnam War.
 Bush described this period of his life as irresponsible and informed by bad choices, characterized by excessive drinking . Bush has described it as 'irresponsible' and 'reckless'
 The former Texas Rangers general manager served as general manager from 1989 to 1994 . After a failed congressional bid, he spent most of the 1980s working in oil industry .
 He ran for governor of Texas in 1994, same year his brother Jeb ran for Florida governor . Jeb lost, but was elected in 1998, the same year George won his reelection by a landslide . George ran for Texas governor in 1994 .
 Bush declared June 10, 2000, to be “Jesus Day,” a state holiday in memory of Jesus and encouraging reaching out to those in need . State executions rose to higher levels than any other state in modern American history .
 At the time, Bush was running for president, he named Jesus as the political philosopher he most identified with . In an early debate before the Republican primaries, he identified him only by the religious title “Christ”
 He won the Republican nomination, picking Dick Cheney as his running mate . Dick Cheney was his father’s secretary of defense .
 Voting irregularities in Florida made it difficult to determine whether Bush or Clinton’s vice president, A1 Gore, had won the state, and the electoral vote in the rest of the country was close enough that the Florida votes would be the tiebreakers .
 Less than one-tenth of 1 percent separated the two candidates, requiring a series of recounts both by hand and machine, and precipitating a national controversy .
 The U.S. Supreme Court finally ruled that with no time remaining to require a thorough and uniform recount, the state’s then-official count would be upheld . The case was decided by the Supreme Court in 2008 .
 More than any other president in recent memory, Bush has worn his faith on his sleeve . Bush has made frequent reference to God and Christian matters in his speeches .
 The events of September 11 proved pivotal for the rest of George W Bush’s two terms . Merely months into his presidency, Bush. declared a “war on terrorism,” and shortly identified an “axis of evil” as those states .
 Domestic policy was affected by the USA Patriot Act and the creation of Homeland Security . Foreign policy led to war with Afghanistan and protracted war in Iraq .
 The Office of Strategic Influence was created in secret to develop psychological means of furthering the war on terrorism . It changed its name once the public discovered its existence .
 He has positioned himself as his father’s successor, staffing his cabinet with several men associated with the elder Bush . He has repeatedly referred to an Iraqi assassination attempt as part of his justification for the war .
 His approval rating has dipped as low as 28 percent, among the lowest presidential approval ratings in history . Several prominent movements have called for his impeachment, usually in response to the controversy surrounding the NSA's warrant-less surveillance .
 Since the mid-20th century Canada has been a constitutional monarchy and a parliamentary democracy . Canada has a federal system of parliamentary government . Bill Kte’pi Canada after 1950 .
 Canada’s constitution governs the legal framework of the country . It consists of written text and unwritten traditions and conventions . Canada's constitution is based on the constitution .
 Until November 1981 Canada’s government retained strong ties to the British parliament . The Canadian constitution could only be amended by an act of Great Britain's parliament . Canada's constitution was only amended by a British act of parliament . In November 1981, the Canadian constitution was amended by the British
 The provinces and the federal government failed to patriate the constitution in the 1960s and 1970s . Negotiations between provinces and government were unsuccessful .
 Talks between the federal government and the English-speaking provinces finally bore fruit in 1981, giving Canada full amendment powers over its own constitution .
 Despite the patriation of the constitution, ties between Canada and the Commonwealth of Nations remain close . Queen Elizabeth II of England had been the chief of state prior to this .
 On September 27, 2005, Michaelle Jean was appointed by the queen, on the advice of the prime minister, as governor-general of Canada for a five-year term . Jean is a former Canadian politician and author of a book called "Canada's First Lady"
 This position belongs to the leader of the political party that can obtain the confidence of a majority in the House of Commons . This position is held by a party that has a majority of support in the Commons .
 General elections are called by the governorgeneral when the prime minister so advises, and must occur every five years or less . General elections must take place every five or less in five years and must be held every five .
 English and French are the mother tongues of 56 percent and 28 percent of the population in Canada . English is Canada's second official language, followed by French and French .
 On July 7, 1969, the Official Languages Act was proclaimed, and French was made commensurate to English throughout the federal government . French was a major part of the Canadian government .
 This started a process that led to Canada’s redefining itself as a ‘bilingual” nation . This started to a process which led to the country being a "bilingual" nation .
 French is mostly spoken in Quebec province, parts of New Brunswick, eastern and northern Ontario, Saskatchewan, the south of Nova Scotia, and southern Manitoba province .
 Several aboriginal languages also have official status in the Northwest Territories . Aboriginal languages are also official languages in the region .
 Inuktitut is the majority language in Nunavut and has official status there . It is the most spoken language in the Arctic region .
 They changed with the arrival of new immigrants, as they did during the country’s early days . The country's immigration policy has been in flux since the 1970s .
 The largest Protestant denomination is the United Church of Canada . About 17 percent of Canadians have no religious affiliation . About 6 or 7 percent practice religions other than Christianity .
 Canada’s entertainment industry grew alongside the U.S. leading film and music industry . It had a quick development during the 1950s and 1960s, but the most rapid development after the 1990s .
 For 77 78 Caribbean Basin Initiative decades the Canadian film market was dominated by the American film industry . Canadians developed a vigorous film industry that produced a variety of well-known films, actors, and directors .
 Canada’s film industry is in full expansion as a site for Hollywood productions . Canada's film industry has been expanding in recent years . The country has a history of film and television productions .
 After the 1980s Canada—and Vancouver, Vancouver, became known as Hollywood North . Hollywood North became Hollywood North in the late 1980s .
 After the mid-20th century there were many advances in literature, mainly since the 1980s . After the 20s, there have been a number of advances in writing since then .
 Canada’s literature also had some important authors . But before those years, Canada had some of its best-known authors .
 The Caribbean Basin Initiative was launched by Ronald Reagan in 1983 . It built on the legacy of the Alliance for Progress to foster free trade, open markets, economic growth, and export diversification .
 Measured in terms of dollar values of goods exchanged, the initiative has proven successful . Measured by dollar values, it has proven to be a success .
 In 2004 the total value of CBI exports to the United States more than tripled from 1984, reaching $27. billion . United States exports to CBI countries reached $24. billion, making the CBI region the eighth largest recipient of U.S. exports . CBI region is 8th largest
 The CBI was launched during a period of escalating tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union . The U.S. was deeply concerned with the growth of leftist and revolutionary movements in Central America and the Caribbean .
 By 1983 the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua was entering its fourth year . The leftist FDR-FMLN political and guerrilla movements in El Salvador posed a serious challenge to that country’s U.S.-supported government . The Guatemalan military’�s war against several guerrilla
 The October 1983 United States invasion of Grenada to oust that country’s anti-imperialist, Marxist-oriented government further underscored the geopolitical concerns of U.S. foreign policymakers .
 Scholarly interpretations of the CBI’s economic and social impact vary widely . Scholarly interpretation of CBI's economic, social impact varies widely . The CBI was founded in 1903 and is now based in Washington, D.C.
 All observers agree that the CBI has expanded trade and promoted economic growth . But disagree over whether that growth has fostered sustainable economic development, diminished inequalities, alleviated poverty, or enhanced the social well-being of the majority .
 Critics say the CBI’s export-led model of growth has done little to improve living standards . Critics say it perpetuates structural inequalities within CBI member countries .
 The CBI’s supporters argue that economic growth remains the sine qua non of poverty alleviation and improved social conditions . The CBI's supporters argue economic growth will help alleviate poverty and improve social conditions.
 Evidence indicates that poverty rates, socioeconomic differentiation, and indices of social well-being in most CBI countries have seen marginal improvements at best since 1984 .
 Carter, Jimmy 79 will continue to have a major impact on the region’s economies and inhabitants . All observers agree that the CBI and related U.S. laws .
 James Earl Carter Jr. was the president of the United States from 1977 to 1981 . He was succeeded by Gerald Ford, succeeding Gerald Ford .
 Though he only served a single term, his was a significant presidency in both foreign and domestic affairs . He presided over a tumultuous time in U.S. history .
 Like his predecessor, he was a gifted student and athlete and a navy officer . He was also a gifted athlete and an athlete and was a Navy officer .
 He resigned from the navy in 1953 immediately following the death of his father . He worked on his family's Georgia peanut farm for the rest of the decade, becoming active in local politics .
 In 1962 he was elected to the State Senate, and he ran for governor only four years later . In 1970 he won the 1970 election, losing but winning the election .
 During the election, he seemed to pay lip service to segregationists . He condemned segregation immediately upon attaining office .
 He was the first southern governor to condemn segregation . He underscored his point by appointing blacks to many state offices .
 A reform-minded pragmatist, he worked at streamlining state government, condensing programs and agencies . He increased school funding, especially in poorer parts of the state .
 Nothing in his governorship brought him national attention, and when he ran for president in 1976, he was almost a complete unknown .
 He made reorganization of state government the centerpiece of his national campaign . His soft-spoken charisma, southernness, and traditional moral character were well received in the aftermath of Nixon's corruption and Ford's irrelevance . His sister Ruth was a well-known evangelist .
 Though his opposition to segregation distanced him from the Dixiecrats, he was conservative for a Democrat . He had criticized 1972 Democratic candidate George McGovern for being too liberal .
 Sentiment was against Ford sufficiently for Carter to win the election, albeit by a slim margin . Carter won the election by a narrow margin .
 The 1979 energy crisis followed the Iranian revolution, when the shah of Iran fled his country and allowed the Ayatollah Khomeini to seize power . The shah was overthrown in 1979 .
 Inflation reached double digits in the 1980s . Many of Carter’s fixes were probably effective, but the results were not seen until after he had lost the 1980 election .
 In September 1978 he brought Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin and Egyptian president Anwar el-Sadat to Camp David to finalize peace negotiations . In the wake of the Yom Kippur War and the other Mideast conflicts of the decade, the negotiations had been ongoing
 Camp David accords set a precedent for Arab-Israeli diplomacy . It segregated powerful Egypt from its Arab allies . The accords remain one of the most important developments in modern Middle Eastern relations .
 Carter’s foreign policy was driven by his respect for human rights, which may have influenced his decision to deny the shah's request for help during the Iranian Revolution . The shah may have asked for help in Iran .
 The shah’s reign had begun with American support immediately after World War II . His governance remained more liberal and Western-friendly than any other in the region . But his social policies were still a far cry from what Westerners would support .
 Carter did grant exiled shah entry to the United States for cancer treatment in October 1979 . Carter did eventually grant the exiled shahs entry into the U.S. for cancer treatments .
 Iranian militants seized the U.S. embassy in Tehran and held 53 hostages for more than a year . In response, the Iranian government seized the American embassy in Iran . The embassy was attacked by Iranian forces in 2009 .
 There is widespread speculation that the final negotiations were delayed by parties seeking Ronald Reagan’s election; the hostages were released on the day of his inauguration . There is also speculation that parties seeking Reagan's election delayed negotiations .
 The combination of the failing economy and the hostage crisis led to Carter’s loss to Reagan in the 1980 election . The failure of the economy and hostage crisis contributed to the election loss .
 He was only the third U.S. president to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . He remained active in humanitarian work, especially in the areas of human rights and health .
 Since the 1990s he has taken on a role as occasional diplomat, visiting countries such as North Korea and Venezuela . He was the first president to visit Cuba 80 Castro, Fidel since the 1959 revolution .
 Peter G. Bourne, Peter G Jimmy Carter: A Comprehensive Biography From Plains to Post-Presidency . Bourne: Jimmy Carter's life spans from Plains to post-presidency .
 The President, The Prophet, and the Shah: 1979 and the Coming of Militant Islam: 1979 . The President and the Prophet, The Shah, 1979 . 1979 and The Coming of Militar Islam. 1979 .
 Kaufman, Burton I The Presidency of James Earl Carter Jr. Little, Brown, 2004; Kaufman, Kaufman I The President of the U.S. I The . Presidency of the . Carter Administration . Kaufman's biography of the president is published in 2004 .
 Castro was born out of wedlock on August 13, 1926, a few kilometers south of the Bay of Nipe in then-Oriente province in eastern Cuba . He is one of the longest-lived heads of state in modern times, and one of most controversial . Castro was
 Fidel Castro y Argiz's father was a Galician immigrant and owner of a large sugar estate . His mother, Lina Ruz Gonzalez, was a servant in Angel’s house and, after Fidel’�s 17th birthday, was his second wife . Fidel Castro
 Fidel grew estranged from his parents, maintaining close relations mainly with his younger brother Raul . Fidel was one of the most prominent leaders of the revolution in Cuba . As an adult, Fidel became estranged from parents .
 In 1948 he traveled to Bogota, Colombia, for a student conference being held alongside the ninth meeting of the PanAmerican Union . He was a member of the student conference in Bogota .
 There he witnessed and participated in the Bogotazo, in which liberal leader Jorge Gaitan was assassinated and Bogota erupted in massive street violence . He witnessed the extraordinary events in Bogota, Colombia .
 The events are considered to have had a major impact on his thinking on the role of violence and popular insurrection in sparking social change . The events were considered a major influence in his thinking .
 Returning to Cuba, he married Mirta Diaz Balart, daughter of a wealthy Cuban family . He returned to Cuba and married a wealthy family .
 He was the undisputed leader of Cuba from 1959 until 2008 . He joined a small firm in Havana whose work focused mainly on the poor in 1950 .
 He became a parliamentary candidate in 1952, only to see the elections cancelled following the coup by General Fulgencio Batista . Intensely interested in politics, he became a candidate for the first time .
 Determined to challenge the regime, he plotted and carried out an assault on the Moncada barracks in eastern Cuba on July 26, 1953 . He and his brother Raul plotted to carry out the assault .
 The assault proved a military defeat but a political victory, with his four-hour “History will absolve me” speech at his October 1953 trial propelling him into national prominence . His speech at the trial helped launch his political career .
 He was imprisoned for less than 20 months of a 15-year sentence . He went into exile in Mexico and began organizing his 26 July Movement . He was released in May 1955 in a general amnesty .
 He and his followers returned clandestinely to eastern Cuba on December 2, 1956 . For the next two years they waged a guerrilla war against the Batista regime . Forming the nucleus of a guerrilla army, he and followers fought against Batista .
 He was still vague about his ideology, which by his public statements could be Central Asia after 1991 . He was characterized as broadly nationalist and focused on issues of social justice . Seizing power on January 1, 1959, he took power in 1959 .
 From 1959 to 1961 the revolution radicalized and became integral to the cold war . The revolution was radicalized during the Cold War . From 1959 until 1961 the revolutionary revolution radicalised and became part of the Cold war .
 Since 1959 he was the undisputed leader of the Cuban revolution and government . He was renowned for his volcanic energy, hours-long speeches, and hands-on leadership style . Cuban exile community is divided over his legacy .
 In early 2007 his death appeared imminent, but he remained in power until his resignation in February 2008 . His death appeared to be imminent in early 2007, but his resignation was accepted .
 The former Soviet Republics of Central Asia consist of the present-day states of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan . Central Asia after 1991 consists of former Soviet republics .
 All five of the so-called stans received their independence during the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 . All five countries were granted their independence from Soviet Union during 1991 .
 Often the five former Soviet republics are considered collectively because they share many of the same challenges and problems . Often the former Soviet Republics are seen collectively as one of the best countries in the world .
 Central Asia is often faced by the rise of radical Islam in the region . Central Asian states have seen a rise in radical Islam as a major problem .
 The valley is shared by Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Kyrgyzstan . The valley has hosted a centuries-long tradition of independent Islamic thinking .
 Quantitative scores for variables such as voice and accountability, political stability, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption rank near the bottom of each state .
 Cities in region face water shortages and contaminated water, pollution, and radioactive and toxic waste issues . Cities in the region face shortages of water, contaminated water and radioactive waste issues.
 Many have suggested that the chronic environmental problems have been inherited from the Soviet regime . Many have said that the problems are caused by the Soviet-era regime .
 Joseph Stalin attempted to increase Soviet cotton production by constructing new canals in order to irrigate Central Asian lands . Stalin built canals to increase cotton production in the 1930s . The canals were constructed in order to irrigate Soviet cotton crops .
 Water from Aral continues to be diverted to existing irrigation systems . Water from the Aral has been diverted to the existing irrigation system .
 A contemporary ecological problem is the constant shrinking of the Aral Sea . As a result, a contemporary ecological . problem is a constant shrinking . The Aral sea is shrinking .
 Land surrounding the Aral Sea faces desertification, which jeopardizes homes and businesses near the water . Land surrounding Aral sea is also at risk of desertification .
 Airborne pollutants have resulted in high levels of tuberculosis, viral hepatitis, and cardiovascular and liver diseases . Airborne pollution has caused high levels in the U.S. and Canada .
 Each state offers a different narrative, and generalizations do not tell the entire story . Although each of the former Soviet Central Asian republics face similar challenges, each state also offers a . different narrative .
 Each of the five former Soviet republics has embarked on different paths since independence . Indeed, each of them has embarked a different path since independence.
 The Republic of Kazakhstan is the successor to the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic . Kazakhstan was formed from the Soviet Union in 1960s and 1961 .
 Kazakhstan neighbors Russia to the west and north, China to the east, and Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan to the south . Kazakhstan is one of the most densely populated countries in the world .
 President Nursultan Nazarbayev has served as the chief of state since before the December 16, 1991, day of independence . Nursultan has been president of Uzbekistan since before before the 1991, 1991 independence .
 Gorbachev turned to another Kazakh in order to placate Kazakh opinion . The violence and rioting that followed forced Gorbachachev to turn to a Kazakh . Gorbache was replaced by another Kazakh .
 Nazarbayev supported Gorbachev during the August 1991 putsch against Gorbachachev . During the putsch, he supported the then-Gorbachev government .
 Nazarbayev banned all political activity in the government as well as in the courts and police . Shortly afterward he banned political activity from the government, courts and the police .
 As the Soviet Union disintegrated, the Kazakh president was one of the last to push for independence . He was the last president to push to become independent from the former Soviet Union . The Kazakh president died in 2011 at the age of 65 .
 Kazakhstan enjoys a prosperous grain agribusiness in the north and raises stock in the south . Economically, Kazakhstan is known for its grain production in the region .
 Central Asia after 1991 enjoys large deposits of oil and gas . Kazakhstan is one of Central Asia's most important countries .
 The rich natural resources have, in addition, made Kazakhstan an attractive destination for foreign direct investment . Kazakhstan is also attracting investment in the country's natural resources .
 From 1991 to 2002, direct foreign investment in Kazakhstan was over $13 billion . In fact, from 1991 to . 2002, . direct foreign . investment in . Kazakhstan was $13billion .
 Kazakhstan boasts 4 billion tons of provable and recoverable oil reserves . Kazakhstan boasts 2 trillion cubic meters of natural gas and 2 trillion tons of crude oil .
 Estimates suggest Kazakhstan may be able to produce about 3 million barrels of oil a day by the year 2015 . Estimates suggest that the country could produce about three million barrels a day .
 The system is a presidential-parliamentary model similar to that in Russia . President Vladimir Putin is expected to lead the country to victory .
 In March 1994 the Constitutional Court found that the method previously used to elect representatives to the lower house of parliament was illegal . The Constitutional Court ruled that the system was illegal in March 1994 .
 A change was made so that the lower house, Majlis, would be elected and the upper house, the Senate, was appointed . The Majlis is elected by the Majlis but the Senate is appointed by the Senate .
 The president controlled seven appointments to the Senate . indirect elections of a joint session of all representative bodies of all local government units filled the other 32 .
 10 of the 67 possible seats were reserved for proportional representation for parties meeting a 7 percent threshold . This time, 10 of those seats are reserved for parties with a 7% threshold .
 Under pressure from Nazarbayev during October 1998, the parliament moved elections scheduled for December 2000 to January 1999 . The parliament moved the elections to December 2000 instead of December 2000 .
 Nazarbayev won the elections and received more than 79 percent of the vote . Nazarayev was the only person to win the election in Azerbaijan .
 Many questions existed about the fairness of the 1999 elections . However, many questions were still raised about the outcome .
 Former prime minister Akezhan Kazhegeldin, a significant opponent of the regime, was not allowed to run . He was a significant opposition leader .
 Kazakhstan operates in the tradition of strong presidential governments in the region . A great deal of control is in the hands of Nazarbayev and his family . Overall, Kazakhstan operates a strong presidential government .
 The Republic of Kyrgyzstan is the successor of the Kirgiz Soviet Socialist Republic . The Republic is the name of the country's successor to the Kirziz Soviet Republic .
 Kyrgzstan is bordered by Kazakhstan in the north, Uzbekistan in the west, Tajikistan to the west and southwest, and China to the east . Kyrzakhstan is also located in Uzbekistan, China and Uzbekistan .
 Fife under the Soviet Union led to more modern life and movement to cities . Fife is now a popular tourist destination in Scotland .
 The late 1980s and early 1990s brought questions of identity to Kyrgyzstan . Tike many republics in the former Soviet Union, the late 80s and 90s brought issues of identity . The country is one of the most isolated in the country's history .
 Askar Akayev was chosen as president of Kyrgyzstan . The movement emerged in opposition to Masaliev, who was elected president in 2010 . Askar is the current president of the Kyrgygstan .
 Early in its history, Kygyzstan was seen by many as the most progressive of all Central Asian governments . The country was seen as a progressive state of its own .
 The United States symbolically opened its first Central Asian embassy in Bishkek on February 1, 1992 . The U.S. opened the embassy in 1992 .
 By 1993 Kyrgyzstan was receiving the highest per-capita aid from the United States of any of the Central Asian states . By 1993 it had the highest amount of U.S. aid from any Central Asian state .
 Kyrgyzstan was the first of the new Central Asian states to be invited to join the World Trade Organization in 1988 . In 1988 the country was invited to become the first Central Asian state to join WTO .
 Bishkek has had fairly warm relations with Russia, which include the presence of Russian troops in Kyrgyzstan . Bishk has also had a warm relationship with the Russian government .
 Central Asian state also offered bases to U.S. forces and allowed military flights into the Manas International Airport in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks . The Central Asian nation also allowed bases to United States forces .
 Kyrgyzstan has distributed free land to approximately 700,000 citizens since independence . Since independence, the country's population has received free land .
 Mining of antimony and mercury ores is a source of revenue . Lead, zinc, and coal are all mined as well as antimony .
 Opposition to market reforms from the legislature led to Akayev’s calling for a referendum for February 1994 . Eventually, opposition to the market reforms led to a referendum in February 1994, which was held .
 In that referendum, 96 percent of respondents favored Akayev and his economic program . 96 percent said they would vote for him and his program in a referendum .
 Akayev created a bicameral legislature called the Assembly of the People of Kyrgyzstan . In its place, the government abolished its own parliament .
 Approximately 80 percent of the candidates ran as independents and, ultimately, created an assembly very receptive to Akayev’s policies .
 Central Asia after 1991: Kyrgyzstan after 1991 . Civic education students listen to a visiting local religious leader .
 After the 1995 elections, Akayev began to increase his own power through a number of constitutional amendments . He has been accused of corruption in the past .
 A policy of privatization resulted in about 61 percent of all state-owned enterprises being privatized by May 1997 . The policy was followed by a policy of privatization in the late 1990s .
 At that time Akayev became convinced that state assets were being sold too quickly, and a oneyear ban on privatization resulted . At that year Akayeva became convinced .
 Many within the political opposition claim that members of the legislature personally profited from the privatization process . Many in the opposition say that politicians profited in the process .
 Kyrgyz government made a concerted effort to minimize the turnout of opposition parties in February 2000 parliamentary elections . Opposition parties were not allowed to turn out for the vote .
 The Organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe criticized the elections as being unfair . In fact, the elections were criticized by the organization .
 Akayev was elected president of Russia in October 2000 . He faced a tough task to win the presidency in the first year of his presidency .
 Akayev’s most significant opposition was widely believed to be Feliks Kulov, a former vice president . The opposition is widely thought to be a former Vice President .
 Kulov, however, was arrested, acquitted, and rearrested on what many felt were fabricated charges . Kulov pulled out of the race after being arrested and re-arrested .
 After the election Feliks Kulov called for cooperation with Akayev’s government . The election was held in Russia on November 11 .
 Opposition parties formed a “People’s Congress” in November that year . In what was mainly a symbolic move, Kulov was elected chair . In November, opposition parties formed "People's Congress"
 Opposition continued to grow when, in January 2002, a parliament deputy from southern Kyrgyzstan, Azimbek Beknazarov, was arrested . Opposition to the arrest of the deputy continued in 2002 .
 Clashes between protesters and government authorities in March resulted in the deaths of six individuals . Six people were killed in March clashes between demonstrators and authorities .
 In May, as the commission released its report, protests calling for the resignation of Akayev spread throughout Kyrgyzstan . The commission's report was released in May .
 Akayev ordered the release of Beknazarov and even replaced the prime minister . Bekanazarov was released by the government .
 The referendum found that 75. percent supported the notion that Akayev serve until the completion of his term—in 2005 . The referendum was held in 2005, and 75.
 The most significant change in the constitution was the movement from a bicameral to unicameral legislature . The change was effective at the end of the legislative term .
 On March 24, 2005, Akayev bowed to widespread protests and the will of the people and resigned . The former prime minister resigned from the post in 2005 .
 The ‘Tulip Revolution’ was seen by many as the result of Akayev’s inability to address growing levels of crime and corruption as well as questions concerning his reelection . The “Tulips Revolution” was seen as a result of growing levels
 Kurmanbek Bakiev became president of Kyrgyzstan after a political shakeup . Omurbek Tekebaev became speaker of the Jogorku Kenesh .
 Tajikistan is the independent successor state to the former Tadzhik Soviet Socialist Republic . The formal name for the republic is the Republic of Tajikistani . Tajikstan is the country's most populous region .
 Tajikistan is neighbored by China to the east, Afghanistan to the south, Uzbekistan to the west and north, and Kyrgyzstan to the north . It is also located in Afghanistan, Afghanistan and Uzbekistan .
 A large number of Tajikistan’s Muslims are Sunni from the Hanafi School . The Hanafi school is based in the country's capital, Tajikstan .
 80 percent of the population is Tajik, with the next-largest group being Uzbek at about 15 percent . In addition, 80 percent are Tajik . The next largest group of Tajik is Uzbek .
 During the Soviet period, Tajikistan was typically ruled by leaders sent by Moscow . During this period, the country was ruled by a leader sent by the Kremlin .
 The programs of perestroika and glasnost introduced by Gorbachev changed the dynamics of Tajik politics . Tajikistan is one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 Tajik Supreme Soviet responded by ousting Aslonov as chair and electing Rakhmon Nabiyev . Tajik's Supreme Soviet has been ruled out of power by the Tajik government .
 Elections set by the Supreme Soviet on November 24 initially featured 10 candidates . 7 would vie for the position . Elections set for November 24 originally featured 10 .
 Rakhmon Nabiyev won of the November 1991 election with 56. percent of the vote . Nabiyeva was elected to the post in November 1991 .
 By the spring of 1992 opposition to Nabiyev came in the form of the Islamic-led Union of Popular Forces . By that time opposition had reached a low level .
 The union pushed for multiparty elections, greater freedom of religion, and the removal of Nabiyev . The union also pushed for multi-party elections and greater religious freedom .
 Tajik parliament gave Nabiyev the use of decree in order to strengthen the hand of the executive . Tajik lawmakers gave him the power to use decree to strengthen his authority .
 Nabiyev resorted to the use of a state of emergency in response to protests . Political protests continued, and political protests continued in the country's capital .
 In May opposition forces seized the capital and created a revolutionary council . The capital was seized by opposition forces in a bid to seize power .
 Nabiyev lifted the state of emergency and promised to form a government of reconciliation . He lifted the emergency and pledged to form an 'government of reconciliation' with the opposition .
 Nabiyev now faces criticism from Islamic opponents and ex-communists . Ex-communist ex-Communists say he ceded too much to the opposition . He has faced criticism from both sides .
 Former communists seized local governments in the north and the east . Islamists seized local government in the south and east of the country .
 Nabiyev requested international peacekeepers from the Commonwealth of Independent States . Opposition forces declared an open rebellion in the country's capital .
 Nabiyev was captured as he attempted to flee Dushanbe and was forced to resign . Nabiyeva was captured and forced to quit as he tried to flee the country .
 A new Islamicdemocratic coalition government, led by Akbarsho Iskandarov, claimed control . The new government is led by a new Islamic democratic coalition .
 The most developed regions of Tajikistan fell under the power of excommunists aligned with Nabiyev . The end result was that the north of the country fell under excommunist rule .
 Forces loyal to Nabiyev took over Dushanbe on December 10 and installed Emomali Rakhmonov as acting president . Forces loyal and loyal forces loyal to the former president took control of the country .
 Islamic forces fled to the mountainous regions of Tajikistan and to areas over the border in Afghanistan . The Islamic forces have been fighting in the region since 2001 .
 As the war continued, the Tajik government received a great deal of financial and military support from Russia . Russia was involved in the conflict in Tajikistan .
 By the fall of 1993 there were some 20,000 Russian troops in Tajikistan . Russian troops were stationed in the country .
 Russian finances were providing an estimated 50 percent of the Tajik budget as well . Russian finances are estimated to provide an estimated half of Tajik's budget . The Tajik economy is estimated to be at an estimated $1.5 billion a year .
 The nearby Uzbekistan government of Uzbekistan also provided a significant amount of support . The nearby government also provided significant support .
 In the summer of 1994 talks between the rebels and the Tajik government, held in Islamabad, led to a cessation of hostilities . The Tajik-Tajik conflict is still ongoing .
 In November 1994 presidential elections were held between Rakhmonov and former prime minister Abdumalik Abdulajanov . In 1994 presidential election was held between former PM and former PM Abdum alkadov .
 Rakhmonov won reelection with 60 percent of the vote . The new constitution was approved, and the new constitution approved .
 Russia informed Rakhmonov that they would not intervene again to save the regime . Russia told him they won't intervene again in Syria again .
 Rakhmonov began negotiations with the rebels and dismissed several high-ranking government officials . The rebels have been fighting for independence in the past year .
 A peace agreement was reached, and a Reconciliation Council was formed . A reconciliation council was formed after a war broke out .
 Once Rakhmonov returned to Dushanbe, however, he was unable to convince political allies to sign off on the agreement .
 Rakhmonov agreed to allow opposition troops into the Tajik armed forces . Tajik President Vladimir Putin agreed to let opposition forces into the country's armed forces.
 Two-party system is hoped to limit violence inherent heretofore in Tajik politics . Tajik is the only country in the world to have a two-party government .
 The late 1990s were characterized by a number of political assassinations . The late 90s were marked by a series of assassinations of politicians .
 In 1998 opposition politician Otakhon Latifi was killed, and a former prosecutor general, Tolib Boboyev, was killed in early 1999 . Former prosecutor general and opposition politician was killed .
 The 1997 agreement called for parliamentary elections by 1998, but the ban on Islamic political parties retarded rapid reconciliation . The agreement was reached in 1997, but it was not reached until 1998 .
 Presidential elections were scheduled for November 6, Central Asia after 1991 85, 1999, and lower-house parliamentary elections for February 27, 2000 . Central Asia was ruled out of the Soviet Union in 1991 85 .
 Three potential presidential candidates were not allowed on the ballot based on the claim that they had not achieved the required number of signatures . The claim was made that the candidates did not achieve the required signatures .
 The end result was that Rakhmonov only faced nominal resistance and was reelected with 96 percent of the vote . The result of the election was that he was re-elected without opposition .
 The Supreme Court used various legal machinations to suppress opposition . In fact, the Supreme Court did use various legal moutlets to suppress dissent .
 Elections for the Majlisi Milliy were held on March 23, 2000 . Elections were held for the newly created upper house, the Majlis Milliy .
 In Tajik system of governance, the Majlisi Milliy theoretically serves as a stabilizing factor in domestic politics . Tajik government is based in Tajikistan, Uzbekistan .
 As in other states in the region, one of the primary concerns of the Tajik government is the specter of radical Islam . Tajik's government is concerned that radical Islam is being spread across the country .
 Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan launched incursions into Kyrgyzstan via Tajikistan in 1999 and 2000 . The Islamic Movement was headquartered in Afghanistan, and is based in Afghanistan .
 President Rakhmonov stepped up attacks and surveillance of Islamic groups in 2002 . In 2002 he stepped up his attacks on Islamic groups .
 Tajikistan is one of the most important countries in the world to deal with drugs and associated problems . The country has a history of drug problems, including drug trafficking .
 As a result of the 1992 to 1997 Tajik civil war, Tajikistan’s relations with Russia have been close . The civil war ended in 1997, but relations remain close .
 Russian troops remained in order to protect the Tajik border with Afghanistan . Even after the civil war ended, Russian troops remain in Tajik territory .
 During the reign of the Taliban in Afghanistan, Tajikistan offered sanctuary to a Tajik commander and his troops . The Taliban was ousted from the country during the Taliban's reign in Afghanistan .
 Tajikistan feared the potential spread of radical Islam from Afghanistan . The country feared the Taliban's influence in Afghanistan .
 Tajikistan was among the first to offer cooperation with the U.S. after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, on the United States . Despite the relatively warm relationship between the two countries, Russia has a warm relationship with Tajikstan .
 Tajikistan permitted the use of the Dushanbe Airport and allowed the basing of a small contingent of U.S. troops within its sovereign borders . Tajikstan has allowed the baseing of the United States troops .
 The president fills both the ceremonial role of head of state and the policy-creating role of a chief executive officer . The president is popularly elected within a multiparty system .
 Prime minister is appointed by the president and confirmed by the lower chamber of parliament . The prime minister is chosen by president and confirms by lower chamber .
 The prime minister and the cabinet control the day-to-day operations of the government . The cabinet is responsible for the government's daily operations .
 The power-sharing arrangement of 1997 guaranteed 30 percent of government and local posts to opposition parties . Power-sharing deal was agreed with the opposition parties in 1997 . The agreement guarantees 30 percent government posts to the opposition .
 Key to this arrangement is the reality that all geographic areas are represented . Key to success is the fact that all over the world is represented in the United States .
 The power-sharing agreement was renewed in 1999 and then again, indefinitely, in 2002 . It was renewed again in 2002 and extended indefinitely in 1999 .
 Most of the Tajik economy is agricultural, and cotton is the most dominant agricultural product . Cotton is the main agricultural product in Tajikistan . Most of Tajik's economy is agriculture .
 Tajikistan is mostly involved in the light manufacturing segments of cotton and silk processing . The country is mainly involved in light manufacturing and silk manufacturing .
 Coal, iron, lead, zinc, antimony, mercury, gold, tin, and tungsten are the most common extractive industries . Mining of coal, iron and lead is the biggest extractive industry in the world .
 The uneasy peace that lasted since the end of the Tajik civil war offered some optimism for the future of that state . Politically, the uneasy peace between Tajik and Uzbekistan has never been fully realized .
 The Republic of Turkmenistan is the successor to the Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic . The formal name for Turkmenstan is the Republic of Turkey . It is also known as Turkmenmenistan .
 Muslims account for 85 percent of the population in Turkmenistan, which is 186,400 square miles in area . Muslims make up the majority of the country's population .
 Turkmenistan is bordered by Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Uzbekistan . The capital city is Ashgabat, and the country's borders are Iran and Afghanistan to the south . The country is also located in Uzbekistan, Afghanistan and Iran .
 The Turkmen landmass is dominated by the Kara Kum Desert, also referred to as the Black Sand Desert . The landmass of Turkmen is also known as the "Black Sand Desert"
 Kara Kum Canal is the largest irrigation and shipping canal in the world . The Kara Kum canal is the world's largest irrigation canal . It is also the largest shipping canal on the planet .
 Approximately three-fourths of all citizens of Turkmenistan are Turkmen . The next-largest ethnic groups are Uzbek, at about 9 percent, and Russian, at 6.6 percent .
 Since independence, a significant problem has been the flight of Russians, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia is the only country in the world to have a large majority of Russians .
 Turkmen Supreme Soviet declared sovereignty in August 1990 . Although loyal to the Soviet Union, the Turkmen were loyal to it . Turkmen are now independent of the USSR .
 After the coup attempt on Gorbachev, Niyazov declared Turkmen independence and scheduled a referendum for October 26, 1991 . Turkmen's independence was declared in 1991 .
 Turkmen foreign policy is based upon a number of bilateral agreements and does not allow multilateral agreements . Turkmen Foreign Policy is based on bilateral agreements, not multilateral ones .
 In terms of domestic policy, Niyazov engaged in a strategy to enhance the Turkmen culture, he said . Niyasov engaged .
 Attempts to isolate Turkmenistan included the banning of opera, closing of concert halls and the circus, ending the Academy of Sciences and institution of Turkmen-only language laws .
 In 2003 Niyazov constructed penal colonies in the Karakum desert in an effort to make society healthier by cleansing society . The penal colonies were constructed in 2003 in an attempt to clean society .
 Niyazov died in late December 2006 . He was succeeded by Deputy Prime Minister Gurbungali Berdymukhamedov .
 During the legislative elections, no opposition party was able to meet the standards required for registration . The opposition party has not been able to register with any of the parties registered .
 In 2002 the former chair of the Turkmen Central Bank, Hudaiberdi Orazov, joined the anti-Niyazov forces .
 Orazov lost credibility when he was charged with embezzling money from the Turkmen government . Characterizing himself as a reformer, he lost some credibility after he was arrested .
 Orazov later admitted partially to the charges and even returned $100,000 in funds . He later admitted to partially admitting to charges and returned the funds .
 Niyazov followed with a purge of the National Security Committee in March 2002 . The purge was followed by a purge from the National Socialist Committee in 2002 .
 Defense Minister Kurbandurdy Begendjev was also fired, as were a number of other high-ranking officials on the National Security Committee . The move follows a series of high-profile resignations from the government .
 The former head of the National Security Committee and 21 of his subordinates were accused of a number of crimes that included murder, hiring prostitutes, accepting bribes, and corruption . A month later, in May 2002, the ex-head of the committee was accused of murder .
 Purges also led to the dismissals of the chair of the National Bank, the head of the country’s main television outlet, and the chairman of the Council for Television and Radio Broadcasting, the Institute of Culture .
 Turkmenistan's Niyazov was assassinated on November 25, 2002 . The assassination was an attempt to kill him . The country's prime minister is now the prime minister .
 Niyavoz says armed attempt was made on him and his car escaped untouched . Police say he escaped unharmed and that his car was left untouched . He was shot dead in the head by police officers .
 Some political opponents accuse Niyazov of masterminding the attack himself in an effort to enhance his political position both domestically and internationally . The attack was carried out in the country's capital, the capital Moscow .
 Niyazov used the attack as an excuse to crack down on the opposition again . The attack was the latest in a series of incidents against the opposition in the country .
 The assassination attempt was followed by the arrests of hundreds, including a number of foreign citizens . Hundreds of people have been arrested in connection with the assassination attempt .
 Niyazov raided the Uzbek embassy and accused them of harboring assassination conspirators . He then expelled the Uzbek ambassador, who was expelled from the country .
 Former foreign minister Boris Shikhmuradov was arrested several days before the assassination attempt . He was attempting to secretly enter Turkmenistan from Uzbekistan .
 In early 2003 Niyazov was pursuing law enforcement and security officials because of an assassination attempt . Niyasov pursued law enforcement officials after the assassination attempt in 2003 .
 Turkmenistan utilized the Soviet-era government system until December 1994 . Turkmenstan used the system until the end of 1994 .
 At that point Turkmenistan created a new system in which the president is the head of state and head of government . The president is now the president of the country, and the country's government is in power .
 The Majlis is the legislative arm of Turkmenistan . It consists of 50 members elected for a five-year term . Turkmenmenistan is one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 The People's Supreme Council is the country’s supreme consultation body . It is based in the United States . The council is the highest consultation body in the world .
 Theoretically, the People’s Supreme Council is to meet annually, but it met for the first time in three years in August 2002 . People's Supreme Council met for first time since 2002 .
 The council includes cabinet members, local executive bodies, judges, and members of some nongovernmental organizations . The council also includes members of the judiciary, the government and the public .
 At the 2003 annual meeting the Khalk Maslakhaty took over many of the functions previously entrusted to the Majlis . At the . 2003 annual . meeting . At . the 2003 . annual meeting . Khalk . Maslakia took over . many functions .
 In December 1996 Niyazov began a program Central Asia after 1991 87 of leasing that allowed farmers to receive land from state farms free of rent for a period of 15 years . In 1996, he began an agricultural program that began in December 1996 .
 Industry in Turkmenistan is limited mainly to extractive ventures and, specifically, oil and gas . Industry in the country is mainly based on extractive projects .
 Turkmenistan has the third-largest natural gas reserves in the world . Its Caspian Sea oil deposits are topped only by those in Kazakhstan .
 Foreign investment, in large part due to the nature of Niyazov’s regime, has been very slow in recent years . Foreign investment in the country has been slow in the past .
 Major markets for Turkmen gas now include western Europe, Russia, Ukraine, and Iran . Turkmen now have a long history of gas from Turkmenistan .
 Energy sales provided needed funds, but these funds were almost all spent by Niyazov in efforts to enhance his own cult of personality . Energy sales were used to provide funds for the construction of the country .
 Turkmenistan’s future was clouded by the possibilities of political instability, made even more cogent with the death of Niyazov in 2006 .
 Uzbekistan is the most populated state of all the Central Asian states . Uzbekistan was the former Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic . It is now officially known as Uzbekistan .
 Uzbekistan is 186,400 square miles, which makes it about the size of California . In terms of area, the country is about the same size as California . Uzbekistan has a population of about 200,000 square miles .
 Uzbekistan is bordered by Kazakhstan on the west and south, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan to the east, Afghanistan to the south, and Turkmenistan on the south and west .
 Uzbekistan boasts parts of the Amu Dar’ya River Valley and the Kysyl-Kum Desert . Geographically, Uzbekistan is located in parts of Uzbekistan . Uzbekistan also has parts of a desert region known as the Kum Desert .
 In eastern Uzbekistan the landscape includes the Tien Shan Mountain Range and the politically significant Fergana Valley . The region is also known as the Ferganan Valley, Uzbekistan .
 Since 1936 Uzbekistan has also included the Kara-Kalpakia Autonomous Republic . Uzbekistan is also part of Uzbekistan, which includes the Kara Kalpakia Republic . Since 1936 it has included Uzbekistan's borders with Russia and Syria .
 Uzbekistan's Soviet era was most notable for its impact on regional agriculture . Uzbekistan’s Soviet era is most famous for its role in the Soviet Union .
 During the 1950s the Soviets completed large irrigation projects that transformed present-day Uzbekistan into a large cotton producer . Uzbekistan is now a major cotton producer in the world .
 With Gorbachev’s perestroika came a nascent nationalist movement . However, the movement was not as strong as the Soviet Union .
 Uzbek Supreme Soviet passed a resolution of sovereignty in June 1990 . In June 1990 the Uzbek Supreme Council of Soviet Union passed the resolution . Uzbek sovereignty was declared by the Soviet Union .
 Under Karimov’s direction, the Uzbek Supreme Soviet called for elections for December 29, 1991 . Karimov's direction called for election for Uzbek President of Uzbekistan in 1991 . Uzbek President Karimov was assassinated in 1992 .
 Opposition parties were not allowed to act freely . Opposition political parties were allowed to take part in the vote .
 Birlik, a popular opposition party, was not permitted to field a candidate for the December elections . The opposition party was not allowed to run a candidate .
 Uzbek authorities banned the Islamic Renaissance Movement, which called for the formation of an Islamic state . Uzbek authorities have banned the movement, which calls for the state of Islamic state, from Uzbekistan .
 In the December elections, Karimov won 86 percent of the vote and the Erk candidate 12. percent . Karimov's election was held in a landslide victory over the opposition .
 Presidential elections scheduled for 1996 were postponed until 2000 with a 1995 referendum . Presidential elections were scheduled to be held in 1996 with a referendum on the issue .
 Karimov won another five-year term in January 2000 with 91. percent of the popular vote . Karimov was re-elected to the second term in 2000 . He was elected to the presidency in March 2000 .
 Karimov’s hand-selected opposition was Abdulhafiz Dzhalalov . The only other option was the hand-picked opposition . Karimov was the only other candidate for the vote .
 Another referendum followed in January 2002 and delayed the scheduled 2005 elections until 2007 . 2005 elections were delayed until 2007 due to the delays .
 A 1997 attack on four policemen in the city of Namangan placed the Karimov regime on notice that radical Islam might be a potential problem . However, a 1997 incident in Namangan led to a government clampdown on radical Islam .
 The Islamic threat became even more pronounced following a February 1999 assassination attempt on Karimov . Karimov was shot dead in February 1999 after an assassination attempt .
 On the way to a cabinet meeting, Karimov’s 88 Chavez, Hugo motorcade was attacked . Karimov's 88 Chavez Chavez, Chavez motorcade attacked. Karimov was attacked on the way into a cabinet .
 16 people were killed and 80 others were wounded in the attack . The president was uninjured, but was not injured .
 Observers of the Uzbek government claimed that the Islamic threat was one that was exaggerated by Karimov in order to rationalize further crackdowns on Islam . Karimov's government has been accused of exaggerating the threat of Islam .
 Islam Karimov was one of the first to offer his country’s support after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the U.S. After the 9/11, Karimov offered his country's support .
 Uzbekistan ultimately offered use of its airspace and modern air bases and allowed the U.S. limited basing privileges . Uzbekistan also offered the United States limited access to its air bases .
 The United States served Uzbek interests with its attack on the Taliban in Afghanistan . For its part, the U.S. helped Uzbek interests in Afghanistan, the Taliban .
 Islamic militants launched a number of suicide bombings in Tashkent from March 28, 2004, to April 1, 2004 . The attacks were carried out by Islamic militants .
 Security officials claim that the attackers were trained in Pakistan and had links to al-Qaeda . Security officials say they were trained by the attackers in Pakistan . The attackers are believed to have links to the terrorist group, officials say .
 Law enforcement seized 50 suicide belts from one Uzbek woman . In addition to wider attacks, law enforcement seized dozens of suicide belts . Uzbek woman was also found to have planned a wider attack .
 Government figures claim that the attacks resulted in the death of 47, including 10 policemen and 33 militants . Government figures say the attacks were carried out by militants .
 In July 2004 further attacks commenced against the Israeli and U.S. embassies and the Uzbek General Prosecutor’s Office . Further attacks commenced in July 2004 against Israeli and United States embassies .
 Uzbekistan and U.S. relations strained in May 2005 . Uzbekistan's relationship with the United States has been strained since then .
 Uzbekistan is said to have massacred demonstrators in Fergana town of Andijhan . During that month demonstrators were said to be massacred . Uzbekistan has also been accused of massacring demonstrators in the past month . The country has been hit by a wave of anti-government
 Karimov claimed that the uprising was a result of the U.S. and nongovernmental organizations’ attempts to replicate the successful revolutions in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan . Karimov said that the United States’s attempt to replicate successful revolutions was a
 Uzbekistan is a presidential-parliamentary system, but the president has been dominant since independence . Uzbekistan has been ruled by the president since 2001 .
 Karimov resigned party leadership in 1996 in order to show a semblance of pluralism . Karimov stepped down as party leader in 1996 to show that he was pluralistic .
 All five political parties represented in the Oliy Majlis, the parliament, are from parties created by Karimov . Karimov's party is one of the most powerful in the country's political system .
 Uzbekistan is heavily reliant on agriculture and, in particular, on the growth of cotton . Uzbekistan relies heavily on agriculture to grow its own cotton production .
 Uzbekistan is the second-largest exporter of cotton in the world . Uzbek cotton accounts for two-thirds of all Central Asian cotton . Uzbekistan also is the world's second largest exporter .
 Most of the food consumed by Uzbeks is produced in the many small farms throughout the country . Uzbekians eat most of their food from small farms in the region .
 All Uzbek agriculture is heavily dependent upon the irrigation system, a remnant from the Soviet era . The irrigation system is a remnant of the Soviet-era Soviet era.
 Uzbekistan also boasts large reserves of coal, natural gas, and petroleum . Uzbekistan is also known for its coal and natural gas reserves .
 Copper, zinc, and lead ores are mined, and uranium is also produced in Uzbekistan . Uzbekistan is also producing uranium and copper .
 The partnership between Uzbekistan and the U.S. in the war on terror brought economic relief to Uzbekistan . Uzbekistan is one of the poorest countries in the world, but it has suffered little economic benefit .
 In November 2001 the United States offered Karimov a $100 million grant in order to make Uzbek currency fully convertible . The U.S. offered the grant in November 2001 to make the country's currency convertible . Karimov is now the leader of Uzbekistan .
 James Wolfensohn of the World Bank visited Tashkent in April 2002 and offered $350 million to fund infrastructure projects over two years and $40 million to aid in improving water supplies .
 Uzbekistan's economy is troubled and operates at levels lower than it did during the Soviet era . Yet the economy of Uzbekistan, like those of others in Central Asia, is troubled .
 Trilateral Commission, 2000; Library of Congress, Federal Research Division, 2000 .
 Hugo Rafael Chavez Frias was president of Venezuela from February 1999 to the present writing in 2008 . He is one of the most influential and controversial Chiang Ching-kuo 89 figures in post-Cold War Latin America .
 Chavez elicits strong emotions among both supporters and detractors . He is the driving force behind Venezuela’s so-called Bolivarian revolution . Chavez is known for his left-populist policies and anti-imperialism .
 A key debate among scholars is whether his ‘democratic socialism’ will lead to a populist dictatorship . Or whether his government can pursue a populist social revolution while maintaining the democratic political structures that have endured since the 1950s .
 Born on July 28, 1954, in the city of Sabaneta , capital of the southwestern plains state of Barinas, and of Spanish, Indian, and African ancestry, he was the second son of school teachers .
 At 17 he entered the Venezuelan Academy of Military Sciences, where he graduated four years later as a sub-lieutenant . At age 17, he entered Venezuela's military academy and was a sub lieutenant .
 For the next 17 years he served in the military, rising from counterinsurgency paratrooper and platoon commander to lieutenant colonel and instructor at the Venezuelan Military Academy . For the past 17 years, he served as a lieutenant colonel .
 Chavez and his comrades secretly founded the Bolivarian Revolutionary Army in 1983 . The ERB-200 was launched on July 24, 1983, on the bicentennial of the birth of Simon Bolivar . Chavez is the leader of Venezuela's socialist revolution .
 The ERB launched a failed coup attempt on February 4, 1992, in the midst of widespread disaffection for the government of President Carlos Andres Perez and his free-market reforms .
 Chavez became an overnight celebrity for denunciations of the government’s corruption and cronyism before he and other coup leaders were jailed . Appearing on national television, Chavez became a celebrity for his denunciation of government corruption .
 Two years later he was released in an amnesty by the government of President Rafael Caldera .
 He won the presidency with 56 percent of the popular vote in December 1998 . Reorganized the ERB as the Fifth Republic Movement (Moviento Quinto Republica) in 1998 .
 Once in office, Chavez embarked on a wideranging program of social, economic, and political reforms . Chavez has a wide-ranging program of reforms .
 Reelected in July 2000 to a six-year term, he deepened the reforms of his first months in office . He was reelected to six-years term in 2000 .
 In spring 2002 an opposition movement coalesced demanding his ouster . Massive street protests led to his reinstatement . He was briefly removed from office .
 In August 2004 he triumphed decisively in a national referendum intended to recall him . In December 2006 he won a second six-year presidential term with 63 percent of the vote .
 In a December 2007 referendum, voters rejected Chavez’s proposed changes to the constitution . Voters rejected the changes, hurting the momentum of his socialist program . Chavez has been in power since 2007 .
 Chinese political leader and reformer Chiang Ching-kuo was Chiang Kai-shek’s eldest son . He was a reformer and political leader in China .
 In retaliation, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin refused to allow Ching-kuo to return to China . Other students were allowed to repatriate .
 He remained in the Soviet Union, where he worked in various factories and mines . He married a Russian woman .
 Early in 1937 he was suddenly summoned to Moscow and told by top Soviet officials that he could return to China . He was then told by Soviet officials he was allowed to return .
 The reason was Japan’s 90 ""Chicago Boys" imminent attack on China and the Soviet realization that if China fell, the Soviet Union would be Japan's next victim . The reason for the attack was Japan's imminent attack .
 Chiang Kai-shek began to train his son in government at the county level during World War II . The Nationalists lost the civil war to the CCP in 1949, after losing the Nationalists' civil war in 1949 .
 In 1965 he was appointed minister of defense; later appointed vice-premier, and he became premier in 1972 . From that post he initiated many important projects that promoted rapid economic growth .
 Chiang Kai-shek died in 1975 during his fifth term as president of the Republic of China .
 Vice President Yen Chia-kan served out the remaining years of Chiang Kai-shek’s term . He retired from the post .
 Chiang Ching-kuo was elected president by the National Assembly in 1978 . He was reelected for a second sixyear term in 1984 . Chiang was elected again in 1978 and reelected again in 1982 .
 Chiang Ching-kuo’s stay in the Soviet Union made him an opponent of the communist system . He was a critic of the Soviet system .
 He saw the political turmoil against the autocratic regimes of the Philippines and South Korea . He understood that the prosperous and educated people of Taiwan yearned for democracy .
 He initiated overall political reforms that ended martial law and censorship, legalized opposition political parties, and implemented free elections . Thus he initiated overall reforms .
 He promised that none of his family would succeed him as political leader . Finally, with his health failing, he promised that no one of his relatives would succeed as leader .
 After Chiang Ching-kuo’s death, political reforms continued on Taiwan that made it into a democracy . In notable contrast to the communist government of the People's Republic of China, the government of Taiwan is still communist .
 The credit for Taiwan’s economic miracle began under Chiang Kai-shek, the credit for its continuation and peaceful political reforms belongs to Chiang Ching-kuo .
 The Republic of China and the People’s Republic of . China After Forty Years. China . After 40 years of diplomatic relations, the two countries meet again .
 The Generalissimo’s Son; Chiang Ching-kuo and the Revolutions in China and Taiwan . Chiang. Chiang . Chang-kao and the revolution in China, Taiwan .
 Chicago School economists were influential throughout much of Latin America in the 1980s and 1990s . A period witnessing the growing influence of neoliberalism as espoused by the International Monetary Fund .
 The Chicago Boys decried the fiscal excesses of populist and socialist governments . They promoted open markets, privatization of state-owned industries, reduced government expenditures, deregulation, and increased foreign investment .
 Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher were both leaders in the U.S. and Europe . Reagan and Thatcher were the two most successful leaders of the 1980s and 1990s .
 Among the most influential of the Chicago Boys were Jorge Cauas, minister of finance , 1975-77; Sergio de Castro, 1977-82; Pablo Baraona, economy , 1976-79; Roberto Kelly, ME, 1978-79 . Jose Pinera, Jose P
 Pinochet privatized social security, pensions, banks, and most state industries . Pinochet's government cut taxes, slashed subsidies and services; and cut taxes .
 The reforms generated a severe economic contraction and sharply curtailed inflation in the mid-1970s, followed by robust growth in the late 1970s . The reforms followed a deep recession (following a broader global economic downturn) in the early 1980s, and renewed growth in mid-and
 The average growth rate from 1973 to 1990 was 3. percent, nominally higher than most Latin American countries . Average growth rate between 1973 and 1990 was nominally high .
 By 1990 the economy was growing rapidly, but inequality had increased, along with economic hardship among the bottom income brackets . 44 percent of families living below the poverty line .
 Chileans have continued to grapple with the effects of the free-market reforms . These and related results of the Chicago Boys’ radical laissez-faire economic restructurings have sparked wide-ranging debates among scholars .
 Neoliberalism's defenders looked to Chile’s privatization of social security as a model for other countries, for example . Critics pointed to the gaps and insufficient coverage for roughly half of the country's labor force . Chile's social security system has been privatized by the government, but
 In early 2005 all of the candidates in Chile’s presidential campaign agreed that ‘the country’�s much vaunted and much copied privatized pension system needs immediate repair . All of Chile's presidential candidates agreed in early 2005 that the country's pension system “needs
 The CCP denied human rights, as understood in the West, to all its citizens . It had a particularly hostile relationship with the intellectuals, whom it distrusted .
 Deng sought to pull China out of its economic disaster by reforms called the “Four Modernizations” The reforms included agriculture, industry, science, science and defense . Deng sought the ‘Four Modernization’ of agriculture, . industry, and defense.
 China relaxed intellectual controls in 1978 by allowing a Democracy Wall in Beijing . The wall allowed citizens to air their grievances in the capital city Beijing .
 Wei was the son of committed communist parents and had lived a privileged life in Beijing . Wei's parents were committed communists and he was born in China .
 His travels during the Cultural Revolution exposed him to the horrors of the regime that condemned millions to death by man-made famines and that denied justice to ordinary people, he says .
 His article argued that the Four Modernizations were not enough without a fifth—democracy . Democracy is not enough, he said, without democracy .
 For this he was arrested, convicted of ‘counterrevolution’ in a show trial, and sentenced to 15 years of hard labor . He was arrested and convicted of 'counterrevolution' in a court trial . For this, he was convicted of "counterrevolution" in a trial
 Wei was released in 1993, one-anda-half years short of serving his full term . He was released because the regime wanted to host the Olympics in Beijing .
 He was rearrested and sentenced to another long jail term in 1994 for speaking out for human rights . He was released in 1997 and exiled to the U.S.
 Harry Wu began to suffer severe persecution as a college student . Wu was forced to leave the country to live with his family . Wu suffered severe persecution in the 1970s .
 After becoming a U.S. citizen, Wu exposed the Chinese government practice of imprisoning political dissenters in brutal labor camps . Wu worked to expose the practice of selling their products and organs of the prisoners to the United States and other nations .
 Bush invited Fang and his wife to a state dinner that he hosted during a visit to China in 1989 . Chinese leaders sent police to prevent the Chinese leaders from attending .
 Liu Binyan was a famous literary figure and investigative reporter for the newspaper the People's Daily . He was also a famous investigative reporter and author .
 For exposing the massive abuses of power by the CCP, he was dismissed from the party . He was dismissed for exposing the abuses by the party, he said . He said he was fired from the CCP after exposing the abuse of power in China .
 Fang and Liu were exiled to Great Britain and the U.S. respectively . Fang's fame protected them from arrest, but both were exiled .
 Wei, Fang, Liu and Liu began as committed communists and later became determined opponents of communism . Among the four, Wei and Fang, and Liu, were committed opponents of the Communist Party .
 Millions of other Chinese, named and unnamed, continue to suffer the denial of their human rights . Millions of others, named or unnamed, continued to suffer from the denial .
 Since then, the CCP has ruled China as a one-party state, although several minor political parties were allowed to exist . The CCP ruled China in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The PRC aligned itself with the Soviet Union in foreign policy, signing a treaty of alliance and mutual aid in 1950 . The treaty was signed under which China received loans and technical help from Soviet Union .
 The BeijingMoscow axis began to crack toward the end of the 1950s because of multiple reasons . By the mid-1960s border conflicts had broken out between them .
 President Richard Nixon established full diplomatic relations between China and the United States in 1979 . To counterbalance the Soviet threat, China began a rapprochement with the U.S. to counterbalance it .
 The PRC joined the United Nations in 1971 as a permanent member of the Security Council . It replaced the Republic of China, or Taiwan, in 1971 . Taiwan replaced the PRC in 1971, replacing Taiwan .
 Since the 1970s the PRC has replaced the ROC in most international organizations . The PRC is now the most powerful country in the world .
 Upon its establishment, the CCP immediately undertook violent land reform, killing millions of landlords and redistributing land to the cultivators . The CCP is the country's most powerful state-run government .
 The peasants were forced to give up their newly acquired land in 1953 to join collective farms under the First Five-Year Plan . The plan was copied from that of the Soviet Union .
 Collective farming continued in varied formats until Mao’s death in 1976 . Mao's death was the last of the Maoist movement in China .
 Mao’s successor, Deng Xiaoping, dismantled the collective farms and allowed individual farmers to work private plots . The state continued to own the land, although the state owned the land .
 Productivity and the standard of living among farmers increased dramatically as a result . Productivity increased dramatically in the 1990s .
 The standard of living of Chinese farmers lagged far behind that of people in the rapidly expanding urban sector, especially in the advanced coastal provinces . With the adoption of private enterprise in most industries, however, China's farmers lags far behind those in urban areas .
 China underwent catastrophic political and economic turmoil under Mao's radical leadership . Mao’s radical leadership led China to catastrophic political turmoil during the Great Leap Forward and the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution .
 Deng Xiaoping was pragmatic in dealing with the economy . But he brooked no political opposition, as the bloody repression of student protesters in Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989 demonstrated .
 After Deng ousted several putative successors who failed to conform to his ideas, the succession among CCP leaders was peaceful . Deng ousted many putative successor who didn't conform to him ideas .
 In 2005 China had the largest military in the world, comprising 2.25 million soldiers . China is the third-largest and fastest-growing economy in world . In 2005, China had an estimated population of 1.1 billion people .
 The close relationship between the two peoples led to the sinicizing of Vietnamese society . The relationship between Vietnamese and Americans led to a sinicization of society .
 After the end of World War II and the establishment of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, the example Civil Rights movement, U.S. of the Chinese revolution persuaded many Vietnamese that they could liberate their country with similar political goals .
 Communist North Vietnam received material as well as political support from China . During the subsequent wars against the French and the Americans, the communist state received material and political support . North Vietnam also received material from China during the war .
 Some among the Chinese leadership felt that the Vietnamese had been insufficiently grateful for the aid they had received . Some felt that they had not been sufficiently grateful for their aid .
 Assistance from China and other Communist-bloc countries contributed to Communist North Vietnam’s victory over South Vietnam in 1975 . North Vietnam and South Vietnam won the country's independence from South Vietnam .
 In 1979 Vietnamese troops entered Cambodia to oust the Khmer Rouge regime in that country . In 1979, they entered the country to oust that regime . Vietnamese troops then entered Cambodia in order to overthrow that regime's regime .
 China resented Vietnam’s ill treatment of ethnic Chinese residents in the country . China also resented the country's closeness to the Soviet Union, China's rival in the Communist bloc .
 The Chinese army (the People's Liberation Army, or PLA) attacked Vietnam in February 1979 .
 PLA successfully achieved the first part of its plan to capture the provincial towns of Cao Bang and Lao Cai and then advance on Lang Son . Caught by surprise, the Vietnamese army lost ground, and the PLA lost ground .
 250,000 Chinese troops were deployed, together with militia, the air force, and a naval detachment, to the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea in the event of Soviet intervention .
 All of the fighting took place in the forested mountainous region that marks the border .
 After a limited advance China declared that it had punished Vietnam and withdrew . After a few days of incursions, China withdrew from Vietnam .
 It threatened to return, however, if Vietnam’s actions warrant further punishment . It threatened not to return to Vietnam if further punishment is needed .
 China's attitude toward small states in areas of its historic influence . Vietnam’s territorial ambition in Southeast Asia, and China’Southeast Asia, are key issues .
 The conflict put Vietnam firmly in the Soviet camp until the end of the cold war . The conflict in Vietnam was the first time the country had been in contact with the Soviet Union .
 Harry Truman assumed the presidency after the death of Franklin Roosevelt in 1944, he had more important concerns than civil rights . Harry Truman was more interested in the civil rights movement than the civil liberties movement .
 He also confronted the decision over whether or not to use the atomic bomb . He faced the decision to bomb the country .
 In 1945 the Fair Employment Practices Committee was involved in trying to end discrimination in a D.C. transportation company . The committee was established by Roosevelt through executive order under pressure from A Philip Randolph’s threatened March on Washington .
 He did, however, establish a committee in 1946 to examine violence against African Americans .
 The committee issued “To Secure These Rights” in October 1947 . The committee was stacked with liberals Truman expected would develop a strong civil rights statement .
 The report called for the extension of 94 Civil Rights movement, United States full citizenship rights to all Americans, regardless of race, color, creed, creed or national origin .
 In his State of the Union speeches of 1947 and 1948, Truman called for adoption of the committee’s recommendations . The committee's recommendations were later adopted by Truman .
 Truman: For Truman, it was a matter of justice in a world divided between free and communist states . Truman: "For Truman, the death of Stalin was justice in the world"
 On July 26, 1948, Truman issued Executive Order 9981, ending segregation in the armed forces, and Executive Order 9980, mandating fair employment in the civil service . Truman issued the order in order to end segregation .
 Discrimination in the officer corps remained strong, and few blacks served as officers . After resisting the presidential order for two years, the military began implementing desegregation .
 A further executive order in 1951 established the Committee on Government Contract Compliance . All potential suppliers of goods to the Department of Defense must have an equal employment policy .
 The end of segregation in Major League Baseball in 1947 was a major turning point in how African Americans were viewed by the country at large .
 Jackie Robinson was the first African American to play professional Major League Baseball in the modern era . Robinson played for the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1940s and '50s . He was the only African American player in Major League baseball .
 Robinson endured abuse from fans, other teams, and even his own teammates, but went on to win the Rookie of the Year award . Robinson was named to the All-Star team six times .
 Murders and lynchings of African Americans still occurred in the 1950s . Most of the murders went unpunished, and often went unpunity .
 Emmett Till, a teenager from Chicago, was visiting Money, Mississippi, in 1955 . Till was a Chicago native and a Chicago resident . He was killed in Mississippi on December 18, 1913 .
 His mother had an opencasket funeral so mourners could see the beating the boy had endured before his two white abductors threw him into the Tallahatchie River on August 28 . The boy was beaten to death by his abductors before he was thrown in the river .
 This blatant disregard of justice fired northern sentiment for reform, northern sentiment . Northern Ireland has seen a surge in support for reform in recent years .
 The approach had won the landmark victory in Brown v Board of Education in 1954, but the Supreme Court had failed to provide any implementation target or tools . The approach was won in the landmark case of Brown v .
 National Association for the Advancement of Colored People chapters in the South attempted to register voters and protest discrimination . Their efforts were usually uncoordinated and unsuccessful in the face of intimidation and harassment .
 On December 1, 1955, in Montgomery, Alabama, she was arrested for failure to yield her bus seat to white passengers . She was also arrested for failing to yield a seat to a white passenger .
 Her trial and conviction for violating the local segregated transit ordinance catalyzed the local black community . She was convicted of violating an ordinance that banned segregated transit . Her conviction led to her release from prison .
 The success in Montgomery was followed by a successful boycott in Tallahassee, Florida, but its greater importance is that it brought national prominence to the minister brought in to lead it . Martin Luther King, Jr. was the man who led the boycott .
 The successful boycott encouraged civil rights leaders to shift from the old civil rights tactic of litigation to a greater emphasis on direct action . Civil rights leaders shifted from litigation to direct action in response .
 Direct action required mass mobilization, led by local churches and community organizations, and nonviolent resistance as well as civil disobedience . Direct action needed mass mobilization .
 Sit-ins, freedom rides, and other local action followed during the decade between 1955 and 1965 . The sit-ins and freedom rides took place during the 1950s and 1960s .
 After Montgomery, the Montgomery Improvement Association created the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1957 . The conference was created by black activists in Montgomery, Alabama .
 The SCLC eschewed the chapter structure of the NAACP, instead providing ad hoc training to those who fought segregation at the local level . The NAACP was founded in the 1930s, when it was a national organization .
 In 1957, in the South Carolina Sea Islands, Septima Clark, Bernice Robinson, and Esau Jenkins began the first Citizenship Schools to give blacks the literacy they needed to pass voting tests .
 The SCLC took over the program and spread it to Alabama, Georgia, and Tennessee . The program is now spread to Georgia, Tennessee and Alabama .
 That same year, Little Rock, Arkansas, school board decided to integrate in accordance with Brown . Little Rock school board also decided to do it .
 NAACP had put pressure on Little Rock because it thought a test case would have better success there than in the Deep South . Little Rock was Little Rock's Little Rock, Arkansas, site of Little Rock school shooting .
 Arkansas had desegregated a couple of small towns, including Fayetteville and Hoxie, and it had a progressive reputation . Arkansas had a reputation for being progressive .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. influenced such marches with his policy of nonviolent protest . King's policy of nonviolence led to the high school regation of high school .
 Faubus’s resistance in Little Rock led to a federal-state confrontation resulting in the nationalization of the National Guard . President Eisenhower was committed to preventing the usurpation of a federal power .
 After Faubus backed off and then shut down the schools, integration was pushed through . Eventually, the schools were integrated, and integration was allowed .
 The sit-in movement began in Greensboro, North Carolina, in 1960 . It spread to Nashville, Tennessee; Atlanta, Georgia; and elsewhere in the South .
 The initial spark was the decision of local college students to eat where they shopped . Local college students shopped where they shop .
 The demonstrators suffered arrest and physical abuse, but refused to post bail so that the local jails would feel the financial burden . Demonstrators were arrested and physically abused, but they refused to put bail .
 When released from jail, civil rights activists returned to the lunch counters again and again until finally the counters desegregated . Civil rights activists were released from prison in 1968 .
 Sit-ins spread from lunch counters to beaches, beaches, libraries, and everywhere that blacks were denied access on account of race . The sit-ins were held at lunch counters, beaches and libraries .
 Some sit-in veterans created the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in 1960 . The committee was created by sit-ins veterans in the 1960s .
 SNCC began freedom rides in 1961, which were bus trips through the Deep South to force desegregation of bus terminals as required by federal law . SNCC's Freedom of Ride began in 1961 in the South .
 The riders faced a bus bombing in Anniston, Alabama; Klansmen in Birmingham; and a mob assault in Montgomery . The riders were attacked in Alabama, Alabama, and Montgomery .
 In Jackson, Mississippi, they were jailed in squalor—and occasionally beaten—and sometimes beaten . They were jailed for their crimes in squalid conditions .
 In 1962 the movement shifted to Mississippi, where the SNCC representative, Robert Moses, united all the state civil rights organizations into the Council of Federated Organizations for the purpose of doorto-door voter education and student recruitment .
 Three times he tried to enter, and three times Governor Ross R Barnett refused him . Governor Ross Barnett refused to let him enter, despite his pleas for entry .
 The Fifth Circuit Court of 96 Civil Rights movement, United States Appeals found Barnett and his lieutenant governor in contempt, and United States marshals escorted Meredith onto the campus . Meredith was escorted onto campus by the marshals .
 President John F Kennedy sent the army to control the Mississippi University of Mississippi . The Mississippi highway patrol withdrew from the campus, allowing Meredith to attend classes .
 In 1961 and 1962 King went to Albany, Georgia, to assist in the Albany Movement . The Albany Movement aimed at ending segregation in all phases of the city . King was a member of the Albany movement .
 The police in Albany reacted not with violence but with mass arrests, including King in December 1961 . King was arrested by the police in New Albany, New York .
 Albany would desegregate buses and set up a biracial committee if King left the state . The city would set up biracial committees and desegregation buses .
 King left, and the city did not fulfill its promises, forcing King’s return . King left after the city failed to fulfill promises . King's return was forced by the city .
 He was arrested again in July 1962, and in August agreed to leave the city and stop the protests . In August, he agreed to stop protests in order to stop the demonstrations .
 He blamed the failure of the Albany Movement on its broad scope rather than a specific aspect of segregation and discrimination .
 The SCLC sought a more limited desegregation of downtown businesses . The organization sought to prevent total desegregregation of businesses in downtown Chicago .
 The SCLC used sit-ins, kneel-ins and marches, among other nonviolent techniques . The organization was founded in 1964 .
 The city obtained an injunction, the SCLC refused to quit, and King and others were arrested on April 12, 1963 . King was arrested on that day .
 King wrote his “Letter from a Birmingham Jail” on April 16 . The campaign was faltering until organizers, desperate for bodies, decided to put high school students on the streets . King's "Letter from Birmingham Jail" was published April 16.
 The next day another 1,000 students appeared, and Connor ordered dogs and fire hoses to be turned on them . Connor ordered the next day a fire hose was turned on the students .
 Downtown public accommodations were to be desegregregated and a committee established to end discrimination in hiring . Downtown public accommodation was to be changed to accommodate African-Americans .
 The prisoners were released, and black-white communications channels were established . Also, the prisoners were . released . Black-white . communications channels .
 Four months later, Klansmen bombed the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, killing four girls . Four months after the church was bombed, four girls were killed in the bombing .
 In August A Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin led the March on Washington, despite Kennedy’s efforts to get them to call it off . Randolph and Rustin were the two men who led the march on Washington .
 All the major civil rights and progressive labor organizations were involved, as were other liberal leaders . All of them were involved in the fight .
 Most important was the new civil rights law, which was stalled in Congress . The law was passed by Congress in 1964 .
 More than 200,000 gathered in front of the Lincoln Memorial to hear King’s “I Have a Dream” speech and other speeches . King's speech criticized the administration's failure to enact civil rights laws and to protect southern civil rights workers .
 After the march, Kennedy had King and other leaders over to the White House for a chat . Kennedy had a chat with King about the march .
 The Civil Rights Bill was going nowhere until Kennedy died on November 22, 1963 . Lyndon B Johnson put all his political weight behind its passage .
 Civil rights workers were murdered in Neshoba County on June 21, 1964 . Civil rights activists were killed in 1964 . Three civil rights workers died in the shooting .
 FBI investigation found others of blacks who had disappeared over the years without attracting more than local attention . FBI found three bodies of black people who disappeared without attracting attention .
 Johnson used the case to bring pressure for enactment of the Civil Rights Act, which passed on July 2 . During the six weeks between the disappearance of the three and the discovery of their bodies, Johnson used his case to push for enactment .
 Civil Rights Act of 1964 barred discrimination in public accommodations, employment, education, and education . Civil rights act was passed in 1964 .
 At Selma, Alabama, the SCLC intervened in 1965 after locals struggled to get voters registered through a SNCC campaign . The campaign was part of a nationwide effort to register voters .
 Hosea Williams of the SCLC and John Lewis of the SNCC attempted to lead a march to Montgomery, Alabama . They were stopped at the Edmund Pettus Bridge by state and local officers, who attacked with clubs, tear gas, and whips .
 Local reaction included a murder by whites . Civil Rights movement, United States 97, led by Martin Luther King Jr.
 Johnson used the violence to push enactment of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . The violence was used to push for passage of the 1965 act of voting rights .
 Signed into law on August 6, the act outlawed poll taxes and literacy tests and other devices to bar voting by blacks . The act was signed into law in August 6 .
 It provided for federal supervision of voter registration in states and districts with a pattern of discrimination . It was intended to prevent voter registration discrimination .
 Within months, a quarter of a million new black voters were created, mostly by federal examiners . Federal examiners replaced local registrars, replacing them .
 Black turnout in 1969 was 92 percent in Tennessee, almost 78 percent in Arkansas, and 73 percent in Texas . In 1969, black turnout in Tennessee was almost 92 percent .
 Blacks began voting out those who had plagued them during their struggles against segregation . Blacks were forced to vote out those they had been plagued by segregation .
 They began voting in blacks they hoped were more sympathetic to their needs . And they hoped they hoped that blacks would be more sympathetic than they needed to vote .
 In 1989 there were 7,200 elected black officials in the United States, more than 4,800 of them in the South . In 1989, there were more than 7,000 elected black officers in the U.S.
 Blacks were sheriffs, mayors, and county, state, and national officials . Blacks were sheriff, mayor, and state, national officials in the 1930s .
 The Civil Rights movement faded as the nation turned from civil rights to the war in Vietnam . King and other civil rights leaders split with the Johnson administration over foreign policy and economic justice .
 SNCC threw out its white members, and the Black Panthers stressed not only Black Power but black self-help . Blacks radicalized—SNCC threw its members out of its white membership . The Black Panthers were the Black National League's first black group .
 When King went to Memphis, Tennessee, in 1968 to support a sanitation workers’ strike, he was murdered . King was murdered when he went to support the strike in Memphis .
 By 1967 22 percent of black students in southern and border states were in integrated schools . By 1967, 22 percent in southern, border states had integrated schools. By 1967 the majority of African-American students were in integration schools .
 The U.S. continues to move toward a two-society status, separate and unequal . Still, the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders of 1968 reported that the United States was continuing to move . The commission found that the U.N. was moving toward an unequal society .
 Richard Nixon’s administration slowed integration by leaving it to the courts rather than his administration . Richard Nixon's administration left integration in place of the courts, leaving the courts with the courts .
 White flight began resegregating America’s major cities after the Supreme Court ruled in Miliken Bradley that cities could not expect to use suburbs to desegregate . White flight was a form of segregation in America's major cities .
 The absence of federal assistance and persistent residential segregation contributed to resegregation, says the NAACP .
 By the late 1990s, a third of black students were in schools that were 90 percent nonwhite . By the mid-2000s, black students had to attend schools with non-white students . In the late 2000s, the black population was in schools with white students .
 During World War II, many African Americans migrated north, following jobs in war industries . Most of the jobs they were able to get were menial and paid very little .
 This created greater racial problems in these northern cities . Blacks were forced by de facto segregation into slums . Slums were plagued by high unemployment and crime .
 Slum areas were patrolled by predominantly white police forces who many felt threatened rather than protected the neighborhood . The slum areas had a history of racial discrimination .
 Urban African Americans rose in protest against conditions in the U.S. Urban Americans rose to protest against the government .
 A white policeman shot a black youth, and a mob demanded the suspension of the officer . A white youth was shot by a white police officer, and the mob demanded his suspension .
 When that did not happen, the mob rampaged through the neighborhood and destroyed Jewish-owned stores and much else that was not black-owned . When that didn't happen, it was destroyed .
 Brooklyn’s black BedfordStuyvesant neighborhood and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, had riots for similar reasons that year .
 After passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, expectations were that there would be celebration . Expectations were high for celebration of the 1965 act .
 California refused to implement the fair housing element of the 1964 Civil Rights Act . California was among the states that refused to comply with the act . The act was part of the federal housing act .
 The black ghetto riots were the most prolonged period of civil disturbance in the U.S. since the Civil War . The riots occurred in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 Tens of thousands of National Guardsmen were required to reestablish order . Tens of millions of National Guardmen were needed to restore order .
 Its approach was similar to that of the Black Panthers, formed in Oakland in 1966 and nationally prominent by 1968 . The Black Panthers were formed in 1966, and became nationally prominent in 1968 .
 Interracial tension and social problems remain, especially pronounced in inner cities . Interracial tensions and social issues remain in the inner cities, especially in inner city .
 Sometimes the cities erupt, as in New Jersey in the late 1990s where racial profiling led to public controversy . Sometimes the city erupts, sometimes with racial profiling leading to public protests .
 Bill Clinton was the 42nd president of the United States . He was in office from 1993 until 2001 . Clinton was elected to office in 1993 .
 William Jefferson Clinton was born on August 19, 1946, as William Jefferson Blythe III . He was born in Hope, Arkansas, in 1946 .
 William Jefferson Blythe, Jr., was a traveling salesman who died in a car accident three months before his son was born . His father died in an accident some 3 months before he was born.
 Bill Clinton adopted his stepfather’s surname when he was 14 . His widow, Virginia Dell, married Roger Clinton, who was a partner in an automobile dealership . After his death, his widow Virginia Dell married Roger .
 It was meeting John F Kennedy and listening to Martin Luther King Jr.’s I ‘Have a Dream’ speech in 1963 that convinced him that he should enter politics .
 On his return to the U.S. Clinton went to Yale Law School, where he met Hillary Rodham Rodham . Hillary Rodham met Clinton while he was at Yale Law .
 They were married on October 11, 1975, and their only child, Chelsea, was born on February 27, 1980 . Chelsea was born in 1980 .
 Hillary Diane Rodham was born on October 26, 1947, at Edgewater Hospital, Chicago, Illinois . She was born in 1947 . She is the daughter of Hillary Clinton and Hillary Clinton .
 She grew up in a conservative Republican family . She attended Maine South High School and grew up with a conservative family .
 At the age of 16 she campaigned for Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater . She campaigned for Goldwater in 1964 . She is now a prominent advocate for women's rights .
 Hillary Rodham then went to Wellesley College, where she developed liberal inclinations and graduated in 1969 . Hillary Rodham is a former presidential candidate for president .
 In 1971 she worked for Senator Walter Mondale's subcommittee on migrant workers . In 1972 she started working for Senator George McGovern’s 1972 presidential election campaign . In 1971, she worked on the subcommittee of a subcommittee of migrant workers on the issue .
 In the following year, 1974, he ran for the House of Representatives but was defeated . He ran for a seat in the House in 1974, but lost .
 At the age of 32, he was the youngest governor in the country . Two years later he was elected governor of Arkansas . He was also the youngest ever elected governor .
 He spent his first term as governor working on improving schools and roads . He became unpopular over the motor vehicle tax and escape of Cuban prisoners .
 In 1982 Clinton was reelected as governor and remained in office until 1992 . Clinton was elected governor of Arkansas in 1982 . He was re-elected in 1982 and remained governor until 1992.
 He used these 10 years to transform Arkansas by dramatically improving the education system and introducing welfare reforms . He also introduced welfare reforms and introduced education reforms .
 By 1988 Clinton was being suggested as a possible presidential candidate, given his high profile in American liberal circles . By 1988 he was being considered as a candidate for president .
 He decided not to run, although he did speak at the Democratic National Convention . He gained a much wider national profile after speaking at the convention .
 Newt Gingrich and Hillary Clinton battled for the presidency in 1992 . Newt Gingrich won the White House in 1996 . Gingrich was the first GOP presidential candidate to challenge Clinton in a presidential race . Gingrich lost the presidency .
 Clinton’s second term in office was preoccupied, on the foreign policy front, by his attempts to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict . Clinton's second term was preoccupying, on . the foreign . policy front .
 In July 2000 Clinton brought both Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian Authority chairman Yasir Arafat to Camp David, but the negotiations failed . Clinton also brought both Israel's prime minister and Palestinian leader Yasir Barak .
 On the economic front, Clinton managed to balance the federal budget for the first time since 1969 . Clinton's budget balance was the first since 1969 when he was president .
 His second term in office was overshadowed by the controversy over Clinton’s affair with White House intern Monica Lewinsky . Clinton was elected to office in 1998 .
 The House of Representatives voted to impeach Clinton for lying under oath in his denial of the affair . The Senate voted to acquit Clinton, and he remained in office until the end of his term . Clinton ended his term with a popularity approval rating of 65 percent .
 Monica Lewinsky affair forced Bill Clinton to abandon his plans for health-care reform . Bill Clinton had been heavily supported by his wife, Hillary Clinton .
 Throughout his presidency, Bill Clinton did much to improve the life of African Americans . African Americans were some of the most loyal supporters of his presidency .
 Clinton saw as one of his major successes the implementation of majority rule in South Africa . The election of the Nelson Mandela government after a peaceful transition of power was a major success .
 Clinton’s secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, was able to engage with North Korea and reduce tensions in Northeast Asia . Albright was also able to reduce tensions with the North Korea .
 Bill Clinton has been active in campaigning for measures to prevent climate change . He spoke at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Montreal, Canada, on December 9, 2005 .
 Hillary Clinton was elected to the United States Senate on November 7, 2000 . She won 55 percent of the vote to 43 percent for her Republican opponent, Rick Lazio . Hillary Clinton won the Senate in 2000 .
 During her time as First Lady, many Americans openly hated Hillary Clinton, with large numbers of Internet hate sites being established . Hillary Clinton was the First Lady of the United States .
 Her election victory proved that she was popular in her own right . However, her election victory proves that she is popular in the own way .
 Hillary Clinton was active in gaining funding for rebuilding after the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon . After the attacks on 9/11, Hillary Clinton worked to get funding for reconstruction projects .
 Hillary Clinton urged for the U.S. to take strong military action against Afghanistan . Clinton also highlighted the ill-treatment of women in that country by the Taliban .
 She voted in favor of the Iraq War Resolution, but later disagreed with the prosecution of the war in Iraq . She voted against the prosecution, but disagreed with some of her views .
 On domestic issues, Hillary Clinton followed the same liberal traditions that had characterized her husband’s presidency . She followed the liberal tradition of her husband's presidency .
 On January 20, 2007, Hillary Clinton announced that she was forming a presidential exploratory committee to run as a candidate in the 2008 presidential elections . Clinton later officially pursued her electoral bid .
 Flarris, John F The Survivor: Bill Clinton in the White House. Simon & Schuster, 2003; Flarries, 2003, The Survivor, by John F. The Survivor .
 The cold war was the decade-long conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . It was characterized by constant tensions, arms escalation and lack of direct warfare .
 First coined by author George Orwell to describe a state of permanent and unresolvable war . Cold war was applied to the U.S.-Soviet conflict in 1947 by Bernard Baruch, the United States representative to the UN Atomic Energy Commission .
 Both sides phrased the conflict as one between capitalism and communism, not simply between two states . Both sides often phrased it as a struggle for capitalism and Communism .
 Before the 20th century, Russia’s imperial designs threatened those of Great Britain and Spain . Spain, which encouraged settlement in California out of fear that Russian colonists would settle the west coast .
 In both cases the Western nations may have been exaggerating or misperceiving the extent of Russia’s expansionist interests . This was likely the case with Western perceptions of the Soviet Union during the cold war during the Cold War .
 In the 20th century, the old European empires had lost their power, and the most powerful countries were the ideologically opposed Soviet Union and the United States . The United States, with its close ally the United Kingdom, was dominant in the world .
 These were the two world leaders that developing nations would be shaped by and recovering nations would have to ally themselves with . Developing nations would need to ally with the leaders of the two countries, writes David Cameron .
 Some historians consider the conflict inevitable given the size and power of the countries . The youth of their governments, relative to those of old Europe, is an additional factor .
 Stalin sought to spread communism to neighboring countries in eastern Europe . The Soviet Union remained uninvolved with communist interests in Finland, Greece, and Czechoslovakia .
 Winston Churchill was the first to refer to this band of communist countries as the “Iron Curtain, “ referring to the fortified borders between the capitalist and communist nations of Europe . The Soviet Union’s protective layer of communist states shielding it from capitalist Europe .
 Communism grew in popularity in China, France, India, Italy, Japan, and Vietnam . Meanwhile, communism grew in France, Italy and Italy .
 Very quickly the West began to perceive communist victories as Soviet victories, and communist nations as Soviet satellites, officially or otherwise . The West was beginning to perceive the West as a communist nation .
 The United Kingdom could no longer afford to govern overseas and in 1947 partition of India had granted independence to that holding . That holding led to the formation of the states of India and Pakistan . The partition partition led to formation of Pakistan and India .
 The United States began increasing its overseas influence as that of the British waned . The U.S. increased its influence as the British influence waned.
 For the first few decades after World War II, the dominant focus of U.S. foreign policy was that of “containment” The United States took pains to limit communist and Soviet influence to states where it was already present .
 Many believed that, so contained, communist governments would wither and die . The domino theory proclaimed that if one capitalist government fell, its neighbors would be next . That proposition was a proposition that motivated U.S. involvement in Vietnam War, which was proclaimed a war over Southeast Asia
 When civil war broke out in China, the Soviet Union aided the Communists, and the United States armed and funded the Nationalists . The Soviet Union helped the Communists .
 The new People’s Republic of China, formed on October 1, 1949, became a valuable Soviet ally . The Nationalists took control of the island of Taiwan, from where they retained their seat in the United Nations .
 The Soviets boycotted the United Nations Security Council as a result, and so were unable to veto Truman’s request for UN aid in the invasion of South Korea .
 The Korean War that followed lasted three years, ending in a stalemate . Into the 21st century no peace treaty had been formed between the two Koreas .
 12 nations formed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The U.S. joined the group in the 1950s . The organization was formed by Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland and the Netherlands .
 Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was one of the countries involved .
 From Eisenhower in the 1950s to Reagan in the 1980s the guiding light of military spending was deterrence theory . The guiding light to military spending is deterrence theory, ensuring retaliation would be swift .
 The specter of nuclear warfare dominated U.S. consciousness in these decades . It was the specter that dominated United States consciousness in decades .
 In the 1950s fallout shelters were built in many towns and private homes, and educational film shorts shown in schools included the famous “Duck and Cover,” in which a talking turtle advises children to seek shelter .
 He was the first to use the CIA to overthrow governments in developing or less powerful nations that were unfriendly to U.S. policy . He replaced them with nominally democratic ones . Perhaps seeking to avoid future military conflicts, he used the CIA .
 Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America became more important to the cold war than Europe . Europe was the focus of the Cold War in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In Latin America, the United States had been involved in national politics since the 19th century . Cold war gave a new lift to foreign policy in Latin America .
 The United States targeted revolutions and instigated coups against left-leaning governments . The U.S. targeted revolutions in many Latin American countries, instigating coups and overthrowing governments .
 Fidel Castro led the communist revolution in Cuba, only miles from the U.S. coast . Fidel Castro was born in 1961 in Havana, Cuba .
 The United States responded by dispatching a group of CIA-trained Cuban expatriates to land at Cuba’s Bay of Pigs and attempt to oust Castro from power . The U.S. responded by sending CIA- trained Cuban expats to land in Cuba .
 The invasion was a significant failure and provided the Soviets with a further excuse to install nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. had already installed missiles in Turkey and western Europe and Turkey .
 Only when President Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and to remove missiles from Turkey -- close to the USSR -- did the Soviets back down . The Soviets backed down when Kennedy promised to remove the missiles from Cuba and Turkey .
 It is still considered the moment when the two nations came closest to direct warfare . The two nations fought each other in the Battle of Stonewall .
 The 28 miles of wall, barbed wire, and minefields separated Soviet-controlled East Berlin from U.S.-supported West Berlin . The wall was built in East Berlin between 1961 and 1989 .
 Families were divided, and some East Berliners were no longer able to commute to work . Families divided, families were separated, and families separated . Families were separated from each other .
 By the end of the 1960s the prevalence of deterrence theory had led to a state of “mutually assured destruction” in which an attack by either side would result in the destruction of both sides . An attack by both sides would end up destroying both sides.
 Theoretically such assurance prevents that first strike, which was the logic behind limiting antiballistic missiles . Such assurance is the reason for limiting missile production .
 Talks and, later, agreements on strategic nuclear arms (SALT I and SALT II) began in 1969 . Talks began in the 1970s and '90s .
 President Reagan’s SDI program in the early 1980s would be a significant step away from the MAD model toward the goal of a winnable nuclear war . SDI would be the first step from MAD to a nuclear war, the author says .
 The word detente —“warming” — is often used to describe the improvements in Soviet-U.S. relations from the late 1960s to the early 1980s . Detente was a time when military parity between the two had all but been achieved .
 Both nations’ economies suffered from the expense of the Vietnam War, and the Soviets from that of catching up to the U.S. in the nuclear arms race . Both nations' economies suffered—the United States .
 Gerald Ford signed into law the Jackson-Vanik Amendment in 1975 . It tied U.S.-Soviet trade relations to the conditions of Soviet human rights . The amendment was designed to encourage Soviet reforms .
 The Soviets had lost their alliance with China because they had failed to strongly support China during border disputes with India and the invasion of Tibet . The Soviets lost the alliance because they failed to support China in border disputes .
 The prospect of facing a ChineseU.S. alliance encouraged the Soviets as much as MAD did . MAD contributed to their willingness to participate in summits such as those that resulted in Outer Space Treaty .
 As they recovered from World War II, western Europe and Japan became more relevant again to the international scene, as did Communist China . Western Europe and China recovered from the war and became relevant again after the war .
 The U.S.-Soviet domination of international affairs eroded in the 1970s and '80s . Especially from the 1970's on, the U.K. and Russia's influence in international affairs was diminished .
 The United States began to come under more frequent and serious criticism for the choices it had made in its opposition to communism, especially for its support of dictatorial or oppressive right-wing governments .
 Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, more and more developing nations adopted the policy of nonalignment . Meanwhile, throughout the 60s and 70s, the policy was adopted by many countries .
 As more countries join the United Nations, the Western majority was broken . The Western majority of the world's most powerful nations have joined the U.N.
 In 1979 the secular democratic regime of the shah in Iran fell to an alliance of liberal and religious rebels, who installed the religious leader the Ayatollah Khomeini as the new head of state . The shah was supported by the United States and restored in 1953 with the CIA
 Iranian students held 66 Americans hostage for 14 months until President Reagan’s inauguration . 66 Americans were held hostage until 20 minutes after President Reagan was inaugurated . Iranian students were outraged at the involvement of the U.S. in Iranian affairs .
 Detente ended as the 1980s began, with the Iran hostage crisis and the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . Detente began in the 1970s as the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, but ended in 1979 .
 The Soviets lost international respect when they shot down a Korean commercial airliner that passed into Soviet airspace . Just as the United States had come under criticism for its support of certain governments, the Soviets lost a good deal of international respect .
 The first years of the 1980s saw an escalation in the arms race for the first time since the SALT talks began . The arms race began in the early 1980s, with arms race on the rise .
 The Strategic Defense Initiative was proposed by the Reagan administration in 1983 . It was a space and ground-based antimissile defense system that would have abandoned the MAD model .
 Work went into seeking a winnable nuclear war, unthinkable in previous decades . Significant work went into it, seeking a nuclear war impossible in previous years .
 Mikhail Gorbachev was the leader of a generation who had grown up not under Stalin but under the more reform-minded Khrushchev . In 1985 the Soviet Politburo elected reformist Mikhail Goraachev to the Soviet Communist Party . Gora was the first member of the Polit
 Gorbachev was savvy, sharp, and politically aware in a way many Soviet politicians were not . Gorbaugh was savvy and sharp, but was not a politician in the Soviet Union .
 The keystones of his reforms were glasnost and perestroika, policies almost encapsulated by catchphrases widely repeated in the Soviet Union and Western newspapers .
 Glasnost, a policy instituted in 1985, simply meant “openness,” but referred to making the mechanics of government visible and open to question by the public . The policy was instituted to make government visible, open to the public, in 1985 .
 Perestroika consisted of major economic reforms, allowing private ownership of businesses and wider foreign trade . The reforms were significant shifts away from pure communism .
 Two years after the start of perestroika, eastern European communism began to collapse under protests and uprisings . Reformist revolutions in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Romania .
 Several Soviet states sought independence from the Soviet Union . Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania declared independence . Estonia and Latvia declared independence in 1991 .
 The period culminated in the fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9, 1989 . The Berlin Wall was the last Berlin Wall to be erected .
 East Germany agreed to lift restrictions on border traffic for those with proper visas . East Germany finally lifted restrictions after years of public pressure from public pressure .
 Mauerspechte began the rehabilitation of the roads that the wall’s construction had destroyed . They did nothing to stop them from demolishing the wall and claim souvenirs from it .
 By the end of the year free travel was allowed throughout the city, without need of visas or paperwork . Free travel is now allowed throughout city without the need of paperwork .
 In 1991 radical communists in the Soviet Union seized power for three days in August, while Gorbachev was on vacation . In 1991, radical communists seized power in August during the summer .
 Boris Yeltsin, the president of Russia, denounced the coup loudly and visibly . Yeltsins stood on a tank and addressed the public with a megaphone . The coup took place in Moscow, Russia's capital .
 The majority of the military quickly sided with him and the other opponents of the coup . The coup ended with little violence, but there was little violence .
 The Soviet Union was soon dissolved, becoming 15 independent states . But it was clear that the Soviet Union would not last .
 With the dissolution of the Soviet Union the cold war was technically over, effective immediately, but a “cold war mentality” continued . The cold war mentality continued with the Soviet-era Cold War mentality .
 The United States continued to involve itself in international affairs in similar ways . The U.S. was accused of acting like a world policeman before the world wars .
 The ECHELON system of signals intelligence was repurposed for the war on terror following the 9/11 attacks in 2001 . The system monitored telephone and electronic communication .
 The cold war ended without direct warfare and without the use of nuclear weapons . The Cold War ended with direct warfare without direct war and without use of nukes .
 Upwards of 200,000 people were killed from 1948 to 1958, the bloodiest years of The Violence, and perhaps 300,000 killed from 1946 to 1966 . Upwardswards of 300,500 people died in The Violence between 1946 and 1966 .
 The longer-term origins of La Violencia can be traced to Colombia’s long history of internecine political conflict . The ‘War of the Thousand Days’ between Liberals and Conservatives was the longest and bloodiest of Latin America’�s 19th-century
 In the shorter term, La Violencia originated in rising Liberalpopulist challenges to oligarchic liberal-conservative rule spearheaded by liberal dissident Jorge Eliecer Gaitan .
 In the context of rising popular support for a more open political system, democratic reforms, and more equitable sharing of the nation’s resources, the regime of Ospina Perez stepped up the persecution of liberals .
 Violence exploded after April 9, 1948, when Gaitan was assassinated in Bogota, Colombia . Violence exploded when he was widely considered the leading contender for the 1950 presidential elections .
 Liberal insurrections soon spread across much of the country, including provincial capitals and rural areas . Liberals were overthrown in the early 1900s . The government was overthrown by the Liberal Party of Canada .
 Conservative elements responded by launching counterinsurgency actions, which by mid-1948 had crushed most overt resistance . Conservative elements reacted to the growing insurgency .
 Tensions ran high as many Liberals continued organizing and mobilizing . Tensions run high, as many continued organizing .
 The Gomez regime unleashed a reign of terror in city and countryside . With the support of most large landowners, the army and police, the church, conservative peasants, and the United States, the regime unleashed terror in the country .
 The spiraling violence reached into almost every city, town, village, community, and family, with political partisanship at fever pitch . Political partisanship was often accompanied by gruesome tortures and murders .
 Especially hard hit were Andean coffee-growing regions dominated by smallholding peasants . Smallholding peasants were especially hard hit .
 Hit squads and assassins were paid handsomely for eliminating targeted enemies . They were protected by the authorities and dense networks of supporters .
 In response, guerrilla resistance armies emerged in many areas, often led by lower-class partisans . In response to guerrilla resistance, guerrilla groups emerged in response to the situation .
 In 1953 the Gomez regime was ousted in a coup led by General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla, who launched a pacification campaign based on amnesty and public works projects . The coup led to the overthrow of the regime .
 By 1955 the pacification effort had largely failed, and the violence and atrocities continued . By 1955, the efforts to pacify the region had largely been unsuccessful .
 In 1958 a national plebiscite brought to power the National Front, a Liberal-Conservative powersharing arrangement that stemmed much of the violence, which continued to simmer in many areas, often in rural banditry .
 By 1966, with the regime of Liberal Carlos Lleras Restrepo , most violence had dissipated . Most violence had subsided during the period .
 Colombia remains one of Latin America’s most violent countries into the 21st century . The country has seen the rise of the marijuana and cocaine trade and skyrocketing U.S. military aid in the “war on drugs .
 Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon) was established in January 1949 by the Soviet Union . Comecon was established by Soviet Union in 1949 .
 The organization was designed to economically unite all communist states in the eastern bloc of Europe . It was created in order to unite communist countries in the communist bloc .
 The founding member nations were the Soviet Union, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Bulgaria . The founding members of the European Union were Poland, Poland and Hungary .
 Albania joined in February 1949, the German Democratic Republic in 1950, Yugoslavia in 1956, and Mongolia in 1962 . Mongolia joined Albania in 1962, Yugoslavia joined in 1956 and Yugoslavia in 1958 .
 Several other communist states, such as China, North Korea, and North Vietnam, were official observers at Comecon .
 Council sessions were held regularly, and the leaders of member states usually met at least once each year . Council sessions would be held regularly in the United States .
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Comecon was formally dissolved in June that year .
 The original goal of the Comecon was to establish stronger ties between the command economies of the Soviet Union and the Eastern-bloc states . The event was originally intended to establish greater cooperation .
 The Comecon provided Stalin with yet another way to strengthen his control over the eastern European allies by linking their economic vitality, production, and trade directly to the Soviet Union . Stalin's control of eastern Europe was seen as a way of strengthening his control .
 The early years of the organization provided only modest results, such as bilateral trade agreements and sharing of technology between member states . The organization was founded in 1973 and is now based in New York .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev attempted to strengthen the organization by proposing that all member states join a centrally planned socialist commonwealth to be run from Moscow . The Soviet Union proposed a socialist state of Soviet Socialist Socialist Socialist Yugoslavia .
 Smaller member states with lessdeveloped economies and those relying more heavily on agriculture disagreed with this plan for a centralized commonwealth . Smaller members of the European Economic Community disagreed with the plan .
 His attempted centralization of the Comecon and most of his other policies were abandoned in 1964 . However, upon his ouster from power in 1964, his attempts to centralize Comecon were abandoned .
 Leonid Brezhnev and the Soviet leadership in the 1960s and 1970s recognized the need for economic acceleration and further industrial development in the Soviet Union and Comecon member countries .
 The economic and technological gaps between countries in western Europe and those in the Comecon are becoming more evident . The economic gap is becoming more apparent, according to Comecon's president .
 Comecon adopted a new plan in 1971 called the Comprehensive Programme for the Further Extension and Improvement of Cooperation and the Development of Socialist Economic Integration . The Comecon plan was adopted in 1971 .
 The basic goal of this program was to emphasize long-term planning and investments in industrial development of all member states . The program was designed to emphasize investment in all member countries .
 Throughout its four decades of existence, the organization encountered many problems . The organization faced many of those problems .
 The dependence of all member states on the economy of the Soviet Union created an unstable and impractical system . The dependence on Soviet Union's economy created an instability, impractical system, the BBC says .
 The planned economies of the member states did not rely on normal market forces and prices . Therefore, therefore, the mechanism created a false and inflated economic situation, says the author .
 When countries traded and dealt with other states outside of the Comecon, the weakness of their economies became evident . The weakness of the countries became evident when dealing with each other outside of Comecon .
 Comecon never completely fulfilled its objectives because of the difficulties presented when attempting to integrate multiple states’ economies . The Comecon failed to completely fulfill its objectives due to the difficulties faced .
 The Commonwealth of Nations is a loose cultural and political alliance of former British Empire territories . The Commonwealth was formerly the British Commonwealth of the British Empire . It is now the most populous country in the world and has a wide range of countries .
 The idea of the commonwealth continually evolved after its origins in the midto late 19th century . The commonwealth is a state of commonwealth in the United States .
 Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Ireland, Newfoundland, Newfoundland and South Africa . South Africa. Canada. Australia. New Zealand. Canada, Canada . Ireland, Ireland . Newfoundland, Ireland and Newfoundland.
 In the 1920s the settler colonies and Britain began to meet in Imperial Conferences . This provided the structure for the later Commonwealth of Nations .
 The commonwealth shifted from a community of British-populated independent nations to a proposed economic bloc, and finally to a multicultural community of nations . The Commonwealth shifted from an independent community to an economic bloc of countries .
 The concept of commonwealth described the constitutional relationship between Great Britain and the settler colonies . Parliament and the Foreign Office presided over foreign affairs that involved the colonies, but the colonial parliaments controlled their own internal affairs .
 In the 1926 Imperial Conference, the Balfour Declaration acknowledged that Britain and the settler dominions were ‘equal in status” to Britain .
 After the Statute of Westminster in 1931, the commonwealth officially became a political organization consisting of the United Kingdom along with its former colonies . Canada, Newfoundland, South Africa, and Ireland were the last colonies to leave the UK .
 The British tried to make the commonwealth work as a large trading bloc, with trade preferences between the former colonies and formal colonies .
 Britain's imports and exports to and from the colonies never amounted to more than a third of Britain’s trade . Britain's trade to the colonies was never a large part of the British trade .
 The sudden decolonization of the British colonies in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s created the foundations for the current commonwealth .
 India’s decision to stay in the commonwealth in 1949 provided a precedence for later nonsettler colonies to join the Commonwealth after independence . The decision was a precedent for later non-settler colonies joining the Commonwealth commonwealth .
 India accepted the king of England as the symbolic head of the commonwealth . In order to keep its political sovereignty while still allowing for cultural ties, India accepted him as the head of England .
 In 1949, when India accepted the king as the symbolic head of the commonwealth, the British Commonwealth of Nations changed its name . The name was changed so not to imply that all of its peoples were all of British ethnicity .
 As a number of newly independent countries applied to join the commonwealth after they gained independence, the composition shifted from a meeting of predominantly white countries to a multicultural organization . The commonwealth is now a multicultural group of countries .
 At the Heads of Governments Conferences in Singapore in 1971 and in Ottawa in 1973, the general consensus was that the commonwealth should be a loose political association of the former British Empire . The Commonwealth was formed from the ashes of the British Empire in 1941 .
 The Commonwealth of Nations continued to uphold these principals into the 21st century . The Commonwealth continues to uphold them into the next century .
 As of 2006 Queen Elizabeth II, the queen of England, held the title head of commonwealth . She is also known as head of the British Commonwealth .
 The commonwealth heads of government decide who will be the next commonwealth secretary-general . The official who leads the Commonwealth Secretariat is the decisionmaking body of the Commonwealth .
 Every five years the heads of government elect a new secretarygeneral at the Commonwealth Secretariat meeting . The new secretary general will be announced at a meeting in London .
 Members as of 2006 included Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, the Bahamas, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, India
 St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, United Kingdom, Trinidad and Tobago, Zimbabwe .
 A Short History of the British Empire 1850-1995. 3d London: Longmans Press, 1996. A short history of the Empire 1850s-1995 .
 A year after the July 1979 triumph of the Nicaraguan revolution, there emerged a counterrevolutionary movement against the Sandinista regime . Brett Bennett contra war was born in Nicaragua in 1979 .
 From around 1982 the war expanded to include large parts of the country, especially in rural zones of the north and east . U.S. funding, training, equipment, and organizing under the presidency of Ronald Reagan .
 The contra war was waged by several counterrevolutionary armies that were responsible for the deaths of thousands of Nicaraguans and millions of dollars of property damage . The war was a civil war between internal and external forces .
 By the mid-1980s the Sandinista regime had to devote around half of the national budget to national defense and to institute universal military conscription . By the 1980s the regime had instituted universal conscription and instituted around half the national defense budget .
 The economic and human cost of the conflict and the shortages of basic goods caused by the war and the May 1985 U.S. trade embargo proved widely unpopular among Nicaraguans . By the late 1980s the latter measure was widely unpopular .
 Most observers agree that the contra war was a critical factor in causing the electoral defeat of the Sandinistas in February 1990, effectively ending the revolution . The contra war ended the revolution in February 1989 .
 By the early 1990s the war effectively ended, though armed groups continued to destabilize many rural areas well into the 1990s . With the electoral defeat of the Sandinistas and an internationally supervised demobilization process, by the early 90s the conflict effectively ended .
 It is estimated that the war uprooted some 600,000 people (around 15 percent of the national population) and caused the deaths of 30,000 to 50,000 civilians and combatants . It is also thought to have uprooted around 15 percent the population .
 Small-scale armed resistance to the Sandinista regime by autonomously organized militias began within a month of the FSLN’s takeover . It is principally in the region north of Jinotega .
 During this early period, contra organizing also emerged in the borderland zones of Honduras and Costa Rica among exiled Somocistas .
 Like the MILPAS, these paramilitary groups were small-scale and organized principally around personal relationships .
 By late 1980 some exile groups began to receive covert funding from the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency and Argentine military . Some of these exile groups received covert funding by the United States .
 Reagan signed a secret order (National Security Decision Directive 17) granting $19 million to the CIA to recruit and train contra forces . Portrayed the Sandinistas as clients of the Cubans and Soviets .
 On December 1, 1981, he issued a presidential finding calling for U.S. support in conducting paramilitary operations against the Sandinista regime . The president issued the finding in 1981 .
 A second contra army was formed in the north, the Revolutionary Armed Forces . The second army was led by exiled businessman Jose Francisco Cardenal .
 In April 1982 a second front was opened in the south with the formation of the Democratic Revolutionary Alliance . The Sandino Revolutionary Front was based in Costa Rica and commanded by former Sandinista Eden Pastora .
 Another largely autonomous armed rebel group formed in the Atlantic Coast region in late 1981, led by Brooklyn Rivera, among disaffected elements of the mass indigenous organization MISURASATA . The organization is composed primarily of Miskitu Amerindians .
 In the United States, congressional opposition to the Reagan administration’s funding of the contra forces mounted . In the U.S. Congress was opposed to the administration's funding .
 In December 1982 the House passed an amendment sponsored by Edward Boland banning the use of federal funds to overthrow the Nicaraguan government . The amendment was passed in December 1982 .
 By 1983 the contra forces had grown to some 13,000 to 15,000 troops, and by 1985 to some 20,000 . The contra forces were in existence at the time of the war .
 By this time the contras had committed hundreds of atrocities against Nicaraguan civilians, as documented by the human rights organization Americas Watch and others .
 In May 1984 Congress passed a second Boland amendment, requiring an end to all military aid to the contras by October 1 . The amendment was passed by Congress in 1984 .
 Reagan administration illegally funneled covert aid to Iran in exchange for Iranian arms shipments to the contras . Reagan administration secretly funneled the aid over the course of the next two years .
 By the late 1980s contra armies were active across much of the northern and central parts of the country . In the 1980s, the majority of the nation was under control .
 In 1988 and 1989 a series of peace accords created a framework for contra demobilization . Peace accords (notably the Sapoa Accord of 1988) were created by peace agreements .
 With the Sandinista defeat in the February 1990 elections, the administration of President Violeta Chamorro negotiated with the leaders of the Nicaraguan Resistance (Resistencia Nicaragiiense) The Disarmament Protocol of May 30, 1990, was the result of the defeat of the
 Agencies of the United Nations and Organization of American States supervised disarmament process . By mid1990, some 23,000 contras had been processed, from an estimated 170,000 .
 By 1992, as many as 23,000 armed insurgents continued to operate in rural areas, posing severe challenges to governance in the second-poorest nation in the Western Hemisphere . In 1992, with the end of the contra war officially ended, the country was the second poorest in the world
 The Real Contra War: Flighlander Peasant Resistance in Nicaragua in Nicaragua . Brown, Timothy C. Brown, Tim Brown and others write about the Contra War .
 The term entered common usage during the 1960s and 1970s when movements of youth rebellion against conservative social standards swept the United States and western Europe .
 The countercultural movement represented a reaction against conformist values embodied by 1950s society, the cold war, and the U.S. intervention in Vietnam . The counterculture movement was formed in response to the Cold War and the Vietnam War .
 Young people throughout the world advocated peace and fairer race relations . Young people in the world advocate peace and fair race relations. Young people across the world are advocating peace .
 The political and social aspects of counterculture are inseparable from the unconventional postures and appearances of its members . The political, social and social aspect of the counterculture is inseparable .
 1960s counterculture originated on U.S. college campuses and later arrived in European universities . Counterculture originated in the United States and later came to Europe in the 1960s .
 To scholars of counterculture, the free speech movement was the point of departure for the protest movements of the 1960s and 1970s . Free speech was a point-pointing point for the movement of free speech .
 The movement demanded that campus administrators suspend the ban on university political activities and recognize the students' right to free speech and academic freedom .
 Weinberg's arrest by the police led to a spontaneous demonstration by fellow students . Fellow students blocked the police car containing Weinberg for 36 hours .
 The following month the university decided to bring charges against those who organized the sit-in . The university decided the following month to charge those involved .
 The decade continued in the United States with the outbreak of more tensions, often along generational lines, concerning the Vietnam War, sexual behavior, the role of women in society, African-American civil rights, and drug experimentation .
 Vietnam became a specific target of criticism, which was also heightened by the imposition of a compulsory military draft . Vietnam was also a focus of criticism over the introduction of the draft .
 A veritable revolution took place in sexual mores with the spread of contraception and the legalization of abortion in 1973 with the Supreme Court ruling on Roe Wade . The birth of abortion was legalized in 1973, and the birth of the first abortion in the U.S.
 The Summer of Love drew thousands of people from around the world to San Francisco in 1967 . The Haight-Ashbury district was the scene of the Summer of 1967 .
 The end of the 1960s also witnessed the organization of gays and lesbians in groups to acquire visibility and to have their identities recognized . Gay and lesbian groups were formed in order to have visibility and identity recognized .
 Drug taking stopped being a social phenomena linked to urban ghettos and became part of middle-class life . Drug taking is no longer a social phenomenon linked to social problems such as drug taking .
 Feminist thinkers asked for comprehensive social change, pointing out that economic structures are at the base of women’s subordination . Feminist thinkers ask for comprehensive change .
 The United States shifted from the family-oriented society of the 1950s to one that had individual rights at its core . The U.S. shifted from a family-orientated society to a society of individual rights .
 It was in the 1960s that women started to challenge the cultural expectation that they would take primary responsibility for child rearing . Women started challenging cultural expectations that they should be responsible for children .
 Most feminists demanded the social burdens of motherhood through paternal involvement in parenting, quality child care, flexible work arrangements, and a system of social welfare that did not leave them to rely completely on their husbands .
 At the beginning of the 1960s few Americans were aware of the struggle of African Americans for civil rights . At the start of the 60s, few Americans knew about the civil rights struggle .
 The Supreme Court ruling Brown Board of Education outlawing segregation in public schools dates back to 1954 . Progress in the implementation of integration had been slow .
 The 1960s witnessed renewed activism of young African Americans . Young African Americans refused to leave lunch counters when they were denied service or to travel on segregated buses .
 In 1962 the admission of African American James Meredith to the state university in Mississippi caused a sensation and an outburst of violence from white supremacists . White supremacists were outraged by Meredith's admission .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. became the leader of the Civil Rights movement in August 1963 . He drew together hundreds of thousands of African Americans and white Americans in his March on Washington .
 The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights act of 1965 were important achievements of the Civil Rights movement . The Voting Rights Act was an important achievement of the movement .
 The acts outlawed segregation in public facilities and authorized federal examiners to register black voters, thus ending disenfranchisement . The acts also outlawed public facilities in public facilities and outlawed segregation .
 As in the U.S. young people taking part in the countercultural movements were well educated, often at the university level . Countercultural movements took place in the 1960s and '60s .
 As riots became widespread throughout European streets, this provoked heated debates within the left . The riots were widespread throughout Europe and provoked heated debate within the party .
 Left-wing groups independent from communist and socialist parties formed in Italy, France, and Germany . Leftist groups were formed in France, Italy, Germany and Italy .
 These groups, such as Potere Operaio and Lotta Continua in Italy, did not have parliamentary representation, but still became avant-garde of the movement because of their capacity to attract young people .
 During the 1960s and 1970s new cultural forms emerged in all artistic fields from cinema to music, from fashion to media . During the 60s and 70s new forms emerged from film to music and media .
 The music of the Beatles came to embody the need for change and the experimentation of younger generations . The Beatles' music embodies the need to experiment with new things .
 The Old Hollywood of dated melodramas controlled by studio moguls was replaced by the New Hollywood . The New Hollywood of the era was replaced with the new Hollywood .
 Dennis Hopper, Peter Bogdanovich, Mike Nichols, Arthur Penn, Francis Ford Coppola, and Martin Scorsese reflected in their movies the rise of the counterculture and expressed the longing for freedom shared by thousands of young Americans .
 In Europe the French and British New Waves and the New German Cinema rejected the classic norms of filmmaking, experimenting with photography and editing . The New German and French New Waves rejected the traditional norms of cinema .
 They focused their films on the ordinary lives of the working classes and on those outside of the social mainstream .
 Underground newspapers spread throughout the U.S. and Europe, constituting a network of resistance to the establishment . Underground newspapers also spread throughout Europe and the United States and U.K.
 One of the most visible icons of the counterculture movements was the figure of the hippie, who often expressed the distaste for social conventions by renouncing consumerism and living in communes guided by forms of spiritualism .
 The figure of the hippie encapsulates a major contradiction in the countercultural movement . The hippie is a contradiction of the counter-cultural movement, says author .
 The communal thrust of the movement is countered by an equally strong emphasis on individual choices, which tends to prevent any form of cooperation, says the author of the book .
 The more fascinating and controversial aspects of the counterculture should not overshadow the contributions of the movement outside the arts . The counterculture's contributions to the arts should not be overshadowed by its controversial aspects .
 The counterculture influence reached less spectacular and more stable fields such as economics, business, and law . Counterculture influence reaches less spectacular but stable fields like economics and business .
 Many of today’s nongovernmental organizations, for example, have their roots in the 1960s search for a fairer and more environmentally minded development . Many of these organizations have roots in their search for justice .
 In general, as the counterculture evolved in the 1970s and its icons began to lead more moderate lives, the movement started to be absorbed to a certain degree within the mainstream . The movement was absorbed by the mainstream in general .
 As such it left its mark on various fields like philosophy, morality, music, art, lifestyle, and fashion . As such as philosophy and morality, it left a mark in various fields .
 There were those who refused to be absorbed, and pushed their refusal to take it to dangerous extremes . Yet, especially in the European context, there were some who refused .
 The late 1970s and the 1980s were characterized by the rise of terrorist groups such as the Red Brigades in Italy, Action Directe in France, and the Red Army in Germany .
 The most apparent features of the 1960s and 1970s counterculture were unconventional appearance, music, drugs, communitarian experiments, and sexual liberation . The counterculture was mostly practiced by white, middle-class young Americans and Europeans and Europeans .
 To some the counterculture represented the longing of young people for free speech, equality, and a more inclusive and less exploitative world . To some young people, it represented a longing of free speech and equality .
 Others denounced the counterculture as hedonistic, meaninglessly rebellious, unpatriotic, and destructive of the Western world’s moral order . The counterculture was a counter-culture movement in the 1960s and '60s .
 Movements of people from Cuba to the U.S. comprise a longstanding feature of both countries’ histories . Luca Prono: Cuban migration to the United States is a long-standing feature of the country's history .
 The panic of 1857 prompted numerous Cuban cigar manufacturers to move their operations to Key West, Tampa, and elsewhere along the Florida coast . Cuban cigar makers moved their operations into Key West and Tampa, Florida .
 A much larger movement of Cubans to the U.S. began with the Cuban revolution, which came to power in 1959 .
 The exodus continued in several waves through the 1960s and into the 1970s, becoming integral to cold war politics . The exodus was welcomed by the United States government and materially harmed the Cuban economy, even as the exoduses proved politically useful to Castro regime .
 The 1966 Cuban Adjustment Act allowed undocumented Cuban immigrants to stay in the country and gain permanent residence after one year . Rights not extended to any other immigrant group . The act was passed in 1966 .
 In 1980 some 125,000 Cubans, the so-called Marielitos, emigrated to the United States in the Mariel boatlift . In 1980, the "Marielitos" emigrated from Cuba to the U.S. in a boatlift to
 In the summer of 1994 at Castro’s invitation, an estimated 33,000 Cubans made the journey to Cuba . The trip was an invitation to Castro's Cuba .
 The exodus prompted the U.S. government to negotiate an agreement with Cuba in 1994 . The agreement was reached in September 1994, in which the United States agreed to admit 20,000 Cubans annually .
 In 1995, undocumented Cuban immigrants who reached U.S. soil would be permitted to apply for permanent residence status in one year . Those intercepted at sea would be sent back to Cuba or to a third country .
 The 2000 United States census enumerated 1,241,685 persons of Cuban ancestry in the United States . The U.S. census counted 3. percent of United States Hispanics and 0.0 percent of the population of 281. million . The census also counted 0.9 percent of
 Dade County, Florida, has 525,841 Cuban-born, the single largest national group . Most lived in MiamiDade County . Most of the population came from the 1980s .
 As a result of these demographic changes, the politics and culture of south Florida have undergone profound shifts, with relatively affluent, politically conservative, and anti-Castro Cuban Americans increasingly shaping the region’s politics, and culture .
 For 13 days in October 1962 the U.S. and the Soviet Union faced off over the Soviet placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba . Experts say the closest the world has yet come to nuclear war was the Cuban missile crisis .
 The Soviet Union agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for the removal of U.S. nuclear missiles in Turkey . In the end, the Soviet Union backed down and the crisis passed . The United States eventually removed the missiles from Turkey .
 The Cuban missile crisis left an enduring mark on U.S. relations . The crisis appeared to demonstrate the viability of the doctrine of nuclear deterrence through mutually assured destruction .
 The long-term roots of the crisis lie in the atmosphere of mutual hostility and distrust engendered by the cold war . The crisis was triggered by the Cold War, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Khrushchev hoped to use the provocation to force the United States to remove the 15 Jupiter nuclear missiles in Turkey, which were within striking distance of Moscow . In the shorter term, the Soviet Premier hoped to force U.S. to remove 15 Jupiter missiles .
 The botched April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba heightened revolutionary leader Fidel Castro’s fears of a follow-up U.S. effort to topple his regime . In addition, the botched Bay of Pigeas invasion heightened Fidel Castro's fears of an attempt to topple him .
 The presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba led the U.S. and the Soviet Union to the brink of war . The United States and the USSR would back down when confronted with the reality of the Soviet missiles . The presence led the United States to the verge of war.
 The events of October 1962 brought the world closer to the brink of nuclear holocaust than officials at the time realized . Declassified documents and a series of conferences among participants from the United States, Cuba, and the former Soviet Union have confirmed the events .
 Scholars have meticulously reconstructed the chronology of events marking the crisis . Scholars have painstakingly reconstructed the events of the 1960s and 1970s .
 Through the summer of 1962, the Soviets built a variety of military installations on Cuba . U.S. intelligence analysts did not believe the installations included nuclear weapons .
 On October 14, 1962, a U-2 spy plane photographed military bases around San Cristobal, Cuba, demonstrating the existence of nuclear installations . The U.2 plane flew over Cuba in October 1962 to photograph military bases .
 Khrushchev had deployed launchers for at least 40 medium-range and intermediate-range nuclear missiles . The missiles were capable of reaching all of the continental U.S. except the Pacific Northwest .
 U.S. analysts poured over the photographs . For the next two days, United States analysts poured into the photos .
 Kennedy opted for the blockade, announced in a televised address to the nation on October 22 . Kennedy opted to the blockade in an address to America on that day .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove launchers in exchange for U.S. removal of missiles from Turkey . The United States had a deadline for launching an invasion of Cuba to remove the launchers .
 On January 1, 1959, a broad-based insurrectionary movement overthrew the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro at its helm inaugurated the Cuban revolution, a process of social transformation that continues .
 By 1961 the revolution was proclaimed unambiguously socialist and Marxist-Leninist . Its ideology was at first broadly nationalist and democratic, but by 1961 it was socialist . The revolution was declared Marxist and Marxist Leninist .
 The Cuban revolution was one of only a handful of social revolutions in 20th-century Latin America . Cuban revolution had a major impact not only within Cuba but around the world .
 In Latin America, the revolution encouraged the formation of leftist and neo-Marxist ideologies and movements of national liberation . After that, guerrilla groups in the 1960s hoped to duplicate the successes of the Cuban revolutionaries .
 The Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua found much of its inspiration in Cuba . Other national liberation and guerrilla movements from Mexico to Argentina also found inspiration .
 By bringing a Marxist-Leninist regime to the historic “backyard” of the U.S., the Cuban revolution was also a major event in the cold war . The Cuban revolution also brought a Marxist Marxist regime to Cuba .
 Its effects were felt in Angola, Mozambique, Vietnam, and scores of other nation-states around the world . It was felt in the two decades following Batista’s ouster .
 The Cuban revolution found its long-term origins in the structural dependency of Cuba on the United States . The U.S.-imposed Platt Amendment of 1901 prompted denunciations of ‘Yankee imperialism” across the island .
 Most narratives of the revolution begin with the rise of the Jesuitand university-educated lawyer Fidel Castro and his band of revolutionaries . Fidel Castro is the son of a Jesuit and university-trained lawyer .
 The assault was quickly defeated but catapulted Castro into national prominence . Castro became a national hero after the assault .
 Castro became something of a folk hero for his eloquent denunciations of the Batista dictatorship and the island’s social injustices . Sentenced to 15 years in prison, Castro was a hero of his own . Castro was sentenced to a 15-year prison sentence .
 Castro traveled to Mexico in 1955 to form a guerrilla army of Cuban exiles . Released on May 15, 1955, in a general amnesty, Castro went to Mexico to form an army . Castro was released in May 1955 in an amnesty .
 In February 1956 he announced the formation of his 26 July Movement, and on November 25, with 81 other men, departed Tuxpan, Mexico, aboard the yacht Granma, headed for eastern Cuba . They reached eastern Cuba on December 2 .
 The guerrilla war in the Sierra Maestra in 1957-58 is the topic of an expansive literature . The war is the subject of an extensive literature .
 Led by Castro, his brother Raul, and the Argentine Ernesto “Che” Guevara, the rebels gradually earned the trust of the peasants and workers who comprised the region’s majority . The rebels were led by Castro and his brother .
 It established contacts with politically disaffected labor leaders, workers, students, intellectuals, and other activists in Cuba’s major cities, especially Havana . The protest movements soon dovetailed with Castro's, and didvetailed .
 Castro’s forces entered Havana in triumph on January 1, 1959 . After a complex series of events that found the Batista regime increasingly beleaguered, the Castro regime was overthrown .
 On seizing power, the revolutionaries embarked on a program of social transformation that focused on nationalization of major industries and broadranging reforms in land ownership, housing, rents, food, and related spheres .
 A large proportion of Cuban land and industries were U.S.-owned, the stage was set for confrontation with the United States . Since a large portion of Cuba's land and industry was owned by the US, it could be used for confrontation .
 Eisenhower administration under pressure from business interests and anticommunists interpreted events in Cuba through the prism of the cold war . Hostile rhetoric intensified on both sides as the war intensified .
 In February 1960 the Castro regime signed a trade agreement with the Soviet Union in which the Soviets agreed to sell Cuba oil at a discount and buy Cuban sugar at a high price . The deal was signed in February 1960 .
 Standard Oil, Texaco, and Shell refused to refine Soviet oil, prompting the Castro regime to nationalize their refineries . In June Standard Oil and Texaco refineries were nationalized .
 Castro regime traded U.S. economic dependency for Soviet dependency . Castro regime, in effect, traded United States economic dependency with Soviet dependency. Castro regime .
 From 1964 the regime opted to increase the economy’s reliance on sugar, culminating in the disastrous policy goal of producing 10 million tons of sugar by 1970 . From 1964 to 1970 the regime hoped to produce 10 million tonnes of sugar .
 Efforts to improve the living standards of ordinary Cubans met with greater success . Efforts have been made to improve living standards in Cuba .
 Government programs in housing, health care, education, and related spheres are generally considered the biggest successes of the revolution .
 By the 1970s hunger, malnutrition, homelessness, and illiteracy had been all but eliminated in Cuba . The Cuban health-care system ranked among the most developed in the world .
 All organized opposition to the regime was banned, thousands of dissidents jailed, and freedom of speech severely curtailed . Political oppression increased markedly .
 Tens of thousands of middle-class and professional Cubans migrated to the U.S. in the 1960s . Large exile communities formed, centered in Miami .
 Cuba became a beacon of hope for revolutionaries across Latin America . Internationally, Cuba became an icon of the Cuban revolution .
 Castro announced his intention to export revolution to Latin America . To the chagrin of his more cautious Soviet patrons, Castro announced plans to revolutionize the region . Castro was one of the leaders of the Cuban revolution .
 Che Guevara’s ‘foco’ theory of revolution was put to the test in Bolivia in 1967 . It held that a small group of dedicated revolutionaries could win peasant support and spark a social revolution . The plan's most ardent proponent was former minister of industries
 The expected mass uprising did not materialize, and Guevara was captured and killed by the Bolivian army . The expected uprising was a success .
 The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the end of its $4 billion in annual subsidies, combined with the continuing U.S. trade embargo, the revolution entered a “Special Period” that saw a decline in living standards and in all major industries .
 Cuba was one of only a handful of countries in the early 2000s espousing communist ideology . Cuba was once one of the only countries in which it espoused communist ideology.
 In early 2007, with over 1 million Cubans and Cuban Americans in Miami and elsewhere anticipating the regime’s demise, Castro appeared on the brink of death .
 He resigned the presidency in favor of his brother, Raoul, in February 2008 . He resigned in 2008 after losing the presidency .
 Wolf, Eric R Wolf: Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century . Wolf: "Peasant Wars" is a Peasant War of the Twenty-Centers century .
 On June 4, 1878, Britain concluded a treaty with the Ottoman sultan Abdul Hamid II, officially known as a Convention of Defensive Alliance . The treaty was known as the Convention of Defence Alliance . Cyprus became the first country to have its independence from the Ottoman Empire .
 In this treaty Abdul Hamid agreed to the loan of Cyprus to Britain . He retained Ottoman sovereignty over the island and the right to collect a tax known as the tribute .
 Britain won de facto control of the island and the right to make laws and international agreements in the name of Cyprus . Britain won the island in 1946 .
 Within weeks of the signing of the treaty, the Union Jack flag was hoisted over Nicosia . Shortly afterward a contingent of Indian army troops arrived from Malta to safeguard British colonial rule, which lasted 82 years .
 For Britain, Cyprus became a vital staging area for its Middle East interests . Cyprus was a vital location for its Mideast interests .
 The island was formally taken over by the British in 1914, when the Ottoman Empire aligned itself with Germany and the other Central Powers during World War I . Under the Treaty of Lausanne of 1923, Turkey and Greece agreed that Cyprus would remain under British sovereignty . In 1925 Cyprus was declared
 Both the Greeks and the Turks of Cyprus considered British control a welcome relief from Turkish taxation . Many Greek Cypriots also felt that the departure of the Ottoman administration brought the island closer to the Greek dream of enosis, or union, with Greece .
 Greek Cypriots began efforts to link the island’s destiny with that of Greece . Thus, in effect, began the efforts of the Greek Cyprus .
 Such an attitude further embittered the Greek Cypriots, although it was of some comfort to the Turkish Cypriot . The attitude of the Turkish-Cypriot community was also a comfort for the Greek-Cyprus people .
 On April 1, 1955, a secret organization called EOKA declared a struggle until death to free the island from British rule . The group wanted to link Cypriot with the Greek mainland .
 The war for the future of Cyprus began as colonial empires were crumbling around the globe . The war began in Cyprus in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The British felt there was no question of a union with Greece or of full independence for Cyprus . The British did not want to see the possibility of a full independence from Cyprus .
 Britain regarded Cyprus as a crucial military base on the traditional crossroads of big-power competition for influence in the eastern Mediterranean . Considering its commitments in the Middle East and its still important role .
 The Turks felt that, if successful, the Greek struggle for enosis against British colonial rule meant that the Turkishspeaking minority on the island would lose the protection of the British . If successful, it would mean that the Turks would lose their protection from the British.
 The Turkish Cypriot minority also cooperated with British police and military in tracking down suspected EOKA fighters . Fear of a Greek victory prompted the creation of a group known as VULCAN .
 To the slogan of enosis , Turkish Cypriots answered with their own solution, that of takism, or partition, of Cyprus . To the . slogan of  enosis, Turkish . Cypriot answered with the . own solution to enosis .
 Grivas arrived on the island from Greece in 1954 and set out to prepare what amounted to an well-organized uprising . Grivas set out in 1954 to prepare an uprising against the government .
 In 1955, rumors of landings of saboteurs, of infiltration by agents dispatched from Greece, and of organized resistance began sweeping the narrow streets of Nicosia . Cyprus became an armed camp .
 An estimated 28,000 British troops were deployed throughout the island, manning roadblocks, searching passersby, pursuing elusive terrorist suspects .
 Greece and Turkey need to work out a system of ethnic power-sharing that would satisfy both nations . Both nations must work to protect their Cypriot ethnic compatriots as well as their own interests .
 On February 5, Greek prime minister Constantine Karamanlis and Adnan Menderes of Turkey met in Zurich . They prepared, after negotiations and consultation with the leaders of the two Cypriot communities, a solution to the Cyprus situation .
 Archbishop Mikhalis Khristodoulou Makarios III and Dr. Dr. Makarios traveled to London, where they were joined by Archbishop Mihalis .
 The new Cypriot constitution, based on the Zurich-London agreements, was issued in April 1960 . It paved the way for the proclamation of the independent Republic of Cyprus .
 The president of the republic was a Greek Cypriot while the vice president was a Turkish Cyprioot . Both were elected by their representative communities .
 Both had veto powers over foreign affairs, defense, fiscal matters, and security . Both veto powers were used in the United States .
 The Treaty of Guarantee was signed by Turkey, Britain, Greece, Cyprus, and Cyprus . The treaty was signed in 1950s .
 It stated that the four countries agreed not to undertake activity aimed at promoting, directly or indirectly, a union of Cyprus with any other state, or a partition of the island . The four countries also agreed that they would not engage in any activity promoting a union .
 Treaty of Establishment was signed between Britain and Cyprus . It granted Britain sovereignty over a territory on the island’s southern coast for two military bases, Akrotiri .
 The flag under which the two communities of Cyprus were to unite was displayed to the public on August 16, 1960 . The flag was displayed in front of the public for the first time .
 The Union Jack was replaced with a white flag bearing an orange map of Cyprus with small green branches underneath . The flag has been replaced with an orange flag bearing a map of the island .
 The invasion was Turkey’s answer to the military coup of 15 July that toppled Archbishop Mikhalis Khristodoulou Makarios III, president of Cyprus, at the behest of the military junta in power in Athens, Greece . The invasion—or intervention, to the
 Turkish officials justified the military action by citing the terms of Article IV of the Treaty of Guarantee . Turkey cites the impossibility of joint action with Greece and the reluctance of Britain to use military force to restore the state of affairs established by the constitution of 1960 .
 The Turkish military offensive began on July 20, and although the Greek National Guard tried to defend the beachfront of northern Cyprus, it was defeated by the far stronger Turkish armed forces . The Turkish forces are now occupying northern Cyprus .
 The Greek National Guard was poorly armed, while the Turks used new equipment and weapons recently purchased from the U.S. The Turkish National Guard is poorly armed .
 Britain evacuated an estimated 12,000 British and other foreign nationals, as well as a number of Cypriots, to the Akrotiri military base and from there to England . The Cypriot population is estimated to be at least 12 million .
 At this stage of the operation, named Attila II, the Turks controlled only a strip of the northern coastline about 10 miles long, including Kyrenia and a few villages . At this time, the Turkish army was only controlling a narrow strip of coastline .
 Athens junta collapsed after more than seven years in power . Under pressure of the events in Cyprus, the Greek junta finally collapsed after seven years of power .
 Constantine Karamanlis returned from exile in Paris to form a new cabinet . Former Prime Minister Constantine Kamanlis returns from exile to form new government .
 Nicos Sampson renounces his seven-day-old presidency of Cyprus, leaving the country to Glafcos Clerides, who had previously been the president of the House of Representatives .
 During the early days of the post-invasion period, the Greek National Guard attacked Turkish Cypriots, thereby worsening intercommunal relations . The Greek national guard attacked the Turks during the early stages of the invasion .
 A conference of the guarantor powers (Greece, Turkey, and Britain), as well as Cyprus, was organized in Geneva on July 25 . It resulted in a declaration calling for an exchange of prisoners and protection by the UN forces of the Turkish Cypriot enclaves of the
 The second part of the conference convened on August 9 with Clerides and a large team of advisers and experts representing Cyprus . As scheduled, the conference was held in Cyprus .
 Small area of Cyprus held by the Turkish army was further occupied by some 30,000 troops with accompanying tanks, and artillery . Meanwhile, a small area of Cypriot held by Turkish army is further occupied .
 Turkish foreign minister Turan Giincs shocked international opinion by refusing a 36-to-48-hour delay made by Clerides in order to consider proposals to resolve the crisis . On August 13 the Turkish foreign ministry refused a request for a delay of 36-48 hours made by
 At dawn on the following day, armor-backed Turkish columns fanned out east and west of Nicosia . At dawn of the next day, the Turkish tanks and troops were seen on the island of Cyprus .
 By this action Turkey was in violation of the many Security Council resolutions calling for a cease-fire and troop withdrawal, as well as agreements that were signed in Geneva, the UN says . The UN says Turkey's actions violate the Security Council resolution .
 37 percent of Cyprus had come under Turkish military occupation . After three more days of fighting, Turkey called a cease-fire, but not before .
 Approximately 10,000 Turkish Cypriot refugees from enclaves in the south were flown to northern Cyprus from British bases by way of Turkey . The refugees were flown into northern Cyprus by air from Turkish bases .
 Some 140,000 to 160,000 Greek Cypriots, making up roughly one-third of the island’s population, were expelled from their homes and land . The island's population is estimated to be one third of the population .
 Acts of ethnic cleansing by the Turkish military were documented, and many POWs are still unaccounted for .
 The events of 1974 dramatically altered the internal balance of power between the two Cypriot communities . The events were coupled with their prevailing political and institutional separation with a stark physical and geographical separation . Cyprus is the only island nation in the Mediterranean region .
 Until the present day, the island remains divided between the Greek-speaking south, now a member of the EU, and the self-styled Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus .
 Dalai Lama has been both the temporal and spiritual leader of Tibet since the 16th century . The Dalai Lama is the 14th Tibetan Buddhist leader . He has been in Tibet's spiritual and temporal leadership since Tibet was ruled by the Dalai Lama .
 In 1578 Altan Khan, a Mongol ruler, conferred the title Dalai Lama (meaning ocean of wisdom) on an eminent Tibetan lama . Since he was viewed as the third reincarnation of Avalokiteshvara, he became known as the Third Dalai Lama .
 The Fifth Dalai Lama, called the Great Fifth, conferred the title Panchen Lama or Panchen Rimpoche (meaning the Great Gem of Learning) on his teacher . He declared that he was the reincarnation of Amitabha Buddha, or the Buddha of Light .
 When one died a committee of senior lamas would be appointed to find his reincarnation, directed by omens and signs . The committee would find the reincarnation of one of the deceased .
 In 1933 the 13th Dalai Lama died and a search began for his reincarnation . Search began for the Dalai Lama in 1933 after his death .
 They found him in a twoyear-old farmer’s son named Tenszin Gyatso in 1939 and enthroned him as the 14th Dalai Lama in Lhasa . The Dalai Lama was found in a farm boy's son by a farmer's son named
 In addition to his traditional education, he was taught Western subjects by an Austrian adventurer and Nazi Heinrich Harrar, who had escaped internment by Great Britain in India . Harrar had escaped from internment in India in 1938 .
 In 1950 the government of the newly founded People’s Republic of China announced its intention to take control of Tibet . Tibet had enjoyed autonomy, with minimal interference from China, for over half a century .
 Tibetan efforts to enlist aid from India, Great Britain, the United States, and the United Nations failed because no nation recognized Tibet as an independent state . Tibet is not recognized as a Tibetan state .
 As the Chinese army advanced, the Dalai and his court fled to India in December 1950, carrying with them the contents of the treasury . The Dalai's court fled with them to India, taking the treasury with them .
 The authorities in Lhasa bowed to the inevitable, traveled to Beijing in 1951, and signed a Seventeen Point Agreement . The agreement granted Tibet large measures of autonomy . Tibet has since become a model for China .
 In 1954 the Dalai and Panchen Lama traveled to Beijing to attend the meeting of China’s National Assembly representing Tibet . In 1954 they traveled to China's capital, Beijing, for the first time .
 In Beijing he met with Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou Enlai . He found many of their government’s policies commendable .
 Relations between the Dalai Lama’s court and the Chinese government began to deteriorate when China pushed for changes and reforms and expanded its control . The Dalai Lama's court and Chinese government have been at odds for years .
 Tibetan resentment of Chinese repression led to violence that culminated in an armed uprising in Lhasa in 1959 . The uprising was the first Tibetan uprising since 1959 .
 Fearing detention by the Chinese, the Dalai, his family, and his entourage left Lhasa in disguise on March 17, 1959 . The Dalai crossed into India on March 30, 1959, and crossed into the country .
 The Tibetan refugees were granted political asylum by Indian Prime Minister Nehru . They were granted asylum along with about 13,000 other Tibetan refugees .
 They were allowed to set up a government in exile in Dharmsala, located in the foothills of the Himalaya Mountains . The government was set up in the Himalayan foothills .
 Since 1959 the Dalai Lama has visited many countries worldwide speaking on behalf of his people and their plight . Since 1959 he has visited countries around the world speaking out on behalf his people .
 He has been a most effective spokesman for the Tibetan cause because of his charisma, fluency in English, and peaceful approach to conflict resolution . The Dalai Lama's charisma is a key to his success in Tibetan politics .
 His numerous writings on Tibetan Buddhism and culture and his personal philosophy are known worldwide . His personal philosophy is known worldwide for his writings on Tibet .
 In the process he has demystified the oncemysterious Tibet and the theocracy headed by a Living Buddha . Tibet is now a theocratic theocracy .
 Since 1988 he has become more flexible on the future of Tibet . He has abandoned demands for independence in favor of autonomy within China . Since 1988, he has also been more flexible .
 Virtual Tibet, Searching for Shangri-La from the Himalayas to Hollywood . Virtual Tibet is a reality TV show based in Tibet .
 In 1989 a civil war began in Sudan after an officer in the Sudanese army, Omar alBashir, seized power through a coup d’etat . In Darfur Darfur, Darfur was the site of the first civil war in Sudan .
 The roots of this war are complex, including struggle over limited resources following a serious drought and famine in the mid-1980s, conflicting conceptions of the use of land and ethnic tensions .
 The cultivation of oil fields in southern Sudan led the government to engage in widespread destruction of longstanding villages to profit from the production and sale of oil . In addition, in a more recent development, the government .
 Throughout the entire process the government used food and resources as weapons, often pitting different ethnic groups against each other and withholding humanitarian aid to force the population to abide by its policies .
 In the 17 years after the civil war began, fighting displaced more than 4 million Sudanese and killed at least 2 million . Many of them were targets of ethnic cleansing and starvation by their own government .
 After 2003, government brutality focused on the western region of Sudan, known as Darfur, was focused on Darfur . Darfur is the region of western Sudan, which is also known as Sudan .
 The tensions in this region were directly linked to the ongoing struggle between pastoral and sedentary communities over land use . The tensions between pastoralists and sedents are linked to pastoralism .
 North Darfur has capital at Al-Fasher; South Darfur, with capital at Nyala; and West Darfur . North and South are based in Darfur; West is based in Al-Jeneina . Darfur is one of three regions in the region .
 In February 2003, in response to insurrection, the government sent in its troops, bolstered by Arab paramilitary groups known as janjawiid (roughly “armed men on horseback”), predominantly drawn from this region . In response to an uprising, government troops were bolstered by
 In retaliation for the continued insurgency and the defiance of the civilian population, these forces implemented a scorched-earth policy, killing both people and communities in a wide swath of destruction . In retaliation, these two forces implemented .
 Satellite imagery indicates that almost 50 percent of villages were completely destroyed in the western and southern regions of Darfur . Satellite imagery shows that almost half of villages are completely destroyed .
 In addition to all these acts of destruction, government troops and the janjawiid murdered civilians, abducted thousands of villagers, and participated in rapes of women and girls .
 Conservative estimates place the death toll in the collective region of Darfur at 200,000 . Other estimates range to 400,000, with other estimates of 400,00 .
 The majority of the deaths were due to starvation and disease, exacerbated by the government’s refusal to allow humanitarian aid, safe passage, and distribution . The government has refused to allow aid and safe passage .
 In early 2006 violence persisted in the region as government troops and the janjawiid destroyed non-Arab villages and drove refugees into camps along the neighboring border .
 Sudanese government refuses to allow humanitarian aid to flow freely into the region . Sudan has refused to allow U.N. peacekeepers on its soil . It has also refused to disband the janjawiid, investigate mass violence against civilians .
 International Secretariat of Amnesty International, July 2004; Human Rights Watch. Amnesty International . Human Rights Rights Watch . Amnesty International.
 Dorothy Day was a peace and social justice activist, journalist, and writer . She cofounded the Catholic Worker Movement, with the aim of enabling the needy to support themselves with dignity . Dorothy Day co-founded Catholic Worker movement .
 When her family lived in Chicago, she often wandered into the poor tenement districts to observe the life there there .
 At various times throughout her life she protested against conscription, championed women’s and African-American rights, and called for an end to war . She died at the age of 92 at her home in New York City .
 Day was jailed numerous times for her participation in nonviolent demonstrations . Day was arrested numerous times in the 1980s for participating in nonviolent protests .
 She was married briefly to an older man before entering a common-law marriage with a scientist . She was also briefly married to a younger man .
 The birth of her daughter Tamar prompted a spiritual awakening that led her to the Catholic Church . Her daughter's birth prompted her to become a devout Catholic .
 She became a devout Catholic, attending daily Mass and immersing herself in Scripture . She also attended daily Masses .
 She felt the solution was a return to the land and worker ownership of the means of production . She felt workers should be able to own the land, not just the land .
 The Catholic Worker was a journal Day and Maurin used to spread the news of the movement . Maurin was a member of the Catholic Worker and used to help spread the movement's news .
 Catholic Worker houses of hospitality and farms, where people would live together and share resources with one another . They also formed Catholic Worker homes of hospitality, farms and shared resources .
 These venues pitted the gospel against the realities of human weakness, often with disappointing results . These venues pit the gospel vs. the reality of human weaknesses .
 Day's radicalism as she applied it to the gospel now inspires many to view her as a saint . Viewed in her time as a revolutionary, Day’s radicalism was seen as a radicalism . She is now seen as an inspiration to many who see her as an
 Pope John Paul II approved the opening of her cause for canonization in 2000 . Her cause was opened in 2000 and she was canonized in 2010 .
 The Nationalist government under Chiang Kai-shek prohibited the formation of opposition parties and imposed martial law in 1949 . Non-KMT candidates could nevertheless compete as independents or nonpartisans in local elections .
 Most citizens accepted the restrictions as a necessary price for living a relatively free and increasingly prosperous life . Some criticized the mainlander-dominated KMT for monopolizing national power .
 His eldest son, Chiang Ching-kuo, was elected president in 1978 and reelected in 1984 . He was elected by his eldest son in 1978; he is now president of Thailand .
 The country ended martial law in 1987, granting full freedoms, and allowing the formation of competing political parties . One was political reforms that included ending martial law and allowing political parties to form .
 He declared that no member of the Chiang family would succeed him . He also promoted highly educated younger people, including native-born Taiwanese, to power .
 Taiwan’s transition to democracy was peaceful . Unlike the chaotic political changes during the same period in the Philippines and South Korea, it was peaceful. Unlike the chaos of the period, the transition was peaceful and orderly .
 After Chiang’s death in 1989, Lee Teng-hui accelerated the pace of political reforms and won two terms as president . He accelerated political reforms after the death of Chiang in 1989 .
 Chen won a second term in 2004 with a very slim majority, but the KMT and its allies won a comfortable majority in the legislature . Chen won his second term with a slim majority in 2004 .
 Taiwan's stable democratic transition with a competitive party system was remarkable . Taiwan’s stable political transition was remarkable, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Crime and money influencing the political process, a situation unknown under authoritarian rule . However, it was accompanied by a new kind of corruption, locally called “black and gold politics,” that is, crime and money . The situation is not known as an authoritarian rule, but it
 Chen Shui-bian was popular among some Taiwanese for promoting a local identity and a thinly veiled goal of separating from China . Chen was popular in Taiwan for promoting the local identity .
 Since the PRC regarded Taiwan as a renegade province and has not disavowed force to compel it to rejoin the motherland, Chen's policies have heightened tensions across Taiwan Strait .
 China became Taiwan’s second-largest trading partner in 2000, after becoming its second largest trading partner . Chen's political stance and corrupt rule resulted in a downturn in Taiwan's economy . Chen was accused of corruption and corruption .
 Despite the end of the United States-ROC Mutual Defense Treaty in 1979, the U.S. continued to sell arms to Taiwan and remained interested in maintaining the people of Taiwan’s right to selfdetermination .
 The unsettled relations between the two Chinas constituted the most important source of friction between the PRC and the U.S. The tension between China and the United States is one of the most significant sources of friction in the relationship between the countries .
 This country is located in central Africa . It is bounded by the Republic of the Congo to the west, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda, and Uganda on the east; Zambia and Angola on the south .
 The capital city is Kinshasa, which changed its name from Leopoldville in 1964 . It is the capital city of the Congo, which is located in the country .
 The topography varies from tropical rain forests to mountainous terraces, plateau, savannannas, dense grasslands, and mountains . The country's topography is known for its mountainous terrain and savannas .
 Its region is dominated by the Congo River system, so it has a main role in economic development, transportation, and freshwater supply .
 This country has equatorial location; as a consequence the climate is hot and humid with large amounts of precipitation in the central river basin and eastern highlands, but it presents periodic droughts in the south . This country is also known for its hot, humid climate .
 The majority of the population is Christian, predominantly Roman Catholic but Protestants also . The majority is predominantly Roman Catholics .
 The population was estimated at 58 million in 2004 and has grown quickly . The population is estimated to have grown rapidly .
 The DRC has a vast potential of natural resources and mineral wealth such as cobalt, diamonds, gold, copper, coal, uranium, crude oil, and tin . The country has a huge potential of mineral wealth .
 The programs and policies of structural adjustment set by the International Monetary Fund have a ruling presence in the country . The IMF has set up a number of programs to help the country's economy .
 In exchange, the country‘s external debt was reconsidered and the IMF awarded a considerable loan . The IMF awarded the country a substantial loan in exchange for the country's external debt .
 In 1989 the DRC was forced to establish a new economic reform due to economic instability . The DRC established an economic reform in 1989 due to the instability of the country .
 On the whole, the adjustments have improved the macroeconomic conditions in some countries, but the population’s living standards have worsened .
 Relative peace in the country in 2002 let President Joseph Kabila, son of the first DRC president, begin implementing an economic plan . The plan was helped by the IMF and the World Bank .
 A country with immense economic resources continues to be dependent on external donors . But the country's economic resources are still dependent upon external donors, say experts .
 DRC's government announced the forthcoming elections with the aim of establishing an autonomous government . In 1959, as an answer to the increasing demands for complete independence by the main nationalistic parties, the DRC announced the elections .
 In 1960 the Belgian Congo proclaimed its independence and was renamed Republic of Congo . Congo was then known as the Republic of the Congo .
 Ethnic disputes and military revolts had provoked violent disorders . The prime minister of the mineral-rich province of Katanga proclaimed his independence from the country .
 Joseph Desire Mobutu, chief of staff of the army, took over the government and declared himself president . He declared himself President of the Congo after the coup .
 During the cold war, Mobutu continued to enforce his one-party system of government, but at the end of this period the regime suffered from external and internal pressures, and he acceded to implement a multiparty system with elections and a constitution . During the Cold War, Mob
 Between 1994 and 1996 Zaire was involved in the Rwanda conflict, hosting large numbers of refugees in its border territory . Zaire hosted large number of refugees during the conflict in its borders .
 The presence of Hutu refugees, among them several responsible for the Rwanda genocide, provoked the Tutsis to revolt . This situation caused trouble in Rwanda when the Hutu refugee's presence in the country caused trouble .
 This rebellion spread over the Zaire territory, weakening Mobutu’s regime . The rebellion was supported by the United States, Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi, and Angola . The U.S. supported the rebellion, supported by Rwanda and Uganda .
 This first war in Congo ended when rebel leader Laurent-Desire Kabila declared himself president and changed the name of the nation back to Democratic Republic of the Congo . The first war ended when the nation changed its name back to DRC .
 Relations between Kabila and his foreign backers deteriorated in 1998 . In 1998 Kabila’s government was challenged by the opposition to his government .
 Troops from Zimbabwe, Angola, Namibia, Chad, and Sudan intervened in support of the president .
 The series of wars in this nation was determined not only by ethnic factors but also by natural resources . The nation's history of wars was determined by ethnic and natural factors, including resources .
 The control of diamonds and other important minerals has contributed to both wars as well as the maintenance of the authoritarian governments, says David Cameron .
 In 1999 a cease-fire was finally signed, but Kabila was assassinated in 2001 . Kabila is still in power in the Congo .
 He was succeeded by his son Joseph, who signed a peace agreement with Rwanda the next year and established a transitional government . He died in 1994 .
 With the United Nations presence, a new constitution was formally adopted in 2006 . The first free multiparty elections were held on July 30, 2006 . With the U.N. presence, the first election was held .
 In November 2006 Joseph Kabila won the presidency in the country’s first democratic elections since 1960 . Kabila was the president of the country in November 2006 .
 Deng's legacy was the creation of a Chinese form of socialism with limited economic liberalization . Deng’s legacy was creation of an economic model with limited liberalization, he says .
 Communist hard-liners argued that Deng represented the potential of a return to capitalism . Many Communist hardliners, however, said Deng represented a threat and the potential for capitalism . Deng died in 1991 at the age of 65 .
 The divided opinion within the CCP with regard to Deng would be a pattern throughout his career . Deng's career has been marked by divided opinion in the past . Deng has been a controversial figure in recent years .
 Under Deng’s ‘second generation’ of leadership, China became one of the fastest-growing world economies . China is now one of world's fastest growing economies . Deng's "second generation" of leadership led China to become one of its fastest growing countries .
 He led the failed uprising in Guangxi province, then fled to Jiangxi Province . He returned to China in 1929, led a failed uprising and fled in 1929 .
 Deng participated in the Long March and guerrilla campaigns against Japan in World War II as well as in the civil war against the Kuomintang . Deng was a member of the Communist Party of China . Deng is also known for his role in China's anti-Japanese war efforts .
 Deng and Shaoqi took over control of the CCP and government and implemented a number of less radical and pragmatic policies . As a result of Mao’s Great Leap Forward and the economic disaster that followed, they implemented a few less radical policies . Deng took over the CCP as a
 The Cultural Revolution, begun by Mao in 1966, dealt a major blow to Deng’s career . Deng was disgraced by the Cultural Revolution and disgraced . Deng died at the age of 65 in 1966 .
 By 1974, Zhou Enlai was able to bring Deng back to power, taking over as first deputy premier in charge of running the day-to-day affairs . Deng was brought back into power in 1974, taking control of the Chinese government .
 The radical Gang of Four, committed to the ideals of the Cultural Revolution, viewed Deng as a significant threat . Deng was able to purge him once again from his positions . However, the Gang of 4 were able to remove Deng from his posts .
 Deng's next opportunity came with Mao’s death in 1976, and he quickly emerged as Mao's successor . Deng became Mao's next leader after Mao died .
 After 1978 Deng implemented policies that improved relations with the West . Deng traveled to Washington in 1979 to meet President Jimmy Carter . Deng met President Carter in 1979 .
 In 1984 China signed an agreement with Great Britain for the return of Hong Kong to China in 1997 . In 1997 China returned the territory to Hong Kong in a joint agreement with Britain .
 China promised not to interfere with Hong Kong’s capitalist system for 50 years . China promised to not interfere in Hong Kong's capitalist system .
 Deng implemented the Four Modernizations Program in agriculture, industry, science and technology, and the military . Deng also implemented the program in agriculture and industry . Deng implemented four modernizations programs in the country .
 The goal of the modernization program was to create a more modern Chinese economy . China's modernization program is aimed at creating a modernized economy .
 Under him China encouraged direct foreign investment and created special economic zones . Under him he encouraged direct . foreign investment .
 The Tiananmen Square massacre is the most controversial of all Deng’s policy decisions . Deng's policy decisions include the massacre of thousands of Chinese soldiers . The massacre was one of the most contentious of Deng's policies .
 Mass student demonstrations in favor of democratic reforms were met with a violent military crackdown ordered by Deng and his senior associates . The crackdown resulted in thousands of deaths in Beijing and dozens of other cities in China . Thousands of people were killed in the crackdown .
 During and after the cold war, the United States and the Soviet Union conducted a series of talks and signed several treaties dealing with arms control and nuclear disarmament .
 Arms control entails the limitation of nuclear weapons or delivery systems . Nuclear disarmament indicates the actual reduction of nuclear nuclear weapons . Arms control is a form of disarmament that involves limiting nuclear weapons, delivery systems and limiting weapons .
 Beginning with the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty in 1987, the powers would begin the process of nuclear disarmament . The treaty began the process in 1987 .
 The United States dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 to end World War II . The U.S. had a monopoly on nuclear weapons after the war .
 In 1946, the United States offered to turn over its stockpile of atomic weapons to a U.N. international agency . The Baruch Plan was presented at the first meeting of the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission .
 The Soviet Union became a nuclear power in 1949 and by the mid-1950s had proposed a gradual reduction in conventional military forces, to be followed by the eventual destruction of nuclear stockpiles . By the 1950s, the Soviet Union had proposed gradual reduction of conventional forces .
 In 1959 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev called for total nuclear disarmament within four years . In 1959 he called for the total disarmament of the Soviet Union in a speech to the UN .
 The United States refused to accept these recommendations without on-site inspections to verify disarmament agreements . The U.S. would not accept the recommendations without inspections without onsite inspections .
 The Soviet Union refused to allow nuclear inspectors on its territory . There would little progress on the issue of disarmament between the two powers in the 1950s .
 After the Cuban missile crisis, the focus of the two superpowers moved away from nuclear disarmament toward preventing the testing, deployment, and proliferation of these weapons . After the U.S. and the Soviets came to the brink of war in the Cuban Missile Crisis, focus of nuclear disarm
 In August 1963, the United States, the Soviet Union, and Great Britain signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty . The treaty banned nuclear tests in the atmosphere, outer space, and underwater .
 In July 1968, the United States, the Soviet Union, and Great Britain signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and Britain .
 Under the terms of the treaty the nuclear powers pledged never to furnish nuclear weapons or nuclear technology to nonnuclear powers . The treaty was made under the conditions of a nuclear disarmament treaty .
 The treaty also created a international inspection team under the United Nations International Atomic Energy Administration to verify compliance with the terms .
 After his election in 1968, President Richard Nixon sought an easing of diplomatic tensions with the Soviet Union . The process known as detente is now known as "deterente"
 Both sides came to the conclusion that the cold war was costing too much and sought to achieve their foreign policy goals through negotiations and peaceful coexistence rather than confrontation .
 In January 1969 the Soviet Union proposed negotiations for the limitation of nuclear delivery vehicles and defensive systems . The Soviet Union also proposed a limit on the number of nuclear warheads .
 President Nixon endorsed the talks, and in so doing altered U.S. policy away from nuclear superiority . President Nixon ended the talks with President Nixon .
 This change in policy was the result of the Soviet arms buildup in the 1960s, which had led to strategic parity between the two superpowers . This change was a result of an arms buildup by the Soviet Union in the 60s .
 SALT I Negotiations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, known as the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, began in November 1969 .
 These talks culminated in the signing of the SALT I Treaty in May 1972 . The treaty was signed by the United States and Russia .
 The SALT I Treaty was to be valid for five years . The two sides began negotiations for a new agreement to take effect after the expiration of this treaty . The treaty expires five years after it expires .
 After 1974 talks slowed because of disagreements over which types of weapons should count under the 2,400 ceiling . Talks were also stalled over which type of weapons were counted under the ceiling .
 1977 to 1979 the U.S. and the Soviets began new negotiations, known as the SALT II talks . The talks took place between 1977 and 1979, when the United States and the Soviet Union began new talks .
 Talks culminated in the SALT II Treaty signed by President Jimmy Carter and Soviet president Leonid Brezhnev on June 22, 1979 . The treaty was signed in 1979 .
 This treaty implemented the principle of equal aggregate limits, placing numerical limits on each side’s nuclear arsenal . This treaty was implemented by the U.S. and Russia .
 The treaty allowed 2,400 total strategic vehicles and limited MIRV ballistic and MIRVs ballistic missiles . The treaty was signed by the U.S. Congress in 1994 .
 Both superpowers sought to end unrestricted competition for strategic superiority . With the principle of equal aggregate limits in place, both superpowers wanted to end free competition for dominance .
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, and United States domestic political opposition, influenced the United States Senate to refuse to ratify the treaty . U.S. domestic opposition to the treaty led to the Senate's refusal .
 Both sides agreed to adhere to the terms of the treaty as long as the other complied as well . Despite this fact, both sides agreed that they would comply with the terms .
 By 1986, both sides were producing weapons programs that led the other to charge it with rejecting the provisions of the treaty . The treaty was signed in 1986, but it was never ratified .
 In 1981 President Ronald Reagan focused on alleged Soviet military superiority . Reagan began the largest peacetime buildup in U.S. history .
 Despite this arms buildup, Reagan agreed to abide by the limits in the SALT II Treaty . Reagan agreed by the treaty despite the growing arms buildup .
 Shortly after Mikhail Gorbachev became Soviet general secretary in March 1985, he announced postponement of the planned deployment of intermediate-range missiles in Europe until November . He expressed a willingness to reenter talks with the United States .
 In November Gorbachev and Reagan met at the Geneva Summit, breaking the period of deteriorating relations since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 . In November the two leaders met for the first time since the war in Afghanistan .
 In these meetings the two sides came to some broad understandings on reductions in long-range nuclear weapons, the elimination of strategic missiles, removal of medium-range missiles from Europe, and on-site verification .
 The summit was abruptly terminated when the Soviets insisted that the agreement was contingent on ending further research into the Strategic Defense Initiative . Reagan refused this condition and the summit was terminated .
 Gorbachev and Reagan signed the Intermediaterange Nuclear Forces Treaty at the Washington Summit in 1987 . The Soviet Union separated its opposition to SDI from the larger question of nuclear missiles in Europe .
 The INF Treaty was ratified by the United States and the Supreme Soviet Union in 1988 . The treaty went into effect after the Moscow Summit in May 1988 .
 START restricted ballistic warheads and launchers, cut land-based ICBMS, and provided for on-site verification . START restricted missile launches and missile defense systems . START also cut the use of ICBMs and provided on site verification .
 This treaty reduced U.S. and Soviet strategic nuclear forces by about 30 percent . The treaty reduced United States and Soviet nuclear forces to about 30% .
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991, the four former Soviet republics possessing nuclear weapons signed the Lisbon Protocol to START I . Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan agreed to recognize Russia as the heir to the Soviet nuclear arsenal . START I is the first nuclear disarmament
 The three non-Russian republics agreed to sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty as nonnuclear states and transfer all their nuclear warheads to Russia within seven years . The three republics signed the treaty as non-nuclear states .
 President Bush continued to campaign for further cuts in strategic nuclear weapons . He proposed dramatic cuts in the number of warheads in existing ground and sea-launched weapons systems .
 Bush also effectively canceled the United States nuclear modernization program . Bush also unilaterally canceled the U.S. nuclear program .
 START II provided for a 25 percent reduction in each country’s strategic forces to 3,000-3,500 warheads over 10 years . Bush and Yeltsin signed START II in January 1993 . START II was aimed at reducing each country's strategic forces .
 The two sides also agreed to the total elimination of MIRV intercontinental ballistic missiles . The U.S. and South Korea agreed to a total total of seven missiles .
 In 1994, Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin announced that their longrange missiles would no longer be targeted at each other’s territory . In a landmark symbolic gesture in 1994, the two presidents announced that they would not target each other's territory .
 In May 2002 Presidents George W Bush and Vladimir Putin signed the Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty . The treaty reduced the number of nuclear warheads to a range of 1,700 to 2,200 within 10 years .
 Many view this agreement as the culmination of the arms control and disarmament process begun by Nixon and Brezhnev in the early 1970s . Although there remain some escape clauses and conditions, many view it as a culmination .
 Detente and Confrontation: American-Soviet Relations from Nixon to Reagan . Garthoff, Raymond L. Garff, Raymond Garff: Detente was a formative period of U.S. relations with Russia .
 William Keylor, William R The Twentieth-Century World and Beyond: An International History Since 1900. Brookings Institution, 1994; Keylors: The Twetieth Century and Beyond . William R
 The fight against drugs dates back as far as 1880, when the U.S. and China signed an agreement prohibiting opium’s being shipped from one country to the other . The United States and China agreed to stop opium being shipped to each other .
 The domestic war on drugs sparked renewed interest in international enforcement of curtailing the supply of illicit drugs in the 1970s . Richard Nixon’s administration in the early 1970s led to international interest in cracking down on illicit drug supply .
 Mexico is a center of the drug trade that would only strengthen over the years . Actions were especially successful in Turkey, but not in Mexico . Mexico's drug trade has only strengthened in recent years .
 Something other than interdiction efforts had to be done to upset the supply of drugs, he says . Something else must be done, he said . The drug supply has been a problem for years .
 During and after Ronald Reagan’s term, attention turned again to the war on drugs . The war against drugs was the focus of the drug war .
 Reagan administration pressured Colombian officials to cooperate in the international drug war by extraditing accused cocaine traffickers . Reagan administration also pressured Colombian authorities to cooperate with the drug war .
 The 1988 United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances argued that continued illicit drug trafficking undermined legitimate economies, threatened stability, and mandated international cooperation in seizing drugrelated assets .
 In 1991 the Posse Comitatus Act amendments allowed the military to train civilian police in counter-drug practices . In 1991, the military was allowed to train civilians to deal with the drug problem .
 A decade later the U.S. Coast Guard was given machine guns and sniper rifles to assist in efforts to interdict drug traffickers . The Coast Guard received machine guns, sniper rifles in the 1990s .
 Shortly thereafter, efforts shifted beyond policing the U.S. borders for traffickers to sending assistance to policing efforts far from the borders .
 Congress earmarked $1.1 billion for Plan Colombia military aid in July 2000 . Plan Colombia added 60 combat helicopters, bringing the number of U.S. troops in Colombia to 500 .
 Efforts in the international war on drugs were not limited to Colombia . Efforts to combat the drug war have also been made in Colombia .
 U.S. forces worked with the Peruvian air force as part of the Air Bridge Denial program . The program was part of an effort to deny access to the country's airspace .
 ABD was stopped shortly after the April 2001 shooting down of a civilian aircraft carrying a U.S. missionary and a child . ABD stopped after the attack on the plane carrying a United States missionary .
 In recent years, the White House Drug Control Policy Office has been working with China to prevent drug trafficking through China to the U.S.
 Many continue to argue that international drug wars to reduce supply are less successful and more bloody than drug wars focused on reducing demand . International drug wars are often more bloody and more successful than those to reduce demand .
 Some argue that reducing demand is the only way to stop supply in the $400 billion global narcotics business . Some argue reducing demand would be better than reducing supply .
 On the western side of Papua New Guinea is situated West Irian, a province of Indonesia . The province is located in Dutch New Guinea/West Irian .
 A colony of the Netherlands after August 1828, it was known earlier as Dutch New Guinea or West New Guinea . It was also known as New Guinea, or West Papua, in 1828 .
 In 1961 it was renamed Irian Barat, and in 1973 Irian Jaya . In 1973 it was changed to Irian Jaya Irian Barat .
 In February 2003 the western portion of Papua was separated and renamed West Irian Jaya . The western portion was separated from Papua in February 2003 . In 2003, the western part of Papua became part of the Papua region .
 The Indonesia constitutional court in 2004 did not allow the division of Papua into three regions, but accepted the creation of the West Irian Jaya province, carved from Papua’s western region .
 The Netherlands controlled Dutch New Guinea even after the Hague Agreement of December 1949 . The Hague Agreement transferred sovereignty to the Indonesian federal government .
 Indonesian leader Ahmed Sukarno did not want any remnant of Dutch colonialism . The Indonesian leader wanted to eradicate the Dutch colonial legacy .
 An agreement was signed on August 15, 1962, by which power was transferred to the U.N. Temporary Executive Authority for six years from 1963 .
 Indonesia had administrative power over the territory from May 1, 1963 . Indonesia had been in charge of the territory since 1963 . The territory was administered by Indonesia .
 West Irian was incorporated with Indonesia as its 27th province in November 1969 . The province is Indonesia's 27th largest province . It was incorporated into Indonesia in 1969 .
 This Act of Free Choice was not accepted by various groups and raised controversy . It was proposed by President Barack Obama to allow Americans to choose their own choices .
 In 2006, a bill was brought in 2006 that questioned the validity of the Act of Free Choice . In the U.S. Congress a bill in 2006 was brought into question .
 independence leaders also had not accepted the merger of West Irian with Indonesia in the act . The independence leaders have not accepted that the merger was illegal .
 Opposition to Indonesian rule and the desire for independence as a free nation were held by a sizable portion of the population . Opposition to independence was held in Indonesia's history .
 Organisasi Papua Merdeka (OPM, or Free Papua Movement) was established in December 1963 . In December 1963 the OPM was established . The OPM is based in Papua Papua, Indonesia .
 It launched a guerrilla campaign against the Indonesian government in 1970 . It set up an independent government the next year . It launched an anti-Indonesian government in the 1970s .
 Its military wing, known as the Liberation Army of OPM, indulged in terrorist activities . The military wing of the OPM was known for its terrorist activities.
 Kelly Kwalik, the commander, was responsible for the kidnapping of Indonesians and foreigners . The commander is responsible for kidnapping of foreigners and Indonesians .
 Moses Werror was the chairperson of the Revolutionary Council of OPM, based in Madang, Papua New Guinea . He was the leader of the revolutionary council of the OPM .
 Theys Hijo Eluay’s (19372001) Lembaga Musyawarah Adat Papua (Papuan Customary Council Assembly) believed in nonviolent methods . Theys believed in nonviolence .
 The Indonesian armed forces were active in suppressing the secessionist movement . The Indonesian military and its paramilitary group, Barisan Merah Putih, was active in suppression .
 The clashes between the army and the rebels continued from 2003 to 2004 . The clashes continued between 2003 and 2004 .
 Indonesian president invited Governor Salossa and Papua provincial council speaker Jhon Ibo to Jakarta on August 10, 2006, for talks . The Indonesian president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, had invited the governor and council speaker .
 Duvalier dictatorship (Haiti, 1957-1986) One of the Western Hemisphere’s most repressive and brutal dictatorships . The successive regimes of Franqois ‘Papa Doc’ and his son JeanClaude “Baby Doc” ruled Haiti with
 The elder Duvalier was elected president in 1957 . With the support of the nation’s security forces, its leading elite families, and a substantial proportion of its urban and rural poor, he was elected President in 1957.
 Violent political oppression and grinding economic poverty for the country’s majority characterized the nearly three decades of Duvalier rule . The country was ruled by the French dictator for nearly 30 years .
 The Tontons Machetes are a state security apparatus responsible for mass imprisonment . Running the country as their personal firs, the Duvaliers terrorized their political foes through secret police .
 The roots of the Duvalier dictatorship stretch deep into Haitian history, from its independence in 1804, through a succession of dictatorial regimes . The United States military intervention of 1915-34 laid the groundwork for the modern state .
 The Garde d’Haiti centralized the state’s violence-making capacity within a single institution, based in Port-auPrince . This included its armed forces, the gendarmerie, or Garde .
 It was from within the structures of this U.S.created security apparatus that the two Duvaliers based their power after 1957 . It was . from within this structure of this . structure that was based their . power after . 1957 .
 Under Duvalier rule, Haiti became a pariah state internationally . The United States suspended diplomatic relations in May 1963, even as many foreign firms continued to do business in Haiti .
 Haiti emerged as a key assembly point for many U.S. manufacturers in the 1960s to 1980s . Haiti is now a key manufacturing point for the United States . Haiti has been Haiti's main source of Haitian-American manufacturing .
 In 1966, 13 U.S. corporations owned assembly plants in Haiti; in 1981 the number had risen to 154 . In 1981, 154 of the plants were in Haiti .
 In 1986, the poorest 60 percent of the country’s population earned an annual per capita income of $60, according to the World Bank . The poorest 60% of the population earned just $60 a year .
 Malnutrition, infant mortality, and other social indices marked Haiti as the Western Hemisphere’s poorest country . Haiti is now the poorest country in the United States .
 At the top of the social hierarchy a handful of economically and politically powerful families controlled many of the island’s key industries, including sugar, textiles, construction materials, cooking oil, and others . The Brandt, Mevs, Accra, Bigio, and Beh
 Jean-Bertrand Aristide rose to power after the overthrow of the French dictator in 1986 . Aristide was a radical populist preacher who preached anti-Duvalier preacher . He was overthrown by the French government in 1986, but was never overthrown .
 One of the symbolic moments announcing the end of the cold war was the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1990 . The fall of Berlin Wall was a symbolic moment of the Cold War .
 The GDR leadership maintained its dictatorial and conservative character . GDR's leadership maintained their dictatorial character .
 In fact, a diplomatic discord developed between reform-oriented Gorbachev and Honecker in the late 1980s . The two leaders met in the 1980s, when they were both reform-minded .
 In the summer of 1989 Hungary decided to open its boundaries with Austria . Hungary decided in the summer 1989 to open the borders with Austria. Hungary's border with Austria was the first time it was opened .
 GDR residents moved to West Germany though Hungary and Austria . A number of GDRs moved to Austria and Hungary in the 1980s .
 The protesters demanded government guarantees that human rights and civic rights would be respected . They also demanded that democratic restructuring be initiated . The protesters are demanding government guarantees .
 On November 10, five crossing points in the Berlin Wall were opened and approximately 40,000 East Berliners crossed into West Berlin . The crossing points were opened on November 10 .
 The atmosphere of festivity and celebration prevailed among the crowds . People on both sides of the Berlin Wall started to make openings in the wall and bring parts of it down .
 The image of East and West Berliners jointly destroying the Berlin Wall became a powerful symbol of the collapse of the cold war and of the termination of the division of Europe . The image became powerful symbol .
 Honecker resigned from his post as the first secretary of the party and as the chairman of the Council of State of the GDR on October 18, 1989 . He was temporarily replaced by another Communist politician, Egon Krenz .
 Honecker fled to Moscow and was extradited to Russia in 1992, but avoided trial for health reasons . He was later found in Moscow and avoided trial due to health reasons, but fled to avoid trial .
 In March 1990 the first postcommunist democratic elections took place in Germany . The Christian Democratic Union of Germany won the election .
 The collapse of the Berlin Wall paved the path for the reunification of Germany . The collapse paved the way for the unification of Germany after the Wall collapsed .
 In Poland, an indication of increased political relaxation took place between 1986 and 1987 with a general amnesty of political prisoners . The amnesty was part of Poland's first general amnesty in 1987 .
 A series of strikes in 1988 pressured the communist authorities to re-legalize the independent trade union Solidarity . Solidarity had been made illegal after martial law was instituted in Poland in 1981 .
 The negotiations were chaired by Lech Walesa and Czeslaw Kiszczak, a former Polish secret services chief . Walesa was a leader of the Solidarity movement and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize .
 Negotiators agreed that Solidarity would be re-legalized and that partially free parliamentary elections would be organized . The negotiators also agreed to re-authorization of Solidarity and re-election of parliamentary elections .
 The parliamentary elections on June 4, 1989, brought an overwhelming majority of representatives from Solidarity, which had transformed into the Solidarity Citizens’ Committee . Solidarity citizens’ committee was formed in June 1989 .
 A coalition government was formed with a Catholic dissident, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, as prime minister . The Polish president was elected in 2010 .
 Jaruzelski served as the president of Poland from 1989 to 1990, when Walesa was elected to that post in presidential elections . Walesa became president in 1990 .
 In 1991 free parliamentary elections were organized, and a coalition government of anticommunist groups emerged . Free parliamentary elections in 1991 were organized . In 1991 the government was formed by anti-communist groups . Free elections were held in 1991 .
 The party Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland was formed in 1990 with no official ideological ties to its communist predecessor . The party was formed with no ideological ties, but with evident personal ones, to its predecessor .
 In Hungary, the deteriorating economic situation, due to increasing foreign debt, spurred public debates on the possibility of introducing radical reform policies . Hungary is one of the most troubled countries in the world, with the highest debt in the country .
 They facilitated the creation of the opposition movement, the Hungarian Democratic Forum, on September 27, 1987 . The Forum was created by the Hungarian Communist Party in Hungary .
 The leader was Jozsef Antall, known for his engagement in the Hungarian revolt in 1956 . Antall is a historian who was also engaged in the revolt in Hungary .
 In May 1988 the first secretary of the party, Janos Kadar, was removed from his post and replaced by Karoly Grosz . The first secretary was replaced in May 1988 by the party's first secretary, Karoly .
 In March 1989, the Hungarian Democratic Forum held a national meeting at which it demanded democratic reforms . The Forum agreed to enter negotiations with the party representatives at the elite level .
 The power monopoly of the party was abandoned, the constitution was amended, and multiparty democracy was reconstituted in 1989 . The party's power monopoly was abandoned and the constitution amended .
 Jozsef Antall is the leader of the Hungarian Democratic Forum . Jozssef is the prime minister of the coalition government .
 The student demonstrations were brutally broken down by the riot police . Riot police brutally broke down the student demonstrations . The student protests were the first of their kind in the country .
 Another student demonstration was organized by the Socialist Youth Union on November 17, 1989, in Prague and Bratislava . The demonstration was held by the socialist Youth Union .
 More than 30,000 students commemorated the anniversary of the murder of another Czech student figure, Jan Opletal, who was killed in 1939 by pro-Nazi forces . The Czech student leader was killed by the Nazis in 1939 .
 On November 19, different opposition and human rights groups created Civic Forum . Civic Forum was created by different opposition groups in response to the November 19 protests .
 Alexander Dubcek, the architect of the Prague Spring events, made a public speech on the same day as the events' architect . The Prague Spring took place in the Czech capital on March 25 .
 On December 17, Czechoslovakia and Austria cut through the wire border between the two countries . The Czech-Austria border was officially closed on December 17 . The two countries have been in contact for decades .
 The first postcommunist democratic parliamentary elections took place in June 1990 . The elections were held in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 Two anticommunist blocs emerged victorious, with over 50 percent of the votes . Civic Forum and the Public against Violence emerged victorious . The Civic Forum won over 50% of the vote .
 The Czechoslovak transformation was called the Velvet Revolution . The collapse of the system and the initiation of democratic change were accomplished without violence .
 Bulgarian Turks emigrated from the country after the collapse of the economy . The result was a massive emigration of the Bulgarian Turks and a rapidly deteriorating economic situation in the country .
 Zhivkov has been accused of corruption in the past by the Russian government . The opposition has increased among reform-oriented members of the party . This increased opposition against Zhovkov is growing among reformists .
 Foreign minister Patur Mladenov condemned Zhivkov’s hard-line economic policies and authoritarianism . During the Central Committee meeting on November 10, 1989, the foreign minister managed to secure Zhivov's removal from leadership position .
 Mladenov consequently took over Zhivkov’s secretarial and presidential posts . Mladeev took over the post in the aftermath of his resignation from the Kremlin .
 He publicly pledged a turn toward political democratization, far-reaching economic reforms, and amnesty for political prisoners . Famously, he publicly pledged to turn toward a turn .
 In January 1990 pro-democracy demonstrations took place in Sofia . 40,000 people took part in the demonstrations . The demonstrations were the first in January 1990 .
 In April 1990 the Bulgarian National Assembly elected Mladenov as president and subsequently dissolved itself . The National Assembly dissolved itself in April 1990 . In 1990 the National Assembly was elected president and dissolved itself.
 Mladenov was forced to resign from his presidential post after it was made public that he had considered the possibility of using force against pro-democratic demonstrators in Sofia earlier that year .
 Zhelyu Mitev Zhelev is a former oppositionist, professor of philosophy, and founder of the dissident Club for the Support of Glasnost and Restructuring . On August 1, 1990, he was replaced by Zheleyu Zhev Z
 He was reelected in 1992 and remained in the presidential post until 1997 . He remained in office until the end of that year .
 Zhelev represented the Union of Democratic Forces, a party that consisted of various anticommunist groups formed in December 1989 . He was a member of the Union's Union of Democrat Forces .
 In 1992 the Union of Democratic Forces took over power in the national elections and embarked on a series of radical economic and political reforms . In 1991 a new democratic constitution was adopted, and the Union took power in 1992 .
 In Romania the Communist dictatorship of President Nicolae Ceau§escu was particularly oppressive . In Romania, the dictator's rule was especially oppressive . The country was ruled by the Communist Party of the Cold War .
 Ceau§escu’s position would remain unchallenged throughout 1989 . Although in other East European countries popular demonstrations and negotiations took place throughout 1989, it seemed that the position would not be challenged . In 1989, protests and negotiations continued throughout the country .
 On December 17 street protests were organized in the city of Timi§oara against the decision by the Romanian Secret Police to deport local bishop Laszlo Tokes .
 The protests against Tokes’s eviction were transformed into anticommunist and anti-Ceau§escescu demonstrations .
 Antiregime demonstrations and a wave of strikes took place in Romania’s other large cities . Demonstrations and strikes began on December 20 in Bucharest .
 Ceau§escu condemned the protests in Timi§oara and ordered the organization of a pro-regime gathering in the center of Bucharest on December 21 . Ceauresescu has ordered the . organization of an anti-government gathering in Bucharest .
 Mass mobilization and civic unrest continued throughout the country, and the regime made extensive use of violence to put down the revolutionary occurrences . Mass mobilization continued through the years .
 The National Salvation Front was formed in a national TV studio on December 22 . It was formed by a national television studio .
 Ion Iliescu was a Communist politician and dissident poet . Silviu Brucan, a former diplomat and opponent of Ceau§escu; and Mircea Dinescu, a dissident .
 The National Salvation Front restored peace and formed a temporary government with Iliescu as a provisional president . Ceau§escu’s execution on December 25, 1989. Subsequently, the government formed a provisional government .
 The National Salvation Front was transformed into a political party in 1990 . It achieved the majority of votes in the democratic elections in May 1990 . Later the party was transformed to a party .
 In Romania, the victorious National Salvation Front comprised former socialist officials . The important difference between the postcommunist elections in Romania and other East European countries was that in Romania, it was not Communist Party members .
 The Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, or East Timor, was a Portuguese colony until 1975 . The country is now known as the country of the Timor Republic . It was also known as a colony of Portugal .
 On eve of Portuguese departure in August 1975, a civil war broke out, leading to the deaths of 1,500 to 2,000 people . On the eve of the Portuguese departure, the death toll from the civil war was 2,500 .
 There was a unilateral declaration of independence on November 28, 1975, by the East Timorese people . East Timoresuans declared their independence in 1975 . Timoreese people declared their unilateral independence from East Timorsuans in 1975.
 Indonesia invaded East Timor in December with U.S. assistance . With United States assistance, Indonesia invaded the country in December .
 Indonesia incorporated East Timor as its 27th province in July 1976 . Afterward, Indonesia incorporated the island nation in 1976 . The province is now Indonesia's 27th largest in the world .
 A guerrilla war against Indonesian occupation followed amid reports of brutality by the army . The guerrilla war was fought against the Indonesian occupation .
 The ensuing civil war was marked by brutality, loss of life, and human rights abuses . The resulting civil war in Iraq and Afghanistan was the deadliest in the world .
 From 1982 onward, the UN secretary-general endeavored to bring a peaceful solution to the conflict . UN Secretary-General tried to end the conflict in 1982 . The conflict has been raging since then since then .
 Indonesia was prepared to grant autonomy to East Timor in 1998, but its proposal was rejected by the East Timorese . In 1998 Indonesia was willing to grant East Timors autonomy, but it was rejected .
 It was decided to hold a plebiscite in East Timor, resulting in a declaration of independence on August 30, 1999 . East Timors declared independence from Portugal in August 1999 .
 The army, along with pro-Indonesian militia, unleashed a reign of terror in East Timor . The Indonesian army and pro-indonesian militias were responsible for the deaths of Timor's people .
 There was a pacification campaign during which more than 1,300 people were killed . 300,000 more were forcibly sent into West Timor as refugees . More than 1.3 million people died in the campaign .
 The ethnic conflict and genocide by Indonesian troops devastated East Timor . Indonesian troops killed thousands of East Timors during the conflict .
 East Timor was placed under the transitional administration of the U.N. Transitional Administration on October 25, 1999 . East Timors is now in the transition period of transition to democracy .
 There are about 8,000 peacekeepers and civilian police helping the administration . There are also 8,500 peacekeepers, civilian police .
 The National Consultative Council, consisting of 11 East Timorese and four UNTAET members, worked as a political body in the transitional phase of the transition period . The Council was formed in the early 1980s .
 An 88-member Constituent Assembly was elected in August 2001 to frame a new constitution . The assembly was elected to frame the country's constitution . It was elected by 88-members of the Assembly .
 East Timor became a fully independent nation on May 20, 2002, with international recognition . The country became an independent nation in 2002 . The Timoris are the only nation in the world to be independent .
 The reconstruction of their damaged infrastructure and the creation of viable administrative machinery became priorities for the new regime . The reconstruction was also a priority for the regime's efforts to rebuild their infrastructure .
 The United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor gave necessary support to the new government . The new government was headed by Xanana Gusmao . The UNTAET had replaced the UNTTAET .
 Shirin Ebadi is a democracy and human rights activist and a lawyer . Ebadi was born in Tehran, Iran, in 1979 .
 In 1975 she became the first woman judge in Iran and was appointed president of the Tehran City Court . She was also the first female judge in the country .
 Following the Islamic revolution in 1979, all female judges, including Ebadi, were removed from the bench and given clerical duties . Ebadi was the first female judge in Iran to be allowed to work in the country .
 Ebadi quit in protest and wrote books and articles on human rights, particularly on the rights of children and women, for Iranian journals .
 In 1992, Ebadi won her lawyer’s license and opened her own practice . After many years of struggle, in 1992, she won her law license and became a lawyer . Ebadi is the daughter of former President George H.W. Bush .
 She is known for taking cases at the national level, defending liberal and dissident figures . She is best known for her work defending liberal figures .
 She campaigns for strengthening the legal rights of women and children . Advocates for a progressive version of Islam .
 Her legal defense in controversial cases, pro-reform stance, and outspoken opinions have caused conservative clerics in Iran to oppose her openly . Her pro-Iranian stance has caused her legal defense to be controversial .
 In 2003 Ebadi was the first Muslim woman and Iranian recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts to promote democracy and human rights both domestically and abroad . Ebadi won the award in 2003 for promoting democracy in Iran .
 ECLA offered an analysis of Latin American poverty and underdevelopment radically at odds with the dominant and neoclassical ‘modernization” theory . The ECLA was founded by Argentine economist Raul Prebisch .
 Since the 1950s, the theoretical models and policy prescriptions of the ECLA have proven highly influential, sparking heated and ongoing debates among scholars . The ECLA has been a model for the U.S. government since the 1960s .
 In the 1970s attention shifted to ‘styles’ or ‘modalities” of economic growth and national development . In the 1980s attention focused on ‘style’ and “modality’ of growth and development .
 The economic crisis of the 1980s generated another shift toward issues of debt adjustment and stabilization . The 1990s saw heightened emphasis on issues of globalization and “neostructuralism,” in opposition to ‘neoliberalism” promoted by the International Monetary Fund and related
 In 1984 the U.N. broadened the mandate of the ECLA to include the Caribbean . It became the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean; its Spanish acronym, CEPAL, remained the same .
 It is one of five UN regional commissions and has remained influential into the 21st century . It is now the most influential regional commission in the world .
 Research and Information System for the NonAligned and Other Developing Countries, 1987. Report: "Research and Information system for the nonAligned. and other Developing countries"
 In 1517 Martin Luther nailed Ninety-five Theses to the door of a church in Wittenberg, a university town in the German province of Saxony, to start a debate .
 His action is often understood to be the beginning of the Protestant Reformation . His actions are often thought to have started the Protestant revolution .
 In 1529 Protestant representatives to the imperial Diet in Germany presented the Augsburg Confession, which enshrined the Protestant position at that time . The Confession is still accepted by all the Lutheran churches .
 The rejection of that confession by the Roman Catholics with the support of the emperor, Charles V, has since been understood by many historians as the definitive division between the Protestant and Roman Catholic Churches . It resulted in a plurality of churches in Western Christendom no longer in communion .
 Central to the Augsburg Confession was the doctrine of “justification by faith alone,” which together with “grace alone” and “scripture alone’s” summarized the Protestant concerns .
 Reformers insisted on changes in worship and sacraments . Changes unacceptable to Roman Catholics and viewed by them as heretical . Reformers insist on changes to worship and the sacramments .
 What began as a movement for the reformation of the Western Church ended up with doctrinal division and ecclesiastical separation . The result of the split ended up in doctrinal divisions, ecclesiastical divisions .
 The Lutheran churches were not the only churches that came from the Reformation . The Reformation was a major event in the history of the Lutheran churches .
 Shortly after the Lutheran movement began, a similar movement arose in Switzerland under the leadership of Ulrich Zwingli in Zurich . The Reformed churches were formed in Switzerland in the 1920s .
 From there churches were established in many countries of Europe, with the predominant theological influence coming from John Calvin in Geneva . John Calvin's influence came from Geneva .
 Radical reformers were persecuted by Reformed, Lutheran, and Roman Catholic Churches alike . In addition, groups of radical reformers (termed Anabaptists by their opponents) were formed .
 From them, especially from the Church of England in England and its American colonies, came many new churches including Baptists, Methodists, and Pentecostals . From them came many churches including the Baptists .
 The 1910 World Christian Missionary Conference in Edinburgh is often considered its beginning . The 1910 conference was held in Edinburgh, Scotland .
 The conviction of missionaries that church division was harmful for their outreach gave rise to a worldwide movement to overcome those divisions . Missionaries were convicted of church division .
 By 1948 many of the churches affected by that movement formed the World Council of Churches, an interchurch body representing a large percentage of Protestant churches . By 1948 the world council of Churches was formed by a large number of churches in the world .
 Many Orthodox churches were separate from the Roman Catholic Church long before the Protestant Reformation . Orthodox churches are closer in theology and practice to Catholicism than to Protestantism .
 Afterward, it entered into more active cooperation with other churches . The church entered into a series of dialogues with Orthodox and Protestant churches .
 Evangelical churches have formed their own world alliance and national associations for cooperation . Many churches also did not join the World Council of Churches but have formed own world alliances .
 In addition, dialogues among theologians representing their churches have produced a number of accords on previous doctrinal differences . In addition to dialogues between theologians and theologians, they have also produced accords .
 The Faith and Order section of the World Council of Churches has sponsored multilateral dialogues . The faith and order section has sponsored multi-religious dialogue .
 In addition, various churches or church bodies have entered into bilateral dialogues with one another . In addition to bilateral dialogs with each other, they have also had bilateral talks .
 Many Protestant churches have joined together or established communion with one another as a result of these accords . The accords were signed by Protestant churches in the 1920s .
 Roman Catholic Church with Oriental Orthodox and Assyrian churches . Some of the more significant have been concluded by the Catholic Church . Roman Catholics and Oriental Orthodox Christians have been involved in the process .
 Commissions of Eastern Orthodox theologians have come to agreements with their Oriental Orthodox counterparts . Oriental Orthodox Orthodox counterparts have also come to agreement with Eastern Orthodox leaders .
 Doctrinal differences that antedate the Reformation by a millennium are now discussed if not reconciled . The Reformation was a millennium ago, but now it's a millennium since .
 Roman Catholic Church has conducted a series of dialogues with the Anglican Communion that have produced a body of agreed statements on many of the disputed points between the two church bodies .
 Not all the important dialogues have been official dialogues between church bodies . Not all of the important discussions have been made public .
 Informal study groups like the Groupe des Dombes have made independent contributions to the study . Informal groups have also contributed to the report .
 Evangelicals and Catholics Together is a series of statements produced by prominent Evangelical and Roman Catholics in the U.S. Catholics Together .
 First statement, The Christian Mission In the Third Millennium in 1994, was widely influential in fostering rapprochement between two Christian groups that are sometimes considered the farthest apart from one another .
 The Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification was signed by official representatives of the Roman Catholic Church and the Lutheran World Federation . The Declaration is a result of bilateral accords signed by representatives of Catholic and Lutheran churches .
 The JDDJ was prepared for by 35 years of dialogue between Lutheran and Roman Catholic theologians on the international level and the national level .
 In 1983 the United States dialogue produced an agreement, The Doctrine of Justification . The doctrine of justification was agreed in 1983 .
 Do They Still Divide? is a significant 1986 statement produced by a German study group . Do They still Divide? was a statement by a study group in Germany .
 Understanding the Church in the Light of the Doctrine of Justification . Understanding the church in the light of the doctrine of justification .
 On the basis of these and other works, the JDDJ was produced and agreed to . The JDDI was agreed to by the Japanese government to produce and publish .
 The JDDJ is the only agreement officially accepted by the highest authority in the Roman Catholic Church and a Protestant church body . The agreement is only agreement accepted by both Catholic and Protestant church bodies .
 An accord on the doctrine of justification, the point of disagreement that began the Reformation, is noteworthy . It is even more noteworthy as being an accord on . The accord was even more significant as it was on the doctrines of justification .
 The JDDJ acknowledges that it did not resolve all questions about justification . It did resolve enough of the most fundamental ones that, in the view of the two parties, the doctrine of justification no longer had to be divided .
 The JDDJ in effect marked an official recognition by the two church bodies that they do not have incompatible views of what it is to be a Christian . Although other points of disagreement remain, the two churches' views of Christian faith remain .
 The JDDJ was signed in 1999, just in time for the beginning of the new millennium . It was signed just before the start of the millennium .
 It was signed in the city of Augsburg, the city where the Augsburg Confession was presented to the emperor . The Confession is signed in Augsburg where it was presented by the emperor to him .
 The document was signed on Reformation Sunday, the day that commemorates the posting of the Ninety-five Theses .
 It was, however, in the minds of those who signed it, it was an indication that the crucial step towards ending that disunity had been taken .
 In 1952 a group of Free Officers led by Gamal Abdel Nasser overthrew the corrupt monarchy of King Farouk in a bloodless coup . Stephen B Clark: The Egyptian revolution began in 1952 with the overthrow of the monarchy .
 After World War II and the loss to Israel in the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, Egypt gradually slid into political chaos . Egypt's political chaos began after the loss of the Arab Spring in 1948 .
 Attacks against British forces stationed along the Suez Canal also escalated . Attacks against the British forces still stationed in the region also escalated. Attacks on British forces in the area escalated .
 A massive riot erupted in Cairo in January 1952 . The British reinforced their troops after fighting broke out between soldiers and Egyptian police forces .
 During “Black Saturday,’s angry Egyptian mobs stormed European sectors, burning European-owned buildings and businesses in a demonstration of nationalist discontent and opposition to imperial control .
 Free Officers had secretly been plotting to overthrow the government for some time . On July 22,1952, they took key government buildings and deposed King Farouk .
 Farouk was permitted to go into exile, and his young son Ahmad Fu’ad II was made the new king . Ahmad Fu'ad II became the first king of Egypt .
 The young officers chose the elder and more well-known Brigadier General Muhammad Naguib as their figurehead leader, although it was known within the group that Nasser was the real political force .
 The Revolutionary Command Council includes Anwar el-Sadat, Abd al-Hakim Amr and Zakariyya Muhi al-Din . They formed an executive branch, the Revolutionary Command council .
 In January 1953 political parties were abolished in favor of one party, the Liberation Rally . In June 1953 the monarchy was abolished and Naguib was elected president .
 The new government was anti-imperialist, anticorruption, and eager to develop the Egyptian economy . It was also eager to secure full and complete Egyptian independence .
 Naguib and Nasser soon argued over the course Egyptian politics was to take . After an assassination attempt against Nasser failed, allegedly by the Muslim Brotherhood, he was forced to resign . The Muslim Brotherhood allegedly tried to assassinate Nasser .
 Nasser was elected president in 1956, a post he would hold until his death in 1970 . Under a new constitution, Nasser would be elected president of Egypt in 1956 . He would hold a post until he died in 1970.
 In 1954 the new regime negotiated an agreement with the British for the full withdrawal of British troops and an end to the 1936 treaty between the two nations . The new regime also negotiated a full withdrawal from British troops in 1954 .
 Under the agreement the old conventions regarding control of the Suez Canal by private shareholders were maintained . This issue led to a major war in 1956 after Nasser nationalized the canal . The Suez canal was nationalized in 1956 .
 Plans for construction of one of the largest development projects of its type at the time, the Aswan Dam, were announced . Plans for the construction of the dam were announced in the 1970s .
 The financing and construction of the dam became a major point of conflict between Egypt and the United States . It was duly built with Soviet assistance . The U.S. helped build the dam .
 With the formation of the United Arab Republic with Syria in 1958, the pan-Arab policies of Nasser seemed ascendant in the Arab world . However, the union collapsed in 1961 .
 In 1962 pro-Nasser forces in Yemen overthrew the weak Imam Muhammad al-Badr and established a republic . The country was overthrown by pro- Nasser forces .
 Pro-monarchy forces assisted by arms and money from Saudi Arabia supported the monarchy . Egypt assisted the republican forces with arms, money, and troops . Saudi Arabia helped the monarchy while Egypt supported the republican .
 Saudi Arabia and Egypt withdrew their support from both sides of the 1967 Arab-Israeli War . Yemen adopted a far more moderate and pro-Saudi stance .
 In the 1960s Egypt turned increasingly toward the Soviet Union and state-directed socialism . Egypt is now a state of socialist state .
 With the creation of a new class of technocrats and officers, the power of the old feudal and bourgeoisie elites was gradually eliminated . The old feudal elites were gradually eliminated, with the help of the technocrats .
 In 1962 a new political party, the Arab Socialist Union, was created . It was created with a worker-peasant membership . In 1962, the party was formed with a majority of workers .
 Under the 1962 National Charter, the authoritarian state held political power exercising control from the top . The state was then known as a state of authoritarian state exercising control of the country .
 The charter outlined an ambitious program of education, health care, and other social services . It also addressed the issue of birth control and family planning, as well as equality for women in the workplace .
 Many conservative forces in Egypt opposed the social changes, especially as they pertained to the family and the status of women . The social programs fell far short of their original intentions .
 Under Nasser, Egypt became the dominant force in the Arab world . Egypt attempted to steer a neutral course in the cold war in the 1950s .
 The Egyptian revolution failed to meet many of its domestic goals, and the state-run economy was often inefficient . The revolution was overthrown in 2011, but the revolution was largely successful .
 Egypt's neutrality in the 1950s alienated many Western powers and conservative Arab regimes, especially Saudi Arabia . Egypt’s neutrality was a major ally of the Arab world .
 Following Nasser’s sudden death in 1970, Anwar el-Sadat became the Egyptian president . After Nasser's sudden death, Sadat became Egypt's president .
 In the 1980s El Salvador made world headlines as a key site of struggle in the cold war . Civil war left some 70,000 dead and the economy and society ravaged .
 The long-term roots of the crisis have been traced to the country’s history of extreme poverty, economic inequality, and political oppression of its majority by its landholding and power-holding minority . The country's history of poverty and inequality has been traced back to its history of
 Important antecedents include the 1932 Matanza, in which the military and paramilitaries killed upwards of 30,000 people, ushering in an era of military dictatorship .
 Open civil war erupted soon after July 1979, when the leftist Sandinistas overthrew the Somoza dictatorship in Nicaragua . Civil war erupted after the overthrow of the government of the Sandinista government .
 Fearing a similar outcome in El Salvador, the U.S. government increased its military aid to the Salvadoran regime . The Salvadoran government launched an allout assault against revolutionary and reformist organizations .
 From 1979 to 1981, approximately 30,000 people were killed by the military and associated rightwing paramilitaries and death squads . From 1979-81, approximately approximately 30,000 killed .
 Oscar Romero was assassinated by a right-wing death squad in El Salvador in 1980 . Romero had denunciations of the military regime and its many human rights violations . Romero was the archbishop of El Salvador and a leading human rights activist .
 In December 1980 centrist Jose Napoleon Duarte assumed the presidency, the first civilian to occupy that post since 1931 . Duarte was the president of Colombia in December 1980 . He was the first non-elected president of the country since 1931.
 His administration failed to staunch the violence . Interpreted by many as a civilian facade installed to obscure a military dictatorship .
 U.S. military and economic assistance to the Salvadoran regime skyrocketed after Ronald Reagan became president in 1981 . Salvadoran government was heavily involved in the 1980s and '80s .
 Reagan administration claimed that the FMLN and its political wing, the FDR (Frente Democratico Revolucionario), were clients of Cuba and the Soviet Union . Despite much evidence to the contrary, the Reagan administration said they were client clients of the USSR and Cuba .
 In 1982 the extreme right-wing party, the Nationalist Republican Alliance (Alianza Republicana Nacionalista, ARENA) won the presidency in an election marred by violence and fraud . In 1982, the president was elected by a far-right party in a vote
 The rest of the 1980s saw continuing civil war waged under a series of ostensibly civilian governments dominated by the military . The end of the decade was a period of civil war between the Soviet Union and Russia .
 In 1991, following United Nations-sponsored talks, the government recognized the FMLN as a legal political party . The FMLN was recognized as a political party by the government in 1991 .
 In January 1992 the warring parties signed the UN-sponsored Chapultepec peace accords, and in 1993 the government declared amnesty for past violations of human rights .
 The civil war and its aftermath left an enduring legacy throughout the country and region . Civil war and aftermath left a legacy in the region and beyond .
 The 12Year War in El Salvador: Report of the Commission on the Truth for El Salvador . The 12 years of the war was fought between Salvadorans and Salvadorans . The report was published by the Commission for the Truth .
 Several major environmental disasters, those that are man-made rather than naturally occurring, have taken place after the World War II due to the emphasis on heavy industrial development .
 Several governments developed more policies for the preservation of the environment . Several governments develop more policies to preserve environment .
 The issues of environmental concerns became internationalized at the Stockholm conference in 1972 . The United Nations National Conference on the Human Environment was held in Stockholm .
 Environmental, nongovernmental organizations started to play an important role in the deliberations . Environmental groups are also taking part in the discussions .
 31 important national environmental laws were passed in the OECD countries during the period 1971-75 . 31 important environmental laws passed in OECD countries between 1971 and 1975 .
 In 1983 the World Commission on Environment and Development was created to seek sustainable development . The Brundtland Commission was created in 1983 . The Commission is also known as the Brunddland Commission .
 In December 1984 the world’s worst industrial disaster occurred in Bhopal, a city located in the northwest of Madhya Pradesh in central India . The world's worst industrial accident occurred in December 1984 in the city .
 The leakage of a highly toxic gas from a Union Carbide pesticides plant killed more than 3,800 persons and affected more than 200,000 with permanent or partial disabilities . The leakage of a toxic gas caused more than 300,000 people to lose their lives .
 It is estimated that more than 20,000 people have died from exposure to the gas . The gas is estimated to have killed more than a million people worldwide .
 Union Carbide was manufacturing pesticides, which were in demand because of the Green Revolution in India . The company's products were used to make pesticides for the first time .
 This environmental disaster raised the public’s concern about chemical safety . This is the first time the public has been asked to question the safety of chemical safety in the United States .
 Similar concerns are related to severe accidents in nuclear power plants such as Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident in the Soviet Union on April 26, 1986 .
 The accident occurred at the block number 4 of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant . The accident was the first nuclear accident to occur at Chernobyl since 1986 .
 The result has been the discharge of radionuclides, which contaminated large areas in the Northern Hemisphere . The result of the release of the radioactive material has led to contamination in large areas of the world .
 This release of radioactive material has damaged the immune system of people in the area . It has also contaminated the local ecosystem . This release has damaged people's immune system and has contaminated local ecosystems .
 Natural processes, some as simple as rainfall, have helped restore the local environment . But problems are still widespread, with many still causing problems .
 More than 750,000 hectares of agricultural land and 700,000 of forest have been abandoned . More than 7,500 hectares of forest has been abandoned by the government .
 In 2000, 4. million people were living in areas still considered radioactive . 4 million people still live in areas that are still considered to be radioactive .
 Two opposing explanations, poor reactor design and human error, have been advanced for Chernobyl accident . Poor reactor design, human error have been blamed for the disaster .
 The Chernobly accident occurred during the glasnost/perestroika era of the Soviet Union . The accident took place during the Soviet-era glaspy era of Soviet Russia .
 The government performed its own investigations of the tragedy . Additional citizens advisory boards, some without any government involvement, were set up .
 Accidents in nuclear power plant installations occurred in Windscale in 1957 and in the United States, such as in the Three Mile Island Unit 2, which was damaged during a 1979 accident .
 Since Chernobyl, other accidents, like those at Tokaimura and Mihama —both in Japan —have occurred .
 These accidents have brought the nuclear industry under greater scrutiny from the general public .
 Many feel that not only should the overall safety of such plants be improved, but also the preparedness and response to such disasters need to be more fully developed . Many also feel that the response to the disaster needs to be developed .
 The Bhopal and Chernobyl cases are disasters of similar magnitudes in terms of damage to people and the environment . Chernobyl was a disaster of similar magnitude . The disaster was similar to the Bhopala and the Chernobyl disasters .
 Questions as environmental impact and sustainability have become as important as concerns over health and human welfare . Today, such questions as environmental impacts and sustainability are now at least as important .
 Nathalie Cavasin has written about impending environmental problems since the 1950s . Rachel Carson wrote about the rise in the human population and the expansion of cities and towns .
 Most people only became aware of major environmental problems from the 1980s, with the environment becoming a major political issue from the 1990s .
 After World War II, the increasing use of pesticides in industrialized countries led to Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring . Silent Spring highlighted the side effects of D.D.T. on the local environment .
 Other environmental campaigns saw protests against the killing of seals in Canada, and also against whaling mainly undertaken by the Japanese and Norwegians .
 The International Whaling Commission introduced a moratorium on whaling in 1986 . But Japan has continued to conduct whaling under the guise of science . Japan's whaling has been controversial since 1986 .
 International environmental organizations such as Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace have been prominent in leading protests around the world . The latter becoming famous for taking part in direct action .
 Developing environmental problems around the world have been added to by many natural occurrences such as hurricanes in the Caribbean, floods in Florence and Venice in 1966 .
 The destruction of forests for timber or to clear land for cash crops continues . The contamination of rivers and the countryside by waste from mines continues to contaminate rivers .
 Hurricane Katrina created a toxic stew of sewage, household chemicals, gasoline, and industrial waste that will take years to clean up . Even natural disasters such as Hurricane Katrina have led to an environmental disaster .
 In addition there have been a large number of manmade environmental problems . In addition to manmade problems, there have also been a number of other problems .
 The one which has resulted in the largest number of deaths in the short-term was undoubtedly the Bhopal poison gas explosion in India on December 3,1984 . The explosion occurred on December 4, 1984 . The one that killed more than 100 people was the explosion of a Bhop
 The biggest disaster on an international scale was the Chernobyl nuclear power station accident in the Soviet Union in 1986 . Chernobyl was the site of the biggest nuclear disaster on a scale of international scale .
 Large number of oil spills around the world created by damage to oil tankers and the like . The largest being that of the Exxon Valdez in Prince William Sound, Alaska, in March 1989 . Others have included the venting of oil into the Persian Gulf by Saddam Hussein in 1991 .
 In the 2000s, the major environmental issue became that of global warming, especially after the screening of former U.S. vice president and Nobel laureate A1 Gore’s film An Inconvenient Truth . The film became the focus of environmental issues in the United States .
 The assault on the world’s forests are as old as humankind . The assault against the world's forests is an assault on humankind .
 More and more carbon dioxide is being expelled into the atmosphere creating a thick blanket of heat around the globe . It was relatively easy to obtain and work with, and there was always more .
 Archaeologists are finding evidence of wood-burning and log construction that began much earlier than anyone expected . Archaeologists say they are finding widespread evidence of log construction and wood burning dating back to the 1800s .
 Clearing of the land was rarely mentioned in the chronicles of the Western or Eastern world in the early modern period . It seems obvious that as the population grew, the forests shrank . Clearing is rarely mentioned .
 In central and northern Europe an estimated 70 percent of the land was covered by forest in 900e; by 1900 it had shrunk to only 25 percent . In 900e, 70 per cent of Europe was covered in forest, but by 1900 only 25 per cent .
 During this long period of growth and expansion, people learned how to fashion wood into sailing ships, opening up new sources of timber to exploit and new lands to settle . During this period, people were able to fashion timber into ships and ships .
 Clearing land in the tropics and subtropics helped the slave trade by creating vast plantations for the cultivation of sugar, coffee, tobacco, tea, rubber, rice, and indigo .
 Rubber trees produced the raw materials for automobile tires and other items for a growing consumer marketplace . Rubber trees were used to make automobile tires, other products for the growing consumer market .
 By the mid-20th century, chainsaws and heavy machinery had made clear-cutting of entire forests easier than ever before . The development of chainsaws made it easier to clear-cut entire forests .
 Today, clear-cutting of forests is driven by a need for both wood and cropland, as the swelling global population demands more and more food .
 Our evolutionary ancestors faced widespread shifts in the climate as glacial periods, referred to as “ice ages,” came and went every 100,000 years or so . Glacial periods referred to "ice ages," such as ‘ice ages’
 The impact of those early ice ages on human development are difficult to judge . It is likely that some proto-human species adapted and others did not .
 Some scientists now believe that it was climate change that spurred the migration of humans out of Africa .
 Homo sapiens had emerged between 150,000 and 120,000 years ago in southern and eastern Africa . Yet it took another 100,000 or more for them to move into Europe, Asia, and beyond . The fossil record is incomplete as it is .
 Ice core samples and excavation of ancient seabeds indicate that the climate in that part of Africa underwent significant changes between 70,000 and 80,000 years ago . The changes put a strain on the food chain and forced humans to look for new habitats, scientists say .
 There is some evidence that there was a major volcanic eruption at Mount Toba in modern Indonesia around 73,000 years ago . The eruption could have caused most of the planet to suffer the effects of a ‘volcanic winter,” lasting up to seven years .
 Some believe this could have caused the mass extinction of proto-human groups outside Africa . It could have reduced competition when humans from Africa began moving into their territories .
 In climatological terms, we are just coming out of the latest glacial period, known as the Little Ice Age . We are still coming from the previous glacial periods known as 'Little Ice Age' We are coming from a period known as a period of glacial glacial
 This period extended from between the 13th and 16th centuries to around 1850 . This period included between 13th century and around 1850.
 In the Northern Hemisphere the period was marked by bitterly cold temperatures, heavy snowfalls, and the rapid advance of glaciers . The period was also marked by heavy snowfall and rapid advances of glaciers.
 Unseasonable cold spells and precipitation lead to periodic crop failures and famines . Cold spells and rain can lead to crop failures, famines and crop failures .
 The Great Famine struck large parts of Europe in 1315 . Most notable was the Great Hunger of 1315, when the famine struck large areas of Europe . It was the first famine to strike in Europe since 1315.
 Heavy rains began in the spring of that year and continued throughout the summer, rotting the crops in their fields and making it impossible to cure the hay used to feed livestock . Heavy rains also made it impossible for the hay to be cured .
 This cycle of rainy summer seasons would continue for the next seven years . This cycle would continue to be repeated for seven years, says CNN.com .
 Crime increased along with food prices, with property crimes and murders becoming more common in the cities . Crime increased as food prices increased, with murders and property crimes becoming more frequent .
 There were stories of children being abandoned by parents unable to find food for them, and even rumors of cannibalism . There were even rumors that cannibalism was a part of the story .
 This was during the height of the Catholic Church’s hegemony in Europe . People naturally turned to the church in times of fear, and people turned to it in fear . This was when the church was dominant in Europe, and it was feared .
 It was the beginning of a long drift towards the Protestant Reformation of the 16th-17th centuries . The 16th century was the start of the Reformation .
 The Little Ice Age was releasing its grip in the early part of the 1800s when a volcanic eruption on Mount Tambora in present-day Indonesia ejected a huge amount of volcanic ash into the atmosphere .
 This ash cloud encircled the Northern Hemisphere over the next year or more, creating climatological havoc throughout Europe, the United States, and Canada . The ash cloud is expected to encircle Europe, Canada, and the U.S. and Europe .
 In June, New England and Quebec saw two major snowstorms, and ice was seen on rivers and lakes . Ice was seen as far south as Pennsylvania .
 At the beginning of the 21st century, signs of another great climate shift seem to be everywhere . Climate change is predicted to be a major climate shift in the next century .
 Severe weather events, including droughts, heat waves, and hurricanes, are growing in length and intensity . Severe Weather events are becoming longer and more severe, experts say .
 The majority of scientists now believe that humans are playing a significant role in global warming . There is some support for the idea that this is an inevitable rise in temperatures growing out of the Little Ice Age in the mid-19th century .
 More CO 2 is being expelled into the atmosphere, creating a thick blanket of heat around the globe . More and more are being expelled from industrial smokestacks, car exhaust systems and open fires used to cook food .
 "The threat to both the environment and human life cannot be underestimated," says environmentalist John Defterios . The threat to the environment can be underestimated, he says .
 Up to a third of the world’s species may go extinct by the beginning of the next century . Up to one third of world's species could go extinct within a century .
 High temperatures and persistent droughts in southern climates will reduce yields and increase the threat of widespread famines . While northern climates may see an initial surge in crop yields, northern climates will see a decline .
 The latest projections indicate that by 2030, hundreds of millions of people in Latin America and Africa will face severe water shortages . By 2030, the world's water supply capacity is expected to be severely constrained .
 By 2050 billions of Asians will also be running far short of their freshwater needs, with the Himalayan glaciers all but gone as early as 2035 . The Himalayan glacier all but likely to be gone in 2035, according to scientists .
 The struggle for an increasingly small share of food, water, and other natural materials could spark “resource wars” among nations .
 Many scientists believe we have reached the “tipping point’s” making a full reversal unlikely . The possibility of reversing this trend is not clear, but many scientists believe it is not possible .
 The Equal Rights Amendment guarantees the equality of rights for all people in the United States . The amendment was first proposed in the U.S. Congress in 1923 .
 Following the Great Depression and World War II, the rise of a second, more sweeping women’s rights movement led to reconsideration of an amendment to secure women the rights to equal wages .
 The 1970s and 1980s saw congressional approval of the amendment but the failure of enough states to ratify it into the Constitution . The amendment was approved by Congress but not ratified by enough states .
 Protesters against the Equal Rights Amendment were spurred on by the rise of the feminist movement .
 The 1848 Seneca Falls Convention was a clarion call by concerned females to the rest of the country for increased rights . The historical landmark for increased women's rights for women was the 1848 Convention .
 The unity of the convention was quickly disturbed by the Civil War and passage of the Fourteenth Amendment . The amendment was meant to give rights and liberties to freed slaves .
 Women's groups argued over how loosely the amendment could be interpreted . Women’s groups said equality was given to black women if the Constitution did not include rights for white women .
 Legal interpretations of woman’s rights in the U.S. became more sophisticated in the early 20th century . The Supreme Court saw fit to deal with issues of labor .
 In Muller Oregon, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a 10-hour work day . The ruling was passed by the Oregon state legislature and aimed toward regulating industry . The state legislature passed a bill to regulate the hours of work .
 Agitation by women dedicated to the cause of women’s suffrage, along with rights to fair wages, was successful . The Nineteenth Amendment was ratified in 1920 .
 Even with this success, a major rift developed between activists like Paul who sought quicker strides for women, and experienced professionals like Carrie Chapman Catt and Florence Kelly .
 The 1920s-1930s saw several phases in the battle between the NWP and other women’s groups . It included vacillation on whether an equal rights amendment would be effective .
 NWP remained active not only in working for an amendment for equal rights but in creating a better work environment for women in the U.S. The NWP was active in promoting equal rights .
 The NWP was not successful in fulfilling many of its goals because of strong-arm tactics by conservative groups in the United States, more conservative governments globally, and the devastation of the Great Depression . However, the NWP did not succeed in fulfilling its goals due to the strength of conservative
 In every session of Congress between 1923 and the passage of the ERA in 1982, an amendment was introduced dealing with equal rights based on gender . The ERA was the first amendment to be introduced by Congress in every session since 1923 .
 The U.S. Senate passed the Equal Rights Amendment three times, in 1949, 1953, and 1959 . Each passage was marred by an irreconcilable rider exempting existing sex-specific legislation .
 The rise of the feminist movement in the 1960s was broad and rapidly well organized . The rise was rapid and rapidly organized, and the movement was broad .
 The movement encompassed all aspects of female life in the U.S. The movement was created in the 1930s .
 The expression of sexuality by women by women was made a topic of discussion after Betty Friedan’s Feminist Mystique was published in 1963 . It was published by Friedan in 1963 and has since been widely debated since .
 The creation of a marketable birth control pill in 1960 made a woman’s control over her own body an important aspect of public health . The pill was the first to be available in the marketable form of contraception .
 The establishment of the National Organization for Women in 1966 and its rapid acceptance among other lobbying groups gave the feminist movement a political organization that would be unrivaled within a few years . The organization was established in 1966 .
 The Equal Rights Amendment was passed several times in the 1970s by the House of Representatives, but was not passed through to the ratification process . The amendment was passed but not ratified .
 It was not until 1982, however, that the legislative approval of the ERA was followed up by the ratification process . The ratification process was delayed until 1982 .
 One cause of trepidation by the public toward the amendment was the activism of antifeminists such as Phyllis Schlafly, who saw the amendment as an unnecessary exercise .
 The rise of feminism and antifeminism have opened a dialogue for women’s issues and legal interpretations of equal rights in already existing amendments . However, the amendment's process and the rise of . feminism and . feminism has opened up a dialogue .
 Politics, Women’s Rights, and the Amending Process of the Constitution, are at odds with the Supreme Court .
 Eritrea is an African country lying along the southwestern coast of the Red Sea and to the northeast of Ethiopia . It is located in Eritrea, along the southwest coast of Eritrea .
 The country’s diverse population speaks many languages and reflects many cultures . The country has a diverse population of people who speak many languages .
 Eritrea has had little internal conflict in part because most factions were united in a struggle for independence from Ethiopia . Eritrea is one of the most diverse countries in the world .
 Eritrean region was one of the first areas in Africa to produce crops and domesticate animals . Eritreans were the first to domesticize animals and produce crops in Africa .
 Early people engaged in extensive trade from Eritrea’s Dead Sea ports . Early people also engaged in . extensive trade .
 Eritrea was a relatively independent part of the Askum Empire in the fourth century . Eritrea is now Eritrea's most populous country .
 In the 16th century the area became part of the Ottoman Empire, and in 1890 it became a colony of Italy . In 1890 it was the colony of the Italian Republic .
 Italian rule lasted until World War II, when Britain conquered the territory in 1941 . Italy was ruled by Italy until the end of WWII .
 In 1952 the United Nations approved a federation of Eritrea and Ethiopia . The federation was an attempt to settle the dispute between Ethiopian claims of rights to the land and Eritrea’s desire for independence .
 Ethiopia’s emperor, Haile Selassie, quickly acted to end the federation and to annex Eritrea as a province . Ethiopia later annexed Eritrea, becoming a province of Eritrea .
 Eritrean Liberation Front was formed in 1958 and initiated armed resistance in 1961 . Eritreans have been fighting for independence since the early 1960s .
 Eritrea finally gained its independence in 1993 . The next three decades were filled with bitter warfare before independence . Eritrea is now one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 In the 1970s, due in part to internal conflicts within the ELF, a new and more tightly organized group—the Eritrean People’s Liberation Front —emerged . The new group is now known as Eritreans People's Liberation Front .
 The Soviet Union and Cuba came to the aid of Ethiopia’s new regime after Haile Selassie was deposed in 1974 . But the alliance was unable to dominate the rural districts of Eritrea .
 ELPF was increasing its control over more areas of the province in 1980 . In 1990-91 it gained possession of two major cities, including the capital, and gained control of the capital .
 At that point the ELPF was recognized as the provisional government by many other countries . The ELPF government was recognized by many countries including the UK .
 Ethiopia and Eritrea agreed to hold a referendum on independence in 1993 . It resulted in almost unanimous approval for the initiative . The two countries have been fighting for independence since 1993 .
 In May of 1993 the United Nations admitted Eritrea to membership and granted a four-year transitional period for the formation of a constitution . Eritrea was granted membership by the UN in 1993 .
 The ELPF dominated the early years of independence, and Isaias Afwerki was elected the first president of the National Assembly . The former general secretary of the ELPF was elected to be president .
 The constitution was approved in 1997 but not yet implemented . The constitution outlines a government directed by the National Assembly, a president, and a supreme court .
 The president holds great power, since he appoints the members of the Supreme Court and the administrators of each of Eritrea’s six regions . Eritrea's president is also the president of the country's six regions, Eritrea .
 The National Assembly elections scheduled for 2001 were postponed indefinitely . The elections were to be held in the National Assembly .
 Eritrea's independence and democratic government have been threatened by a number of factors, including the government itself and the economic and physical damages of the long war for independence . Eritrea’s independence has been threatened since the war ended in 1994 .
 During the 1970s-1980s, nature dealt Eritrea devastating blows in the form of droughts and famine . Eritrea was hit hard by drought and famine in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In addition, the government pursued policies that led to engagement in several wars . In addition to the Iraq War, the U.S. government pursued other policies that resulted in wars .
 Eritrean forces invaded the Red Sea island of Hanish al Kabir, a possession of Yemen, in 1995 and claimed ownership . Eritreans invaded the island in 1995, claiming ownership of it .
 Conflict that led to thousands of deaths broke out again between Ethiopia and Eritrea in 1998 over disputed territory . Conflict that left thousands of people dead in 1998 also broke out over disputed land .
 In 2000 the two countries agreed to a cease-fire, but a formal agreement on the borders between them was not approved . In 2000, the two sides agreed to an agreement on borders between the two nations .
 UN peacekeeping force in Eritrea continues to patrol a 25-mile-wide Temporary Security Zone along the countries’ borders . UN peacekeepers continue to patrol the area .
 Eritrea faces severe economic and ecological concerns arising from deforestation, soil erosion, overgrazing, and its decayed infrastructure . Less than 5 percent of its land arable, Eritrea continues to face severe economic, ecological concerns .
 Ethiopia is situated in the east of Africa in the region known as the Horn of Africa . The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is the capital of the Ethiopian state .
 This country is bound to the west and northwest by Sudan, to the south by Kenya, and to the east by Djibouti and Eritrea . It is also bound by the east and southeast by Somalia, and by the west by Sudan and Kenya .
 The diversity of Ethiopia’s terrain determines regional variations in climate . Ethiopia's terrain has been the source of some of the world's most extreme weather patterns .
 The most important current environmental issues are deforestation, overgrazing, soil erosion, desertification and water-intensive farming and poor management that contribute to water shortages in some areas .
 Another problem that the country faces is the constant loss of biodiversity and the threat to the ecosystem and the environment . The country is facing a constant threat to biodiversity, the government says .
 Ethiopia's population is mainly rural and has a high annual growth rate . Ethiopia’s population is mostly rural . Ethiopia has a very high growth rate and a high population growth rate.
 Modern Ethiopia has a long history of conflict with neighboring countries in the Nile River basin . Estimated Ethiopia’s population at more than 70 million is estimated at over 70 million .
 The principal groups include the Oromo, who account for 40 percent of the population; the Amhara, 25 percent; and the Tigre, f2 percent . The principal group of people in Ethiopia is the Oruo .
 Smaller groups are the Gurage, 3.3 percent; the Ometo, 2.2 percent; and the Sidamo, 2 percent . Smaller ethnic minorities include the Gurages, Ometos, Sidamo and Sidamo .
 More than half of Ethiopians, 53 percent of the population, are Christians . Around 31 percent are Muslims; there are also indigenous tribal beliefs .
 Ethiopia was considered a strategically important territory by superpowers during the colonial period . Ethiopia’s monarchy maintained its freedom during that period .
 During the cold war era in 1974, a military junta deposed Emperor Haile Selassie and established a socialist state . The state maintained a relationship with the Soviet Union, which was deposed in 1974 .
 In 1994 a new constitution was approved, and Ethiopia’s first multiparty elections were held in 1995 . In 1994, Ethiopia's first multi-party election was held in the Ethiopian capital, Ethiopia . Ethiopia is one of Africa's most populous countries .
 Ethiopia granted control of its colony to Italy in 1889 . Between 1941 and 1952 this country was put under British administration . Ethiopia and Italy fought between 1889 and 1952 .
 In 1991 a provisional government was established in Eritrea, and it became an independent nation in 1993 . Eritrea is now the most populous country in the world .
 The border between Ethiopia and Eritrea was never precisely demarcated . But the border between the two countries has never been precisely defined . Eritrea is one of Africa's most populated countries .
 In 1998 Eritrean forces occupied the disputed Ethiopian town of Badme, and a new war began . The war lasted until 2000, when both countries signed a treaty . Eritrea and Ethiopia signed a peace treaty in 2000 .
 Despite an international commission that delimited the border, the relationship between the two countries remains hostile . The relationship between them remains hostile.
 Ethiopia has always sought access to the sea and looked to Somalia for the reunification of its territory . Somalia has always looked to the Somali territory to reunite its territory with Ethiopia .
 Somalia used to claim the Ogaden region, inhabited for the most part by Somali ethnic groups . The Ogaden is now known as Ogaden by Somali people .
 During the conflict with Eritrea, Ethiopia controlled almost the whole region, with a consequent breaking off of diplomatic relations with the country . During the war, Ethiopia took control of most of the region .
 In 1988, after 11 years of constant confrontation, Ethiopia removed the troops from the border with Somalia, reestablished diplomatic relations, and signed a peace treaty . Ethiopia removed troops from border with Somali in 1988, reestablish diplomatic relations .
 Central section of Ethiopia’s border with Somalia was never fully demarcated and is only provisional . The central section of the border with Somali was not fully demarked . Ethiopia's border with the Somali nation is only a provisional border .
 Ethiopia and Somalia have always had aspirations to control the territory of Djibouti . Also, Ethiopia and Somalis have always wanted to take control of the territory .
 Egypt, Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda, Sudan, Kenya, Rwanda, Ethiopia, and Congo . Sudan, Ethiopia and Kenya are among the countries listed .
 It has a vital role in agriculture and also plays a major role in transportation . It has also played a role in transport and agriculture .
 Ethiopia controls 85 percent of Ethiopia's water, but Egypt makes the most profit from its water flow . The river is born in Ethiopia’s territory, and Ethiopia controls the most of its water .
 This country, with its military superiority and economic and political stability, puts pressure on upstream countries . This country's military superiority, with . military superiority .
 During recent years these countries have not been able to divert the water flow because of the constant tensions . The tension has been high in recent years .
 All the countries in the Nile basin will be affected while the population continues growing and water needs increase . Though the conflict is still between the main actors—Sudan, Egypt, and Ethiopia— it is probable that all the countries will have water shortages .
 Ethiopia’s economy is based on agriculture, and 90 percent of the products obtained are exported . Ethiopia's economy is largely made up of agricultural products .
 The principal crops are cereals, pulses, oilseed, cotton, sugarcane, beans, and potatoes . The most important is coffee, the most important crop is coffee .
 This sector suffers from frequent drought and poor cultivation practices . Agriculture sector suffers frequent drought, poor practices .
 It has small reserves of gold, platinum, copper, potash, and natural gas . The country is also known for its mineral reserves .
 Ethiopia's leading manufactures in Ethiopia include cement, construction materials, food processing, and textiles .
 During the 1990s Ethiopia abandoned its exclusive bilateral policy with the Soviet Union . Ethiopia began to acquire more freedom in the wake of the Cold War . Ethiopia has a long-standing bilateral relationship with the USSR .
 It became a decentralized, market-oriented economy with privatization and the cooperation of international financing organs . The country's economy became a decentralised economy with the help of international finance organs .
 Ethiopia’s participation in the world economy remained marginal, but participation remained marginal . The country's dependence on international financing organisms increased Ethiopia's external debt . Ethiopia is now in a state of state of emergency emergency force in Ethiopia .
 In 2001 Ethiopia qualified for debt relief from the Highly Indebted Poor Countries initiative . In 2005 the International Monetary Fund voted to forgive Ethiopia’s debt . In 2001 the IMF voted for Ethiopia to be forgiven .
 Ethiopia is among the poorest countries in the world according to the Human Development Index established by the United Nations . Ethiopia is one of the world's poorest countries, according to a UN index .
 Climate conditions, the lack of means to develop agriculture, displacements, refugees, and AIDS are factors that contribute to worsening the situation . The climate conditions are among the factors contributing to the worsening situation .
 Foreign aid is constantly needed to prevent diseases and famine, particularly in times of drought . Therefore foreign aid must be constantly needed, especially during drought times .
 The European Economic Community, also known as the Common Market, was established by the Treaty of Rome among France, Italy, West Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, Luxembourg and the Netherlands .
 Its acts were devised to achieve free labor and capital mobility . The abolition of trusts and the implementation of common policies on labor, welfare, agriculture, transport, and foreign trade .
 Konrad Adenauer, Italian prime minister Alcide De Gasperi, and French foreign minister Robert Schuman agreed on the necessity of securing a lasting peace among previous enemies . After Europe had been ravaged by two brutal world wars, politicians such as Adenauer and Schuman decided on the
 European nations should cooperate as equals and should not humiliate one another, they said . They believed that European nations . should cooperate and not be humiliated one another .
 In 1950 Schuman proposed the creation of a European Coal and Steel Community . The community was established with the Treaty of Paris . Schuman's proposal was rejected .
 France, Italy, West Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, Luxembourg and the Netherlands consented to have their production of coal and steel monitored by a High Authority .
 Steel and coal, the raw materials of war, became the tools for reconciliation and common growth . Steel, coal, were the tools of reconciliation and shared growth .
 ECSC members started to plan an expansion of their mutual aid . These first years of cooperation proved fruitful, and ECSC plans to expand its cooperation . ECSC is based in the United States .
 Negotiations between the six countries making up the ECSC led to the Treaty of Rome . It created the European Economic Community, a common market for a wide range of services and goods .
 The process of integration continued during the 1960s, with the lifting of trade barriers between the six nations . The six nations established common policies on agriculture and trade policies .
 As the EEC grew, its leaders realized that European economies needed to be brought in line with one another . The EEC's leaders decided to bring in economies that could compete with each other .
 Euro became a currency union in 2002 with the circulation of the euro . This was the first meeting of the Eurozone countries in the 1970s and 1980s . The Eurozone is now one of the biggest economies in the world .
 The European Monetary System was created in 1979 to stabilize the fluctuations of European currencies caused by the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system . It was created to stabilize fluctuations of the European currencies .
 EMS helped make exchange rates more stable and promoted tighter policies of economic solidarity and mutual aid between EEC members . The EMS helped to make . make exchange . rates more . stable .
 The monitoring of the members’ economies became vital during the 1980s, when membership in the EEC rose to 12, with the entries of Greece in 1981 and Spain and Portugal in 1986 . Greece and Portugal were the first two countries to enter the European Economic Community .
 The first Integrated Mediterranean Programme was launched with the aim of making structural economic reforms . It aims to reduce the gap among the economies of the 12 member states .
 With the enlargement of its membership the EEC also started to play a more relevant role on the international stage . The EEC has signed treaties and conventions with African, Caribbean, and Pacific countries .
 The worldwide economic recession of the early 1980s seemed to endanger the process of market integration . The world's first major economic recession in the 1980s was the result of a global recession .
 Commission gave new impetus to European incorporation . Commission led by French socialist Jacques Delors gave impetus to EU incorporation .
 The Single European Act, the first major revision of the Treaty of Rome, was signed under Delors’s leadership . The Act set a precise schedule for the removal of all remaining barriers between member states by 1993 .
 The Delors Commission also worked to create a single currency for the European Common Market . The Commission was also involved in creating the European Single Currency .
 The single currency option was chosen with the creation of the Central European Bank aiming to unify monetary policies and create a common currency . The single euro was chosen by the central European Bank aimed at unifying monetary policies .
 Treaty of Maastricht set up a timetable for the adoption of a single currency . The choice was made explicit in the treaty . The treaty set up an early timetable for single currency adoption .
 Ten more countries (Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia) joined in 2004 . The EU is now the world's largest trading power .
 In some countries the introduction of the euro was marked by controversies and heated debates . The euro was introduced to the euro in 1999, and the euro became a common currency .
 Economists have shown that the European Common Market has much to benefit from the euro . Yet economists have shown it is not only possible that the euro will benefit from its existence .
 Frankel and Rose suggest that being part of a single currency tends to triple the country’s trade with other members of the single currency zone . Leading to increases in the country's per capita income, they say .
 The EU quickly became the world’s major trading power and enjoyed fast economic growth .
 Free internal trade and common customs duties, which member countries enjoyed since the beginning of the union, led to significant trade development among the different members of the different countries .
 Croatia and Turkey were negotiating their membership, which was prevented by concerns over human rights violations in both countries . Croatia was negotiating its membership with Turkey, but it was stopped by human rights concerns over both countries' rights .
 Of the 25 members, 12 adopted a single currency -- the euro -- for financial transaction in 1999 . 12 of the 25 countries adopted the single currency, the euro, for financial transactions .
 As the union expanded, however, it increasingly found resistance and obstacles on its way . The union has been in touch with some of the world's biggest powers .
 A powerful movement of Euro-skeptics emerged throughout the EU in the late 1990s . They pointed to a supposed lack of democracy in the EU institutions and to the danger of losing national sovereignty to a centralized body .
 Some politicians in those countries with more developed economies looked upon the enlargement of the union with suspicion . Some politicians feared a wave of uncontrollable migration .
 Referenda in Denmark and Sweden showed that the majority of citizens were against adopting the euro . French and Dutch voters rejected the European Constitution in 2005 in 2005 .
 Two world wars had divided European countries and massacred their people . Konrad Adenauer, Alcide De Gasperi and Robert Schuman agreed on the necessity of building a lasting peace between previous enemies .
 The cooperation between these countries led to the Treaty of Rome in 1957, which established the European Economic Community and the first European Commission, led by German Christian Democrat Walter Hallstein .
 Customs duties among member states were entirely removed from 1968 . Common policies for trade and agriculture were also devised . Customs duties were also removed from member states .
 The most important EU institutions include the Council of the European Union, European Commission, the European Court of Justice, European Central Bank, and European Parliament .
 The origins of the European Parliament, which convenes in Strasbourg, date back to the 1950s . The European Parliament is based in the city of Strasbourg and is based there .
 The European Central Bank manages the union’s single currency, and the EU has a common policy on agriculture, fisheries, and foreign affairs and security .
 EU policies devised by the EU range across a wide variety of areas . But not all have binding power for the union’s members .
 The union has the character of a federation for monetary affairs; agricultural, trade, and environmental policy; and economic and social policy . Each member state retains wider independence for home and foreign affairs .
 Policy making in the EU results in an interplay of supranationalism and intergovernmentalism . Policy making is a key part of the EU's policy making .
 European Communities, Common Foreign and Security Policy, and Police and Judicial Cooperation in Criminal Matters. European Communities . European Communities and Common Foreign . Security Policy . Police and . Judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
 Supranational concerns are strongest in the first pillar, while Council of Europe and thus intergovernmental opinions count the most in the second and third pillars . Intergovernmental opinions are most important for intergovernmental opinion in the third and fourth pillars .
 The Council of the EU, together with the European Parliament, form the legislative branch of the union . The European Commission represents the EU's executive powers .
 The council is made up of nine subcommissions, which meet in Brussels . The presidency of the council rotates between the members, and the presidency rotates .
 The European Commission has 25 members, one for each member state . Its president is chosen by the Council of Europe and confirmed by the European Parliament . The European Parliament has a total of 25 members .
 Unlike the Council, the commission is completely independent from member states . Unlike the council, it is independent from the member states of the EU .
 Commissioners, therefore, are not supposed to take suggestions from the government of the country that appointed them . Commissioners are supposed to be impartial . They are appointed by the government that appoint them .
 Their only goal should be to propose legislation to favor the development of the whole union . Their aim is to create legislation that favors the union's development .
 The major setback for the EU was the rejection of the constitution by two of its founding members, France and the Netherlands . The EU's constitution was rejected by the two founding members of the EU .
 The main challenge that the EU will have to face in years to come is, paradoxically, a direct result of its success and its capacity to attract new nations . The EU's main challenge is to find a way of attracting new nations to the EU, says David Cameron .
 With more member countries, the EU is threatened by increasing regional interests that endanger the deployment of shared policies . With more members of the EU, regional interests threaten the EU's shared policies, EU says .
 The Falklands War was a short war between Argentina and the United Kingdom over the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) The war occurred between March and June of 1982 .
 The Falklands consist of two large, and many small, islands in the South Atlantic Ocean east of Argentina . The islands are rich in subaquatic offshore oil reserves .
 Disputes over the sovereignty of the islands have occurred since the 18th century . The islands are actually located within the Argentinean continental platform .
 British troops and inhabitants took possession of the islands in 1833 . Despite many Argentinean claims, the islands were never claimed by the British .
 At the beginning of the 1980s Argentina’s military government had become less powerful . Argentina's military government was less powerful at the time of the decade .
 Argentina faced a devastating economic crisis and large-scale civil unrest, with many people clamoring for the return of democracy . Many people clamored for a return to democracy . Argentina's democracy was overthrown in 1992 .
 Argentine government thought it would be quick and easy to reclaim Falkland Islands . As a way of recovering some power and maintaining the military dictatorship, the government launched a war to reclaim the islands .
 Argentina’s military experts likely misjudged the political climate in Britain and did not anticipate that the British would move their fleet halfway across the globe to reclaim their rights over the islands .
 General Galtieri ordered the invasion of the Falkland Islands, triggering the Falklands War . After days of tension, the war finally began on April 2, 1982, when the British troops invaded the islands .
 Argentina’s troops moved quickly, invading the islands, defeating the improvised British troops, and gaining domain of the islands . During the first weeks Argentine troops were able to defeat British troops .
 Britain quickly organized a naval task force, consisting of the HMS Conqueror submarine, helicopters, Royal Air Force bombers and fighters, destroyers, and a large number of naval fighting boats .
 In comparison to Argentina’s task force technologically, in quantity, and in the areas of military professionalism and experience, British troops by far were better prepared than the Argentinean troops .
 One of the war crimes most sadly remembered by the Argentineans was the sinking of the General Belgrano light cruiser . The sinking was one of the most tragic war crimes in Argentina .
 Argentine air force launched an air attack and sank the destroyer HMS Sheffield . HMS Sheffield was sunk by the Argentinian air force in response to the attack .
 Given the difference in military force between the sides, the war quickly turned in Britain’s (United Kingdom's, or U.K.) favor .
 The U.K. government received strong international support from the United States, France, and Chile, among other countries .
 The 1949 North Atlantic Treaty only obliged the signatories to support if the attack occurred in Europe or North America above the tropic of Cancer . However, the 1949 treaty only obliged to support the attack if it occurred above the Tropic Cancer .
 Rio Pact obliged the United States to intervene if an adherent was attacked . U.K. never attacked Argentina, only Argentine forces on British territory . Rio Pact required the U.S. to intervene in the event of attack .
 French President Francois Mitterrand gave full support to the U.K. in the Falklands War . He gave full backing to the British government in the war .
 France provided the U.K. with aircraft, identical to the ones supplied to Argentina, for British pilots to train against . France also provided intelligence to help sabotage the Exocet missiles sold to Argentina .
 Chile also gave its support to the U.K. by threatening an invasion on the west border of Argentina . Argentina’s neighbor country Chile also provided logistical support during the war .
 Argentina's only support was military assistance from Peru and Venezuela . Argentina’s only support came from Peru, Venezuela and Peru .
 This came in the form of critical aircraft supplies like long-range air fuel tanks . The U.S. military says it has been forced to cut back on some of the world's most important aircraft supplies .
 Cuba and Bolivia also offered ground troops, but their offers were seen as political propaganda and not accepted . Their offers were also seen as a political propaganda, but they were rejected .
 Only after the war was over did the Brazilian air force send some reinforcements . Only after it ended the war did the Brazilian air force join forces .
 The British eventually prevailed, and the islands remained under British control . The islands were eventually under British rule .
 The Argentine commander of the Argentine garrison in Stanley surrendered to Major General Moore of the Royal Marines . The final battle in Port Stanley ended in June 1982 after the final battle .
 The Falklands War was one of many small military conflicts in which the U.K. has been engaged . From the British point of view, the Falklands was a small military conflict that the UK has engaged in .
 For Argentina, the war remains the country’s main military conflict and is very much present in the people’ memory . Argentina's war was the country's biggest military conflict . The war is still very much remembered in Argentina .
 Argentina showed no sign of relinquishing its claim to the Falkland Islands in 2006 . Argentina still showed no signs of giving up on its claim .
 Falun Gong is a system of meditation exercises, termed qigong, introduced by Li Hongzhi in 1992 . It is a meditation meditation system .
 Falun Gong, translated as Practice of the Wheel of Law, grew quickly after its public introduction and is also known as Falun Dafa . Falun Gafa is a Chinese version of the ancient ancient Chinese religion .
 In 1999 the Chinese government suppressed Falun Gong in response to growing numbers and large peaceful demonstrations . In 1999, the government was forced to suppress the practice . The Chinese government did not tolerate large numbers of practitioners of the Gong .
 Li Hongzhi introduced Falun Gong at the Fifth Middle School in China in 1992 . Li Honghanghi introduced the practice at the school in Beijing, China, in 1992.
 Falun Gong is a cultivation practice associated with Buddhism . It is a system of qigong, a cultivation system associated with the teachings of Buddhism . Gong is known for its cultivation of meditation .
 Falun Gong's foundation is dharma, the doctrine and discipline of Buddhism, says Gong leader . Faluna Gong is based on the doctrine of the discipline and doctrine of Buddhism . Gong is a meditation group that focuses on meditation and meditation .
 Falun Gong core principles are truthfulness, compassion, and forbearance . The Falu Gong core principle is truthfulness and compassion .
 In Falun Gong, practitioners are required to enforce strict meditation and must abide by truth, compassion, and endurance in all of their actions . Practitioners are required by enforcing strict meditation in all forms .
 Falun Gong, using evidence they believe does not fit into modern anthropology, teaches that humankind has endured several cycles of civilization . Falun Dao believes that humans have endured cycles of civilizations .
 Lust, homosexuality, and other practices considered of low morals in Falun Gong are believed to hinder the cultivation process . Lust and homosexuality are thought to hinder cultivation process in the Gong .
 It believes that karma is the cause of disease and that only by letting go of earthly attachments can one prevent and cure disease . It also believes that only let go of the attachments can prevent disease .
 In Falun Gong the Wheel of Law must be installed in the abdomen through meditation . The Wheel must also be installed through meditation in order to pass the law .
 Falun Gong, spread by the Internet, had gained followers all over the world . Falu Gong is a Chinese spiritual group that has been spreading around the world since the 1990s .
 Controversy over its beliefs led to protests by believers in 1998 . Some practitioners were arrested in 1998, during which some people were arrested .
 According to Falun Gong reports, the police beat some of the protesters . According to reports, some of them were beaten by police . The protests were held in China's capital, Beijing .
 On July 20, 1999, the Chinese government began attempts to suppress the movement . The Chinese government was concerned about its growth .
 The movement continues to claim followers in more than 80 countries . Government reactions range from acceptance to suspicion . However, the movement has followers in over 80 countries, where governments are wary .
 Frantz Fanon was born of the descendants of African slaves . He was French-educated and became a practicing psychiatrist as well as a writer and spokesperson for Third World revolutions during the 1950s-1960s .
 Fanon influenced an entire generation of revolutionary activists in Africa and in the Civil Rights movement in the U.S. Fanon is credited with inspiring a generation of African-Americans .
 Fanon championed the cause of black liberation movements . Influenced by Aime Cesaire and Negritude, Fanon explored the interrelationship of racism and colonialism .
 Fanon worked with the French resistance against the Nazis in World War II . Fanon went to Algeria as a doctor at a hospital at Blida in the early 1950s .
 Fanon was a leading spokesperson for the cause of Algerian independence from the French . After the Algerian revolution broke out in 1954, Fanon quit to join the Algeria National Liberation Front .
 Fanon argued that violence was an integral part of the struggles for Third World independence . He argued that imperial colonial powers would never willingly cede their control over people of color . Fanon: Violence was integral to the struggle for freedom of expression .
 Fanon died of leukemia in Washington, D.C., in 1961 . Fanon was returned to Algeria to be buried on Algerian soil .
 The phenomenon of feminism worldwide in the latter part of the 20th century reflects the diversity of social and cultural theories, political movements, and moral and religious philosophies shaped by the experiences of women . Janice J Terry feminism, worldwide .
 There is no universally accepted form of feminism that represents all of its advocates, but its representatives share a similar vision . Women's representatives share similar vision of feminism .
 Feminist theory questions basic assumptions about gender and sexuality, including the understanding of what it means to be a woman . Feminist theory continues to question basic assumptions .
 Feminist scholars seek clarity about feminine consciousness, identity of women, their values, and their ambitions . Feminist scholars and activists seek clarity on feminine consciousness .
 "They address the issue of oppression by men as an issue of power, dominion, and hierarchy," they say . They address the issues of oppression as a matter of power and dominion .
 Feminists believe this oppression exists in relation to the identity of women and the challenges they have to face in local and global contexts . Feminists say oppression exists as a result of women's identity .
 By the mid-20th century the feminist movement had brought about positive transformation and advances for women . The feminist movement has brought about many positive changes for women in history .
 This first wave of feminism formally ended in 1920 with the passing of the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution . The amendment secured the right to vote for women .
 In the late 1960s, after 40 years consumed by economic depression, world war, and cold war fears, women again revisited issues of gender equality . Second Wave Feminism was a movement that came to be known as Second Wave feminism .
 Many women in the industrialized world asserted new rights and demanded liberation from stereotypical female roles . Looking beyond the right to vote, many women in industrialized world, joined by some women from developing nations .
 Simone de Beauvoir published The Second Sex, a major analysis of women’s lives and roles, in 1949 . A precursor of the post-suffrage women's movement appeared in 1949, when French philosopher Simone deBeauvoir wrote a major piece of analysis .
 By the 1960s a growing racial Civil Rights movement and rising opposition to Soviet and U.S. cold war policies were sparking protests in Europe and the Americas . The protests were sparked by the growing racial civil rights movement .
 Betty Friedan’s 1963 analysis, The Feminine Mystique, was a huge best seller . Friedan's 1963 analysis of the world's changing climate was a bestseller .
 Canada's National Action Committee on the Status of Women followed in 1971 . Canada’s national action committee on the status of women followed in 1970s .
 The movement quickly took on a life of its own, as women in many nations found new ways to understand and advance their social, economic, and political rights .
 Movement women discussed issues long considered private, such as motherhood, divorce, abortion, rape, lesbian relationships, prostitution, and the sexual double standard . Asserted that “the personal is political,” movement women discussed topics such as rape, motherhood and abortion .
 In 1976 de Beauvoir keynoted a huge International Women’s Day rally in Brussels . In 1976 she criticized the timidity of United Nations efforts for women .
 The same year 100,000 Italian women held the first “Take Back the Night” march to spotlight male violence against women . The march was held in the same year as the first 'Take Back The Night’ march .
 Around the world, female political leaders began to emerge in far greater numbers than ever before . First women's political leaders emerged in greater numbers of women in politics .
 Legislative bodies in Scandinavia and other western European nations saw near-parity in their sex ratios . Scandinavian countries saw near parity in sex ratios in their legislative bodies .
 In 1984 Geraldine Ferraro became the first woman chosen for vice president by a major U.S. party . In 2007 Nancy Pelosi of California became the United States’ first female Speaker of the House of Representatives .
 Nations including Britain, India, and Pakistan have been governed by women . Critics say that the feminist movement had little to do with their success .
 Not all women were comfortable with Second Wave Feminism’s new issues and styles of protest . As was true during the original suffrage movement, not all women felt comfortable with new issues .
 The relevance of feminism in the lives of poor women, women of color, and women living in traditional societies continues to create controversy . Competing efforts to define the contours of women’s equality versus women's differences from men continue to cause controversy .
 Alice Paul’s Equal Rights Amendment of 1923 was reclaimed by new feminist leaders and became the centerpiece of a broad spectrum of women's rights initiatives . As an example, in the U.S. in the United States, in 1923, the amendment was reclaimed and became a centerpiece of
 In 1972, a measure promising ‘equal rights under the law’ for women was easily cleared Congress . It was sent to the states for ratification . In 1972 this measure was approved by Congress .
 Religious conservatives, led by mother and lawyer Phyllis Schlafly, were able to raise enough opposition to halt the ERA . Three states short of passage .
 Schlafly and her supporters feared that traditional wives and mothers would be devalued and could lose legal protections . The decision was approved by the Supreme Court last week . The Supreme Court has since overturned the decision .
 Some opponents claim ERA would require that public toilets be available to both sexes . ERA supporters say it would require both sexes to use public toilets .
 Title IX, a 1972 federal program to afford equal opportunities to high school and college women, expanded women’s college enrollments and participation in competitive sports . Title IX is still controversial, although still controversial . It expanded women's college enrollment in competitive college sports .
 Legislation and market forces combined to narrow the ‘pay gap’ between men and women . Market forces and legislation have helped narrow the gap .
 Modern contraception was approved for sale in the U.S. in 1960 . Birth control pioneer Margaret Sanger helped finance its development .
 In 1965 a Supreme Court decision in Griswold Connecticut struck down a law that had prohibited contraceptive use even by married couples . The decision was the result of a decision that struck down the law in 1965 .
 By 1973 the United States Supreme Court’s narrow decision in Roe Wade legalized abortion in the first three months of pregnancy . By 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court's narrow decision legalized abortion .
 Anti-abortion protests have tended to increase restrictions and have sometimes made safe, legal abortion unavailable, especially to the poor and rural . In the U.S., Canada, and elsewhere, anti-abortion protest has tended to make safe abortion unavailable .
 Nations emerging from communism, including Russia, have tended to tighten formerly liberal abortion and contraception alternatives . Russia, where abortion was freely allowed after 1955, has tightened restrictions since then .
 Middle-class women have struggled with demanding full-time jobs paired with fulltime home responsibilities . European nations have traditionally offered generous maternity and childcare benefits .
 Women who have surged into law, medicine, science, and other nontraditional jobs have experienced pay gaps, sexual harassment, and the so-called glass ceiling, which is said to limit women’s ultimate success . However, women who have surge into law and medicine have experienced
 By the early 21st century, especially among the Second Wave’s second and third generations, a ‘mommy track’ has emerged as at least a temporary alternative to an unfulfilling job .
 Critics point out that the mommy track offers little help or economic advancement to working-class mothers . Critics say it offers little assistance or advancement to those in need .
 Recently Third-Wave feminists have been identified, although the work of the Second Wave is by no means complete . Second-wave feminists assert that the work on the Second wave is not complete .
 Women who were born in the 1960s-1970s felt that their personal experience set them apart from older leaders of the feminist movement . Women born in those years felt that they were different from older women leaders .
 Third-Wave feminists of this period strove to form their own distinct identity as feminists . They sought to correct perceived inadequacies and contradictions of their predecessors .
 Hazel Carby, a representative of the Third Wave of feminism, identified a problem with the Second Wave . She said that the problem was with the 'Second Wave' of feminism .
 She believed that the Second Wave overlooked the experiences of black women by emphasizing experiences of patriarchy and oppression endured by white women . The Second Wave emphasized white women's experiences, she said .
 She concluded that theories of patriarchal oppression studied in the 1970s and early 1980s overlooked the negative influences that slavery, colonialism, and imperialism had on women, and sought to raise awareness about these issues .
 Feminists argue that men should not be leaders within feminist organizations because they have been conditioned to seek leadership aggressively . Feminists say men are conditioned to be aggressive in order to be leaders .
 Those critical of accepting men in the movement believe that women have been socialized to defer to men, which may hinder their asserting their own leadership when working alongside men .
 Some feminists believe men should be accepted within the movement because the virtue of equality should serve to promote inclusion and acceptance . Even so, some feminists say men should not be excluded from the movement .
 The feminist movement has been influenced by and has shaped the study of culture . It has influenced and influenced the study into culture .
 Since the late 1970s feminist cultural studies have expanded the study of women and established gender as an important criteria of analysis within broader cultural studies . Since the 1970s, the study has been expanded to include women in cultural studies.
 Feminist cultural studies serve to answer questions about the influences of present cultural systems and their oppression of women . What can be done to combat patriarchy and oppression?
 Feminist cultural scholars observe the everyday lives of women . They learn about their daily experience, how they cope with it, and how they are challenged by systems of oppression .
 All cultural objects, writings, and practices constitute the subject of cultural studies . The subjects of feminist cultural studies are likewise as diverse as those of the subject .
 Areas that are studied within feminist cultural studies include advertising, art, being a housewife, class, colonialism, materialism, movies, pornography, postcolonialism, shopping, soap operas, and youth subcultures .
 In the 1980s cultural feminists used the mass media in their analysis of culture . Cultural feminists used mass media to analyze culture in their analyses .
 Feminist cultural scholars believe that an analysis of mass media gives insight into the dynamics of society and politics . They believe that a critical analysis of the media provides insight into society's dynamics .
 Feminists who study the influence of mass media on culture seek answers to the questions of how women may relate to and be affected by the mass media . They ask how oppressive patriarchal ideologies may be throughout all forms of media .
 Studies argue that women who engage in watching television dramas and reading romance novels actively judge implicit patriarchal messages found within them .
 After the late 1980s, the feminist movement was influenced by post-structuralism . The feminist movement is influenced by this type of ideology .
 Post-structuralist feminists seek to understand and value feminine subjectivity and the implications of the power of written discourse for women . Post-feminist feminists are concerned with the power women have in writing .
 Some writings argue that the term and meaning of woman itself results from male-dominated discourse . Some writings say that the meaning of the word itself is that of woman is male dominated .
 Through uncritical use of the word, it loses its value in trying to shape and transform feminist thinking . The word 'feminist' is lost its value when it is used uncritically .
 These writings have caused feminists to insist that feminist cultural studies have lost track of the real material lives of women . Feminist cultural studies are concerned about women's material lives .
 English-speaking feminists have advocated using nonsexist language, such as Ms. instead of Mrs. or Miss and berstory .
 Many feminists advocate using gender-inclusive language such as humanity in place of mankind or he or she or just she instead of he when the gender of a subject is unknown .
 Many non-English languages do not have gendered pronouns and thus do not require gender-inclusive language . Non-English language does not require gendered language to use .
 The increasing popularity of using English in the world gives feminists reason to promote gender inclusivity in language . The increasing number of people using English is increasing .
 The influence of feminism in the late-20th century created distinctive ways of developing ethics . The impact of feminism has created distinctive ethics in the U.S.
 Feminist ethics attempt to investigate and rethink traditional Western ethics that do not take into account the moral experiences of women, in order to form a critique of traditional ethical theories formed by a male-dominated culture .
 The aim of the different forms of feminist ethics possesses a liberating aspect, based on moral theory founded in nonsexist methodology . The aim is to create a non-sexist society based on non-sexualist methodology, says author .
 Late 20th-century feminist thought has also influenced the movement toward equality in Islamic countries . Feminist thought has been influential in the development of equality in Islam .
 Islamic feminists seek full equality of men and women in both the public and personal sphere . Grounded in Islamic thought, Islamic feminists want full equality in the public sphere . Islamic feminism is rooted in the Islamic teachings of Islam .
 Among the issues addressed are the female dress code in Muslim society, sexuality, and the legal discrimination against women . The author also addresses the issue of sexuality and legal discrimination .
 A variety of women-centered approaches to feminist ethics have been developed, including feminine, lesbian, maternal, political, and theological . Women-centered ethics have a variety of approaches to feminism .
 These approaches seek to provide guidelines for undermining the systematic subordination of women . These approaches aim to undermine the systematic subservience of women in the workplace .
 The different forms of feminism that exist worldwide in the late-20th and early-21st centuries are manifold . The different ways of feminism exist in the world today are manifold.
 They include African-American, Amazon, anarcha-feminism, black, feminist, gender, egalitarian, equity, existentialist, French, gender . They include material, non-Western, postcolonial, postmodern, pro-sex, psychoanalytic, queer theory,
 Carlos Fonseca Amador was the intellectual guiding light of the Sandinista National Liberation Front . He died in battle in 1976 . He was one of the most influential figures in modern Nicaraguan history .
 Carlos Alberto Fonseca was born out of wedlock in Matagalpa, Nicaragua, in 1936 . He was tall, slender, severely nearsighted, and self-abnegating .
 His biological father, Fausto Amador Aleman, was one of the region’s wealthiest and most prominent coffee growers and businessmen . Aleman was born into a coffee grower and businessman .
 Carlos entered Matagalpa’s only public secondary school at age 14 . He is the only one among five maternal siblings to go beyond primary school . Carlos was born in the abject poverty characteristic of the working class .
 In the same year he copublished a cultural journal, Segovia, in which he developed many of the themes that would later play a major role in his political thought . The journal was published in 1939, when he published many of his themes .
 He was honored for finishing all five years as first in his class . Graduating from high school in 1955, he was honored .
 Fonseca was jailed for seven weeks by the Somoza regime in 1956 . Arrested following the assassination of Anastasio Somoze’s father in September 1956 . He was jailed by the regime of then-President Luis SomoZA .
 In 1957 he embarked on a PSN-sponsored trip to Moscow as the Nicaraguan delegate to the Sixth World Congress of Students and Youth for Peace and Friendship . In 1957, he was a delegate to a World Youth Congress in Moscow .
 With the triumph of the Cuban revolution in January 1959, he traveled to Cuba, along with many other Nicaraguan dissidents . With many other dissidents, he was able to travel to Cuba with many others .
 He joined a newly formed guerrilla group training in Honduras . From there he trained in Honduras he joined a new guerrilla group .
 On June 24, 1959, he was severely wounded in a firefight with the Honduran military and Nicaraguan National Guard at El Chapparal .
 He was determined to forge an independent revolutionary movement modeled on Fidel Castro’s 26th of July Movement . He returned to Cuba and began a serious study of Nicaraguan rebel leader Augusto C Sandino .
 In 1961-62 Fonseca and several comrades formed the FSLN, though the idea of using Sandino’s name and image was the original idea . The idea to use Sandino's image and name was Fon Seca's . FonSeca and
 He interpreted Sandino as a kind of “path” that, through the FSLN vanguard, would combine Marxist theories of class struggle with Nicaragua’s history and culture of popular resistance .
 For the next 15 years Fonseca guided the group through many hardships and phases . Organizing relentlessly and writing prolifically, he guided them to success . The group is now in the midst of a worldwide tour .
 He was killed in a National Guard ambush on November 7, 1976, in the mountains northeast of Matagalpa . Nearly three years before FSLN overthrew Somoza, he died .
 From Boyhood to Guerrilla: A Personal Narrative of Nicaragua’s Struggle for Liberation . The book will be published by John Sutter .
 Gerald Ford was the president of the United States from 1974 to 1977 . He was followed by a vice presidency of about eight months . Ford was a vice president for eight months before becoming president .
 He is perhaps best known as the successor to disgraced president Richard Nixon, whom he pardoned, and as the American president during the fall of Saigon .
 Ford was elected to the House of Representatives in 1948 on an internationalist platform that meshed well with the recent creation of the United Nations . Ford was a college football player, Yale Law School graduate, and navy officer during World War II .
 He served as a representative for 24 years, proposing no major legislation and focusing on negotiating between and supporting the legislation of others .
 As a member of the Warren Commission, he altered the Commission’s findings to support the single bullet theory . He altered the findings to misreport the location of one of Kennedy's wounds in order to support that theory . That was not revealed until 1997 .
 In 1973, while Ford was House minority leader, Nixon’s vice president Spiro Agnew resigned in the middle of the Watergate scandal . Agnew was the vice president of the United States from 1973 to 1973 . Ford was the House majority leader in 1973 .
 The Speaker of the House and other congressional leaders made it clear to Nixon that they would accept only the mild, moderate Ford as Agnew’s replacement . Agnew's successor was Ford, the mildest, moderate Republican .
 He was confirmed at the end of the year and became president when Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974 . He became president in August 1974 .
 One month later, Ford pardoned Nixon preemptively for any crimes committed against the nation during his presidency . Nixon pardoned him preemptively . One month after his pardoning Nixon, President Richard Nixon was pardoned .
 Some accused him of pardoning Nixon in exchange for the resignation that made him president . Others thought it was simply terrible judgment .
 Many agreed that it discouraged the pursuit of charges against Nixon, hampering the Watergate investigation . Ford’s supporters have pointed to a 1915 Supreme Court decision that established that for the accused to accept a pardon, he must President Gerald Ford and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger converse on the
 Nixon pardoned Nixon found himself guilty in the process of pardoning him . The pardoning Nixon found him guilty of the crime .
 In September 1975 two assassination attempts were made on Ford, the first by Lynette "Squeaky" Fromme, a troubled follower of Charles Manson . Fromme was a troubled young follower of Manson .
 Secret Service agent Larry Buendorf managed to block the hammer of Fromme’s handgun with his thumb, preventing her from firing . Fromme was shot in the head by Fromme, police say .
 Later in the month, 45-year-old bookkeeper Sara Jane Moore shot at Ford during his visit to San Francisco . Moore failed because of the intervention of bystander Billy Sipple, a former marine and Vietnam veteran who came out of the closet .
 Ford was upfront about the odd start to his presidency . Ford referred to himself as an ‘unelected” president . Ford said he was an "unelected" president .
 Rockefeller’s replacement when Ford ran in the 1976 election was Bob Dole . Dole would later be known for his own run of failed presidential campaigns . Rockefeller's replacement was Dole, who would later run for president .
 After narrowly beating Ronald Reagan for the Republican nomination, Ford lost the election to Jimmy Carter . Ford narrowly defeated Ronald Reagan in the 1980s .
 In 1980 he rejected Reagan’s offer to make him his running mate when Reagan refused to consider a “copresidency” in which Ford would be increased beyond ordinary vice presidential duties . In 1980 Ford turned down Reagan's offer to be his presidential running mate .
 As an ex-president, he spoke in favor of election reform and gay rights . He condemned the war in Iraq and condemned the Iraq invasion .
 He died the day after Christmas, 2006, at the age of 93—the longest-lived American president . He died that day at 93 .
 It was the catalyst for student protest in the U.S. and in the world during the 1960s-1970s . The University of California was the birthplace of the first African-American protest movement .
 The movement began as a protest by students, teaching assistants, and faculty against the university’s ban on political activities . The movement sought to establish the right to state political views on campus .
 The size of the incoming freshman class at Berkeley grew by 37 percent between 1963-64 . Berkeley's freshman class grew 37 percent in the same period .
 Humanities and social majors had risen from 36 to 50 percent in the previous decade . Humanities, social majors rose from 36-50 percent in previous decade to 50% .
 The student left wing began emerging in the late 1950s as the anticommunist fervor of the McCarthy era eased eased . Student left wing emerged as the anti-war era eased .
 Some of its leaders were the children of liberal and radical professionals . Some of their leaders were children of liberals and radicals .
 The student party at Berkeley, SLATE, wanted to end nuclear testing, capital punishment, and the cold war . SLATE wanted the end of nuclear testing and capital punishment .
 In 1957 it began running slates of candidates in student elections, and it included civil rights as one of its issues . In 1957, the student body began running a slate of candidates for elections .
 Berkeley students in 1960 protested the San Francisco hearings of the House Un-American Activities Committee . The hearings were the most blatant symbol of the 1950s suppression of civil liberties .
 The HUAC produced a film, Operation Abolition, that attempted to portray the protesters as subversives, but the movie backfired . The movie was so poorly done that it supported the liberal case against the committee .
 Mario Savio, the son of a Roman Catholic machinist, entered this climate . Savio was born in New York City, New Jersey, in 1961 . He says Savio is "a good guy"
 Savio spent the 1964 summer teaching at a freedom school in McComb, Mississippi . Savio was a teacher at the school during the summer .
 Berkeley's Bancroft strip of Telegraph Avenue was off limits for handing out of pamphlets, petitions, and recruitment . Berkeley had been the scene of demonstrations by students against local businesses that discriminated .
 The conservative regents pressed the administration into closing the campus and adjacent areas to recruiting and agitation . The campus was closed to recruiting, agitation and agitation, the regents said .
 SLATE, anti-HUAC groups, civil rights activists, and ordinary students— even some conservative ones—protested the closure . SLATE and other groups protested the closure of the campus .
 On September 29, they set up tables on the Bancroft strip and refused an order to leave . They refused to leave, refusing to leave the strip .
 Administrators added the three leaders of the march to the five and suspended all eight . Administrators have suspended the five leaders and all eight suspended from school .
 The next day, students received handbills declaring that a fight for speech was under way . Students were told that the next day they would have to defend their speech .
 Student tables in front of Sproul Hall included representatives from the Congress of Racial Equality, the Du Bois Club, the Students for a Democratic Society and half a dozen others .
 When asked to identify himself, Jack Weinberg at the CORE table refused . When asked for identification he refused to answer .
 When campus police attempted to arrest Weinberg, Weinberg went limp in the classic civil disobedience manner . Weinberg was arrested after refusing to comply with the arrest order .
 For 32 hours the police car containing Weinberg and the police was unable to move . Weinberg was arrested and charged with obstructing traffic control . The police were unable to remove Weinberg from the car .
 Weinberg was released, the academic senate committee examined the question of suspensions, and the big issue of appropriate political behavior on campus was given to a faculty-studentadministrator committee .
 The FSM wanted an absolute First Amendment freedom of political activity . The FSB wanted to protect the First Amendment from political activity.
 Savio denounced it as prior restraint when a compromise was announced by a Senate committee . Savio: "When the senate committee announced a compromise it was prior restraint" Savio called it prior restraint. Savio said it was a compromise .
 On November 9 Savio and his allies put up the tables even though the administration opposed them . Savio: "I'm not afraid to put up my tables. I'm scared to put it up" Savio says he's not afraid of the tables .
 The administration did nothing, leading many undergraduates to conclude that the administration was picking and choosing, taking on the FSM because it was weak . Many undergraduates believe the administration picked and choosing .
 Savio and Art Goldberg were to be on suspension for six weeks . Six of the eight were reinstated, but Savio was to be put on six-week suspension . The suspension was retroactive to the incident more than six weeks ago .
 On December 2, in another protest of university action against the FSM, graduate students went on strike . Graduate students are protesting against the university's actions .
 Four to five thousand heard Savio speak against the grinding of the machine . 1,000 to 1,500 students occupied the administration building . Savio spoke about the need to resist .
 The strikers were well organized, and with the support of faculty sympathizers turned out thousands of flyers . The strikers are well organized .
 When the meeting ended, Savio attempted to speak, but two campus guards dragged him from the stage . Savio tried to speak after the meeting, but was taken away by the campus guards .
 The crowd demanded that Savio be allowed to speak; he announced a rally at Sproul Plaza . Savio announced that a rally was planned for Sproun Plaza .
 The academic senate meeting on the following day was the largest in memory . Academic senate meeting was the biggest in memory for the university . Of course, the academic senate met with the largest number of students ever .
 Several thousand students outside heard the proceedings over loudspeakers . The proceedings were carried out in front of students .
 The senate’s academic freedom committee endorsed all FSM demands . The administration only has the power to prevent physical disruption .
 On December 18 the regents refused to accept the faculty committee’s recommendations . The regents said they would not accept the recommendations . On Dec. 18, regents decided to reject faculty committee recommendations .
 The regents reinstated the rights of students to set up tables on campus, especially in Sproul Plaza, and to collect money through donations . Students were also allowed to collect donations through donations from donations .
 Protests and marches for religious, social, and political causes were once again permitted . Protests were allowed to take place in the U.S.
 The Berkeley Free Speech Movement was the prototype of the new campus liberalism . It was the first movement of its kind in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Traditional controls and curricula were gone, and students enjoyed the free exchange of ideas and freedom in general . Traditional controls were gone and students were able to learn from the lessons .
 The Berkeley FSM was but the first round in the generational clash of the 1960s-1970s . The first round of the generation clash was in the 1960-70s .
 Students were taught the tactics of the Civil Rights movement, tools they would use in protesting the war in Vietnam . Students would use the tools to protest the war .
 Veterans of the 1960s protests would turn into leaders of the women’s rights movement, and both conservatism and liberalism would change . Both conservatives and liberals would change in the coming decades .
 Ronald Reagan would emerge from political obscurity on the issue of opposition to all that the FSM represented . Ronald Reagan emerged from obscurity to emerge from opposition to FSM . The FSM was a major source of support for the Reagan administration .
 Eduardo Mondlane, its first president, settled its headquarters in 1963 outside of Mozambique in Dar es Salaam .
 His group was founded on the ideals of liberation from Portugal’s colonial power . His group is based in Portugal's former colonial capital .
 The war waged against the Portuguese, concurrent with the anticolonial wars in Angola and Guinea-Bissau, drew heavy economic losses for Portugal . Portugal suffered heavy losses in the war . The war was the first of its kind and lasted for more than a decade .
 The resulting depression in Portugal contributed to the end of fascism in the home country and aided the victory of FRELIMO over the colonial forces . Portugal's depression contributed to end of the fascism in Portugal .
 Portugal and FRELIMO negotiated Mozambique’s independence in 1975 . FrelIMO’�s victory in 1975 also delivered a completely bankrupt nation .
 FRELIMO established a one-party state based on Marxist principles, with Samora Machel as the first president of the newly independent nation . Frelimo established a Marxist-inspired one- party state .
 Its Marxist and communist roots provided Mozambique with diplomatic and some military support from Cuba and the Soviet Union . Its Marxist roots provided some of the country's military support .
 The new FRELIMO government went on to fight a civil war with RENAMO—a South Africanand Rhodesian-sponsored political faction . The new government was formed in 1953 after the war .
 This conflict did not see a resolution until the Rome General Peace Accords were signed in 1992 . This conflict was the first to see an agreement between the two sides .
 Mozambique, as inherited by FRELIMO, was rife with poverty and illiteracy . Frelimo's government inherited the country from FrelIMO and inherited poverty, illiteracy.
 The Portuguese colonists had prohibited elementary education to the indigenous population . Upon fleeing the Portuguese dug up roadways, destroyed electrical and plumbing infrastructure, killed livestock, smashed equipment, and left the national treasury empty .
 The price of this solidarity was $600 million in lost Rhodesian revenue and punitive sanctions imposed by apartheid South Africa on independent Mozambique . South Africa imposed the sanctions and lost millions in revenue .
 Rhodesia, backed by South Africa, waged war against Mozambique and FRELIMO . Rhodesia waged war with FRELimo with increasingly harsh raids into the central provinces . Frelimo was defeated by Rhodesia and Rhodesia .
 FRELIMO, with overwhelming popular support, was able to cultivate outstanding economic growth in Mozambique by 1979 . Despite the continuation of war, Frelimo was still able to grow the country's economy .
 FRELIMO’s healthcare policies were soon lauded worldwide as an ideal for developing nations . Mass literacy campaigns quickly nullified centuries of deprivation . Frelimo's healthcare policies are now lauded worldwide .
 With Machel’s death in 1986, Joaquim Chissano began to lead both FRELIMO and Mozambique .
 Despite his education in the communist bloc countries, Chissano was not a hard-line Marxist . He called for democratic, multiparty elections in 1994 that put an end to single-party rule . Despite being educated in communist blocs, he called for democracy in 1994 .
 Chissano stepped down as leader of FRELIMO and Mozambique in 2005 . Armando Emilio Guebuza took over as leader in 2005, and became president of FrelIMO in 2006 .
 The State against the Peasantry: Rural Struggles in Colonial and Post-Colonial Mozambique . Bowen, Merle L. Bowen, M. M. Bowen .
 Colombian politician and reformer Jorge Eliecer Gaitan was assassinated on April 9, 1948 . His death precipitated an explosion of popular outrage in Bogota, Colombia .
 His rise to prominence rested on his keen political skills, gifted oratory, populist message, and ability to make that message resonate among ordinary people . His rise was based on his ability to connect ordinary people, especially workers and the poor .
 His discourse was filled with references to “the people,” a source of moral good, in contradistinction to ‘the oligarchy” The oligarchy was a force of evil, corruption, and oppression, he said .
 He advocated economic justice and reconfiguring the nation's political life . Denounced poverty, inequality, exploitation, and oppression .
 In 1940 he was named minister of education, and from 1943 to 1944 served as labor minister . In 1944 he was labor minister and education minister . He also served as education minister and labor minister between 1940 and 1944 .
 His assassin, Juan Roa Sierra, was killed by rioters moments after Gaitan’s death . The assassin was killed moments after the assassination .
 Gaitan’s daughter, Gloria, implicated the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency and its Operation Pantomime . Gloria, 11 years old at the time of her father's death, later implicated the CIA in her death .
 No definitive evidence has surfaced to prove the allegation . The allegation is consistent with the broader U.S. cold war effort to stem populist leftist movements in Latin America .
 The assassination took place during the Ninth Pan-American Conference in Bogota, and its Latin American Youth Conference, attended by Gaitan supporter Lidel Castro of Cuba .
 She was a member of the Indian National Congress, a nationalist organization established during British rule in 1885 . She was the leader of an organization established by British rule of India .
 In the 1930s Gandhi began the Vanara Sena, a movement that consisted of young people who participated in marches and protests to support the independence movement . Young people also distributed nationalist propaganda and illegal materials .
 Shortly after their marriage she and Feroze joined Mohandas Gandhi’s nonviolent action against the British, which landed them in jail . She and her husband were jailed for their nonviolent actions against British .
 During India’s first election, Gandhi worked as campaign manager for both her father and her husband . Gandhi worked for both father and husband during the first election .
 Nehru won the election and became the first prime minister of India . Feroze won a seat in Parliament . Nehru was the first Indian prime minister to win the election .
 Friction between Nehru and Feroze Gandhi caused the couple’s official separation . Nehru was the prime minister of India . Gandhi was the president of the Indian Republic .
 Feroze Gandhi suffered a heart attack in 1957 and after a brief reconciliation with Indira and their two sons, died in 1960 . Indira died in 1961 after a reconciliation with her husband .
 After her father’s death in 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri appointed her minister for information and broadcasting in his cabinet . Her father died in 1964 .
 In this position she became a very popular figure, as she traveled to many non-Hindi-speaking regions and calmed rising violence against the imposing of Hindi as India’s national language .
 She refused to leave volatile border regions when she was vacationing when the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 broke out . She also gained popularity when she refused to move during the war .
 After Prime Minister Shastri died, Gandhi won the election and become the third prime minister . Gandhi won election and became the third Prime Minister of India .
 She immediately began successful programs to aid farmers in the production of staple foods . She immediately started successful programs that helped farmers produce staple food .
 Indira Gandhi was the third prime minister of India following independence and the first woman to hold the office . Indira was the leader of India's first cabinet minister .
 East Pakistan declared independence from Pakistan in 1971 . In 1971 she met her first major crisis when East Pakistan split from Pakistan .
 India’s intervention led to the defeat of Pakistani forces and independence for Bangladesh . India intervened in the fight for independence from Pakistan .
 India detonated a nuclear device and joined the nuclear club in 1974 under her leadership . India detonated the nuclear device in 1974 . It is the first country to have a nuclear weapon in the nuclear arsenal .
 Her shifting of power away from individual states to the central government was one reason for her shift . One reason was that she shifted the power of individual states away from the individual states .
 Her sentence was removal from office and prohibition from running in elections for six years, which she appealed . She appealed, thus remaining in office until the appeal could be heard . She was removed from office .
 She then countered the advice of President Fakhuruddin Ali Ahmed to declare a state of emergency . The prime minister and her government have unchecked power, she said .
 On June 26, 1975, the emergency proclamation was ratified by Parliament . Parliament ratified the proclamation .
 The emergency ended in 1977, possibly because she believed in her popularity . The emergency in 1977 ended because of her popularity.
 Her measures in imposing and leading the government during the emergency split the Congress with an offshoot wing called Congress-I supporting her . The Congress split over her measures . Her measures led to a split in Congress .
 The Janata government immediately sought to prosecute the former prime minister for her illegal acts . The former Prime Minister was accused of defying India's constitution and defying the law .
 Congress-I won a landslide victory in 1980 elections . It reviewed, and the president called for, new elections .
 Gandhi’s final term as prime minister had to deal with challenges from the Sikh Akal Takht extremist movement . The Sikh extremist movement sought autonomy for Punjab, a state with a Sikh majority . Gandhi was prime minister during his final term .
 Gandhi countered by ordering the Indian army to raid the Golden Temple in Amritsar . The Golden Temple is a site holy to Sikhism . Gandhi responded by ordering a raid on the temple, a holy site in the holy city .
 After finishing high school in India, Rajiv went to England for further education . Rajiv, like most children of prominent Indian families, went to the UK for further studies .
 At Cambridge Rajiv met Sonia Maino, an Italian student, and despite opposition from her family she moved to India and the two were married in 1968 . Despite opposition from the family, the two are married in India .
 After the death of his brother, Sanjay, Rajiv was persuaded to enter politics by his mother . Rajiv's mother persuaded him to become a politician after his brother died .
 He was viewed as merely a successor of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty . He was criticized for his lack of experience .
 In 1981, Rajiv won the Parliament seat vacated by his brother and became a top adviser to Indira Gandhi . Rajiv became an adviser to the former Prime Minister and later won a parliamentary seat .
 After Indira Gandhi’s assassination in 1984, President Zail Singh dissolved Parliament, and new elections were held . After the assassination, President Singh dissolved the parliament in 1984 . President Singh later dissolved Parliament .
 Rajiv began changing foreign policy to strengthen relations with the U.S. and distance India from the Soviet Union . Rajiv changed foreign policy after taking office .
 He also began to reform governmental quotas, tariffs, taxes, and educational spending policies, extending the opportunity to receive an education to lower-class citizens .
 Conflict broke out between Indian forces and rebels over disarmament . After a treaty was signed, conflict broke out with the Indian forces .
 Many Indian soldiers were killed, forcing Rajiv to withdraw his forces . Rajiv's forces were forced to withdraw after the deaths .
 Rajiv's image was further tarnished by a scandal involving foreign defense contracts that paid highranking Indian officials . Rajiv’s image has been tarnished .
 On May 21, 1991, he was assassinated by a suicide bomber from Sri Lanka opposed to his interventions in her country, while he was campaigning for reelection .
 Sonia, his widow, urged to enter politics and assume the seat vacated by her husband . Sonia, Sonia, was urged to become a politician and assume her husband's seat in the Senate . Sonia's husband died in 2009 at the age of 56 .
 She refused and remained outside of the political arena until shortly before the 1998 elections . She refused to become a politician until after the 1998 election .
 She was unanimously elected as the new prime minister of India but declined due to the controversy surrounding her foreign birth . She declined to become the prime minister due to her birth in India .
 She appointed former economist Manmohan Singh, the former finance minister, as the first Sikh prime minister of India . She appointed him as the new prime minister .
 They fell from power within a month of his death, were tried for high crimes in 1980, and were convicted . Instead of resigning from power, they were convicted of high crimes and jailed .
 Mao became Mao's secretary, then his wife, over the objection of his colleagues . Mao's colleagues reputedly made him promise to keep her out of politics for at least 20 years . She became Mao’s secretary and wife over the objections of colleagues .
 Mao promoted her to great prominence in 1966 to help him recapture power . Mao had been sidelined from running the party since 1960 as a result of the failed Great Leap Forward . Mao was re-promoted to power in 1966 after Mao's defeat in 1960 .
 Mao unleashed the Cultural Revolution and empowered the youthful Red Guards to inflict a reign of terror . Mao's enemies eliminated Mao’s enemies . Together they unleashed the cultural revolution and unleashed the youth Red Guards . The Red Guards were empowered to inflict terror on Mao's opponents .
 Jiang Qing took control of the media and banned all entertainment except for the eight ‘model operas’ that she authorized . Jiang Qing also banned entertainment in China except for eight “model operaas” operas she authorized.
 Mao appointed Hua Guofeng , minister of public security and acting premier, to be his successor . Mao died in September 1976, but Hua was appointed by Mao before his death in 1976 .
 Jiang then planned to mount a coup and assassinate the senior party leaders with the aid of her lieutenants and the militia, which was loyal to them . Jiang planned to kill the senior leaders in a coup, with the help of the militia .
 Hua had the support of the senior party and military leaders . But they were preempted by Hua, who had the backing of senior party leaders .
 Zhang, Wang, and Yao fell into the trap and were arrested as they arrived for the meeting . Jiang was captured while still in bed . Zhang was captured as he slept in his bed .
 It took four years before the Gang of Four was brought to trial for crimes they had committed against the state and people . Nevertheless it took . four years to bring to trial because of the difficulty of assessing Mao’s role in what transpired during the Cultural Revolution .
 In November 1980 a special court charged them with framing and persecuting party and government leaders, torturing and killing more than 34,750 people . The court also accused them of plotting an armed uprising in Shanghai after Mao’s death .
 Jiang remained defiant, claiming that she had acted as Mao’s dog, doing his bidding . Although the others admitted guilt, she remained defiant . She claimed that she was Mao's dog and that she acted as his dog .
 Jiang and Zhang were sentenced to death sentences with a two-year suspended execution . The trial lasted two months and resulted in the death sentences . Jiang was sentenced to the death penalty with a suspended execution of Zhang .
 His determination to defend France’s independence and freedom of action earned him both plaudits and criticism . French President Nicolas Sarkozy was a strong advocate for French independence .
 His social and cultural conservatism frustrated French youths of the late 1960s . His supporters appreciated his respect for tradition, although his social conservatism frustrated youths .
 De Gaulle received a solid, humanist education at Catholic-run schools . He was educated at Catholic schools in France .
 De Gaulle entered the military academy of Saint-Cyr in 1908 . Having decided not to continue in his father’s footsteps, he entered the academy aged 18 .
 He joined the infantry because it would be exposed to direct fire in wartime . The soldier joined the army because he wanted to protect himself from direct fire .
 Following graduation from Saint-Cyr in 1912, de Gaulle chose to join Petain’s 33rd Infantry Regiment from Arras . De Gaulle was a member of the Petain's 33rd Regiment .
 Lieutenant de Gaulle received several wounds during World War I, though he returned to combat as soon as he recovered from them . He was wounded in World War One .
 He received a third, nearly fatal wound during the battle of Verdun in 1916 . He became a colonel before he received a second, almost fatal wound in the battle .
 After armistice he briefly returned to France before being posted to Poland . He briefly returned briefly to France but was later posted to France .
 He spent the years after his 1921 marriage to Yvonne Vendroux in France . He spent most of the time in France during his marriage to France .
 In 1931 he joined the general secretariat of National Defense in Paris, where he became involved in politics for the first time . In 1931, he became a member of the General Council of Defense .
 He commenced writing and theorizing about warfare during the interwar period . He also commenced writing about warfare .
 He published several articles that attracted attention due to his unorthodox claims . de Gaulle recommended that commanders adapt to the particular features of their situation .
 In a series of lectures at the Ecole Superieure de Guerre, under Petain, he considered possible reforms of the military .
 De Gaulle advocated the creation of a corps that combined firepower and mobility in the interest of rapid, daring offensives . The corps was created by the French President of France in 1944 .
 After France declared war against Germany in September 1939, de Gaulle became commander of the 5th Army . De Gaulle commanded the French Army in the Second World War .
 After the French troops had been pushed back and many evacuated from Dunkirk, de Gaulle left for London with his aide-de-camp Geoffroy de Courcel .
 He expected that the French government would continue the war from abroad, he said . He said he expected that France would continue to do so .
 In response to Petain’s announcement of armistice with Germany, General de Gaulle made his first appeal for continued resistance . De Gaulle appealed to the French government to continue resistance to Germany .
 The next day, however, the press promulgated de Gaulle’s call to arms . Relatively few in France heard the initial message; the next day .
 In succeeding days, de Gaulle repeated his rejection of the armistice and of Petain’s government . De Gaulle continued to reject Petain's government .
 De Gaulle organized the Free French Forces and, with the help of French jurist Rene Cassin, ensured that they would retain their national identity and enjoy a special status when fighting .
 Free French soldiers would assist the Allies during the campaigns in North Africa, Italy, and France . The Free French troops would help the Allied forces in the Middle East and Italy .
 De Gaulle established a series of committees designed to give structure to the Free French . The committees were meant to help give structure of the French government .
 The French National Committee, created in September 1941, began as the focal point for the government in exile . The committee was created as a focal point of the French government .
 de Gaulle organized the French Committee for National Liberation, on June 3,1943 .
 He helped coordinate the resistance within France by deputizing Jean Moulin to lead the National Council for the Resistance . He was deputized by Moulin, who later led the French Resistance .
 De Gaulle disagreed with the new Constituent Assembly, chosen through elections held in October 1945, about the form of the new French state . He resigned on January 20, 1946 .
 On April 14, 1947, de Gaulle launched the Rassemblement du Peuple Francis . It was intended as a “gathering’ of loyal Frenchmen who opposed the weak executive and sweeping social legislation .
 RPF enjoyed local electoral success but had little effect on national politics given their small numbers in the National Assembly . The RPF had little influence in national politics due to its small numbers .
 Between 1955 and 1958 de Gaulle relaxed at his estate at Colombey-les-Deux-Eglises . De Gaulle spent the time at the estate between 1953 and 1958 .
 He remained attuned to current events, especially to the crisis of the Fourth Republic as it confronted the independence movement in Algeria that began with a November 1, 1954, insurrection .
 Some influential people called for de Gaulle to take control as a means of preventing civil war . De Gaulle took control of the country in order to prevent civil war in the 1930s .
 On May 19,1958, de Gaulle expressed his willingness to lead the republic, though he had no intention of staging a coup . De Gaulle: "I'm not going to stage a coup"
 On May 29 then-president Rene Coty called upon de Gaulle to form a government . De Gaulle's government was formed on May 29, 1961 .
 The National Assembly accepted his presidency on June 1 . He received the power to rule by decree for a six-month period and introduce constitutional reforms . He is expected to rule for six months .
 The constitution was approved on September 29, 1958, brought the Fifth Republic into existence . It provided for a strong executive and an influential parliament .
 De Gaulle assumed the powers given to the president under the new constitution on January 8, 1959 . He received a large plurality in presidential elections and assumed the presidency .
 He traveled to Algeria numerous times, finally concluding that France had to give the colony its independence . He concluded that France must give Algeria independence .
 Negotiations proved difficult, given multiple factions in Algeria and the failed putsch staged by French generals in April 1961 .
 The Evian Accords were signed on March 22, 1962, and accepted by the French and Algerians through referenda . After almost a year of talks the Evian Accords were signed in 1962 . The French and the Algerians accepted the Accords through a referendum .
 De Gaulle made important contributions to the formation of a united Europe, though he never accepted the need for France to surrender any sovereignty in the process of building the European Union .
 He adhered to the requirements instituted by the Treaty of Rome, signed just prior to his arrival in office . He initiated financial reforms and by reducing customs duties and tariffs imposed on trade .
 De Gaulle pursued cordial relations with Germany . German chancellor Konrad Adenauer and de Gaulle signed the Elysee Treaty in 1965 .
 De Gaulle directed his attention to ensuring French national independence during the cold war . He also directed his efforts to ensure French independence during cold war.
 The head of the Free French during World War II, Charles de Gaulle led France through the postwar period . Although always opposed to communism and a sup sup sup, he believed it important for France to retain a 'free hand' in the world .
 In his quest to preserve France’s international stature de Gaulle continued the nuclear program started after World War II . France exploded its first atomic bomb in the Sahara in February 1960 .
 De Gaulle gradually pulled France out of the NATO military command in 1966 . The country remained part of the alliance even after 1966 .
 De Gaulle showed his determination to maintain an autonomous foreign policy by recognizing the People’s Republic of China in 1964 .
 He criticized the United States war in Vietnam during a 1966 speech in Cambodia . He also criticized the U.S. war in Cambodia during a speech .
 He justified his encouragement of Quebecois independence activists as being in line with his lifelong opposition to imperialism and his belief in the right to national self-determination . He said he supported the Quebecois movement as being a lifelong opposition .
 He developed amicable relations with the Soviet Union and its Eastern European satellite states . On the other hand, he had diplomatic relations with Russia .
 Despite hesitations and almost no campaigning, de Gaulle won reelection to the presidency over Franqois Mitterrand in 1965 .
 Many citizens chafed at the lack of social and cultural modernization of the country . President George W. Bush's tenure was generally economic prosperity .
 The events of May 1968, when students and labor union members engaged in protests and strikes, posed a problem for de Gaulle . De Gaulle: Students and labor unions engaged in strikes and strikes .
 He disappeared from France by helicopter on May 29 . Much to the public’s consternation, he disappeared by helicopter .
 After returning from an evening in Baden Baden, he gave a radio address in which he stressed the need to remain intransigent about the necessity of public order .
 The legislative campaigns that followed de Gaulle’s dissolution of the assembly did little to eliminate the social fissures that had been revealed and exacerbated by the events of May 1968 . The political fallout of the May 1968 events led to the collapse of the French Assembly .
 The president became more cut off from the citizenry, while the new assembly refused necessary reforms . The new assembly refuses necessary reforms, according to the new president .
 de Gaulle put planned reforms of the Senate to referendum in 1969 . De Gaulle ignored his advisers, putting planned reforms to referendum on the issue .
 In the year prior to his death he wrote his Memoirs d’espoir and received visitors at his estate . He died at the end of his life .
 De Gaulle was buried in the local church according to his instructions . He was buried there in accordance with his wishes .
 The Stonewall Riots and the social movement they engendered were influential in many countries . The social movement was influential in the United States and many other countries .
 Stonewall did not occur in a vacuum, and there were social movements advocating gay liberation in the U.S. and elsewhere long before 1969 . There were movements for gay liberation long before Stonewalls .
 Gay and lesbian communities thrived in certain cities early in the 20th century in the United States . Same-sex behavior was both illegal and widely considered immoral in the U.S. It was difficult for gay people to organize in the 1920s .
 The Society for Human Rights was founded by Henry Gerber in Chicago in 1924 . It was shut down by the police a few months into its existence . The society was founded in 1924 by Gerber .
 These organizations were more conservative than the post-Stonewall gay liberation organizations . They often stressed how similar homosexuals were to heterosexuals and advocated “blending in” to the dominant culture . These organizations often stressed that homosexuals were similar to heterosexual males .
 Judy Garland, an icon of the gay community, died on June 27, 1969 . Not coincidentally, Judy Garland died on that date . Judy Garland was a gay icon of sorts .
 Eyewitness accounts of the Stonewall Riots differ, but all agree that the precipitating event was a police raid in the early morning of June 28 . The raid was a raid on a bar on Christopher Street frequented by members of the gay community .
 Patrons of gay bars were used to police raids; normally they would peacefully allow themselves to be arrested, but on June 28 they decided to fight back . Patrons were arrested in a gay bar raid .
 The outnumbered police had to take refuge in the bar after the incident . Passersby joined in the action, people began throwing stones and bottles . Eventually the outnumbered police were forced to retreat .
 A riot-control unit was summoned, and the crowd was dispersed . Another large crowd gathered outside the Stonewall, and there were more confrontations with the police into the early morning of June 29 .
 A change of spirit was noted in the gay community, as gay people realized that they did not need to accept second-class status . Gay people realized they had sufficient strength in numbers to resist harassment from the police or anyone else .
 The first modern gay liberation organization, the Gay Liberation Front, was formed a month after Stonewall . The first major gay liberation group, the G.L. Front, formed a year after St.onewall.
 It was modeled more on other radical social organizations of the 1960s such as the Black Panthers . The organization is modeled more than other social groups of the 60s .
 They believed a societal transformation was necessary to ensure the rights of gay and lesbian people . They also opposed racism, sexism, and militarism, they said .
 The success of these organizations in winning full civil rights for gay people was uneven and varied within the U.S. success was uneven within the United States .
 Same-sex activities were technically illegal in both Germany and Austria . However, laws were frequently ignored, and a thriving homosexual subculture existed .
 This period of freedom came to a halt with the rise of National Socialism . This period came to an end when National Socialism was established .
 More than 100,000 homosexuals were arrested during the Nazi years, many serving time in prison or concentration camps . Many of them were sent to concentration camps or prison .
 Gay and lesbian activism revived in the 1970s in Germany and Austria, and in 2006 both countries recognized same-sex civil unions . In 2006, Austria and Germany both legalized civil unions, but Austria did not .
 The country legalized same-sex behavior among adults among adults in the 19th century . Same-sex was legalized in the country in the late 1800s and early 1900s .
 In the 1970s many gay and lesbian groups formed, and most forms of discrimination against gay people were abolished . In the 1980s, gay rights groups were formed, but discrimination was not abolished in Britain .
 In 2001 the Netherlands became the first country to recognize same-sex marriage, including the right to adopt children . The Netherlands is now the only country in the world to recognize gay marriage . In 2001, the Netherlands was the first to recognize a gay marriage in the country .
 In many ways, gay men and lesbians in these countries had more rights than they did in the U.S. In the United States, gays and lesbians were more likely to have rights than in other countries .
 Most European countries have decriminalized homosexual behavior and outlawed discrimination against homosexuals . Most of Europe's homosexuality has been decriminalized .
 Belgium and Spain became the second and third countries to recognize same-sex marriage, in 2003 and 2005 . Many other countries recognize civil unions, including Portugal, France, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, Finland, Hungary, Croatia, and Denmark .
 AIDS was referred to as gay-related immune deficiency until it became evident that the disease was not limited to the homosexual community . AIDS was originally known as AIDS, but it is now known as HIV .
 AIDS was seen as divine retribution against the homosexual lifestyle . Some saw the disease as a justification for antigay discrimination . Others saw it as justification for anti-gay discrimination .
 It's difficult to generalize about gay liberation in non-Western countries, says author . It's not a good generalization of gay liberation, he says. It's a good thing to say, but it's hard to say .
 In some countries the history of rights for gay people is similar to that of western Europe . The history of gay rights in western Europe has been documented in Europe .
 In general, greater prosperity may be associated with greater personal freedom, but this is not always the case . In general prosperity is associated with increased personal freedom .
 Singapore outlaws homosexual behavior between men . Singapore has one of the highest standards of living in the world . It outlaws homosexuality .
 Japan, an equally industrialized country, has a history of tolerance of homosexuality . Gay organizations within that country have been oriented more toward entertainment and culture than political reform .
 In Turkey, same-sex behavior is not technically illegal but gay people are often harassed by the police . In 2006, Turkey hoped to become a member of the European Union . Gay people in Turkey often face harassment by police .
 The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was an international agreement, originally between 23 nation-states, in 1947 . The agreement was created from meetings held in Geneva, Switzerland, in Geneva .
 Its goal was to promote global trade through a reduction of tariff barriers and other obstacles to the free flow of goods and services . Its goal is to reduce tariff barriers .
 GATT was the principal international agreement governing commercial and tariff policies until its subsumption by the World Trade Organization in 1995 . Born at the dawn of the cold war and shaped most by commercial and security concerns of the U.S. and western Europe .
 GATT was originally conceived as the International Trade Organization . GATT would complement the International Monetary Fund and World Bank . Both were founded at the 1944 Brett on Woods Conference .
 GATT had no enforcement mechanism to ensure compliance by signatory states . GATT survived principally through its members’ voluntary adherence to its provisions .
 Among the most important aspects of the agreements concerned the principle of “most favored nation status,” or nondiscrimination, in which no signatory could discriminate against another without discriminating against all .
 Supplier of a particular commodity negotiated with the consumer of that commodity regarding tariffs, regulatory quotas, and related issues . Typically, the supplier of a commodity negotiates with the . consumer .
 Once an agreement was reached, it became part of GATT, shared by all member nations . Once a deal was reached it was part of the GATT .
 Average world tariffs on industrial commodities declined to 13 percent by the mid-1960s . As a result, the average world tariff fell from 13 percent to just 13 percent .
 Opponents of GATT accuse it of perpetuating global economic inequalities and undermining the principle of national sovereignty . Pointing to the historical example of the U.S. in which tariffs were routinely used to promote domestic industries .
 GATT’s defenders countered that tariffs and quotas constituted unfair trading practices . Free trade agreements in general increased trade by increasing trade, they said .
 Critics denounce the WTO as a tool of wealthy multinational corporations . The WTO has been criticized by some for being a tool for wealthy multinationals .
 Its defenders regard it as essential in ensuring the free flow of goods, services, and ideas . Its defenders say it is essential to ensure the flow of ideas .
 Debates regarding the efficacy and ethics of GATT and the WTO will likely remain heated . Debates will likely continue to be heated .
 Hockin, Thomas A The American Nightmare: Trade Politics after Seattle. Sage, 1996; Hockins, Thomas, Thomas. Sage: Seattle. Seattle. Washington. D.C. artist .
 Yalta Conference agreed that Germany would be divided into four zones of occupation following its military defeat in 1945 . Germany was divided into a zone of occupation after its defeat .
 Berlin would also be divided into four sectors, one for each ally . The capital city of Berlin, which lay within the Soviet zone, would also have been divided into sectors .
 The political leaders did not anticipate that these occupation zones would lead to a formal division of Germany into two separate nations . Germany's occupation zones were occupied by the Nazis .
 Germany became the primary battleground in a new kind of war, one of ideology rather than conflict . Germany was the focus of the Cold War in the context of growing tensions between Western and Eastern Allies, which laid the basis for the cold war .
 The division, formally made in 1949, lasted until reunification on October 3, 1990 . The division was officially formed in 1949 and ended in 1990 .
 The three western zones fused together as the Federal Republic of Germany . Germany reconstituted as a parliamentary democracy . The Soviet zone became the German Democratic Republic .
 The Allies endeavored to administer their zones by developing interzonal policies, through the auspices of the Allied Control Council . Initially, the Allies were administering their zones through interzorial policies .
 As part of their reparations the Soviets began to strip their zone of foodstuffs, livestock, transportation networks, and even entire factories . The Soviets stripped the area of food, livestock and transportation networks .
 A major breaking point occurred in early 1948 as the three Western Allies—joined by Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg—called for the western zones of occupation to be eligible for Marshall Plan aid from the U.S. The three countries were joined by the Netherlands and the Netherlands .
 This paved the way for a proposal to fuse the three western zones together economically and to introduce a common currency, the deutschmark, in May 1948 .
 The former Allies were now clearly on opposite sides of a new war, and former enemies, the Germans, had become the respective allies of the two hostile superpowers . The former allies had become each other's allies .
 Each of these new German nations had to grapple with the legacy of the Third Reich . They wrote new constitutions, revised legal codes, rebuilt their economies, and struggled to find new identity .
 A first step in the process was for occupation authorities to allow the revival or creation of political parties . The occupation authorities have not allowed political parties to be revived in the occupied areas .
 Occupation authorities first encouraged politics to resume at the local and regional levels, while the question of national unity remained uncertain .
 By 1947 each of the regions, or Lander, in the western zones of occupation was led by a minister president, who was chosen by directly elected parliamentary assemblies . By 1947 the regions were led by ministers, who were chosen by parliamentary assembly .
 A similar process emerged in the Soviet zone, but with much less freedom of choice . The Soviet zone was much less free of choice in the 1980s and 1990s .
 It was apparent that the four occupation zones would not be unified as one political entity . The occupation zones were not unified as a single political entity, it was apparent .
 Western powers began to take steps toward encouraging the fusing of their zones, politically as well as economically . The Western powers took steps to encourage the fusions of zones, including the creation of zones .
 The West Germans authorized the West Germans to hold a constitutional assembly, draft a constitution, and secure its ratification by the state parliaments . The West German constitution was passed into law by the West in 1953 .
 This assembly convened in September 1948 and worked for nine months, compromising over issues such as the balance between state and federal powers . This assembly was the first of its kind to convene in 1948 .
 West Germany ratified its constitution in May 1949, held its first nationwide elections in August 1949, and narrowly chose Konrad Adenauer as its first chancellor . The West German constitution was ratified by the West German parliament in March 1949, 1949 .
 Political parties on the Left called a People’s Congress into session at the end of 1947 . The People's Congress was held in the UK in 1947 .
 By October 1948 this congress of about 2,000 delegates had written and approved a constitution for what would become East Germany . The constitution was approved by the congress in October 1948 .
 On October 7, 1949, the Congress voted unanimously to form the German Democratic Republic . The Congress voted to create the country in 1949 .
 Economic rebuilding in West Germany received an enormous boost from the United States through Marshall Plan aid . West Germany was heavily dependent on the Marshall Plan .
 By the mid-1950s the West German economy was robust . This led to the German Economic Miracle . The West German economic miracle was born in 1953 .
 The volume of foreign trade tripled between 1954 and 1964, while unemployment dropped from between 8 and 9 percent in 1952 to less than 1 percent by 1961 .
 The EEC created a common market, which allowed for the free movement of goods and people . It facilitated stronger economic growth in a collective sense, and eliminated .
 West Germany also rearmed itself and joined NATO in 1955 . The West Germany joined NATO over the objections of France .
 East Germany’s economy was closely tied to that of the Soviet Union . East Germany instituted centralized economic planning, reduced private ownership of property and seized farmlands .
 Relations between the East Germans and the Soviets were strained during the first decade of West German existence . The Soviets’ stripping of the eastern zone in the immediate aftermath of the war; the brutal treatment of German civilians, particularly women, at the hands of the Soviet military; and the economic
 By 1952 more than 700,000 East Germans had fled to the West . It also led to a serious drain of workers; by 1952 over 7,000 had fled .
 Tensions between West and East Germany increased again in the late 1950s, sparked by the steady stream of young, productive, educated workers from East Germany to West Germany .
 Nikita Khrushchev spoke out against the infiltration of Western saboteurs and imperialists into the East . More than 3 million East Germans had fled to the west since 1949 since 1949 .
 Berlin's war of words culminated on August 13, 1961, when the citizens of the divided city of Berlin awoke to the sounds of construction . The citizens awoke in 1961 to hear construction being built in the city .
 The wall cut across streets and through subway and train stations, and separated families, religious congregations, and friends, dividing them for 28 years and 4 months, until it fell on November 9, 1989 .
 The 1960s in West Germany were marked by generational conflict and the resurgence of the political left . The 60s in Germany was marked by a wave of political left in the 1960s .
 In 1966 the West German economy suffered a depression, leading to increased unemployment and stagnation in industrial production . West Germany's economy had boomed for more than 15 years, but suffered a slump in 1966 .
 This marked the first incursion of the SPD into the postwar West German cabinet . The SPD became the first party to enter the post-West Germany cabinet .
 The power of the SPD continued to rise, culminating with its electoral victory in 1969 . Willy Brandt held the position of chancellor, which he held until 1974 .
 The government, under the control of Walter Ulbricht, ensured higher production of consumer goods, built limited flexibility into centralized economic planning . The government achieved an average annual increase in industrial production by 1967 .
 Greater choices among clothing, food, and leisure activities also grew in the U.S. Great choices also grew .
 Under a new constitution, basic freedoms, such as the rights to emigrate, were stripped away . But by the late 1960s, the climate turned harsher; under the new constitution it became harsher .
 Ostpolitik mediated the strict foreign policy of the Hallstein doctrine, established in 1955 . During the late 1960s the thawing of relations between the East and West mediated the development of Ostpolitika . The Hallstein Doctrine was established by 1955 .
 This doctrine stated that the Federal Republic of Germany was the sole authoritative government of the German people . As such, it demanded that diplomatic recognition never be extended to East Germany .
 West Germany did not extend diplomatic relations to any of the Soviet satellite states in eastern Europe . Among the practical implications of this policy was the fact that West Germany didn't extend relations with any of these states .
 Negotiations culminated in December 1972, when the governments of West and East Germany signed the Basic Treaty . The treaty guaranteed respect for the borders, and promised to renounce the use of force .
 Since October 3, 1990, Germany has been a unified country again . Germany is now a unified nation again .
 Germany was first unified and subsequently became a nation-state in 1871 . Germany was then unified and became the nation state in 1872 .
 Five new states were added to the existing 11, and the population grew by about 18 million . Germany, with over 80 million inhabitants, is the most populous country of the EU .
 By 1989 the two states had established themselves firmly as separate players on the world stage . West Germany and West Germany never had given up on the possibility of reunification .
 In September 1989 Hungary opened its borders to Austria, allowing thousands of East Germans to escape via Hungary and Austria to West Germany . Reform movements had begun to ripple through a few communist countries, beginning with the Solidarity movement .
 The festivities for the 40th anniversary of East Germany, on October 7, 1989, were accompanied by demonstrations . Demonstrations demanding democracy and freedom of expression were held in 1989 .
 East Germans could monitor the wealth of West Germany via radio and television . The contrast was too stark to be tolerated any longer . The vast majority of East Germans were able to monitor West Germany's wealth .
 Even the “big brother,” the Soviet Union, talked of reforms, and in 1989 its leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, famously admonished the East German government to engage in change . Even the "big brother"
 By midOctober Honecker, who had been in power since 1971, was forced to resign and Egon Krenz took over . Egon Hrenz was the first person to take over the government of Germany since 1971 .
 The East German government resigned while the demonstrations continued on November 7 . On November 7, East German authorities resigned while demonstrations continued .
 East German leadership suddenly opened the borders to West Germany and to West Berlin on November 9 . Thousands of East Germans were allowed to visit the West for the first time in their lives .
 After reunification, the German government strongly supported moves toward greater European integration and common action . But the German population was less certain about the future of Europe .
 On November 10 East German soldiers began to take down the wall, and Elans Modrow became the new head of state . The wall was taken down on November 10 .
 Gorbachev granted Germany the right to unify and to do so at its own pace . In February Helmut Kohl, chancellor of West Germany, met with the former West German leader .
 In East Germany free elections were held in March for the first time, and in April, Lothar de Maiziere became head of state . His coalition decided to unify East and West Germany according to Article 23 of West Germany's constitution .
 Negotiations began between East Berlin and Bonn and between the Allied forces, who still had soldiers in both Germanies, began in April 1945 .
 In June another symbol of the divided states, the border crossing at Checkpoint Charlie, was demolished . The border crossing was demolished in June .
 In July the West German mark was designated as the common currency for both Germanies . In July it became the currency of Germany's West and Germany's two countries .
 In late August East German leaders decided that East Germany would join West Germany on October 3, 1990 . The four Allied powers, the foreign minister of West Germany, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, and de Maiziere signed the reunification contract .
 Germany regained its sovereignty on October 1, and the four Allied powers suspended their rights . Germany regained sovereignty on Oct. 1 .
 On October 3, 1990, Germany, after 45 years of separation, was once again one country . After 45 years, Germany became one nation after reuniting in 1990 .
 The stunningly quick reunification, not even one year after the fall of the Berlin Wall, brought with it unintended and unforeseen consequences . In addition to the rapid reunification of Berlin, the reunification has also brought with unintended consequences .
 Germany struggled with an economic downturn, the pressure of larger political integration with the European Union, spikes in anti-Semitism and xenophobia, and the growth of splinter political parties on the far Right and far Left .
 Article 23 of the Basic Law was to make provisions for including the former East German lands in the parliamentary system . Article 23 was made after signing the official treaty to reunify Germany and the German Democratic Republic .
 The CDU continued to hold control of the government until the national elections of 1998 . The SPD, under the leadership of Gerhard Schroder, took over the CDU .
 The CDU regained control over the government in the elections of May 2005, resulting in the election of Germany’s first female chancellor, Angela Merkel . Merkel is also the first chancellor of reunified Germany to have come from the former eastern lands .
 By 1994 a plan for moving the institutions of government had been drafted, and the process was complete by 1999 .
 The transfer of labor, offices, and institutions from Bonn to Berlin was extremely expensive . Some estimates of costs ranged as high as $70 billion . The Berlin-Bonn transfer was expensive .
 This was fiercely debated given the shaky economic ground of Germany in the early 1990s . This was hotly debated given a shaky economic footing in Germany .
 Moving capital to historic place had another set of meanings . But moving capital to its historic place was not always the same thing .
 Placing the seat of government within former eastern lands indicated the state’s commitment to full integration of the two portions of Germany and shifted the orientation of the government further to the east . Placed the seat in former eastern areas indicated a commitment to integration of Germany .
 As a unified state, Germany is the most populous in western and central Europe at more than 80 million inhabitants . Germany is also the most densely populated country in Europe .
 It is the third-largest state in terms of land and also one of the most industrialized and prosperous nations in Europe . It is one of Europe's most prosperous nations .
 The economic recession of 1992 had devastating effects on the newly unified German nation . Despite population and industrial capability, the economic recession was devastating for Germany .
 The integration process proved to be ruinous for the eastern region . As demand for their products dropped off, hundreds of factories closed and millions of workers lost their jobs .
 Despite some optimistic projections, deindustrialization was the immediate effect, not economic growth . Deindustrialization is not the same thing as economic growth, it's the result .
 Between 1990 and 1991 the Gross National Product of the East declined by 33. percent . The East had a 33.9 percent drop in GDP between 1990 and 1992 .
 Industrial production fell by 67 percent in 1990-92, while the prices of goods increased by 12 percent . Industrial production dropped 67 percent and prices increased 12 percent in the same period . Industrial output fell 67 percent, while prices rose 12 percent, according to the OECD .
 A total of 3 million jobs were lost, amounting to close to 50 percent of its total workforce . A . total of three million jobs have been lost in the United States .
 Older workers are at a serious disadvantage, lacking education and skills necessary in the transition economy . Older workers were at a significant disadvantage, with older workers at a disadvantage, the government says .
 Of the workers aged 52 to 63 who were employed before the fall of the wall, 90 percent were unemployed following unification . 90 percent of those aged between 52 and 63 were unemployed after unification .
 Any waste was slashed at those entities that did manage to stay afloat . Those that did managed to stay alive were also slashed .
 A complicating factor was that the ‘natural’ market for their goods and services was floundering . The “natural” market for such products was “floundering’s floundered,” they said .
 More than 1.1 million people lost property under communist state in 1949 .
 When the economic recession of 1992 hit, its impact was even more severe in the East . The East was hit hard by the recession in 1992, when it was the worst in the world .
 By 1993 more than 10 percent of the German workforce was unemployed, the highest level in the West in more than three decades . It was an unheard-of phenomenon in the east, where chronic unemployment underneath communism did not exist .
 Although unemployment reached its nadir in late 1994, it continued at rates higher than before unification . Unemployment rates continued to rise in the 1990s, but unemployment rates remained higher .
 As of 1997 eastern unemployment stood at 18. percent, while in the West it was 9. percent . Eastern unemployment was 18. per cent . Eastern Eastern unemployment rate was 18 per cent in 1997 .
 By the end of 2005 unemployment rates overall stood at just over 11 percent . Unemployment rates in the U.S. were 11 percent, according to census figures .
 The German government, under the leadership of Helmut Kohl, remedied this drain on economic resources in part through an increase in taxes . The increase in tax rates was part of the rise in taxes in Germany .
 Many in the East feel as if their former way of life has been discredited and devalued, and many in the West blame the East for difficult economic times . This tension between “Wessis” and “Ossis’s” persists, with many
 A wall remains in the heads of many, still separating West and East . A common expression is that a wall remains . A wall is still separating East and West .
 One of the most visible, public reactions against the economic downturn and dislocations caused by reunification was backlash against foreigners .
 With the fall of communism across eastern Europe, the collapse of the Soviet Elnion, and the regional conflict in the Balkans, the number of people seeking asylum in Germany jumped dramatically in the 1990s . Germany was struggling to provide jobs, housing, and basic welfare to its own citizens
 More than 2,600 violent acts were carried out against immigrants in 1992 . Violence reached a height in 1992, with over 2,000 violent acts taken against immigrants, their neighborhoods, and businesses .
 This led to stricter asylum legislation in 1993 as well as widespread public demonstrations against the acts and attitudes that lay behind them .
 A strong immigration stream of Jews, particularly from the former Soviet Union, has led to some spikes in anti-Semitism . A more recent development was a strong immigration flow of Jews .
 One of the largest groups suffering dislocations following unification was working women . Working women were among the most affected by the unification of the unions .
 In West Germany, women were not encouraged to hold full-time jobs and develop careers . In East Germany women were an integral part of the workforce . Women were also encouraged to work in West Germany .
 In 1989 at the time of the fall of the wall, only 51 percent of women were working in West Germany . 91 percent were employed in the East while 51 percent were working .
 After unification, as unemployment skyrocketed in the East, women were disproportionately represented among those who lost their jobs . Women disproportionately represented in the loss of jobs .
 Marriage and birth rates in the former eastern lands dropped drastically in the years after unification . Divorce rates surged after unification, and divorce rates surged . Marriage, birth rates dropped dramatically .
 Germany’s position within Europe also shifted after unification, with important debates about its role within larger institutions such as NATO and the European Union .
 Germany's government strongly supported moves toward greater integration and common action . But the German population was less certain about the plans .
 Six out of 10 Germans did not want to give up the deutschmark in exchange for the euro, in 1998 . Six in 10 Germans didn't want to trade deutschmarks for euro in 1998, when the euro was launched .
 In 2005 an attempt to adopt a political constitution for the European Union was defeated in both Germany and France . In 2005 the attempt was defeated by both France and Germany in Germany .
 Although economic unification clearly had its benefits for the German economy, its people remained wary of it .
 The German public still strongly supported NATO as a means of providing for security and coordinated international efforts to combat crime and terrorism . However, the public still supported the military alliance, NATO, as a way of providing security .
 Frank Tipton, Frank B A History of Modern Germany Since 1815. Dartmouth, 1993; Tiptons, Frank . Frank B. A History Of Modern Germany since 1815, Frank T. B. T. A. B .
 Ghana celebrated its independence from Britain on March 7, 1957 . Ghana is one of the largest economies in the world .
 Ghana, formerly the Gold Coast, merged with a part of British Togoland, a former part of German West Africa ceded to Britain after World War I . Ghana was the first nation in Africa to overthrow a colonial power .
 Ghana is the sixth African nation to receive independence from a major colonial power . Ghana was deliberately named to highlight its historical political situation . The country was named after its political situation as a result of its political instability .
 Ghana's leaders sought to link their nation to one of the great West African kingdoms of the past . Ghana’s leaders seek to link Ghana to the one of its great West Africa kingdoms .
 This name represented both a political victory and a symbolic hope for black people everywhere . The name "Black" is a symbol of hope for the future of black people in America . This name is the name of a black person in the United States .
 Ghana's independence was a symbol of black intelligence, self-determination, and power . Ghana’s independence led to many idealistic expectations, including black intelligence .
 Kwame Nkrumah had spent time in prison in the struggle for independence in Ghana . He led a nation with many contradictory expectations . He was the first African leader to lead a nation to independence .
 Nkrumah liked neither the capitalism of the West nor the communism of the East . His Pan-Africanist ideology, a nationalist outlook, and mounting racial pride, he liked neither capitalism nor communism .
 He articulated a nationalist ideology that celebrated and encouraged traditional African culture and dress . He was a nationalist who celebrated traditional African dress .
 He embraced Pan-Africanism as a student in the U.S. and London . In addition, he embraced Pan Africanism .
 What became known as “Nkrumahism’s” started out as a hybrid economic and social philosophy . It combined the best practices from both systems .
 Nkrumah’s ‘African Socialism’ became the model for organizing society in Tanzania under Julius Nyerere and in Kenya under Jomo Kenyatta . The “African Socialist” was the model of organizing society under Nyereerere .
 Nkhrumah’s articulations of selfdetermination also influenced the doctrine of Pan-Arabism championed by Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser . The Egyptian president Nasser was assassinated in 1961 .
 Nkrumah demanded free education on all levels and the development of rural health care . He also demanded the construction of bridges, roads, railroads, and waterways to build up Ghana’s economy .
 Ghana’s independence had major consequences for global politics and the lessening of European hegemony . The independence of Ghana in 1960s and 1970s had major implications for the future of the continent .
 In the decades following Ghana’s independence, many linked the dissolution of the British Empire, the end of Portuguese colonial power in Africa, and the destruction of apartheid system in South Africa to Ghanaian independence .
 Nkrumah instituted many customary practices to help maintain order and restore stability . He instituted many customs practices to maintain order in Ghana .
 Nkrumah sought to empower local chiefs and elders by restoring respect for and interest in traditional structures of society . While utilizing the British model of government at the superstructure level, he sought to restore respect for the local chiefs .
 Elders, healers, and local officials were enlisted in his effort to make Ghana a stable nation . Elders and healers were all enlisted in Ghana's efforts to make it stable .
 Many blame Nkrumah for destroying the country with socialist polities and making it ripe for coups . His vision led to Ghana’s independence and also defined the ethos of the new nation .
 There was a great deal of dissatisfaction with his government in the years leading up to his ouster in 1966 .
 Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings seized power in 1981 in a countercoup . In 1981 he seized control in a coup, he seized power .
 In 1992 a new constitution was approved, free elections were held, and Rawlings was elected to two four-year terms . In 1992, Rawlings became the first president of Texas .
 Under the terms of the 1992 constitution, executive power was vested in the president, who was named head of state and commander in chief of the armed forces . The president is currently the country's president .
 Given that Rawlings could not be elected to a third term, John Kufuor, a rather unknown politician, was elected president in 2000 .
 Ghana has a successful diaspora of almost 2 million people who send almost half a billion dollars to Ghana every year . Much of the current economic and social optimism in Ghana is tied to an enlightened ruling class .
 Ghana has a multilanguage, multiethnic, and diverse population . Ghana is a pluralistic society, with a multilingual society, multilingual language .
 Ghana has also been successful in attracting foreign investments from India, China, Lebanon, and other nations . The country has also attracted investment from other countries .
 Ghana has a highly educated population of about 20 million people . Ghana also has a high-educated population .
 It operates a 12-year preuniversity educational system and has five public universities, private universities, eight polytechnics, and 22 technical institutions as well as many educational exchange programs around the globe .
 Ghana is a stable nation with a credible government, a working infrastructure, and a highly trained population . Ghana’s future seems bright as a stable country with a stable government .
 Ghana’s best-known crop is cacao . Other major exports include bauxite, diamonds, gold, foodstuffs, and timber .
 globalization is the process through which world populations become increasingly interconnected and interdependent, both culturally and economically . The process was investigated by Canadian scholar Marshall McLuhan in 1964 and then further explored since the 1970s .
 The process is often perceived by critics as creating a sense of standardization throughout the globe . Critics say it reinforces economic inequalities between developed countries and underdeveloped countries .
 Advanced capitalism is seen as stretching social, political, and economic activities across the borders of communities, nations, and continents . Advanced capitalism, enhanced by technological developments such as the Internet and electronic business transactions, is seen .
 Global connections have deepened the impact of distant events on everyday life . Global connections and the circulation of goods, ideas, capital, and people have deepens the impact on distant events .
 The G8, the IMF, World Economic Forum, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization are instrumental to globalization . They are the major transnational financial, political, and commercial institutions that are key to global economic growth .
 Samuel Huntington coined the expression Davos Culture in his book The Clash of Civilizations to define such universal civilization . Samuel Huntington: Davos culture is a form of universal civilization in the world .
 Davos Culture takes its name from Davos, the Swiss town that had hosted a preponderance of World Economic Forum meetings since 1971 . Davos is the birthplace of Davos culture, the first time Davos has hosted meetings in the Swiss city .
 Davos Culture seems to share the same visions of democracy and individualism . Davos is obviously favoring capitalism and the free market . The Davos culture seems to favor individualism and capitalism .
 The appeal of Davos Culture reaches across the political spectrum, often leading liberals and conservatives to share the same table at Davos . Davos culture is a global melting pot of both sides of the spectrum .
 The rise of a new global economy involves a discrepancy between decentralization of production processes and centralization of command and control processes in rich economies . This is a huge decentralization to developing countries where manpower is cheaper and unions are weaker .
 Corporations perceived to have replaced governments in economic and social control . Corporations' level of accountability to the public has been questioned .
 Corporations involved in this massive exposure of exploitative labor practices have included Gap, Wal-Mart, Guess, Nike, Mattel, and Disney . Gap has been accused of exploitation of labor practices .
 Antiglobal organizations are investigating the links between transnational corporations and totalitarian regimes in developing countries . Antigobal organizations also investigating links between corporations and regimes .
 Parallel to economic globalization is the phenomenon of cultural globalization, cultural globalization . The phenomenon is also known as cultural globalization and globalization .
 Its supporters claim that the rise of a global culture entails multiculturalism and a hybridization of national cultures . Its supporters say that multiculturalism is the result of the rise in global culture .
 The creation of a global culture will build a more peaceful world based on shared cultural values, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 Critics of cultural globalization point out its darker side, claiming that cultural globalism destroys all local traditions and regional distinctions, creating a homogenized world culture .
 In addition, globalization through economic commoditization is not such a simple and straightforward process, as well as the spreading of Western values and lifestyles through the selling of Western goods throughout the world . In addition to globalization, globalization is not a simple, straightforward process .
 In regard to economic globalization, cultural globalization has given rise to movements for resistance . Cultural globalization gives rise to movement for resistance against economic globalization . In the U.S. President Barack Obama has been criticized for his views on globalization .
 Antiglobal theorists stress how corporations have hijacked culture and education through their aggressive marketing practices . They say they have hijacked education through aggressive marketing .
 The antiglobalization movement was thrown from the fringes to the center of political debates thanks to the protests in Seattle against the World Trade Organization in November 1999 . The protests were sparked by the protests against the WTO in Seattle .
 Alternative media and communication networks such as Indymedia have been established to turn the Internet, one of the tools that makes globalization feasible, into a powerful anti-global weapon . Alternative media networks have been set up to turn Internet into a weapon of war, says Indymedia .
 Antiglobal activists argue for fragmentation and radical power dispersal . In reaction to power centralization typical of the corporate world, activists say fragmentation is needed .
 Klein, N. Klein: Fences and Windows: Dispatches from the Front Lines of the Globalization Debate . Klein: "Windows and Windows" is a series of books by Klein that chronicles the rise of globalization .
 Ross, A No Collar: The Humane Workplace and Its Hidden Costs. Flamingo, 2000. Ross, 2000; Ross, 2001. Ross: Workplace is the most humane workplace experience in the world .
 He was a reformer who attempted to fix the economic problems of the system . He wanted democracy to grow within the country . He was an economic reformer .
 Gorbachev and Reagan sign the INF Treaty limiting the use and production of ground-based ballistic missiles . The INF Treaty was signed in 1987 .
 Gorbachev was born on March 2, 1931, in a small village in the Stavropol region in south Russia . He was born in the small village of Stavrovol, south Russia, in 1931 .
 Both his grandfathers were arrested as kulaks during a collectivization drive of 1928-33 . Both grandfathers had been arrested during the drive to collectivize .
 During his time in Moscow he met his future wife, Raisa Maksimovna Titorenko . Raisa would play a crucial supporting role in his reforms throughout their lives .
 While in Moscow, Gorbachev gained a reputation as something of a liberal . He publicly approved of the reformist efforts of the current leader, Nikita Khrushchev, in 1960s .
 He also became close friends with Czech student Zdenek Mlynar, who would be active in Czechoslovak politics during the reformist Prague Spring of 1968 . He became friends with a Czech student who would later become active in politics .
 After graduation, Gorbachev returned to Stavropol, where he practiced law for a few years . After graduation he returned to Russia, he went on to practice law in the Soviet republic .
 He was elected first secretary of the Stavropol city Komsomol committee in 1956 . He was the first secretary to the city's Komsol committee .
 He was first secretary of the Stavropol city party organization in 1966 . He became first secretary in 1966 and later became party leader in Moscow .
 After eight years he moved to Moscow, where he became the Central Committee secretary for agriculture . He was also a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 Within two years he was a full member of the Politburo, the ruling council of the Soviet state . He was also a member of Russia's ruling council .
 Even before Gorbachev became general secretary, he was thinking about ways to reform the system . He was looking at ways of reforming the system before becoming general secretary . Even before he was general secretary he had been thinking about reform .
 These are fairly conservative, calling for higher levels of productivity of labor . These were fairly conservative .
 In 1986 Gorbachev announced a set of more radical proposals that he called perestroika, or restructuring . The proposal was part of a series of radical changes to the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Perestroika called for decentralization and self-accounting for industries . Perestoika was founded by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 He continued to innovate, even allowing cooperatives in order to gain control of illegal economic activities . He allowed cooperatives to be controlled by cooperatives .
 None of his reforms challenged the basic nature of the Soviet Union’s planned economic system . The Soviet Union's economic system was designed to be a socialist state of mind .
 Political reforms became an integral part of perestroika . Political reforms were part of the reforms that led to political reforms .
 Gorbachev’s economic reforms were criticized and often ignored by entrenched party officials . He sought to remove them and bring new initiative through democratization, he said .
 Elections were held in 1988, with thousands of contests throughout the country . Thousands of contests were held throughout the nation .
 Perhaps the most traumatic moment of Gorbachev’s reign occurred when the Chernobyl nuclear station exploded in April 1986 . Chernobyl was the site of the most dramatic explosion in history .
 A mix of unsafe construction, insufficient maintenance, and human error led to the worst radiation leak in history . The leak was caused by unsafe construction and insufficient maintenance . The radiation leak was the worst in history.
 In its wake, Gorbachev launched the policy of glasnost, or openness, in earnest . In the wake of the war, the policy was launched by the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 At first it involved a few magazines and journals, such as Ogonek and Moscow News, but it quickly spread to almost all other media . At first, it started with a few magazine and journals .
 These outlets began to publish stories that openly revealed the problems that faced the Soviet Union . This included poverty, corruption, and divorce, among other things .
 There was a broad reexamination of Soviet history, leading to harsh criticism of Joseph Stalin and even Vladimir Lenin . In addition, there was also a broad criticism of Stalin and Lenin .
 Literary works and authors that had been banned reappeared, such as Mikhail Bulgakov’s Master and Margarita and Boris Pasternak’�s Doctor Zhivago .
 Many were happy to see the truth of the past revealed but many, perhaps a majority, felt that these revelations unnecessarily blackened the reputation of the Soviet Union . Many felt that the revelations were unnecessarily blackening their reputation .
 The pent-up hostility of the nations inside the Soviet Union was also released by Gorbachev’s economic, political, and cultural reforms . The pent up hostility was released by the reforms, according to the former Soviet leader .
 In 1986 national groups began to resist decisions made in Moscow . They began in Uzbekistan in 1986 . The protests began in response to Moscow's intervention in the 1980s .
 Arguments between Armenians and Azerbaijanis over a small piece of territory led to violent clashes in 1988 . The clashes demonstrated the increasing weakness of central authority .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania announced their sovereignty starting in 1988 . Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia have sovereignty since 1988 . Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia announced sovereignty starting at the start of 1988 .
 A movement began among Russians, led by Boris Yeltsin, to limit the power of the Soviet government over their territory . A movement even began among the Russians, leading them to limit their power over their territories .
 The increasing pressure from national groups weakened Gorbachev’s ability to hold the Soviet Union together, he says . “The increasing pressure” from these national groups, he adds, “wasn’t enough to keep the USSR together .
 Foreign affairs were the area where Gorbachev had the most success, says Reagan . Foreign affairs was the area of Gorbachachev's most success in his career .
 Gorbachev pursued a policy of reducing international tension from the beginning of his rule . The former Soviet Union leader sought to reduce international tension in the 1980s .
 After 1985 Gorbachev quickly moved toward negotiations that would eventually lead to the end of the cold war . The negotiations would lead to an end of Cold War .
 He met with U.S. president Ronald Reagan repeatedly throughout the 1980s . He also met with Ronald Reagan .
 The first arms control treaty in a decade was the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty . It removed both U.S. and Soviet nuclear-tipped missiles from Europe . The treaty removed both United States and Soviet missiles .
 Gorbachev was never able to gain the large restructuring loans that he had hoped for from the Western powers . Bush was president of the Soviet Union in 1990s .
 Soviet allies in eastern Europe benefited from Gorbachev’s approach to foreign policy . The Soviet allies benefited from the Soviet policy of foreign policy, including the Soviet Union .
 The centripetal forces unleashed by perestroika did not stop at the Soviet border . The centripeal forces were unleashed by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Gorbachev felt that it was unwise to attempt to keep eastern Europe forcibly under Soviet control . Gorbache felt it was too dangerous to try to keep the Soviet Union under control .
 Conservative regimes in the Soviet bloc were unable to respond to perestroika and glasnost . Conservative regimes failed to respond in the face of perestoika and the fall of the Soviet Union .
 "Once his policy of nonintervention became clear, these regimes unraveled very quickly," he said . "These regimes unravels very quickly."
 Gorbachev received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1990 for his leading role in the reduction of international tensions and the generally peaceful transition to democracy . He received the award for his role in reducing international tensions .
 With the end of Soviet dominance over eastern Europe, Gorbachev faced increasing internal resistance to his reforms . With the rise of the Cold War, the Soviet Union faced increasing resistance to its reforms .
 He convinced the Congress of People’s Deputies to create a new position, president of the Soviet Union . He was elected to the post in March 1990 . He tried to strengthen his political position by convincing the Congress .
 He proposed the most radical transformation of the Soviet economy so far . He also proposed a most radical change of Soviet economy .
 He brought in new advisers who held a conservative vision for the future of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was founded in 1945 .
 In spring 1991 Gorbachev proposed a new arrangement that would greatly decentralize power but keep the Soviet Union together . The new arrangement would have greatly decentralized power but also keep the USSR together . In the fall of 1991, Soviet Union broke up with the West .
 Gorbachev’s archrival Boris Yeltsin used the referendum to create a position of president of the Russian Federation . Yeltsins was able to undermine Gorbachachev and his plans to hold the Soviet Union together . Gorbache's archrival used the vote to
 The new, weaker union was scheduled to go into effect on August 20, 1991 . The new union was set to go to effect in August 1991 .
 The weakness in this agreement led a group of conservatives to attempt to restore the centralized power of the Soviet state . The weakness led to the failure of this agreement .
 A coup attempt was launched on August 19 by men that Gorbachev had appointed earlier . The coup attempt took place in the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 Gorbachev was placed under house arrest and placed under martial law . The plotters declared martial law in response to a plot to oust the former Soviet leader . Gorbama was placed on house arrest .
 Thousands of Muscovites gathered outside the Russian parliament convinced the army to remain uninvolved in the political struggle . Resistance from Yeltsin, now president of the Russian Federation, convinced them to stay out of politics .
 When Gorbachev returned from house arrest, his power was fatally weakened . The former Soviet leader's power was weakened when he returned to power .
 Gorbachev resigned as president on December 25, 1991, and the Soviet Union was officially disbanded on December 31, 1991 . After months of futile negotiation, Gormachev resigned .
 Gorbachev remains active in Russian political life, though he is intensely disliked by most Russians . Gorbachachev is a controversial figure in Russia's political life .
 He ran for president of Russia in 1996 but received less than 1 percent of the vote . He was elected to Russia's first president in 1996 .
 In 2006 he was the head of the Gorbachev Foundation in Moscow . He traveled the world giving speeches . In 2006, he traveled the globe giving speeches.
 He is also the author of numerous books and a commentator on Russian and world politics .
 Armenia and Azerbaijan have been the two countries since the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 . Azerbaijan and Azerbaijan are both located in the Azerbaijevan region .
 Billy (William Franklin Graham) is one of the bestknown and respected religious leaders of the 20th century . Billy (Billy) Franklin Graham is a well-known religious leader . Billy Graham is an evangelical leader .
 His influence has been immense in his roles as evangelist, as a shaper of modern evangelicalism . He has been a link between evangelicalism and prominent political leaders, particularly Republican presidents .
 Graham was raised and educated in a Southern, fundamentalist milieu, but by the 1940s had graduated from Wheaton College in Illinois and had become a world-roaming evangelist with Youth for Christ . Graham was born in a fundamentalist Southern Baptist family .
 A 1949 Los Angeles crusade brought him to the attention of William Randolph Hearst, who helped boost his career among a national audience . Hearst helped boost him to fame with a crusade in 1949 .
 Graham urged personal and national repentance to avoid divine judgment . In a context of cold war anxieties, Graham urged national repentance . Graham urged people not to be judged .
 Throughout his career Graham’s preaching would remain simple and direct, stressing that the answers to all essential questions are to be found in God through Jesus Christ . Graham's preaching would stay simple, direct, and direct .
 In other respects, Graham departed significantly from the conservatism of many of his constituents . Graham left the conservative wing of the Republican Party in favor of the liberal wing .
 He refused to allow his audiences to be segregated by race, as was common in the South when he began his ministry .
 Fundamentalists who insisted that no fellowship could be maintained with theological liberals considered this a fatal compromise . Fundamentalists refused to compromise with liberals, calling it a "final compromise"
 Both positions followed from Graham’s principled biblicism . Far from accommodating any kind of liberalism, these positions follow from Graham's principled bibliblism .
 Graham was critical in shaping a post-fundamentalist stance for conservative Protestantism in the 1950s . Graham is credited with shaping the post-19th-century stance of Protestantism .
 Through the National Association of Evangelicals and Christianity Today, Graham helped evangelicals shed what many saw as the angry selfrighteousness of fundamentalism . Graham and others helped evangelicals emerge from the cultural ghetto that kept them separated from "the world"
 It also made him welcome the attention of U.S. presidents who were eager to profit from associating with him . "I was a very successful businessman," he said .
 Politicians sought the approval of Graham’s constituency, and evangelicals in turn moved closer to the cultural mainstream . Evangelical leaders sought to move closer to cultural mainstream, with politicians seeking their approval .
 Graham would later express some regret that he had allowed himself to be used by Richard Nixon, who aggressively cultivated religious conservatives . Graham later expressed regret he had been used by Nixon .
 At the time it had seemed an appropriate way to bring biblical truths to the ears of the powerful . At the . time it seemed . appropriate way for the . powerful to speak out .
 In the 1980s, Graham would again shock his more conservative supporters by questioning the morality of the nuclear arms buildup . Graham would shock his conservative supporters with questions about the morality .
 China followed the Soviet Union’s model of planned economy on the socialist model . John Haas: Great Leap Forward in China was the first step in the country's economic development .
 The Second Five-Year Plan for 1958-62 called for a 75 percent increase in industrial and agricultural production . The plan was undertaken with Soviet financial and technical aid .
 Mao Zedong proclaimed a ‘Great Leap Forward’ in 1958 with the goal of passing Great Britain in industrial production by 1972 . This was not enough for the party leader, who proclaimed a 'Great Leap forward' in 1958 .
 It mandated an average 18 percent increase in steel, electricity, and coal production for that year . The government also mandated an increase in electricity, steel, coal production and steel .
 "This was only the beginning of a series of escalating and totally unattainable goals for production. This was only ... not the end of the series," says director Mark Holbrook .
 Mao called on the Chinese people to “walk on two legs,” that is, to use modern and sophisticated plants built with Soviet aid to make steel . Mao called for the Chinese to use sophisticated plants and primitive "backyard" furnaces .
 By late 1958, 600,000 backyard furnaces had been built throughout China that smelted pots, pans, and farm implements . They produced millions of tons of unusable metal in order to fulfill their quotas and avoid punishment .
 In addition, some city people were organized military fashion into urban communes . The communes were organized in military fashion . Some of the communes are now known as urban communs .
 Communist bosses competed with one another to announce overachievement of quotas and goals, which allowed the government to announce at the end of 1958 that industrial production for that year had exceeded that of 1957 by 65 percent .
 In launching the Great Leap Forward Mao was also motivated by his disapproval of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, whom Mao castigated as “revisionist” for giving incentives to improve productivity in Soviet agriculture . Mao also castigated the Soviet leader for encouraging Soviet agriculture incentives .
 He boasted that he had found a shortcut, through the People’s Communes, to reach the ultimate Marxist utopia ahead of the Soviet Union and thus the right to lead the communist movement .
 The debate over the validity of the Great Leap Forward widened the split in the international communist movement . The debate contributed to worsening relations between China and the Soviet Union .
 In reality the Great Leap Forward brought unprecedented disaster to the Chinese people . In reality, it brought unprecedented disaster to China .
 By 1959 it was no longer possible for the government to deny that the economy had been crippled . By 1959 the government had been forced to admit that the country's economy was crippled .
 The people were exhausted and demoralized, and famine stalked the land . The people died of starvation and disease, but the people were resilient .
 More than 30 million people died of starvation in the Mao-made famine, the worst in world history . Economists estimated that the economy had declined by $66 billion .
 Mao had to admit his folly, stepped down from chairmanship of the PRC . Mao let others who had not lost touch with reality—called pragmatists—run the country to bring it back from ruin .
 The background for this event was the catastrophic economic losses suffered in the Great Leap Forward that the chairman of the CCP and the People’s Republic of China . Mao Zedong instigated between 1958 and 1960 .
 These men, called pragmatists, dismantled communes, scrapped backyard furnaces, and restored private plots to peasants . The pragmatistists were called "pragmatists" and "practical"
 Mao's measures led to a gradual economic recovery but left Mao seething impotently . Mao's policies led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Mao turned to his wife, Jiang Qing, who had been out of the limelight and held little power until now . To recover power, Mao turned his wife to Jiang Qing .
 She went to Shanghai and formed an alliance with local Communist leaders Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan . They would later be known as the Gang of Four . Wang Hongwen was a young factory activist .
 Mao next called on young people, mostly students, to form Red Guard units . Mao called on students, mostly secondary schools and universities, to become Red Guards . Mao's Red Guard unit was formed by students at secondary schools .
 They destroyed anything they considered ‘old’ and therefore bad, including countless cultural treasures . They also destroyed anything considered “old” and ‘bad’, including cultural treasures, they destroyed .
 She banned most forms of cultural expression, including Western classical music . Beethoven was denounced as a counterrevolutionary . Chinese operas, movies, and so on were replaced with revolutionary operas .
 The Red Guards attacked Liu Shaoqi as a revisionist; he was dismissed and humiliated, and later died in prison . Liu was dismissed by the Red Guards, humiliated and later dies in prison. Liu died in a prison sentence .
 Zhou Enlai (Chou En-lai) was only one of a few who retained his post in China . Zhou was one of the top leaders in the country's history .
 Mao eight times reviewed the Red Guards at Tiananmen Square in Beijing and lauded them for their revolutionary zeal . At the height of their power between August and November 1966, Mao and his wife Mao were in power at the height .
 Lin Biao rose after most senior CCP leaders were ousted and imprisoned . He rose to become Minister of Defense in China's first major party shake-up .
 Mao called on Lin to use the army to put down the Red Guards . Mao called Lin's use of the army was necessary to put them down . The Red Guards became uncontrollable and began battling among themselves .
 Lin was designated Mao’s “closest comrade-in-arms and successor” in the revised CCP constitution . Lin was elevated to vice chairman of the Central Committee of the CCP in 1968 . Lin became Mao's ‘closmost comrade in arms and successor
 Mao and Lin were plotting to eliminate each other in Mao's first term . Mao was Mao's successor, Lin's successor . Lin's death was the result of a power struggle between Mao and Mao . Lin and Mao plotted to kill each other .
 In September 1971 Lin, his wife Ye Qun and their son, an air force officer, plotted to assassinate Mao and seize power in a coup d’etat . Lin and his wife planned to kill Mao in a plot to seize power .
 The plan was discovered by the younger Lin and his brother . They fled toward the Soviet Union in an air force jet, which crashed in Outer Mongolia, killing them all . Upon the plan’s discovery they fled in a jet piloted by Lin .
 Several of Lin’s confederates were arrested but the news of the attempted coup was kept a secret until 1973 . The news of Lin's death was kept secret until the end of 1973 .
 Jiang Qing pressured the ailing Mao to confirm her as his successor . With Lin dead Jiang Qing and her allies became even more powerful .
 Zhou Enlai and other senior party leaders opposed her and rehabilitated the disgraced Deng Xiaoping, whom Zhou groomed as successor . Zhou's successor was Zhou's wife, who died in 2011, but she died in 2012 . Zhou and other party leaders oppose her .
 When Zhou died in January 1976, Deng’s position became insecure and he disappeared from public view . Deng sought refuge in southern China, where a local military commander protected him . Deng's position was insecure when Zhou died, and he fled to southern China .
 Just before he died Mao chose a dark horse to succeed him with the words “with you in charge I am at ease” scribbled on a sheet of paper . Mao chose the dark horse as his successor, writing ‘with you at ease I am in charge’
 A power struggle ensued among Jiang and her allies, and Hua Guofeng and the resurfaced Deng Xiaoping and other CCP elders . Jiang's allies and allies were involved in a power struggle between Jiang and the re-elected party leaders . Hua Gu ofeng and other party elders were
 These events ended the Maoist era, the succession struggle, and a decade of unprecedented turmoil called the Cultural Revolution . The events were the end of the Maoists era, and the subsequent succession struggle . The Cultural Revolution was the beginning of a decade in China's history .
 President Lyndon B Johnson’s Great Society was an aggressive agenda of domestic legislative reforms . Jiu-Hwa Lo Upshur was a member of the Great Society . President Johnson was assassinated in 1968 .
 By the time Johnson became president, he had already had three decades of political experience .
 Johnson used all the powers given to him to extend and even surpass the New Deal’s progressive record . Once he became president, Johnson decided to use all of the powers .
 With his landslide victory in the 1964 election, he had a powerful mandate and a large Democratic majority in Congress . With his victory in 1964, he was able to win a large mandate and Congress .
 He was particularly interested in equality of opportunity, improved urban conditions, improved educational system, ending poverty, and implementing racial justice . He was also interested in ending poverty and ending racial injustice .
 It offered reduced interest rates to builders of housing for the poor and elderly . It also offered reduced rates to build homes for poor and the elderly .
 It allocated funds for urban beautification programs, health programs, recreation centers, and improvements to inner-city housing . In addition, it also provided funds for health programs and housing improvements .
 The law made it mandatory that all applications for federal aid to cities be approved by city or regional planning agencies . The law was designed to streamline and control programs .
 To administer the new programs, Congress created a new cabinet secretary and agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development .
 In 1966 Congress allocated even more funds for that purpose, and created a new agency . The Department of Transportation was created to administer them .
 Model Cities Act of 1966 granted $1.1 billion for slum clearance and removal . Model Cities act was passed in 1966 . Model cities Act was passed into law allowing slums to be cleared and removed .
 The goal of the act was to revitalize inner-city life in many respects, including housing, schools, job training, recreation, and health care . The act was created in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Johnson envisioned the Great Society as one in which all children could enrich their minds . Johnson, a former teacher, was a former president of the United States .
 The Elementary and Secondary Education Act was passed in 1965 . It allocated over $ 1 billion for programs to aid children who were seen as educationally deprived .
 The bill also targeted bilingual education for Hispanic children and the education of disabled children . However, the bill also targets bilingual education .
 In addition to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, the Higher Education Act was also passed in 1965 . The Education Act is also known as the "Education Act of 1965"
 The two acts had an enormous impact on the state of education in the United States, but also increased government expenditures substantially . These two acts increased government spending substantially .
 Johnson’s Medicare bill was enacted by Congress in 1965 . It provided health insurance for all Americans over the age of 65 . Medicare was enacted in 1965 and provided health care to all Americans .
 Medicare was initially provided with a fund of $6. billion, with long-range funding to come from increased social security payroll deductions . The fund was initially set up with $6 billion .
 Medicare’s companion program, Medicaid, administered through state welfare systems, provided healthcare for poor Americans . Medicaid is administered by states and administered through welfare systems . Medicare's companion program provides healthcare for the poor .
 Preserving the environment and national splendor was another of Johnson’s Great Society goals . Preserving America's environment was part of Johnson's Great Society .
 Johnson sought to combat the effects of industrialization, which included shrinking wilderness areas, vanishing species of wildlife, a degradation of the landscape, and pollution . Johnson: "I want to protect the environment from industrialization"
 The Upward Bound program helped gifted students from poor families attend college . The program was founded by parents of gifted students in poor families . It also helped students from gifted students attend college.
 Another section of the act expanded the 1962 Manpower Development and Training Act, which focused on job training . The act was expanded in the 1960s .
 Job Corps was created to teach important and marketable skills to inner-city youth . Volunteers in Service to America was a domestic parallel to President John F Kennedy’s Peace Corps . Job Corps is a national parallel to the Peace Corps.
 Legal Services Program provided lawyers to defend the rights of low-income citizens . The Legal Services program provides lawyers to help people defend their rights . The program is funded by the state of South Carolina .
 Other parts of the Economic Opportunity Act funded public works programs in poor and rural areas . The act also provided loans for small farmers and small businesses .
 To administer the war on poverty, the act created the Office of Economic Opportunity . The office was created to administer the act .
 Another section of the Economic Opportunity Act was the Community Action Program . The Community Action Act was also part of the Act's Economic Opportunity Program .
 This initiative reflected the belief held that social-policy formation had too many experts and bureaucrats and lacked grassroots input . The initiative reflected a belief held by some that social policy formation lacks grassroots input.
 By 1966 more than 1,000 Community Action Programs were in place in many African-American and Mexican-American inner-city neighborhoods .
 The programs encouraged political organization and community development, and when used as intended, their funds went to education, medical services, and legal services .
 The Supreme Court had its part in the Great Society as well as the Supreme Court as well . The Great Society was founded in 1881 .
 The Court’s decisions improved individual rights, equal protection under the law, and electoral processes . The Court's decisions improved individuals rights, electoral processes, and individual rights .
 Baker Carr made states do all that was practical to maintain population balance in the drawing of congressional and state legislature lines . To help give all citizens an equal voice at the polls .
 Gideon Wainwrigbt ensured that poor people would have legal counsel provided to them by the court if they could not afford to pay for it . Gideon ensured poor people had legal counsel to them if they couldn't afford it .
 Miranda Arizona mandated that people be informed of their legal rights when placed under arrest . The case of Miranda Arizona was the result of a 1966 Miranda Arizona case .
 Before the Civil Rights Act of 1964, opponents of the bill filibustered for 75 days . Opponents of the act had to wait 75 days for passage .
 It made it easier for the attorney general to take part in all civil rights cases . It allowed him to prosecute segregated school districts and election officials who denied voting rights to black Americans .
 Other sections forbade discrimination in public facilities, hiring, and federally funded programs . Other sections of the law prohibited discrimination in federal facilities and hiring .
 The Voting Rights Act of 1965 authorized federal officials to register voters and oversee elections . The act was passed by Congress in 1965 . It was the first time federal officials were able to oversee elections in the U.S.
 It outlawed long-standing measures used primarily in southern states to keep African Americans from voting . It outlawed measures used to keep blacks from voting in the southern states .
 A final civil rights measure, the Open Housing Act, was passed in 1968 . It outlawed racial discrimination in the sale or rental of housing . The act was passed by the House of Representatives .
 Immigration Act of 1965 abolished discriminatory national-origins policies . Also under the heading of civil rights was the Immigration Act . The Immigration Act was also introduced in 1965 . The Act was passed under the influence of the White House .
 Some of Johnson’s Great Society measures were received with mixed feelings . They helped overall to improve the quality of life for millions of Americans . Johnson's Great Society was created in the 1920s .
 Johnson’s presidency was marred by the stigma of Vietnam, which curtailed spending on some of his Great Society programs . The cost of Vietnam curtailed some of Johnson's programs .
 His noble and idealistic crusade was cut short by a bitter and unpopular war . He was killed in the Battle of the Second World War .
 The Greek Junta is the name given to the April 21, 1967, military coup that ended Greek parliamentary democracy . After seven years of democracy, the Junta ended parliamentary democracy in Greece .
 The suggested reason for this military action was the prevention of an impending communist takeover . It was suggested that this was to prevent an impending Communist takeover .
 There remains little or no evidence to confirm that this threat was real . However, there remains little evidence that this is real .
 The immediate background to the event was a series of social, economic, and political developments in the period from 1963 to 1967 that affected Greek stability . The events occurred during the period between 1963 and 1967 .
 A leftist conspiracy of military personnel known as ASPIDA threatened the monarchy and the existing military structure, was also uncovered during this time . The leftist conspiracy was uncovered during the time of the dictatorship .
 Greece entered a period of continual uncertainty with a series of unsatisfactory governments that failed to establish a solid governing base . Greece has been in a state of uncertainty for more than a decade .
 The Right, especially within the military, had become suspicious of these political maneuvers and the accompanying instability . The Right became suspicious of the military's moves, especially in the military .
 Many of the officers came from the lower social classes . They felt that their rise and prestige had been undermined by the country’s corrupt political elite . Many of them felt their rise was undermined .
 Archbishop Makarios's leadership was demanding concessions from the island’s Turkish minority, who threatened to bring about outright war with Turkey . In addition to social tension, Cyprus, under Archbishop Makario, was .
 A Turkish invasion was prevented in 1964 by the United States . The United States prevented a Turkish invasion in 1964 . Peacekeeping forces were used to maintain peace .
 Greece’s King Constantine II was coping with youth and inexperience, having been king only since March 1964 . Constantine II had been king of Greece only since 1964 .
 The threat of George Papandreou’s return to power motivated the king to plan his own revolt, which was also scheduled for April 21, 1967 . The king's revolt was also planned to be held on April 21 .
 Their action changed the course of postwar Greek history and took the entire political establishment by surprise . Their action took the whole political establishment in Greece by surprise. Their action was a surprise.
 Led by Colonels Georgios Papadopoulos and Nicholas Makarezos, the army struck on the morning of April 21 . Backed by a vague revolutionary council, the Greek army struck .
 Communications were seized, as were other key civic and military installations, and martial law was declared . The king and his advisers appeared to have endorsed the declaration of martial law .
 Constantine attempted a countercoup in December 1967; it was ill-conceived and failed even before it started . Constantine attempted to counter-coup, but it failed before he started .
 Constantine’s final recourse was to flee into exile with his family . Constantine was forced to flee to exile in order to save his life . Constantine's final recourse to escape was to go into exile .
 The junta’s political philosophy was ill-defined but generally paternalistic and authoritarian, with populist overtones . It was designed to appeal to the peasantry and workers .
 They promoted Greek nationalism and proclaimed themselves as defenders of Greek values, civilization, and Christianity . They proclaimed themselves to be defenders of the Greek values and Christianity, and Christian values .
 In essence, the junta wanted to discipline Greek society and, in 1968, produced a new authoritarian constitution to allow them to do so . The junta produced an authoritarian constitution in 1968 to allow it to operate in Greece .
 They made frequent use of propaganda and the secret police and military police to silence critics and opponents . They used to use propaganda and secret police, to silence opponents and critics . They also used secret police in order to silence opposition .
 Such violations gave the colonels a bad international reputation within Europe . Such violations left them with few friends within Europe, leaving them with little friends .
 Colonel Georgios Papadopoulos soon rose to command the regime . He held a position until November 1973, when he was in charge .
 The regime managed to maintain its membership in NATO while suffering only minor criticisms . U.S. military aid was curtailed from 1967 to 1973 . The regime was heavily criticized by the United States .
 Greece's strategic position in the Mediterranean in the face of cold war realities meant that the U.S. needed Greek ports to be open to the Sixth Fleet . Greece’s strategic position . in the . face of the cold war reality meant that . the . United States needed Greek
 The junta eventually failed because of its inability to govern effectively or respond to external crises . The military junta failed because it was unable to respond to crises .
 By relying on crude suppression, the colonels destroyed any chance for popular support . The colonels used crude suppression to destroy any chance of popular support, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Campaigns against the regime, such as Andreas Papandreou’s Panhellenic Liberation Movement, were maintained from abroad . The regime was overthrown by the Greek government in 1991 .
 The most important cause was the rise of an active university student opposition . But the most important is the rise in an active student opposition to the government .
 Dimitrios Ioannidis, a previous secret police head, seized junta leadership from Papadopoulos . This, in turn, he led the junta to take control of the government .
 Ioannidis then searched for a populist/nationalist cause to restore the government . Ioannidi then searched . for an anti-establishment cause .
 A confrontation with Turkey over oil deposits in the Aegean seemed to be the ideal circumstance . A confrontation between Turkey and Greece was the perfect circumstance .
 Ioannidis thought he had he had the military challenge he needed, but dissent and dissatisfaction in the heart of the military establishment left him isolated . He was isolated by dissent from the establishment, leaving him isolated in Greece .
 The only resolution to the junta’s failure was a return to legitimacy, which was now backed by the military itself . The junta's failure was the only resolution for the failure, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Former prime minister Konstantinos Karamanlis returned from exile in Paris and restored democratic government . He was in exile from exile from Paris and returned to Greece in 1994 .
 He reintroduced political parties, created a new constitution modeled on that of France, and purged junta supporters from the military and civil service . He created political parties and created new constitution .
 He also sought a referendum on the future of the monarchy, which produced a 70 percent majority against the restoration of the king .
 The new constitution of 1975 increased the powers of the executive in the form of a president .
 The junta leaders were tried and given death sentences, which were later commuted . They were later sentenced to life in prison for their crimes .
 Some military and police officers were convicted of more serious crimes . Some of the most serious crimes were carried out in the military .
 The term Green Revolution refers to the incredible transformation of agriculture in developing nations between the 1940s and 1960s . Theodore W Evers ole Green Revolution . The Green Revolution is the name of the revolution in agriculture between 1940 and 1960 .
 Agricultural research and the development of infrastructure led to significant increases in agricultural production . Programs of agricultural research and development of . infrastructure .
 The Green Revolution has had significant social and ecological impact on the world, and because of this has been equally praised and criticized . It has had a significant social, ecological impact, and has also been criticized .
 For English wheat yield to increase from one-half metric ton per hectare to two metric tons took 1,000 years . The increase from two to six metric tons in 40 years took only 40 years . English wheat yields increased from one half metric ton to one metric ton .
 The change took place due to improvements in breeding, agronomy, and the use of pesticides and fertilizers . The change is due to improved breeding and agronomics .
 The result was that by the second half of the 20th century most industrial countries were agriculturally self-sufficient . By the end of the century most industrialized countries were self-sustainable .
 Colonial powers invested little in the food production systems of their colonies and did nothing to slow population growth . By independence in the 1950s-1960s, the new nations were approaching a crisis .
 India suffered back-to-back droughts in the mid-1960s, exacerbating the problem . The country suffered back to back to-back drought in the 1960s . Back to Mail Online home .
 The Rockefeller and Ford foundations led in the establishment of the international agricultural research system . The system adapts the latest science and technology to the Third World to adapt the latest technology .
 Efforts focused on rice and wheat, two of the principal sources of food in the developing world . Efforts focus on rice, wheat and other key sources of rice and other food in developing countries .
 United States Agency for International Development administrator William S Gaud coined the term ‘Green Revolution’ in 1968 . Gaud was a U.S. administrator for the U.N. Agency for . International Development .
 The Green Revolution created higher crop yields, but also may have contributed to widespread environmental damage . The 'Green Revolution' may have also contributed to environmental damage, experts say .
 By 1970 approximately 20 percent of the Third World’s wheat area and 30 percent of rice land in developing countries were planted in high-yield varieties . By 1970 around 20 percent . of the . Third World's wheat area was planted with high yield varieties .
 The Green Revolution led to markedly improved yields of cereal grains during the 1960s-1970s . The development of new seeds through genetics led to the development of the new crop varieties .
 Norman E Borlaug led a team that developed a strain of wheat resistant to disease and efficient in converting fertilizer and water into grain . Borlau developed the strain that was resistant to diseases and efficient to convert fertilizer into grain using water and fertilizer .
 Shorter and sturdier stalks were necessary to allow the plant to hold the larger grain yield . Sturdier and shorter stalks are necessary to keep the plant in operation .
 By 1956 it was self-sufficient, and by 1964 it was exporting half a million tons annually . By 1956, it had been selfsufficient and self-exporporporated .
 Equal success in India and Pakistan kept millions from starving . Equal success kept millions of people from starving. Equal success was achieved in India, Pakistan .
 As the technologies spread through the world, crop yields increased each year . Crop yields have increased in the past few years .
 Production of rice and wheat and other genetically altered crops grew, but output of indigenous crops declined . Output of other indigenous crops, including pulses, declined as a result .
 The International Rice Research Institute developed semidwarf rice plants . The institute is based on the efforts of China, Japan and Taiwan .
 By 1992 a network of 18 research centers, primarily in developing countries, continued the effort to improve yields . By 1992, the network had expanded to include 18 countries .
 At the same time the Green Revolution came under criticism because it requires fertilizer, irrigation, and other tools unavailable to impoverished farmers . The Green Revolution has been criticized for its lack of access to fertilizer and irrigation .
 The emphasis on monoculture leads to a loss of genetic diversity . Most important, it leads to the loss of diversity in the species .
 Academic critics note that increasing food production does not necessarily lead to improved food security . Academic critics, such as the economist Arartya Sen, say increased food production doesn't lead to better food security.
 The crops are created through crossbreeding or random mutagenesis to improve crop yield and increase durability . Crossbreeding allows for longer shipment and storage times, allowing for longer shipments and storage time .
 Modified strains still depended heavily on the high use of fertilizers, which consume fossil fuels, instead of the traditional crop rotation, mixing of crops, and use of animal manure . Modified strains are still dependent on the use of fertilizer, which consumes fossil fuels .
 Large-scale irrigation entailed the use of large volumes of natural monsoon and other water sources . And large-scale . irrigation . entailed . use of huge volumes of . natural . monsoon . sources .
 Control of pests and weeds by pesticides and herbicides also improved crops . Control of pest and weeds also improved the crops .
 India became one of the world’s largest producers of food grain . India is also an exporter of grain grain and a major exporter .
 The Green Revolution also allowed food production to match population growth . Food production grew faster than the rate of food production in the 1930s . The revolution was the result of the Green Revolution .
 Farmers and agricultural workers have seen increases in income as production costs have dropped . Production costs have also dropped markedly in the past year .
 Mechanization encouraged collectivization, or corporatism, because the machines were too expensive for small landowners . Corporatism is a form of collectivism, but it's not a solution to the problem .
 After the initial exploitation, real improvement occurred for many poor farmers, real improvements were made . After the first exploitation, the real improvement was made for poor farmers .
 Between 1970 and 1995, real per capita incomes in Asia almost doubled, with a decline in poverty from nearly 60 percent to less than 33 percent . Asia's poverty rate has fallen from 60 percent in 1970s to 33 percent in 1995 .
 India’s rural poor before the mid-1960s ranged from 50 to 65 percent; by 1993 the number was about 33 percent . By 1993, the number of rural poor in India was 33 percent.
 Critics object to emphasis on genetically modified, high-yield crops at the expense of quality ones . Vandana Shiva and other critics of the Green Revolution object to the emphasis on high yield crops .
 The dependence on a few strains increases the risk of disaster if a new crop pest arises . The dependence of a few strain strains is also a risk to farmers .
 The revolution also makes populations dependent on external sources of food, it has been claimed .
 The potential for future improvement through breeding of different strains is weakened . And the potential of future improvement by breeding is weakened, scientists say .
 Critics say the reduction in crop types leads to a less varied, less healthy diet . Critics also note that the crops are produced for volume, not nutritional quality, not quantity .
 Herbicides kill wild plants that are traditionally eaten as vegetables, further restricting the variety in many diets . Herbicide kills wild plants, further restricts the variety of vegetables eaten in the wild . Herbicides are often used to kill the wild plants in a bid to grow vegetables .
 Water buffalo exposed to the pesticide-rich land develop hoof-and-mouth disease . Pesticide-poisoned water buffalo have been found to be resistant to hoof and mouth disease .
 Some villages that were previously self-sufficient are suddenly enduring famine that seems irreversible . Some villages are now suffering from famine that seem irreversible .
 Supporters note that the Green Revolution has created higher gross nutrition levels and increased the intake of calories . Supporters say that the increase in calories is due to the increased intake of food .
 To promote variety, advocates encourage the planting of vegetable gardens .
 There is more attention to developing altered versions of less common crops . The newer varieties have improved nutrient content, for example, the “golden rice” with increased carotene .
 High-yield sorghum, millet, maize, cassava, and beans are now available in Nigeria . High yield sorghums, millets, maize and cassava are also now available .
 Farmers have to buy seed each year, and the seed they buy is usually hybrid . Traditional seeds produce much less than hybrid ones . Farmers buy hybrid seeds each year .
 The Green Revolution also brought traditional subsistence farmers into the world of large-scale industrial agriculture .
 Many are forced off their farms and into urban poverty because their small holdings are not competitive with the large agribusinesses . Many of them are forced to live in urban poverty .
 Dependence on chemical fertilizers also leads to ecological damage such as on the Pacific island of Nauru, which was mined extensively for its phosphates .
 DDT and other chemicals used in the early Green Revolution have given way to safer varieties, but the impact remains . DDT was used to create the "Green Revolution" in the 1960s and '70s .
 Critics claim that the Green Revolution’s methods destroy land quality because irrigation increases salinity, soil erosion increases and the soil loses organic material and trace elements .
 The soil weakens, and chemical dependency grows until the soil finally fails . Chemical dependency on the soil grows until it fails, and the soil fails .
 Supporters counter that new techniques will develop as resources become scarce or environmental damage becomes likely . Supporters say they will develop new techniques as resources are scarce .
 Work continues on the development of alternative energy sources, disease resistant crops, and closed nutrient cycles .
 Technology, and Society, Food, Population, and Employment; The Impact of the Green Revolution. The impact of the green revolution. Technology, Food and Society. Food, population, and employment. The Impact . of the . Green Revolution . Technology, . Food, . Population and Employment
 The action garnered widespread domestic popular and bipartisan support, while being roundly condemned by much of the international community . A clear violation of international law, the action was widely condemned by many of the world's nations .
 The United States cast the sole dissenting vote in the Security Council on a resolution condemning the invasion . The U.N. General Assembly overwhelmingly condemned the invasion; the U.S. was the only dissenting vote .
 The invasion boosted Reagan’s popularity at home; intimidated leftist movements and parties throughout the circum-Caribbean . The invasion resulted in a corrupt and elite-dominated post-invasion government characteristic of the region .
 The invasion’s antecedents have been traced to the 1979 triumph of the leftist Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua; ongoing leftist revolutionary movements and civil wars in El Salvador, Guatemala, and elsewhere in the circumCaribbean .
 Independent from Great Britain since 1974, Grenada was ruled from 1974 to 1979 by Prime Minister Sir Eric Gairy . Gairy was notorious for his preoccupations with the occult, his ‘Mongoose Squad’ kept his opponents in check .
 From 1979 to 1983, the economy grew at an average of 9 percent . Literacy rates increased from 85 to 98 percent . The nation’s health, education, and welfare systems were reformed and expanded .
 Bishop articulated a socialist, anti-imperialist vision at odds with U.S. economic, strategic, and security interests in the region . Bishop was influenced as much by Jamaican musician Bob Marley as by Marx . Bishop, as much as a nationalist as socialist, articulated a
 Bishop government did not hold elections as promised, imposed press censorship, jailed political opponents, and lent rhetorical support to the Soviet Union and Cuba . Bishop government also imposed censorship, imposed jailing of political opponents .
 On October 19, 1983, hard-liner Bernard Coard ousted Bishop, precipitating islandwide protests and a general strike . New Jewel hard-liners led the island nation to oust Bishop . Coard's ouster precipitated islandwide demonstrations and general strikes .
 Coard’s forces killed several dozen protesters and executed Bishop and two cabinet members . After crowds forced his release, crowds forced him to be executed, Coard's forces killed dozens .
 Reagan administration claimed they were in imminent danger and prevented from leaving St. George’s School of Medicine in 1980s . Reagan administration said the school was at risk of being bombed .
 The Grenada invasion comprises a minor but revealing episode in the late cold war in the Western Hemisphere . Grenada was a major part of the Cold War in the 1980s and 1990s .
 From 1960 to 1996, the nation-state of Guatemala was convulsed by a civil war that caused the deaths of at least 200,000 people . The civil war in Guatemala lasted between 1960 and 1996 . The death toll from the civil war is estimated at 200,500 .
 The worst years of the violence were 1981-82, when the U.S.-backed government launched what has been accurately characterized as “acts of genocide” against the country’s majority indigenous population . The report was published by the Commission for Historical Clarification .
 The short-term origins of the civil war have been traced to the U.S. Central Intelligence Agencyorchestrated coup of 1954, following a decade of farreaching reforms .
 In 1960 a group of junior officers revolted and formed an even more hard-line military government . In 1960, the government was formed by an even harder-line government .
 Beginning in 1966 the army launched a major counterinsurgency campaign in rural areas . The campaign eliminated most armed resistance to the regime . Most armed resistance was eliminated by the army .
 Guerrilla operations continued in urban areas through economic sabotage and targeted assassinations . Attacks continued to be carried out in the U.S.
 Repression by the military, right-wing paramilitaries, and death squads such as the White Hand intensified . Tortures and murders of labor organizers, community activists, students, professionals, and other suspected leftists intensified .
 His presidency is linked to the worst human rights abuses in the 36-year civil war . Human rights organizations amply documented the ‘acts of genocide” perpetrated by his government .
 In March 1994 a United NATiONS-sponsored peace process resulted in an accord between the URNG and the government . The accord was signed by the United Nations in March 1994 .
 The final peace accord was signed on December 29, 1996, formally ending the 36-year civil war . The major events of which are amply documented in the 1999 CEH Report and related reports .
 The Official Report of the Human Rights Office, Archdiocese of Guatemala, was published by the Archbishop of Guatemala . The report was compiled by the Archdiocesal of Guatemala's Human Rights Council .
 Ernesto Guevara de la Serna joined Fidel Castro’s 26 July Movement in late 1955 . An iconic Eatin American revolutionary .
 An exceptionally effective guerrilla leader, his charisma, intelligence, and revolutionary idealism soon made him one of the leading figures of the early years of the Cuban revolution .
 He was the primary impetus behind the notion of the socialist ‘New Man,” at the core of many Cuban government policies in the early 1960s . Revolutionary fervor was seen as more fundamental than material incentives in propelling workers to produce .
 Fidel Castro was inspired by the 'foco' theory of revolution . He traveled to Bolivia in 1967 to test his theory . He was convinced that Cuba’s successes could be replicated in other countries .
 The anticipated popular uprising failed to materialize, and after a few months he was captured and executed by the Bolivian military . He was captured by the military and executed .
 His writings on revolution and guerrilla warfare remain classics of the era . His work on revolution, guerrilla warfare, remains classics of his time .
 Guevara was a frail and sickly boy, suffering asthma that plagued him throughout his life . Born on June 14,1927, to a wealthy landowning family in Rosario, Argentina .
 Raised Roman Catholic, because of his asthma he was educated mainly at home by his mother, Celia de la Serna y Llosa, and his four siblings .
 His father, Ernesto Guevara Lynch, was a businessman and for a time ran a mate farm owned by his wife . Lynch's father was also a businessman .
 From his mother, he acquired his lifelong passion for books, learning, and politics . He became close to his mother throughout his life .
 After completing his high school studies he began studying engineering . After completing high school, he decided to focus on engineering .
 In 1947 he and his family moved to Buenos Aires, Argentina, where he studied engineering . He entered the university to study engineering before switching to medicine . He was born in Buenos Aires and moved to Argentina in 1947 .
 After Arbenz’s overthrow in a U.S.-orchestrated coup in 1954, Guevara journeyed to Mexico and established contact with Cuban exile Fidel Castro . After his overthrow in 1954 he became involved in anti-imperialism .
 He joined Castro’s 26 July Movement and soon became one of its leaders . Convinced that Castro was the visionary revolutionary he had long sought, he joined the 26 July movement .
 Guevara played a central role in the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista's war against Cuba in 1956 . The group played a key role in Cuba's struggle against the dictator .
 After Batista’s ouster, Guevara was appointed to the National Institute of Agrarian Reform . He later became president of the National Bank, minister of industries, and ambassador to the United Nations .
 During this period he developed ideas regarding the socialist New Man and his foco theory of revolution . During this time he developed his ideas regarding socialism and the New Man .
 In late 1966 he traveled to Bolivia in the hope of sparking a mass insurrection . After failing in several attempts to launch socialist revolutions in other countries (including Panama, the Dominican Republic, and Congo) in late 1966, he traveled there to launch a revolution .
 On October 8, 1967, he and his bedraggled forces were captured by the Bolivian military . The next day he was executed .
 He is widely considered one of the most important revolutionary figures of the 20th century . He is also considered a major figure in the world's most important political movements .
 Che Guevara was a member of the Communist Party of Argentina . He was killed by the death of Che Chevez in 1968 . Chevez was the leader of the Cuban Revolution in Argentina .
 The First Gulf War was fought by a coalition of forces from 34 countries against Iraq in 1991 . The war was fought in response to the 1990 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait .
 The war began because of several crises stemming from the Iran-Iraq War of 198088 . The Iraq-Iran war began in 198088 after a series of crises .
 Iraq was left with huge debts, largely to other Arab nations that had helped to finance the war, and extensive material damage . However, the Iraqi military had benefited from the war by becoming the strongest military force in the Gulf .
 Kuwaiti government made the disastrous decision to increase its oil production in violation of OPEC agreements . OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) agreements were violated .
 The Kuwaitis increased oil extraction from the Rumaila oil wells, which lay on disputed territory with neighboring Iraq . The wells are located in disputed territory .
 Kuwaiti increase in oil production helped lower oil prices and slowly began to strangle Iraq economically . Iraqi revenues were 90 percent dependent on oil, and the increase in output helped lower prices .
 Until the early 20th century Kuwait had been a semi-independent emirate administered from Baghdad under the Ottoman Empire . Kuwait was an independent semi-colonial state of the late 19th century .
 During the 19th century British influence in the Gulf increased . After World War I Britain was responsible for drawing the borders between the two nations .
 Iraq ultimately established diplomatic relations with Kuwait, many Iraqis continued to view it as part of Iraq . Many Iraqis still believed it was part of the country .
 Iraq also owed $14 billion from the Iran-Iraq War to Kuwait . Iraq had expected that Kuwait would cancel the debt since Iraq had fought and suffered during the long war with Iran .
 Kuwait refused to cancel the debt, demanded its immediate repayment . Kuwait not only refused, it demanded immediate repayment of the debt .
 During the Iran-Iraq War many of Iraq’s limited port facilities in the Shatt al-Arab were destroyed, leaving Iraq almost landlocked . During the war many of the country's limited ports facilities were destroyed .
 Kuwait had greater strategic access to the Persian Gulf, which Iraq viewed as essential were hostilities to erupt again with Iran . Iraq viewed the situation as essential .
 From 1988 to 1990, Saddam Hussein increased his threats against Kuwait, asking for cancellation of Iraq’s debts . From 1988-1990, Iraq's debt to Kuwait was canceled .
 King Hussein of Jordan sought help from King of Jordan to mediate the problems . King Hussein also sought help .
 In July 1990 Saddam met with the United States ambassador April Glaspie and stated his grievances regarding Kuwait . He took a controversial response that he took him to mean that the U.S. would not become involved in the dispute if he took stronger steps to rectify the problem .
 The Iraqi military quickly overran and occupied all of Kuwait, and the ruling family fled the country . The ruling family of Kuwait was forced to flee the country after the Iraqi military took overran Kuwait .
 Hussein justified the invasion based on Kuwait’s slant-drilling into Iraqi oil fields across the border, as well as his complaints over debt cancellation . Hussein justified his decision to invade Iraq based on the slant drilling into the border . Hussein said the invasion was justified based on
 He also appealed to Arab nationalism, claiming that Kuwait was part of Iraq, calling it the 19th province of Iraq . He also claimed that Kuwait, which is now part of the country, was a province in Iraq .
 Operation Desert Shield was begun on August 7, 1990, to defend Saudi Arabia from a possible Iraqi attack . The U.S. military beefed up its forces in Saudi Arabia to defend its Saudi ally from an attack . Desert Shield began in August 1990 .
 The UN placed a January 15, 1991, deadline for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait . In addition, the UN placed an additional deadline for the withdrawal of Kuwait .
 The United States and the UN assembled a coalition force of 34 countries to implement this resolution by force if Iraq fails to comply . The U.S. and 34 countries have assembled a force to implement the resolution .
 On January 12, 1991, the United States Congress narrowly approved the use of U.S. military force in an operation against Iraq . The United States voted to use military force against Iraq in 1991 .
 Operation Desert Storm was launched in 1991 after Iraq failed to comply with a January 15 deadline . A massive monthlong air campaign was launched against Baghdad and much of Iraq . The U.S. launched Desert Storm in 1991 .
 The air attacks, over 1,000 in number, disabled military and communication installations . They severely weakened the Iraqi military and infrastructure . The air strikes were launched by the Iraqi government in 2003 .
 Iraqi troops hastily retreated back across the border, setting Kuwaiti oil fields on fire as they withdrew . Iraqi troops set fire to the oil fields as they retreated, setting them alight .
 This caused massive environmental damage that persisted into the 21st century . It was caused by the devastation of the Great Depression in the 1930s .
 Iraqi troops dumped 1 million tons of crude oil into the Persian Gulf . Iraqi troops also dumped approximately 1 million tonnes of oil into Persian Gulf.
 The quick victory was a surprise, and the war ended sooner than predicted . "The quick victory is a surprise," says President Obama .
 On February 27, 1991, Kuwait was officially liberated and the Iraq-Kuwait border was restored . Kuwait City was recaptured, and Kuwait was declared a free state of Kuwait .
 President Bush justified this decision by noting that the goal of the coalition had been to liberate Kuwait . President Bush said this decision was justified by the fact that it had been made to liberate the country .
 U.S. administration hoped that continued economic sanctions against Iraq would lead Iraqi people to revolt against Hussein . However, the United States administration hoped continued sanctions would lead to an uprising against Hussein and oust him .
 The sanctions caused the deaths of an estimated 500,000 Iraqis, mostly women and children . They had little effect on Hussein’s regime, extending its political control over a nation crippled by years of war .
 The First Gulf War was a military success, succeeding in liberating Kuwait, but it did not change the Iraqi regime . The Iraqi regime was overthrown by the U.S. in 1991, but not by Iraq .
 The United States, Great Britain, and a small number of other nations moved to oust Hussein and occupy Iraq in the Second Gulf War, beginning in 2003 .
 The stated justification for the invasion was that Saddam Hussein, ruler of Iraq, had weapons of mass destruction and supported terrorism . The Iraqi people were suffering under his tyranny and needed to be freed, he says .
 The United States contended that Iraq was in violation of both U.N. Security Council Resolution 1441 and the terms of the 1991 cease-fire agreement . The U.S. contends that Iraq is violating both the UN resolution and the peacekeepers' terms .
 Documents prohibited Iraq from possessing or researching WMDs . Both Iraq and the U.S. have been involved in the Iraq War . Iraq was not allowed to have or research WMDS .
 Allegations that Saddam was linked in some way to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks were never supported by evidence . Allegations were never proven to have been true .
 A “Coalition of the Willing” was created by the U.S. in the time after September 11, 2001 and the invasion of Iraq in 2003 . 98 percent of the Coalition troops were British and American .
 Coalition forces assembled for the attack on Iraq numbered just under 300,000 . The Coalition forces gathered for the Iraq attack were assembled in Iraq in 2003 . The coalition forces assembled that day were only about 300,500 .
 Iraqi army numbered 390,000 soldiers, plus 44,000 Fedayeen and potentially 650,000 reserves . The Iraqi army is thought to have around 650,500 troops .
 The 2003 invasion was not preceded by an extended bombing campaign, as was the 1991 attack . The invasion of Iraq in 2003 was not followed by a long bombing campaign .
 The strategy for the 2003 invasion depended on speed and precision strikes to destroy Iraqi command rapidly enough to ensure that the defenses would collapse . The strategy was to destroy command quickly enough to kill Iraqi command lines .
 A primary strategic goal of the Coalition was to limit damage to Iraq’s oil production capability . Key sites related to the oil industry were to be secured as quickly as possible, the Coalition says .
 The course of the invasion was designed to prevent both the destruction of oil sites and to limit the Iraqi army’s ability to concentrate their defenses . The Iraqi army was able to concentrate its defenses, allowing the invasion to destroy oil sites .
 British forces concentrated on securing southeastern Iraq, particularly the Basra area . British forces were deployed in southeastern Iraq in 2003 .
 Major actions took place at Nasiriyah and Karbala where the Iraqis defended important crossroads and bridges over the Euphrates River . Major actions also took place in the city of Nasirahiyah, which is located on the border with Iraq .
 In the third week of the invasion, United States forces entered Baghdad . The U.S. entered Baghdad in 2003 .
 Raids called “Thunder Runs’ were launched on April 5 and 7 to test Iraqi defenses in the capital . Raids were launched to capture the key objectives of the Baghdad Airport and Saddam’s palace complex .
 Saddam was declared deposed and went into hiding, and many Iraqis rejoiced by defacing his monuments . Many Iraqis were happy to deface Saddam's monuments .
 Looting followed the fall of the regime, with store goods, museum items, and military arms and equipment being targeted . Outbreaks of violence between tribes and cities based on old grudges have occurred .
 Saddam’s sons Uday and Qusay, along with a grandson, were killed during a standoff at their fortified safe house in Mosul in 2003 . On July 22, 2003, Saddam's sons and a grandson were killed in the standoff .
 After the fall of Baghdad and Saddam’s regime, the Coalition Provisional Authority was formed . Two United States Marines speak with local Iraqi woman during a security patrol .
 The marines were assigned to Weapons Platoon, Fox Company, 2nd Battalion, 7th Marine Regiment . The marines are assigned to weapons Platoon .
 The CPA officially controlled Iraq from April 21, 2003, until June 28, 2004 . CPA was officially controlled by the CPA from 2003 to 2004 .
 The CPA opposed holding elections in Iraq shortly after the fall of Saddam Hussein . It wanted to hand power over to an appointed interim Iraqi government, which would be chosen by the Coalition .
 ISG was charged with finding the WMDs that Iraq alleged to possess . The ISG has been accused of carrying out WMD operations in Iraq .
 Iraq was known to have nuclear, biological, ballistic missile, and chemical weapons programs prior to the 1991 Gulf War . They could not find any WMDs or programs to build them even though Iraq had nuclear, biological weapons programs .
 The media explored a new format to cover the war by “embedding’s journalists inside military units . Journalists are embedded in military units to cover up the conflict .
 The war also saw for the first time soldiers instantly reporting their activities by means of digital cameras, cell phones, and the Internet . Soldiers instantly reported their activities using digital cameras and cell phones .
 Uncensored soldiers’ stories, photos, Web blogs, and movies became available shortly after events took place in Iraq and Afghanistan . Uncensoring soldiers' stories and photos became available after events .
 Arabic news networks such as al Jazeera provided the Islamic viewpoint and was available worldwide though satellite TV and on the Internet . Arabic news was available through satellite TV, satellite TV .
 On May 1, 2003, major combat operations were declared over by U.S. president George W Bush . Major combat operations have been declared over in 2003 .
 Peace was short-lived, as a disjointed insurgency took hold in Iraq with many factions fighting for control . The country's first Iraqi government was overthrown in 2003 .
 They included religious radicals, Fedayeen, Ba’athists, foreign Arabs, and other Muslim jihadis . And Iraqis opposed to the occupation .
 The insurgency was a chaotic decentralized movement with as many as 40 separate groups fighting for control . The insurgency is a chaotic, decentralized decentralized movement . It was formed by up to 40 different groups .
 The picture was further clouded as each group was splintered into large numbers of semiautonomous cells .
 Insurgent attacks increased around Iraq, but especially in the ‘Sunni Triangle” home to most of the Sunni population . The region is home to the majority of Iraq's Sunni population, home to many of the country's Sunni residents .
 In late 2004 the focus of insurgent attacks switched from Coalition forces to the newly elected Iraqi government and its collaborators, including the Shi’i population . Coalition forces were attacked by insurgents in late 2004 .
 At the end of March 2004 insurgents in the town of Fallujah ambushed and killed four private military contractors from the Blackwater USA Corporation . The four contractors were killed in the ambush .
 Pictures of burned bodies hanging from a bridge were distributed around the world, causing outrage among Americans . Pictures of their burned bodies were distributed worldwide . Pictures were taken around the globe .
 Blackwater was one of many private companies that provided specialized services and expertise needed by the U.S. military . Blackwater is one of several private companies providing military expertise .
 The employees or contractors of these companies are typically men with special-forces or police backgrounds . The employees are typically employed by special forces or police .
 They are paid much more money than they would make in the official armed forces . They are also paid more than their counterparts in the military .
 It is believed that there were more than 100,000 private contractors in Iraq around 2007 . It is thought to have been at the peak of the private contractor boom .
 Two fierce battles were fought after attacks by the U.S. Marines to gain control of Fallujah after the Blackwater incident . The United States Marines launched attacks after the incident .
 The first battle in April 2004 was not successful and ended with the Marines withdrawing . First battle ended with Marines withdrawing from base in 2004 .
 The second battle, fought in November and December 2004, resulted in the complete takeover of Fallujah . More than 5,000 insurgents died in the second battle . Fallujah was overrun by the Taliban in 2004 .
 The battles for Fallujah are considered to be the heaviest urban fighting the U.S. Marines have done since the battle for Hue fought in Vietnam during 1968 . The battles are considered the most intense urban fighting in the history of the United States .
 On June 28, 2004, the CPA transferred sovereignty of Iraq to the Iraqi Interim Government, charged with holding national elections . The Interim government is charged with elections in Iraq .
 Interim Government was also to try Saddam Hussein for his many crimes . Interim government was to try Hussein for many crimes.
 Saddam Hussein was executed by hanging on December 26, 2006 . Saddam was sentenced to death for crimes against humanity at the end of his first trial . He was executed in 2006 .
 The Iraqi constitution was ratified on October 15, 2005, and a general election was held on December 15 to choose the new national assembly . Iraqi constitution ratified in 2005 .
 Iraq's constitution stipulated that 25 percent of the assembly seats must be held by women . In a first for Iraq, the constitution stipulates that 25 per cent of the seats in the assembly must be female . In Iraq, women will be allowed to hold seats in Iraq's parliament .
 Sunni minority feared their power slipping into the hands of the Shi’i majority . An escalation in sectarian violence followed an escalation in Sunni-Shi sectarian violence .
 Sunni bombers destroyed a very important Shi’i mosque and ignited a cycle of revenge violence in which both sides used bombs, ambushes, and death squads against both politicians and civilians . Both sides are using bombs and ambushes to kill civilians and politicians .
 Many feared that this sectarian violence could spread to other countries in the Middle East, especially if Iraq was splintered into independent Sunni, Shi’i, and Kurdish states .
 Many of the opposition insurgents and suicide bombers were in fact foreign Sunni Arabs who came to Iraq to fight against the U.S. and against the Shi’i . Many of those who came in to fight for the United States were Sunni Arabs .
 Abu Musab al-Zarqawi was one of the most notable foreign insurgent leaders . He was a key figure in the insurgency against al-Qaeda in Iraq .
 Born in Jordan, he moved around the Middle East and Central Asia working as a terrorist and jihadi . He took leadership of alQaeda in Iraq after the 2003 invasion .
 Some estimates as high as 900,000 Iraqi dead from all causes related to the war . Some estimates are as high . up as high up as 9,000 Iraqis killed in Iraq .
 In addition, an estimated 2 million Iraqis are said to have fled to Syria or Jordan . In addition to fleeing Iraq, 2 million Iraqi refugees have also fled to Jordan .
 Private contractors killed and wounded are not included in this figure and have not been published . Private contractors not included include private contractors killed or wounded .
 The Military Offensive, from Victory in 21 Days to the Insurgent Aftermath. The military offensive, from victory in 21 days to the insurgency's end, was a major success .
 The United States, Britain and Europe in the Aftermath of the Iraqi War. The U.S. and Europe are in the aftermath of the Iraq War.
 Hamas Hamas was an acronym of Harakat al-Muqawama alIslamiyaa in Arabic, literally “Islamic Resistance Movement” Hamas was both a part of a regionwide radical Islamic movement that developed in the 1980s .
 Hamas was established shortly after the outbreak of the first Intifada in the Gaza Strip in 1987 . Hamas established after the first intifada began in 1987, when Hamas was formed .
 Its political program and ideology was drafted in lofty Arabic rhetoric and religious symbolism . The program was drafted with lofty rhetoric .
 Hamas regarded nationalism as an implication of religious faith and struggle against the enemy as a religious duty . Hamas regarded nationalism as a result of religious belief .
 Both its charter and many of its official statements are harsh and uncompromising . The group is known for its harsh language and its uncompromising policies .
 The Hamas underground militant operations included a number of suicide bombings that killed a few hundred Israeli soldiers and civilians . Hamas underground operations included suicide bombings, especially in 1996 and 2000 .
 During the second intifada, Hamas organized clinics and schools that served Palestinians . It also summarily executed Palestinian collaborators with Israel .
 Many Hamas leaders and activists, including its founder, Sheikh Yassin, and his successor, Dr. Dr. Shamsi, have died in Gaza .
 Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi, were assassinated by Israel during the so-called targeted killing operations . The targeted killings were carried out by Israel in the early 1980s .
 The social programs and political and religious stance of Hamas contributed to its considerable popularity among the Palestinians . Hamas is a Palestinian state of origin . Hamas was founded by Hamas in 2007 .
 Hamas participated in the January/May 2005 Palestinian municipal elections . Hamas achieved control of some places such as Beit Lahya in northern Gaza, Qalqiliya in the West Bank, and Rafah . Hamas won the elections in 2005 .
 Hamas faced diplomatic and financial pressure to adjust its ideology to Western and Israeli demands . After the elections Hamas faced considerable diplomatic pressure from the West and Israel .
 In June 2007 Hamas attacked their Fatah rivals, resulting in Hamas taking control of the Gaza Strip . Hamas took control of Gaza Strip, while West Bank remained under control of National Authority .
 Institute for Palestine Studies, 2000; Mishal, Shaul, and Avraham Sela. Institute for Palestinian Studies. 2000 . Institute of Palestine Studies . 2000 .
 As a member of a former bourgeois family in a communist regime, Havel was denied privileges, including education . Havel is denied privileges including education, including those in communist regime .
 In order to finish high school he had to enroll in night school while supporting himself as a lab assistant . He enrolled at night school and supported himself as lab assistant in a lab .
 He trained for a short time at a technical institution . He later completed his theater degree as a part-time student at the Academy of Arts . He is now a member of the National Theater Network .
 After his mandatory military service Havel worked first at the ABC Theater and then at the Theater on the Ballustrade . Havel was known for experimental theater .
 In the 1960s, Havel gained acclaim as a leader in the theater of the absurd in Czechoslovakia . Here, in the 60s, he gained acclaim for his role in the '60s .
 Many of Havel's plays were highly critical of the totalitarian state’s oppression of individual liberties . Havel was critical of state's oppression of individuals .
 Havel played an important role in the Prague Spring, a 1968 reform movement led by Alexander Dubcek . Havel was a key figure in the movement that led to the 1968 Prague Spring .
 His outspoken support for human rights during the period earned him the antagonism of the communist government . He was known for his outspoken support of human rights .
 When Warsaw Pact forces invaded Czechoslovakia in August 1968, Havel was prohibited from involvement in public affairs . Havel's plays were banned from performance or publication .
 In spite of this Havel continued to write, and his plays and books were published to acclaim in other countries . Havel's plays, books and plays are still being published .
 Havel was arrested and imprisoned a number of times during his work for human rights in Czechoslovakia . He was imprisoned and imprisoned for his human rights work .
 In 1989 he participated in a commemoration of the 1969 death of Czech student Jan Palach and was again imprisoned for several months . He was imprisoned in 1989 for participating in a protest against the murder of Czech students in 1969 .
 In the same year the Civic Forum, which Havel had helped establish, began a series of protests that overthrew the communist government in what has become known as the Velvet Revolution . The Civic Forum was founded by Havel in 1989 .
 In December a heavily Communist parliament chose Havel as the new interim president of Czechoslovakia . Havel was chosen by heavily Communist Parliament in December .
 After national elections the new Federal Assembly reelected him in June 1990 . He was reelected in 1990 .
 During his 13 years as leader of postcommunist Czechoslovakia, Havel brought his country back into the mainstream of European politics . Havel spent 13 years in charge of post-communist country .
 Havel negotiated withdrawal of Soviet troops and forged friendships with the U.S. and European nations . He negotiated withdrawal from the Soviet Union and negotiated the withdrawal .
 Czech Republic became a member of the Council of Europe, NATO, and the European Union . Czech Republic joined the EU in 2007 after a referendum on the EU . The Czech Republic is now part of the Czech Republic .
 Hizbollah is a political, military, and social Islamic Shi’i organization . It was established in Lebanon in 1982 . It is based in Lebanon and Lebanon .
 After the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, Shi’i Muslims formed Hizbollah to combat the Israeli occupation . Shi'i Muslims with the assistance of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, formed the organization in Lebanon .
 In the mid-1980s the Hizbollah guerrillas, known as the Islamic Resistance, executed a series of operations against Israeli and United States targets to force the United States and Israel to withdraw all military presence from Lebanon .
 In 1996, the United Nations sponsored the ‘April Accord,” legitimizing Hizbollah as a resistance movement . The Accord legitimized the movement, which still exists today in Iran .
 Hizbollah continued fighting the IDF around the disputed, Israeli-occupied Shaaba Farms area . After the withdrawal of the IDF from southern Lebanon in May 2000, the IDF continued fighting .
 UN regarded Shaaba Farms as Syrian territory, but Hizbollah considered the area part of Lebanon . UN regarded the area as part of Syria, but not Lebanon, which borders Lebanon .
 Hizbollah also sought the release of Lebanese and Arab prisoners in Israel . The group has followed a strategy of snatching IDF soldiers in Shaba Farms to exchange for prisoners .
 In addition to its military wing, Hizbollah maintains a civilian arm, which runs hospitals, schools, orphanages, and one television station . In addition, Al-Manar runs one of the country's most popular television stations .
 Hizbollah remains active in Shi’i-dominated areas in Lebanon, including the Bekaa Valley, the southern suburbs of Beirut, and southern Lebanon .
 Vietnamese communist leader Ho Chi Minh’s original name was Nguyen Ai Quoc . He was also known as Nguyen Ai-Quoc, the leader of Vietnam's communist regime .
 He fought against French rule over his country and fought against the U.S. in Vietnam War . He struggled against the United States in the Vietnam War and fought for his country in Vietnam .
 Ho left an indelible mark in history . Combining ideology of communism with love of his country, Ho left a legacy in China .
 He was born in the village of Kim Lien in Annam on May 19, 1890, and received education from his father, Nguyen Sinh Huy, as well as in the local school . He was also educated by his father and his mother .
 He attended the National Academy school in Hue and then worked as a teacher in south Annam . He attended Hue's National Academy School in Hue .
 Ho traveled to the West to find means for liberating Vietnam from French rule . After taking a course in navigation, Ho traveled around the world to find ways to liberate Vietnam . Ho was inspired by his studies in navigation .
 He was appalled at the oppressive rule of the colonial masters and had a burning desire to free his country . He was also appalled by the oppressive colonial masters .
 Ho went to Marseilles in 1911 and after three years traveled to London, where he worked in the kitchen of the Carlton Hotel . After three years in London, Ho went on to work in Marseilles .
 He called for Vietnamese independence, convinced that the road to it was through the doctrine of Marxism-Leninism . Called for independence, he called for Vietnam independence through Marxism- Leninism .
 Ho edited a journal, Le Pariah, where he published articles on anticolonialism under the alias Nguyen Ai Quoc . Ho edited the journal under the pseudonym Nguyen Ai quoc . He published articles in the journal in Vietnam .
 Ho advocated anticolonial revolution in Asia . Ho played a prominent role in the fifth congress as well . Ho advocated anti-colonial revolution .
 Ho began to contact Vietnamese exiles in Guangzhou, Guangzhou in southern China . Ho began contacting the Vietnamese ex-Vietnamese ex-vietnamisis . Ho has been in contact with the exiles since 2003 .
 Its agenda was to end French rule in Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam; nationalize the economy; and institute land reforms . It was also nationalizing the economy and instituting land reforms in Laos and Cambodia .
 In neighboring Laos and Cambodia, communist parties such as the Pathet Lao and the Khmer Rouge were set up . In neighboring Cambodia and Laos, communists were also set up.
 Until its formal disbanding in February 1951, the ICP took the lead in Vietnam’s struggle against French rule . The ICP organized party cells, trade unions, and peasants . Ho was the leader of the Communist Party of Vietnam .
 Ho was in Moscow when World War II in Europe broke out on September 1, 1939 . Ho was there when the war broke out in Moscow .
 The war provided an opportunity to free Vietnam after the German victory over France that allowed Japan, Germany’s ally, to occupy Vietnam . Vietnam was liberated after the war .
 He established the Vietnam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi (League for the Independence of Vietnam) or Vietminh. Hoi . Hoi established the League for the independence of Vietnam .
 In the northern portion of Vietnam, liberated zones were set up near the Chinese border . liberated zones have been set up in the north of Vietnam .
 Ho was arrested by the Chinese government and returned to Vietnam in 1944 . Ho spent two years in jail in China before returning to Vietnam . He was arrested in 1944 and spent the rest of his life in China .
 In August 1945 Ho called for a revolution, and the Vietminh took control of Hanoi on August 17 . Ho was the prime minister of Vietnam's communist regime .
 A communist state, North Vietnam would be embroiled in cold war politics, war with France, and the struggle for unification of both the Vietnams after the French defeat . The state of North Vietnam was a communist state .
 Ho relentlessly followed his objective to establish a unified communist Vietnam . Ho relentlessly pursued his objective of establishing a unified state of Vietnam .
 After the breakdown of an agreement Ho had signed in Paris, the First Indochina War began . Ho signed an agreement to end the war in Vietnam .
 The Vietminh resorted to guerrilla warfare and by 1950 were in complete control of the northern portion of Vietnam . By 1950, they had control of most of Vietnam's northern areas .
 The United States, following a containment strategy in the cold war, gave military help to the French . The U.S. gave military assistance to France following the Cold War .
 The French-sponsored South Vietnam had been established in July 1949, which the United States recognized in 1950 . South Vietnam was established by France in 1949 . The U.S. recognized South Vietnam in 1950.
 Ho’s dream of a unified Vietnam had not been realized, and he would fight against the U.S. in the Vietnam War . Ho would go on to fight in Vietnam against the United States .
 Ho never wavered from the path toward his goal . Although much of his country was devastated, Ho was determined to keep his dream alive .
 Both Vietnams were unified in 1975, six years after Ho Chi Minh’s death . Both Vietnam and Vietnam were united in 1975 . Ho Chi-Minh died in 1968 .
 Duiker, William J Ho Chi Minh: A Life of the Vietnamese, was published in 2003 by Greenwood Publishing Group, 2003 . Duiker also published a biography of Vietnam's leader, Ho Chi-Minh, in 2003 .
 Britain acquired the adjoining Kowloon Peninsula (opposite Victoria, the principal island of the colony) from China under the Treaty of Beijing in 1860 . In 1898 it leased for 99 years additional land beyond Kowlowloon, called the New Territory .
 Hong Kong was a free port and a hub of international trade in eastern Asia . It provided refuge for Chinese revolutionaries led by Dr. Dr. Huijijao .
 Sun Yat-sen, father of the Chinese Republic, was assassinated in 1940s . He was assassinated during the Second Century of the Republic of China . He is now the country's most prominent leader .
 Millions of refugees found opportunities and a haven from Communist-ruled China . Refugees found opportunities during the chaos of the Cultural Revolution .
 The continuation of a British colony on the China coast offended Chinese nationalism, China demanded Hong Kong’s return . China demanded the return of Hong Kong from the British colony .
 Negotiations between British prime minister Margaret Thatcher and Chinese paramount leader Deng Xiaoping (Teng Hsiaop’ing) culminated in an agreement in 1984 that would restore all the ceded territories to China .
 The agreement stipulated that Hong Kong would be ruled for 50 years as a Special Administrative Region . It would maintain its own legislature, executive, and judiciary, currency, customs and police forces, flag, and passport .
 Britain made many reforms before 1997 that furthered the legal protection and self-governing rights of Hong Kong’s citizens . Britain made reforms to protect Hong Kong citizens before 1997 .
 Several hundreds of thousands of people emigrated to Western countries before 1997 . Nevertheless, several hundred, thousands of them emigrated .
 China appointed a prominent local businessman, Tung Chee-hwa, first chief executive of Hong Kong . China appointed him as the first Hong Kong chief executive . China appoints him as a prominent businessman .
 In 1999 the Chinese National People’s Congress overruled the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeals on the right of abode for children with one Hong Kong parent . For example, in 1999 it overruled Hong Kong court of final appeals on the issue .
 Tung resigned in 2005, two years before his second term ended . He was replaced by Donald Tsang, a respected high-ranking civil servant who had risen to prominence under British rule .
 PRC remained leery of demands for human rights and democracy by Hong Kong’s citizens . Hong Kong's citizens are demanding human rights, democracy .
 After the opening of China in 1979, a strong economic bond developed between Hong Kong and China . Hong Kong is one of the largest economies in the world, with the largest stake in the region .
 They became each other's foremost partners in investment and trade . Initially limited to adjoining Guangdong province, and after 1992 spreading to other centers in China . After 1992, it spread to other parts of China .
 Hong Kong benefited from China’s deep, cheap labor pool . China needed Hong Kong's managerial skills and capital, while China needed its own managerial skills . Hong Kong also benefited from the country's deep labor pool.
 The arrangement also applied to the former small Portuguese colony of Macao, but found no acceptance from the people or government of Taiwan . The SAR arrangement also applies to former Portuguese colony Macao .
 Hong Kong has one of the highest standards of living in Asia . In 2005 Hong Kong had an estimated population of 6. million people who enjoyed one of Asia's highest standards .
 The Horn of Africa witnessed some of the most intense and violent geopolitical maneuvering during the cold war . It is currently composed of Ethiopia, Somalia, Eritrea, and Djibouti .
 Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union poured vast sums of money and weapons toward their allies in the region .
 The meddling of the superpowers disrupted the decolonization and modernization processes, intensified local rivalries, heightened resulting violence, and contributed to the deaths of many Africans . The meddling disrupted decolonizing and modernization .
 The growing importance of the Middle East and its vast petroleum resources, the increasing intensity of the zero-sum competition between the U.S. and the Soviet Union for influence around the world, the author says .
 In 1943 the U.S. constructed a radio communications station near the town of Asmara in Eritrea, then under British control . The station was called Radio Marina . It was located near the Eritrea border with Eritrea .
 The Horn and Radio Marina took on increasing importance as the contours of the oil-based postwar world and cold war rivalries took shape .
 The United States worried that losing influence in the Horn would destabilize the governments of allies in the region, interrupt shipping lanes, and possibly staunch the supply of Middle East oil to the West . The U.S. worried that the Horn of Africa could destabilize allies' governments .
 The strategic significance of Radio Marina changed the course of both Eritrean and Ethiopian history . Radio Marina was a radio station for Eritreans and Ethiopians .
 During the middle decades of the 20th century, Ethiopia was ruled by Emperor Haile Selassie, an autocrat who had first gained power in 1917 . During the 1930s and '60s, the Ethiopian monarchy ruled the country . It was the first time Ethiopia had been ruled
 Selassie had dismantled the aristocracy and used the revenues gained from taxing coffee exports to centralize power . In the name of modernizing Ethiopia, he dismantled the aristocrats .
 With aid from the U.S. Selassie continued to modernize Ethiopia and tighten his grip on power . He would not yield until he was deposed in a coup in 1973 .
 The U.S. viewed the mostly Christian Ethiopia as the most stable and influential state in the entire Horn . During the early postwar years the United States viewed the majority Christian Ethiopia . Ethiopia was viewed as a stable, influential state .
 Before World War II, Eritrea had not been part of the Ethiopian state . Eritrea is a small, mostly Muslim sliver of land along the Red Sea known as Eritrea . It was not part of Ethiopia during the early 1950s .
 Eritrea found an unfavorable environment for independence after the war . Despite this, Eritrea still found it difficult to find independence .
 Two studies by the U.S.dominated United Nations found that Eritrea lacked national consciousness as well as the basis for a stable economy . Eritrea lacks national consciousness and a national identity, according to U.N. studies .
 In 1953 the UN established a federation in which Eritrea and Ethiopia were conjoined . The UN established the federation in 1953 . In 1953, Eritrea became part of Ethiopia and Eritrea .
 Ethiopia and the United States signed a 25-year arms-for-bases accord in 1953 . In May 1953, five months after the Ethiopia-Eritrea federation was established, the U.S. and Ethiopia signed an arms deal . Ethiopia and Eritrea signed the accord in
 In 1962 Selassie dissolved the federal system and absorbed Eritrea into Ethiopia . In 1962, the Ethiopian president dissolved the state of Ethiopia .
 The result was a 30-year war between Eritrean nationalists and Addis Ababa . It ended in 1991 and the establishment of an independent Eritrea in 1993 .
 The 1953 deal became the foundation of a 25-year relationship between Washington and Selassie . The deal was the basis of the relationship between the two countries .
 Between 1953 and 1974 the U.S. gave more aid to Ethiopia than any other country in sub-Saharan Africa . The United States gave more than $1.5 billion to Ethiopia .
 In 1958 the United States helped fund Ethiopia's modern air force . In 1960 the U.S. agreed to train and equip an army of 40,000 . In 1966 it provided Ethiopia with a squadron of F-5 fighters .
 U.S. support strengthened Selassie’s hand against opposition groups that criticized his increasingly autocratic and corrupt administration . United States support strengthened his hand against the opposition groups .
 It helped Salassie meet his nation’s top geopolitical interest, maintaining access to the Red Sea . It also helped his nation meet his country's top geopolitical interests .
 The U.S. was trying to improve relations with Arab nations in the Middle East, many of whom opposed Christian-led Ethiopia .
 In 1973 a group of junior and noncommissioned army officers overthrew Selassie . In 1973, the army overthrew the dictator's regime .
 In 1977 Mengistu Haile-Mariam emerged as the leader of the new Ethiopia . After a transitory phase, in 1977, he became a hard-line radical leader .
 Haile-Mariam nationalized many businesses and implemented a sweeping land reform program to undermine the power of the old ruling class . He mercilessly repressed his political opponents, and cultivated closer ties with the Soviet Union .
 Somalian government launched a military offensive against Ethiopia in 1975 . In 1975, taking advantage of the instability and immaturity of the regime in Addis Ababa, the Somalian army launched an offensive .
 Somalia had not fared well in a modern world organized by agricultural and industrial nation-states . A mostly pastoral society, Somalia has struggled to adapt to modern society . Somalia is a largely pastoral society .
 Many Somalis in British Somaliland hoped to reunite with Somalis across the border in Ethiopia . In 1960, many within the newly-independent Somali Republic hoped for reunite . The Somali Republic is now the Somali Republic .
 In 1969 a coup organized by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre replaced the parliamentary system with a Soviet-style democratic republic run by a Supreme Revolutionary Council . The country was ruled by a military coup in 1969 .
 Siad Barre maintained the long-standing hope of bringing together all Somalis under one government . Fueled by a massive arms buildup funded by the Soviet Union, the Somalis have built up their own government .
 Siad Barre’s government spearheaded the mid-1970s war with Ethiopia, which ended when Somalia withdrew in 1978 . Somalia withdrew from Ethiopia in 1978 after the war ended .
 A reshuffling of cold war alliances accompanied internal political changes during the 1970s . Cold war alliances were reshuffled by internal political change during the 70s .
 Jimmy Carter suspended United States aid to Ethiopia in response to the radicalism of Mengistu Haile-Mariam . Jimmy Carter offered Somalia ‘defensive” weapons and incorporated the country into the U.S. security network .
 Moscow labeled its attack on Ethiopia aggression and began to support the new regime in Addis Ababa . Although an ally of the Siad Barre government in Somalia, Moscow labeled the attack on Ethiopian aggression .
 During the early 1990s, as the cold war ended, the Horn of Africa underwent yet another round of sweeping political changes . In the early 90s, political changes were sweeping .
 In Ethiopia severe economic problems and sustained rebellions in various parts of the country brought about the collapse of the Dergue . In Ethiopia the economic problems led to the collapse .
 In May 1991, after a final push by the Tigray Peoples Liberation Front , Ethiopia came into the hands of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front .
 Eritrean Peoples Liberation Front seized control of Eritrea . Meanwhile, in Eritrea, the People's Liberation Front took control of the country .
 The late 1980s found Somalia in a state of instability as factions competed for state control without any clear victor . The late 80s was a period of instability in Somalia that saw numerous factions vying for control .
 After Siad Barre was toppled in 1991, Mogadishu fell into a state of civil war . Somalia is now a nation of war-torn Somalia .
 During the second half of the 20th century the people living in the Horn of Africa witnessed repeated changes in the political configuration ruling Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Somalia .
 The intense rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviet Union shaped these changes in profound ways . The United States and Russia were the two most powerful rivals in the world .
 Such external influence sharpened divisions within the Horn and intensified the conflicts, says CNN.com . The Horn of Africa is the region's most populated region .
 Ethiopia's imperial relationship with its neighbors, the legacy of previous European colonialism in the area, and the personal and ideological agendas of local leaders such as Haile Salassie, Haile-Mariam, and Siad Barre . International rivalries also combined with local dynamics .
 Hu Jintao was born in December 1942 in Shanghai . Elected president of the People’s Republic of China on March 15, 2003 .
 He is the first Chinese leader whose career began after the communist victory of 1949 . He is also the first leader to have his career started after 1949 .
 Hu became active in the Communist Youth League while in high school . He graduated with a degree in hydraulic engineering . Hu is a member of the Communist Party Youth League .
 He worked for a hydropower station in Gansu and then, from 1969 to 1974, worked as an engineer for Sinohydro Engineering Bureau . He also worked for an engineering company in China .
 Within a year he earned a promotion to vice senior chief and met up with Song Ping, who would become his mentor . Song Ping would be his mentor when he became a senior chief .
 Song took over as deputy director of Gansu’s Ministry of Construction in 1980 . Song and Song were Song's first colleagues in China's construction industry .
 His political career advanced rapidly when Deng Xiaoping named him to the Politburo Standing Committee in 1992 . His career expanded rapidly when he was named to the Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China .
 Hu’s meteoric career rise continued with his appointment as governor of Guizhou province in 1985 . Hu was appointed governor of Guangzhou province in 1986 .
 In 1988 he took over as party chief of the Tibet Autonomous Region at a time of great political turmoil . He took over in 1988 at the height of political turmoil in Tibet .
 In his 50s, he became the youngest member of the seven-person Politburo Standing Committee . He is the son of former Soviet Union leader Vladimir Putin, who is now in his 60s .
 In 1993 he became secretariat of the CPC Central Committee, and vice president of China . In 1998 he became vice-president of China in 1998 .
 Economically, politically, and socially, China faced difficult issues, including the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing . China faced issues including the uncertainty of a rapidly globalizing economy .
 Hu Yaobang was born to a peasant family in Hunan Province and joined the Chinese Communist forces at age 14 . He joined the Communist forces aged 14 and became a politician .
 He became a protege of Deng Xiaoping after serving under him in the Chinese Red Army . They had many differences of opinion on political and philosophical issues .
 Hu held many positions within the national government during the formation of the People’s Republic of China in 1949 . Hu was one of the most prominent figures in the Chinese government .
 Hu attempted to create a more flexible, less dogmatic government that would seek practical and flexible solutions to particular problems rather than relying on rigid applications of Maoist ideology . Hu's government was created by Maoist activists in 1968 .
 He oversaw the rehabilitation of thousands of people, from party leaders to ordinary Chinese citizens, who had been unjustly exiled or imprisoned . He was also a strong champion of reform and democratization within the party .
 Hu was forced to resign in 1987 and forced to sign a statement of “self-criticism .” accepting responsibility for his failure to crack down on a series of student protests the previous year . Hu resigned in 1987 .
 He retained his seat on the Politburo, however, until he died of a heart attack two years later . He kept his seat as a member of the party until he was forced to resign .
 His death on April 15, 1989, sparked the Tiananmen Square Democracy Movement . The movement began with public protests and a hunger strike by thousands of students .
 Tiananmen Square massacre took place on June 4, 1989 . The protesters were brutally suppressed by the Chinese government, culminating in what is now termed the Tiananman Square massacre .
 The Huk Rebellion was a leftist, rurally based armed rebellion in the Philippines . First against Japan and later against the newly independent, U.S.-supported Filipino government .
 The movement blossomed during World War II, dissipated in the mid-1950s, then returned during the late 1960s . The movement is still alive today .
 The Hukbalahap, or Huks, originated during World War II to liberate the Philippines from Japanese control . The Huks originated in the Philippines during WWII .
 The Huks found a base of support among the peasants of central Luzon, where approximately 80 percent of local farmers lived under oppressive debt .
 Led by socialist Luis Taruc, they advanced an agenda of nationalism and agrarian reform . Led by the socialist LuisTaruc, the government advanced a nationalist agenda .
 Taruc worked as a peasant organizer in the Pampanga region during the 1930s . Taruc had worked in the region as a peasants organizer .
 Throughout the war the Huks trained local farmers in political theory and fighting strategy . The Huks also trained locals in politics and military strategy .
 By the end of the conflict the Huks could claim roughly 15,000 armed soldiers and many supporters . The Huks are believed to be the largest force in the country's history .
 They used their power to block Japanese food and military supplies and to interrupt the collection of taxes . Obtaining their weapons mostly from retreating Filipino soldiers, old battlefields and downed planes .
 Huks developed communication networks and fighting tools that would serve them well in later years . Besides earning widespread popular support, they earned widespread support .
 After U.S.-led forces recaptured Luzon from the Japanese in February 1945, the Huks looked forward to independence as promised by the Tydings-McDuffie Act of 19 34 .
 They formed a political party and won a number of elections in 1947 . But they were denied their rightful seats in parliament . They won a series of elections, but were denied the right to parliament seats .
 In response they once again returned to the mountains and took up arms . In response to the situation, the men in the mountains returned to their homeland .
 In November 1948 the Huks renamed themselves “Hukbong Mapagpalaya ng Bayan,” or People’s Liberation Army . The Huks are now known as the People's Liberation Army.
 Under the leadership of Ramon Magsaysay, the Filipino government was able to turn the tide on the Huks . However, under the leadership, the Philippines was still at the center of the conflict .
 Magsaysay pursued a two-pronged approach, combining vigorous military action with successful efforts to reform the army . Magsayay succeeded in reforming the country's armed forces .
 Magsaysay’s campaign became the model for U.S. efforts in Vietnam . The campaign was modeled for the United States in Vietnam.
 Rural discontent pushed the Huks to take up arms against the government in the late 1960s . Rural discontent once again pushed the . Huks took up arms in response to the government's actions .
 In August 1969, President Ferdinand Marcos, with the aid of the United States government, launched a military campaign that crushed them . President Marcos with the help of the U.S. government, led the military campaign .
 Zaide, Sonia M. Zaide wrote The Philippines: A Unique Nation. People’s Publishing House, LTD, 1953 . Zaide: Philippines is a unique nation .
 As a result of the First Five-Year Plan, it had collectivized agriculture and advanced industries . As a part of the plan, the first five-year plan was to collectivize agriculture, advanced industries.
 Chairman Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung) believed that most intellectuals supported his goals, but feared that there was resistance among the 100,000 or so “higher intellectuals” who had been Western trained . Chairman Mao Zingong believed most intellectuals support his goals
 This term was borrowed from the Hundred Schools of Thought era of the late Zhou dynasty, circa 500c. i.e. When many philosophies developed, this term was used to refer to a period of thought .
 Its goal was to gain the intellectuals’ cooperation by permitting some debate . The intellectuals' cooperation was to allow them to question the competence of party cadres to direct science and technology . Its goal is to gain some debate by allowing some debate and to allow the intellectuals to question party cad
 Cadres, too, were encouraged to criticize the system under which they worked . Cadres were also encouraged to be critical of the system they worked under .
 Critics were encouraged by some liberalization in the Soviet Union after Nikita Khrushchev began de-Stalinization in 1956 . The critics were encouraged to liberalize the country .
 Many were inspired by Marxist-Leninist ideals and thought it their duty was to point out where the party had deviated . Many thought it was their duty to say that the party has deviated from its ideals .
 Most sought to express their criticism within the limits of the system, such as the writer-journalist and CCP member Liu Binyan .
 The students protested the politicization of academic life on a Democracy Wall . They put up posters protesting the politicized academic life . The students say they are proud of their experience .
 The leaders of the CCP were unprepared for the extent and bitterness of the criticism by writers, scientists, and social scientists . The CCP leaders were, however, unprepared . The leaders were unprepared .
 In July 1957 Mao reversed himself, stating that intellectual freedom was only permissible if it strengthened socialism . Mao reversed course and said intellectual freedom would only be allowed to be used to help strengthen socialism .
 Many senior CCP leaders had never endorsed the campaign and supported the crackdown . Many senior party leaders had backed the campaign .
 By the end of the year the anti-rightist campaign was in full swing, and more than 300,000 intellectuals had been condemned and sent to jail or labor camps .
 Many bright students and young cadres never got a chance for a career as a result of their participation . Countless bright students were never given a chance to a career .
 The swing of the pendulum to severe repression was sharp and unrelenting . The swing was sharp, unrelenting, the author says . The pendulum was sharp .
 It reflected the insecurity of the CCP leaders and their fear of freedom, he said . It reflected their insecurity, he added, and the fear they feared freedom .
 In 1956, Hungary was a nation of 9 million . Jiu-Hwa Lo Upshur Hungarian revolt was a revolt against the government .
 Allied to Germany during World War II, it was occupied by Soviet troops in 1944-45 . Soviet troops occupied it during the war .
 Hungarian Communists began the process that by the late 1940s would give them control over the government . By the late 1950s, the Communists had control of the Hungarian government .
 Hungary's government had undergone changes that ensured that the leadership strictly followed directives from the Soviet Union . By that time, Hungary’s government had changed .
 The first Communist leader, from 1949 to the early 1950s, was hard-liner Laszlo Rajk. Rajk was the hard-line hard-liners from 1949-50s .
 Russia replaced Moscow’s harsh leader, Matyas Rakosi, with an equally harsh leader . He, in turn, was replaced by the equally harsh Rakosi . Rakosi was replaced in turn by Moscow's own harsh leader in 2010 .
 Communist rule in Hungary was particularly repressive . It was applied with force throughout Eastern Europe into the early 1950s . Hungary was one of the most repressive countries in Europe .
 At that time, a series of events took place that indicated restrictions from the Soviet Union might be loosening . At the time, events indicated restrictions were being loosened, according to the historian .
 A slight thaw and liberalization followed in both the Soviet Union and the satellite states . The Soviet Union was the most powerful state in the world, but it was also heavily closed .
 There were changes in the internal policies in the East European states . There were also changes in internal policies .
 Hard-liners died mysteriously, and in countries where rebellions against the Soviets had been put down, there seemed to be a certain degree of liberalization . In countries with a history of hard-liners dying mysteriously, they died mysteriously . Hardliners die mysteriously, but in countries with history
 Rakosi was pushed aside and Imre Nagy was brought in to take his place . Nagy is a moderate and a moderate . Rakosi is a former member of the Russian House of Representatives .
 In July 1956 Nikita Khrushchev suggested to Rakosi that he should visit Moscow . In 1956 he visited the Soviet Union for the first time . Rakosi's visit to Moscow was a success .
 On October 23, 1956, students demanded that Nagy return to the government . Nagy was forced to resign from the government in 1956 . Students protested against Nagy's resignation .
 The students were fired on by the police, and on the following day martial law was declared . The police fired on the students and declared martial law on the next day .
 Soviet troops in Hungary put down the increasing number of riots and demonstrations in Hungary . Soviet troops were deployed in Hungary to put down riots and protests .
 The violence escalated until October 28, when Nagy returned to the government . A cease-fire was signed, and Soviet troops withdrew from Budapest . Nagy's government was overthrown by the Soviet Union .
 In the next week Nagy and the newly formed government began making changes that alarmed not only hard-line Hungarian Communists but the leadership in Moscow as well . Nagy's changes alarmed the leadership of the Communist Party in Hungary .
 Hungary will begin withdrawing from the WarSaw Pact, Hungary announced . Hungary will withdraw from the warSaw pact, Hungary said in a statement .
 Khrushchev ordered the Soviet army to commence Operation Whirlwind, a strong military response to the rebellion . The Soviet army responded to the revolt with a heavy military response . Operation Whirlwind occurred in response to the uprising .
 It was a Soviet-only operation, as the 120,000-man Hungarian army was not trusted politically . It was the only operation to take place in Hungary, Hungary's capital .
 He was a long-time Communist operative with a history of being in and out of power . He was also a longtime Communist operative .
 When the revolt began, Kadar left Budapest and went to the Soviets, formally asking them to intervene in ending the disorder . Kadar went to Budapest to formally ask them to end the disorder, but died in 1944 .
 Hungarian member of Hungarian government requested Soviet intervention in Hungary . The request reinforced the impression of the legitimacy of the Soviet intervention .
 Hungarians left the country, first to Austria, where refugee camps were set up, and then later to the United States, Canada, France, and Britain . Many thousands of Hungarians fled the country .
 Kadar, assisted by the Soviet ambassador Yuri Andropov, restored political order . The Soviet Army put an end to the rebellion in 1953 . Kadar was assassinated by Soviet troops in 1961 .
 Kadar’s rule was, at first, characterized by harshness and reprisals against anyone who participated . Anyone who participated in Kadar's rule was punished for not participating .
 Hungary, in relation with other members of the Warsaw Pact in the 1960s-1980s, was very liberal . Hungary, Hungary and other Warsaw Pact members, were very liberal.
 Authors did not have to submit their works to a censor prior to publication . But those who crossed the unstated line could still find themselves in trouble .
 The potential for a nuclear war outweighed the benefits of assisting the Hungarians . The U.S. government decided not to help the Hungarian rebels .
 Khrushchev succeeded in reestablishing the Communist government . However, his indecisiveness and actions prior to the rebellion damaged his credibility . The government was overthrown in 1953 .
 It took the prodding of many within the Soviet government to make him act . Tito had to fly to Yugoslavia to get Tito’s approval before intervening in Yugoslavia .
 His continued problems in foreign policy, however, led to his ouster in 1964 . He was forced to step down from the White House .
 Hungary tore down barbed wire fences on its frontier with Austria in April . In April the Hungarian government tore down the barbed fence .
 200,000 Hungarians attended the reburial of Imre Nagy from a common grave to a place of honor in June 2013 . Nagy was the first Hungarian to be reburied in Hungary . In June 2013, Nagy's death was celebrated in Budapest, Hungary .
 Granville, Johanna Granville C The First Domino: International Decision Making during the Hungarian Crisis of 1956 . Granville: Hungary was the first country to enter into conflict with Hungary in 1956 .
 Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein was born in A1 Awja near Tikrit, Iraq, to a poor family . Saddam Hussein is the son of Robert Stacy Hussein . Hussein was the first Iraqi president to be elected to power .
 Hussein was involved in an abortive attempted to assassinate Abdul Karim Qassem, the leader of the Iraq revolution, in 1958 . Hussein fled to Egypt, where he studied law . He fled to the country to study law .
 When the Ba’ath seized power in 1963, he returned to Iraq but was soon imprisoned for another attempt to overthrow the regime . He was imprisoned in 1963 for trying to topple the Ba'ath regime .
 He escaped from prison in 1966 and was elected assistant general secretary of the Ba’ath . He escaped in 1966 after being convicted of a double murder conviction .
 Hussein rose in power following the 1968 Ba’athist-led coup . Under the patronage of Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr, to whom he was related by blood, Hussein rose to power .
 In 1975 Hussein and Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi signed the Algiers Accord, which led to the Iran-Iraq Treaty of International Boundaries and Good Neighborliness . The eastern portion of the Shatt al Arab was ceded to Iran in 1975 .
 Hussein argued that Iraq had only signed under duress . The agreements were a victory for Iran, and Hussein subsequently argued that Hussein had signed them .
 He emulated the Stalinist approach to government, establishing a totalitarian state based on a cult of personality . The state was based on the cult of the personality of the dictator .
 Hussein often appeared in military uniform, and he curried favor with the army . Although not a professional soldier, Hussein was known for his popularity with the military .
 He appointed relatives and close associates from Tikrit to key government positions . He also demanded absolute loyalty from his relatives, close associates .
 His regime improved education, healthcare services and the status of women . However, his regime also improved education and healthcare services .
 Hussein initiated the Iran-Iraq War ostensibly to recover the Shatt al Arab but also to contain the Shi’i-led Iranian revolution . The war was fought to stop the Shi'i-backed revolution in Iran .
 The resulting war of attrition led to massive human, military, and economic losses for both sides . Both sides suffered massive losses in the war .
 Neighboring Arab nations in the Gulf and Saudi Arabia, fearing the export of the Iranian revolution, assisted Iraq with loans and aid . Neighboring Gulf nations helped Iraq in the wake of the revolution .
 From the Iraqi perspective, the Arab regimes were paying for the war with money, and Iraq was paying with the blood of its soldiers . From Iraq's perspective the Arab regime were paying with money and Iraq's soldiers' blood .
 After the war Hussein downplayed his former secularism and adopted a more Islamic approach . Hussein's secularism came to an end after the war and he adopted an Islamic stance .
 He launched major offensives, including the use of poison gas, against Kurdish forces in northern Iraq . He also launched major attacks on Kurds, including using poison gas .
 With the collapse of the Soviet Union, Iraq became more isolated . Iraq has found it increasingly difficult to obtain loans or assistance to rebuild its war-torn economy .
 Hussein also recognized the mounting hostility of his former Arab allies . He resented the refusal of Kuwait to forgive wartime loans . Hussein also resented Kuwait's refusal to forgive war loans .
 He also accused Kuwait of illegally slant-drilling for petroleum into Iraq into Iraq . The Iraqi president also accused the country of illegally drilling for petroleum .
 Kuwait quickly fell to the Iraqi forces and was incorporated into Iraq . The Iraqi forces captured the country in 1991 . Kuwait was then incorporated into the Iraqi government .
 The international community, including the Arab world, condemned the invasion . After a month of massive aerial bombardment in the so-called First Gulf War, coalition forces, led by the United States, moved into Kuwait .
 The coalition established no-fly zones that essentially created an autonomous Kurdish region in the north . The region was essentially created by the U.S.-led coalition .
 Hussein crushed uprisings, especially among the large and disaffected Shi’i population in southern Iraq . However, Hussein crushed the uprising, especially in the southern region .
 Iraq managed to rebuild much of its infrastructure, and water and electricity services were restored to major cities . The country was devastated by the fall of Saddam Hussein .
 Hussein clung to power in spite of a decade of international sanctions that resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of Iraqi civilians . Hussein's death was the result of the decade-long international sanctions against him . Hussein was forced to step down from power in 2003 .
 International diplomacy and arms inspections resulted in the demilitarization and destruction of most of the Iraqi military arsenal . Although severely weakened, the military remained intact in Iraq .
 Hussein’s sons Uday and Qusay became increasingly powerful during the 1990s . Their erratic behavior and violence terrorized those around them . Hussein's sons became increasingly influential in the late 90s .
 As U.S. forces entered Baghdad many leaders of the regime, including Hussein and his sons, went into hiding . Hussein's sons were among the most prominent leaders in Iraq .
 Hussein was captured and put on trial for crimes committed during his rule . His sons were found and killed, and he was captured by U.S. forces . Hussein was then put on a trial for his crimes .
 Hussein maintained he was still the legitimate ruler of Iraq, but he was found guilty and executed . Hussein adopted a belligerent tone during the protracted trial, maintaining that he was legitimate ruler .
 The Iraqi army was also disbanded, but the nation continued to face tremendous economic and social problems . Sectarian fighting broke out and massive opposition to foreign occupying forces erupted throughout much of the country .
 India became an independent nation on August 15, 1947, with the end of British colonial rule . India became the first country to become independent from British rule .
 With a population of 1,095,351,995,995 , India is the second most populous nation after China . India is also the world's second largest country, with 1.095 million .
 It is the seventh-largest nation in land area in the world, covering 3,287,590 square kilometers . It is also the seventh largest land area of the world . The country is the world's seventh largest in size .
 After Indonesia, India has the second-largest number of Muslims, who constitute 13 percent of the population . Muslims constitute 13% of India's population, the second largest in the world .
 The partition of the British Empire into India and Pakistan created problems for both countries . The British Empire created problems in both countries, including Pakistan .
 India faced problems including the merger of princely states, the influx of refugees from Pakistan, communal riots, the division of assets, and war with Pakistan .
 Vallabhbhai Patel was the architect of the merger of the two states . Patel was also the home minister of the states .
 Hyderabad and Junagarh were annexed when their rulers did not select the option of merging with India . Hyderabad was annexed by its rulers when they did not choose to merge with India.
 War broke out over the state of Jammu and Kashmir, whose ruler, Maharaja Hari Singh, signed the Instrument of Accession with the governorgeneral of India, Lord Louis Mountbatten on October 26, 1947 .
 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru took the matter to the United Nations . The United Nations called for a cease-fire on August 13, 1948 . Despite opposition, the U.N. called for the ceasefire .
 It called for a plebiscite to determine the desire of the people of the state . It was called for the state to decide what its people want .
 The hostilities were over by December 31, 1948 . The demarcation line became the Line of Control between the two countries .
 Dr. Ambedkar was appointed chairperson of the Drafting Committee on August 29, 1947 . He was the first member of the draft committee .
 On November 26, 1949, the Constituent Assembly adopted the constitution . The constitution was adopted in 1949 . It was the first of its kind .
 India became a sovereign democratic republic on January 26, 1950, when the constitution came into effect . India became the country's first democratic republic in 1950 .
 Rajendra Prasad was the first president of India . He was elected by a parliamentary form of government . He became the first Indian president .
 In 1952 the first general elections were held, and the Indian National Congress formed the government . The first general election was held in 1952, and Nehru formed the new government .
 Nehru left an indelible mark on modern Indian history with his belief in a parliamentary form of democracy, a socialist pattern of society, secularism, equality before the law, and nonalignment . Nehru's belief in parliamentary form democracy, socialist pattern and secularism .
 He believed that India could play a meaningful role at the time of cold war . He said that India was a major player in the Cold War .
 India pursued a dynamic policy in international politics . Imbued with a high dose of idealism, India pursued an idealistic foreign policy . The country's foreign policy is based in New Delhi .
 India contributed to a lessening of tensions by hosting conferences like the Asian Relations Conference in 1947 and the Conference on Indonesia in 1949 . Acting as intermediary, India acted as an intermediary .
 Nehru also played a pivotal role in establishing the Non-Aligned Movement in 1961 . Nehru was also a key figure in the non-aligned movement in the 1960s .
 India had maintained friendly relations with China and signed a friendship treaty in 1954 . India and China had maintained friendship relations in the 1950s .
 There were boundary disputes with China, which resulted in the Sino-Indian War of October 1962 . India and China were at odds with each other for decades .
 India’s humiliating defeat was a great shock to Nehru, and Indian foreign policy lost its momentum . Nehru's foreign policy in India lost momentum after the defeat, writes CNN.com .
 The new policies aimed for an increase in agricultural productivity and industrialization within the framework of a socialist pattern of society . New policies aimed to increase agricultural productivity .
 The government engaged itself in manufacturing, railways, aviation, electricity, communication, and infrastructructural activities .
 In tune with the scientific temperament of Nehru, research and educational institutions were established . The Indian Institutes of Technology were established in tune with Nehru .
 Attempts also were made to change the social sector through legislation in parliament . Attempts to change social sector were also made to improve the economy .
 The debacle for India in the Sino-Indian War of 1962 and the death of Nehru prompted Pakistan to wage another war . Pakistan won the war in 1962, but India lost it in 1962 .
 The Indian army crossed the border, bringing Lahore under Indian artillery fire . Lahore came under fire from the Indian army during the standoff with Pakistan .
 The Tashkent Agreement was signed on January 10, 1966, and the cease-fire line became the de facto border between the two countries .
 Indira Gandhi was the prime minister of India in the early 1950s . Indira was the first Indian prime minister to become a prime minister . She became the country's first female prime minister in 1964 .
 She was prime minister of India twice, between 1966 and 1977 and again from 1980 to 1984 . Daughter of Nehru, she was PM of India from 1966 to 1977 . She was PM twice, and was PM again in 1980 and 1984 .
 She unleashed a program of Garibi Hatao (abolish poverty), supported the Indochinese people in the Vietnam War, and supported the Soviet Union with the signing of a 20-year treaty in August 1971 .
 The liberation war in East Pakistan had started, and India was facing problems arising out of the exodus of 10 million refugees to provinces in eastern India . The exodus was caused by the liberation of East Pakistan .
 Shimla Accords prevented outbreaks of any major conflict between the two countries until 1999 . The Shimla peace deal was reached in 1999 .
 Scientific development went forward at a tremendous speed with the launch of a satellite into space . The launch of the satellite was the first of its kind in space history .
 In May 1974 India successfully carried out an underground nuclear explosion at Pokhran . The explosion took place at the nuclear plant in May 1974 .
 The program of the Green Revolution, which utilized new types of seeds, resulted in greater agricultural productivity and self-sufficiency in food production . The program used new seeds to increase agricultural productivity .
 There were demonstrations and strikes in protest against inflation and the poor standard of living . Demonstrations and strikes were held in response to inflation and poor standard living .
 Indira Gandhi imposed a state of national emergency on June 26, 1975 . Indira was found guilty of violating election laws and she imposed a national emergency . She imposed a new state of emergency in 1975 .
 Fundamental rights were suspended, censorship was imposed on the press, and opposition leaders were put behind bars . Fundamental rights have been suspended and the press was banned .
 Morarji Desai was the first non-Congress prime minister of India . Desai headed a coalition that lasted for two years .
 The mutual bickering among coalition partners and unsolved economic problems witnessed the return of Gandhi to power with a large majority in January 1980 . The return to power was seen as a result of a series of unsolved problems .
 The rise of militancy in the Punjab was crushed by the Indian security forces in 1984 . Gandhi died at the hands of her Sikh bodyguards on October 31, 1984 .
 The violence that erupted against the Sikhs created another dark chapter in Indian history . The violence against Sikhs was a dark chapter of Indian history. The Sikhs are now living in the United States .
 The Indo-Sri Lankan Peace Accords were signed in 1987, and the Indian Peace Keeping Force was dispatched to Sri Lankan . The Indian peace Keeping Force has been deployed to Sri Lanka .
 Rajiv Gandhi was charged with corruption and the Congress lost the elections in November 1989 . The Congress lost in the elections of November 1989 after the charges were brought against him .
 The history of India since the last decade of the 20th century has been marked by the menace of terrorism, major economic reforms, tackling poverty, and tackling poverty . India has also become a nuclear nation .
 Politicians like Singh and others jettisoned merit-based awards for the quota system . The quota system was replaced by a quota system that was based on national quotas .
 Even after more than five decades of reservation, the various governments retained this system . The various governments kept this system of reservation .
 The government of Manmohan Singh reserved seats for lower classes in some of the premier institutions of the country . The government has reserved seats in the lower classes .
 The educational infrastructure had developed so as to . produce one of the world’s largest concentrations of technical personnel . The educational . infrastructure had . developed so . as well as . the educational infrastructure .
 There had been communal violence between Hindus and Muslims following the demolition of the Babri mosque in 1992 over the question of the birthplace of the Hindu god Ram in Ayodhya .
 Violence erupted in 2002 after a train fire in Godhra, Gujarat, resulting in the massacre of Hindus and Muslims alike . Violence again erupted in Gujarat in 2002 following the massacre .
 Relations with Pakistan deteriorated over Kashmir, which has remained one of the major sources of conflict between the two countries . Relations with Kashmir has remained a major source of conflict with Pakistan .
 The conflict assumed dangerous proportions with the specter of a nuclear conflict after the Kargil War of 1999 . The conflict assumes dangerous proportions after the 'Kargil war of 1999'
 Prime Minister Shri Vajpayee and the Pakistan premier Nawaz Sharif signed the Lahore Declaration in February 1999 to solve the Kashmir problem . The declaration was signed by the Pakistan prime minister and the then-prime minister of Kashmir .
 The fourth war between the two countries began on May 8 and lasted for 73 days . The war was the first between North Korea and South Korea . But the fourth war began in May 2008 and lasted 73 days.
 The country maintains steady economic growth and a reduction in the poverty level . The country has also seen steady growth in the past decade .
 India is striving for a permanent seat on the UN Security Council . India also is striving to be a permanent member of the Security Council. India also wants to be part of the UN.
 Being Indian: The Truth About Why The 21st Century Will Be India’s. Pavan Varma, Pavan K Being Indian . Varma: The truth about why the 21st century will be India's. Varma .
 World War II opened new avenues for anticolonial movements in Southeast Asia . Anti-colonial movements were formed in the wake of the war .
 Ho Chi Minh set up the Vietnam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi (League for the Independence of Vietnam) in the wake of the Japanese occupation of Indochina . Ho Chi-Minh was the leader of the Vietnamese Communist Party in the 1950s .
 The Democratic Republic of Vietnam was established on September 2, 1945, after the formal Japanese surrender on the same day . North Vietnam was formed after the Japanese surrender .
 The Vietminh was ordered by the French to lay down arms, but they attacked French troops in Hanoi on December 19, 1946 . They attacked the French troops on December 20, 1946, in a stand-off .
 Khmer Issarack, the Free Khmers of Son Ngoc Thanh, were aligned with the Vietminh . The Khmer issuedarack was aligned with Vietnam's government . It was the first Khmer state of the Khmer .
 In Laos, the Pathet Lao under Souphanouvong also fought against the French . The Pathetlao also fought in Laos, where they fought for independence from the French.
 The three communist factions formally formed the Viet-KhmerLao alliance on March 11, 1951 . The alliance was formed by three communist groups .
 In the cold war period, the United States followed a containment strategy and helped France by giving it military aid . In the 1950s, the U.S. helped France with military aid.
 It provided up to 40 percent of the military budget of France during the First Indochina War by 1952 . It amounted to 85 percent of French Indochinese budget .
 In March 1949 the southern part of Vietnam became an associate state within the French Union, along with Laos and Cambodia . Vietnam became a French associate state in March 1949 . Laos, Cambodia and Cambodia were also associate states in 1949 .
 By 1950 South Vietnam had been recognized by the United States and Great Britain . South Vietnam was recognized as a nation by the U.S.
 China recognized the government of Hanoi and supplied military materiel according to an agreement of April 1, 1950 . The agreement was reached in 1950 .
 The actual combatants in the First Indochina War were the Vietminh, the Pathet Lao, and the Khmer Issarack fighting against the French .
 By 1950 the Vietminh had established complete control over the northern free zone, and the communists had strengthened their position in Laos and Cambodia . By 1950, the Vietnamese were in complete control .
 Vo Nguyen Giap was the commander in chief of the Vietminh . Giap led the army of Vietnam from its inception . He was an expert on modern guerrilla warfare .
 His strategy of dispersing French troops and capturing weak outposts had paid off well . His strategy was successful, he said .
 By 1952 half of the villages of the Red River Delta were under his control . By 1952 he had control of half the villages under him .
 The war was becoming unpopular in France, with a heavy loss of men from the French Expeditionary Corps and materiel .
 General Henri Navarre had captured the town of Dien Bien Phu in November 1953 . The town was 16 kilometers from the Lao border, 16 km from the border .
 Navarre established a fortified camp and was convinced of a North Vietnamese attack so as to open the road to Laos . Navarre set up the camp to defend against an attack by the North Vietnamese army .
 Giap surrounded the camp with about 50,000 soldiers of the Vietnamese People’s Army . Giap did not make any assault and instead surrounded it with troops of the army .
 The siege of Dien Bien Phu began on March 13, 1954 . 11,000 French troops were entrapped by the Vietnamese army .
 On May 7 Dien Bien Phu fell, and the next day the Geneva Conference on Indochina began . The next day, the Geneva conference began .
 Geneva Conference divided Vietnam temporarily along the 17th parallel into two states, North and South Vietnam . The Geneva Conference split the country temporarily into two countries .
 Elections would be held two years after unification of the two Vietnams . Elections would then be held to decide unification of two countries . Election would be two years before unification was decided .
 On November 7,1953, Cambodia became independent, two days later . Norodom Sihanouk returned to form a government .
 The conference recognized the Pathet Lao as a political party with control over the Phong Saly and Sam Neua Provinces . The conference also recognized the party's control of two of the provinces .
 There is no disagreement over the Second Indochina War ending in 1975, but there is controversy about the year of its beginning . The war ended in 1975 .
 The years 1954, 1957, 1959, and 1960 have been named as the starting point . The years 1953, 1956, 1959 and 1960 were the start points of the series .
 Geneva Conference of 1954 did not resolve the Vietnamese problem, and all the signatories violated its provisions . Gradually the whole of Indochina would be involved in war because the Geneva Conference failed to resolve the issue .
 The United States provided military and economic assistance to Ngo Dinh Diem . Diem was the president of South Vietnam . The U.S. provided economic and military assistance .
 Diem refused to hold the elections called for in the Geneva Conference to decide about unification . Diem was the leader of the South African Republic .
 Compared to the weakness of Diem’s regime, Hanoi under Ho was politically stable and increased support to the communist factions in Laos, Cambodia, and South Vietnam . Ho was the leader of Vietnam's communist regime in the 1960s .
 Le Duan had earlier led the independence struggle against France in the south . He had also fought for independence from France .
 The United States commitment to South Vietnam strengthened during President John F Kennedy’s administration . The dispatch of American Green Beret ‘special advisers’ to Vietnam began during the Kennedy administration .
 In August 1964 the USS Maddox was attacked by North Vietnamese patrol boats, creating the Gulf of Tonkin incident . The incident occurred in August 1964, when North Vietnamese attack boats attacked the Maddox .
 The United States Congress gave full authority to President Lyndon B Johnson to retaliate . The veracity of the incident was questioned afterward, but the veracity was later questioned .
 The Vietnam War escalated, with the survival of South Vietnam a primary consideration for Johnson . Johnson reaffirmed the policy of Kennedy, who had reaffirmed Kennedy's policy . The survival of the South Vietnam was a key consideration for the president .
 The United States aimed at eliminating the Vietcong by bombing, chemical warfare, and counterinsurgency operations . The U.S. bombed, bombed and used chemical warfare on the ground .
 Combat troops were sent in 1965, and their number reached 500,000 three years later . The number of combat troops in the Vietnam War rose to 1,500,000 in 1965 .
 During the Tet Offensive of January 1968, the communists attacked major cities of South Vietnam . During the 1968 Tet Offensive, South Vietnam was attacked by the communist army .
 Domestic dissent in the U.S. regarding the Vietnam War was gathering momentum . Meanwhile, domestic dissent against the war in the United States was gathering .
 The coup by General Lon Nol in Cambodia on March 18, 1970, added a new dimension to the Second Indochina War . The coup was a coup by the general general who ruled Cambodia out of power .
 The summit conference in southern China was attended by Pham Van Dong representing North Vietnam . Norodom Sihanouk as head of the National United Front of Cambodia, Souphanouvong from the Pathet Lao, and Nguyen Huu Tho represented South Vietnam .
 The objectives of the 1971 U.S. attack on Laos were to cut the trail and prevent North Vietnam from attacking northern areas of South Vietnam . Laos was attacked by the United States and Laos in 1971 .
 With 9,000 U.S. and 20,000 South Vietnamese troops, the campaign lasted for 45 days . The campaign resulted in a disastrous defeat of South Vietnam .
 The failure of South Vietnamese ground troops in spite of air support showed that it was not ready to take over a ground combat role from the U.S. The failure showed that the South Vietnamese were not ready for ground combat, the author says .
 The lessening of tension in the international arena had its impact on the Paris Peace Talks, which had started on January 23, 1969 . The Paris talks were the first of the peace talks to begin in 1969 .
 The SinoUnited States rapprochement, growing domestic opposition, increasing success of communists in battlefields, the mounting cost of the war, and the loss of life of U.S. soldiers compelled the United States to disengage from Vietnam .
 It was only a matter of time before the communists would score the final victory. It's only a few more days before the end of the Soviet Union .
 On April 30, 1975, communist forces entered the South Vietnamese capital of Saigon . Saigon was invaded by communist forces in April 1975 . The Vietnamese capital was occupied by the Vietnamese government .
 The government of Lon Nol in Cambodia was ousted by the Khmer Rouge on April 17, 1975 . The government was overthrown in 1975 by the communist regime . The Khmer regime ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1975 .
 By 1975 the whole of Indochina was communist, and the Second Indochino War was over . By 1975, the whole Indochine was communist and the war had been over .
 Larry Addington, Larry H. Addington: America’s War in Vietnam: A Short Narrative History . Addington says the Vietnam War was the first American war in Vietnam . He says the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam war was a failure .
 A South Vietnamese General Remembers the Indochina War to the Fall of Saigon . The South Vietnamese general Remembers Indochino War to Fall of the Fall .
 Henk Sneevliet established the Indische Sociaal Democratische Vereenigin (ISDV, Indies Social Democratic Association) in 1914 . He worked within the Sarekat Islam and worked in the Indies .
 Dutch authorities, alarmed, expelled leaders like Sneevliet and Tan Malaka . The PKI organized strikes, and Dutch authorities alarmed . The Dutch authorities were alarmed by the strikes .
 The policy of repression by the government made the PKI popular, and it organized large-scale strikes in 1926 . The PKI was banned from entering the country .
 PKI believed it to be Japanese sponsored and fascist . After proclamation of Republic of Indonesia on August 17, 1945, by Ahmed Sukarno the PKI .
 The republic successfully crushed two communist rebellions in 1946 and 1948 . The republic was founded in 1903 .
 It had an agenda of nationalist commitment and supported Sukarno’s anticolonial policy . It had a national agenda of nationalistic commitment . It was also a nationalist movement that was formed in the 1930s .
 In the first general elections of 1955 the PKI was aligned with the Perserikatan Nasional Indonesia (PNI, Indonesian Nationalist Union), founded by Sukarno in 1927 .
 The PKI received 16. percent of the votes, and in the newly elected parliament it had 39 seats . The new parliament has 39 seats, and the PKI has 16 percent of them .
 With maneuvering and a dedicated party cadre, the PKI had become a political force to be reckoned with in the country . The PKI has become a powerful political force in Pakistan .
 In the wake of a campaign to annex it, the members of PKI seized control of Dutch industries in December 1957 .
 PKI’s voice against the dominance of foreign capital in Indonesia gradually led to nationalization of major industries . The PKI's voice against foreign capital led to the nationalization .
 Religious parties like Islamist Masyumi were in favor of declaring the PKI illegal . The PKI was banned from entering the country .
 The party had found Sukarno as an ally and supported his Guided Democracy . The party was in fact an ally of Sukarna's government in the 1950s .
 The PNI, PKI, and Nahdatul Ulema were among the major political parties that were allowed to function in Romania . PNI and PKI were among major parties allowed to operate .
 After the abortive coup of February 1958, martial law was imposed by Sukarno, and the PKI supported it . The PKI was behind the coup .
 By 1960 the PKI could influence Sukarno on internal and foreign policy of the country . The PKI was able to influence the government of Indonesia . By 1960 it could influence the country's foreign policy .
 The situation in Indonesia during the 1960s was ripe for a communist insurrection . The PKI exploited the situation to its maximum potential . The situation was ripe to be ripe for an uprising .
 The crop failure in central Java in February 1964 resulted in a starving population of 1 million . 1 million people were starving after the crop failure .
 PKI cadres crossed over the border and took part in guerrilla warfare in Sarawak and north Borneo . The PKI was formed in the early 1950s .
 It had become the third-largest communist party in the world, with a membership of 3. million . The party is the third largest in communist world with 3.6 million members .
 It had the direct support of 20 million people through its varied organizations, it said . The organization had 20 million members of the public .
 Six top army generals were rounded up, taken to the Halim Air Force Base, and brutally killed . On the night of September 30, 1965, six top army officers were killed . The deaths were the result of a coup by the government .
 There was a slaughter of a half-million Communists, including the Chinese, in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 General Haji Mohamed Suharto became the acting president of Indonesia in March 1967 . He was the first president of the country since the coup in 1967 . Suharta was assassinated by a coup in March 1968 .
 In 1999 President Abdurrahman Wahid asked exiled PKI leaders to come back to open a dialogue . But the proposal did not find favor with fundamentalist Islamic groups .
 Merle Ricklefs, Merle C A History of Modern Indonesia ca.00 to the Present Day. Charles Scribner’s Sons, 2002; . Ricklef: Indonesia's history of modern Indonesia . Merle: Indonesia is one of the world's most populous countries
 After the departure of the British in August 1947, India and Pakistan became successor states . After the British left the UK in 1947, the two nations became successor nations .
 The partition of the British Indian Empire into India and Pakistan left a legacy of mutual discord that is felt to the present day . Pakistan and India are the two countries that have been at odds for centuries .
 India's foreign policy after independence was centered around world issues . Relations with India dominated Pakistan’s security concerns . Pakistan's security concerns were dominated by India's relations with India .
 Kashmir remained the major bone of contention between the two countries . Kashmir remained a major bone- contention between Kashmir and Pakistan .
 The state of Jammu and Kashmir was Muslim-dominated, with Hindus and others constituting about 48 percent of the population .
 Maharaja Hari Singh vacillated over whether to join India or Pakistan . Maharaja Singh was ruler of India and Pakistan until he died .
 Pakistan sponsored an attack on the state on October 22, 1947, leading Hari Singh to sign the Instrument of Accession with the governorgeneral of independent India, Lord Mountbatten .
 The sovereignty of Kashmir became a source of conflict as Pakistan did not recognize the merger of its state with India . Kashmir is now a state of disputed territory in Kashmir .
 India agreed to Hari Singh’s request for military assistance after accepting the Instrument of Accession, and thus the first war between India and Pakistan began . Pakistan was defeated by India in the war .
 Pakistan gained control of Punch, Mirpur, and Jhanger regions in late December . In late December the war turned in favor of Pakistan when it gained control . Pakistan says it has taken control of the Punch and Mirpur regions .
 Jawaharlal Nehru of India took the matter to the United Nations despite some opposition in the cabinet, which saw Kashmir as an internal problem of India . Nehru took the issue to the U.N. in 1953 .
 The terms of the cease-fire outlined in the UN resolution of August 13, 1948, called for withdrawal of Pakistani troops and the holding of a plebiscite to determine the desire of the Kashmir people . The peace deal was reached in 1947 after a vote by Pakistani troops .
 On December 31, 1948, a cease-fire was declared, and the demarcation line after the end of hostilities became the line of control between the two countries .
 Kashmir valley, Jammu, and Ladakh came under Indian control . The state became the only Muslim majority province of secular India .
 Swat, Gilgat, Hunza, Nagar, and Baltistan constituted Pakistanadministered Kashmir . Swat was part of the region which was formed from Kashmir .
 Neither India nor Pakistan adhered to the August resolutions, and the conflict over Kashmir continued . India and Pakistan did not comply with the August resolution . The Kashmir conflict continued .
 In February the Constituent Assembly of the state of Jammu and Kashmir ratified accession to India . After two years, the state became one of the provinces of the Indian Union .
 China gained a large portion of the Trans-Karakoram Tract, ceded by Pakistan . The situation became even more complicated after a boundary agreement was negotiated in 1963 .
 The defeat of India in the 1962 October War by China by China encouraged Pakistan to enter another round of war . Pakistan was defeated by China in the October War .
 It was widely believed that hawkish elements in Pakistan began the war so as to snatch an easy victory from a humiliated India after the Sino-Indian War .
 Second Indo-Pakistan conflict began after a series of border clashes starting in March 1965 . The second Indo-Pakistani conflict began in 1965 after border clashes between Pakistan and India .
 The border skirmishes, which began in the Rann of Kutch region of Gujarat, were contained in June after British mediation . British mediation helped contain the skirmishes .
 President Ayub Khan (1907— 74) ordered Operation Gibraltar in August 1964 and sent infiltrators to Indian-held Kashmir . Operation Gibraltar was launched in 1964 .
 The skirmishes between the forces of India and Pakistan began on August 6 and escalated into a large battle nine days later . The battle began nine days after the skirmishes began .
 The UN Security Council called for a cease-fire on September 22 and the war ended the next day . The UN called for an end to the conflict in Afghanistan .
 Lal Bahadur Shastri and Ayub Khan met in Tashkent in 1960s . Meeting was arranged by Soviet premier Alexey Kosygin . Ayub was the prime minister of India and the Soviet leader of the Soviet Union .
 Under the Tashkent Agreement of January 10, the armies of both India and Pakistan went back to the positions they had held before August 5 . Under the agreement, both sides agreed to return to the same positions they held .
 Both agreed to resolve their disputes by peaceful means and not to interfere in each other’s internal affairs . Both sides agreed to not interfere with each other's internal affairs.
 The Tashkent declaration proved to be a temporary respite in the deteriorating relationship between India and Pakistan . The declaration was made in a joint declaration by Pakistan's President Akbar Khan .
 Ayub was blamed for Pakistan’s debacle . Zulfikar Bhutto resigned as foreign minister . Ayub blamed for the collapse of the country .
 East Pakistan was simmering with discontent at the time of the 1965 war . Its leader, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, criticized the government for neglecting the security of East Pakistan . The war was the first East Pakistan invasion of Pakistan in 1965 .
 When East Pakistan declared its independence, the Pakistani army retaliated with brutality against the people of East Pakistan . The Pakistani army responded to the East Pakistan declaration of independence .
 India signed a 20year Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Cooperation with the Soviet Union in August 1971 to checkmate either Chinese or U.S. interference in case of a war with Pakistan . India also gave support to Bangladesh’s revolt and gave support for Bangladesh .
 Pakistani air force began preemptive air strikes against eight airfields in East Pakistan on December 3 . The strikes were carried out against eight of the country's airfields .
 India retaliated and began an air, land, and sea attack on Pakistani forces in the east, marching toward Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh . The Indian government says it has been conducting an air and land attack on Pakistan forces .
 More than 1 million people in Bangladesh perished before Pakistan’s army surrendered in Dhaka . More than a million people died in Bangladesh during the conflict .
 Bhutto and Gandhi signed the Shimla Accords on July 2, 1972, by which both countries recognized the line of control after the war of 1971 . Both countries agreed to the agreement in 1972 .
 India and Pakistan resolve to refrain from the use of force against each other . They also agreed to solve disputes bilaterally without third-party mediation .
 Starting in the mid-1980s, a sizable number of the people of Kashmir expressed a desire for independence and received support from Pakistan . Pakistan has supported Kashmir's independence from Kashmir .
 Human rights abuses by the terrorists and the Indian army drew international attention . The Indian army was accused of human rights abuses in Kashmir .
 In 1998 both India and Pakistan conducted nuclear tests and relations became more volatile . In 1998, both countries tested nuclear weapons and tensions became more tense .
 Both armies had to fight in the inhospitable terrain of the Kargil mountains . Both armies fought in the same terrain .
 On July 14 both India and Pakistan ended military operations without boundary changes . The two countries ended their operations on July 14 without changing boundaries .
 It has assumed dangerous proportions with the potential for a nuclear conflict . The potential for nuclear conflict has been described as 'dangerous' by experts .
 The ruling party went through several name changes and transformed in important ways as the century progressed . Dubbed the “perfect dictatorship” in 1990 by the conservative Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas Llosa, the ruling party has maintained institutional continuity .
 While the PRI did not outlaw opposition parties, it encouraged their existence to lend greater legitimacy to its rule . Its grip on the reins of state power remained unassailable by virtue of its domination of the machinery of state, the major media, and the electoral process .
 Despite its origins in the aftermath of the Mexican Revolution and its ostensibly “revolutionary” orientation, the PRI grew increasingly conservative, authoritarian, and corrupt after the major reforms of the Cardenas years . The PRI became increasingly conservative and authoritarian after major reforms .
 Unlike many Latin American countries, the Mexican army and police remain firmly subordinated to civilian authority . Unlike many other Latin American nations, Mexico's police and army are still under civilian control .
 Organized labor was represented by the Mexican Workers’ Federation (Confederacion de Trabajadores de Mexico, or CTM) CTM was an increasingly bureaucratized union founded under Cardenas .
 Independent or insurgent labor unions were either repressed or coopted . Independent unions were repressed and coopted in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The agrarian sector was represented by the National Peasant Confederation (Confederacion Nacional Campesino) and other state-controlled organizations .
 PRI was characterized by its conservatism at home and its rhetorical support for leftist movements abroad . From the 1950s, the PRI supported Cuban revolution, such as the Cuban revolution .
 Under pressure from the United States government and commercial interests, the program was extended until 1965 . Conceived as a wartime measure, it was extended under pressure from U.S. government .
 Camacho administration slowed the pace of agrarian reform . Established a state-run national bank and loosened restrictions on foreign ownership of Mexican resources . Expanded public works programs and embarked on an export-led model of national development .
 These were the years of the so-called Mexican Miracle, when relative social peace prevailed . State-led industrialization made major strides, and economic growth rates were the highest in the nation’s history .
 The government’s principal source of foreign exchange derived from state control of the Mexican oil industry . PEMEX, established in 1938, controls the country's oil industry, and controls the majority of the world's largest oil markets .
 In the 1960s many Mexicans grew increasingly disenchanted with the ruling party’s authoritarianism and corruption . Mexico's current president has been elected to the Senate in a landslide .
 A major crack in the PRI's ideological edifice came in the 1968 Tlatelolco massacre in Mexico City . The massacre occurred on the eve of the country’s hosting of the Olympics .
 Oil revenues were at an alltime high, though much of the income was squandered in bribes, kickbacks, inflated salaries, and wasteful projects . Much of the money was wasted in bribes and kick-backs .
 Numerous protest movements by workers, students, farmers, and others were violently suppressed, including a guerrilla movement in the state of Guerrero led by former schoolteacher Lucio Cabanas .
 Government debt rose dramatically, with world financial markets flush with petrodollars . Transnational financial institutions like the World Bank eager to extend low-interest loans to ‘developing’ economies .
 A combination of a global recession, low world oil prices, record-high debt ($80 billion in 1982), galloping inflation, and massive government expenditures led to the effective bankruptcy of the Mexican state . In 1982, under President Miguel de la Madrid, Mexico was bankrupted by record-
 In December 1988, when de la Madrid left office, foreign debt had risen to a record $105 billion . Devaluation of the peso and a restructuring of the international debt followed, though in December 1988 .
 As a result of these and related crises, the administrations of presidents Carlos Salinas de Gortari and Ernesto Zedillo embarked on a major effort to rein in inflation and slash the size of the federal government through privatization of state-owned industries and pursuit of fiscal austerity measures .
 The combination of prolonged economic crises and erosion of the PRI’s ideological legitimacy led to its defeat in the 2000 elections . The PRI continued to play a major role in the National Assembly and in state and local governments throughout Fox's tenure . The party promised to play in the
 The Mexican Shock: Its Meaning for the United States . Castaneda, Jorge G. Castanado, Jorge J. G. The Mexican shock is its meaning for the U.S.
 Meyer, Michael C. Sherman, William L Sherman, and Susan M Deeds. New Press, 1995; Meyer, . Michael C., William . Sherman, . William L. Sherman and Susan . Deeds . New Press . 1995 .
 Since its foundation at the end of World War II, the International Monetary Fund has been one of the world’s most powerful and controversial multilateral economic institutions . Michael J Schroeder says the IMF has been a powerful and contentious institution .
 Debates on the role of the IMF in the global economy have intensified in recent decades, especially from the 1990s . Debates have intensified on the IMF's role in global economic policy since the 1980s . The IMF has been criticized for its role in the world's economies .
 It is governed by its Board of Governors, one from each member country . The board of governors is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Executive Board, comprised of 24 directors, is responsible for its daily operation . Executive Board is made up of 24 members of staff .
 IMF's largest contributors wield the most power within the institution . IMF’s largest contributor wields most power in the institution, the IMF says .
 Critics charge that the IMF locks underdeveloped countries into positions of structural subordination within the global capitalist system . Critics say the IMF and the “neoliberal” economic paradigm that it promotes locks under developed countries .
 IMF policy prescriptions for “austerity measures” and “structural adjustment” include privatization of state-run entities, reduced public expenditures, and radically curtailed intervention of national governments in their national economies .
 Opposition to IMF policies has intensified in recent decades, as evidenced in part by the rise of left-leaning neo-populist regimes in Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Chile .
 Critics characterize the IMF and associated multilateral institutions and treaties as instruments of the wealthy and powerful . IMF policies are unjust, immoral, corporate welfare, and a major contributor to poverty, unemployment, and human misery worldwide .
 As economic globalization accelerates in the 21st century, debates on the role of the IMF are likely to intensify . The IMF's role in the IMF is likely to be scrutinized more and more .
 In 1919 shortly after the conclusion of World War I, the U.S. Army organized a convoy that departed Washington, D.C., bound for San Francisco, California . The convoy was organized by the United States Army .
 The objectives of the cross-country trek were to test military vehicles and ascertain the feasibility of mass transport on a nationwide scale . The objectives were to . ascertain the . feasibility of . mass transport .
 General Eisenhower commanded the invasion of Europe during World War II . He noted the ease and freedom of movement for the troops . Twenty-five years later General Eisenhower praised the ease of movement .
 Eisenhower advanced an agenda that led to the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1954 . State and federal governments would match road and bridge construction costs . Eisenhower was elected president in 1952 .
 Eisenhower signed the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956 . It provided federal funding of $25 billion for a highway system . Two years later, Eisenhower signed a highway bill .
 The roads were designed to accommodate traffic volumes expected 20 years later . The roads are expected to be built in the next 20 years .
 Lanes were required to be 12 feet wide with a paved 10-foot shoulder . A minimum of two lanes in each direction had to carry cars at speeds of 50 to 70 miles per hour . Lanes had to be two lanes each direction with a minimum of 2 lanes per direction .
 North-south roadways were designated with numbers ending in odd integers . East-west interstates were given even numbers for north-south interstates .
 Eisenhower may have considered a highway system necessary for the efficient movement of military equipment and personnel or the effective evacuation of cities in event of a nuclear attack . But the effects on the economy were much wider-reaching .
 Suburbs grew, construction jobs were created, and commercial freight was transported . More automobiles were built, and roadside businesses developed . Suburbbs grew and construction jobs created .
 Interstate routes disrupted urban neighborhoods and slashed across farmers’s fields . Farmers’ fields were slashed across the fields . Interstate routes cut across urban neighborhoods .
 Interstate travel discouraged mass transit and helped speed the demise of long-haul passenger rail service . The ease of interstate travel encouraged mass transit in the United States .
 Interstate maintenance and capacity issues continued to create friction between the federal and state governments . Interstate maintenance, capacity issues created friction between state and federal governments .
 Rose, Mark H Interstate Express Highway Politics, 1941-1981. Viking Press, 1997; Rose: Interstate Express . Highway Politics . Rose: Highway politics in the '50s and '60s . Rose, Rose, '80s, '90s.
 The first intifada (the Intifada, from the Arabic for “shaking off ”) was a popular uprising among Palestinians against Israel’s military occupation, confiscation of their land, and suppression of their collective identity .
 The uprising started on December 8, 1987, in the Palestinian refugee camp Jabalya in the Gaza Strip . The uprising quickly spread to the rest of Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, all of which had been under Israeli occupation since 1967 .
 The Intifada was a spontaneous popular phenomenon caused by a number of domestic and international factors . It was a popular popular phenomenon in the wake of the Second World War .
 Palestinians believe neither the military efforts of the Arab states nor diplomatic efforts by the Palestine Liberation Organization nor Arab states would end the occupation . The most important of these factors was a sense of hopelessness that had pervaded the occupied territories .
 Arab leaders at the Summit Conference in Amman, Jordan, placed the Iran-Iraq War at the top of the Arab political agenda and relegated the Palestinian question to the end of the list . Some analysts say the final catalyzing factor emerged in November 1987 .
 The territories had become a reservoir for cheap labor for Israel and its second-biggest export market after the United States . In addition, the Palestinian economy had declined since the 1967 war, and the territories had been a reservoir .
 The average income of the Palestinian worker had declined, Palestinian worker says . Growing number of Jewish settlers had moved into the territories, he says .
 The Intifada used mainly low-key violence and avoided the use of weapons . The Palestinian movement avoided weapons and avoided violence in the early years .
 It was largely limited to political demonstrations, strikes, refusal to pay taxes, and some stone throwing . Some stone throwing was also used .
 Between 1987 and 1990 the GNP in Gaza declined at least 30 percent . The situation in the West Bank was not much better . The GNP declined 30 percent between 1987 and 1989 .
 By the middle of 1990 the Intifada had lost much of its earlier impetus, and popular frustrations resulted in the killing of real or suspected collaborators . Real or suspected co-conspirators were also killed .
 The Intifada was seen by the Palestinians as a major event in their recent history . In spite of these hardships and the lack of success, it was seen as one of the most significant events in the Palestinian community .
 Popular committees in towns and villages mobilized the population and looked after the families of the dead and wounded . The popular committees were mobilized by the population, looked at the families and wounded.
 The Intifada failed to achieve the long-term goal of self-determination and the end of the Israeli occupation . However, it failed to achieved the long term goal of ending the occupation of Israel . Israel has never been occupied by Palestinians .
 Although the PLO did not initiate the Intifada, it tried to play a leading role in the struggle . The PLO and Hamas became political rivals in the course of which the two became rivals .
 The Intifada did succeed in bringing international attention back to the Palestinian cause and was a factor behind the United States sponsorship of the Madrid Conference in November 1991 .
 The Haram al-Sharif complex includes the al-Aqsa Mosque, viewed by Muslims as the third-most-sacred site in Islam . The al Aqsa mosque is considered the most sacred in Islam by Muslims . It is considered by Muslims to be the third most
 Many Jews believe the site is also the location of the ancient temple of Solomon and refer to it as the Temple Mount . The site is believed to have been the site of the Temple of Solomon .
 The site has been a flash point for confrontations between Palestinians and Israelis . Owing to these conflicting religious and historic claims, the site is a flashpoint for confrontation between Israelis and Palestinians . The site is located in the West Bank of Jerusalem .
 The al-Aqsa Intifada was also evidence of continued Palestinian opposition to the Israeli occupation and the failure to achieve meaningful national independence . The Palestinian uprising was also a sign of continued opposition to Israel's occupation .
 The uprising fed Israeli fears and the determination by those on the Israeli right to retain control of the territories . The uprising feeds Israeli fears, and the Israeli government is determined to keep control .
 Since the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Israeli military had controlled more than 1. million Palestinians through military orders . These included arrests, detention without trial, restrictions on movement, and land appropriation as well as appropriation of water resources .
 Under dual governance, Israeli settlers in the territories—some 200,000 by 2006—came under Israeli law . Palestinians remained under military rule .
 Under the Oslo Accords Israel had agreed to trade land for peace . Israel had gradually withdrawn from some territory in the West Bank . Israel agreed to withdraw land from some West Bank territory .
 The Palestinians had hoped that Oslo would be a step toward the creation of an independent Palestinian state . The Palestinians hope that Oslo will be the first step toward a state .
 Many young Palestinians turned to the more radical Hamas and Islamic Jihad . Disillusioned with the continued Israeli occupation and the perceived failures of the PLO .
 Suicide bombers are now using a new tactic of using suicide bombers to attack Israeli soldiers and settlers in the occupied territories . They are targeting Israeli civilians across the socalled green line inside the pre-1967 Israeli borders .
 These attacks undermined support for the peace process in Israel and strengthened the position of Israeli hard-liners who were opposed to returning any territory .
 Further Israeli settlements also continued to be built even after Oslo in 1993 . Israel continued to build settlements after Oslo .
 Ariel Sharon, known for his hawkish stance and support for the settlers, was elected Israeli prime minister in 2001 . Ariel Sharon was elected Israel's first prime minister .
 In 2002 Israeli forces reoccupied much of the West Bank territory that had been turned over to the Palestine Authority . In 2002 Israel reoccupied some of the territory that was taken over by the Palestinian Authority . Israeli forces have reoccupied the area since 2002 .
 Israeli forces retaliated by reducing much of the town to rubble, and many were killed or made homeless . Israeli forces also destroyed the town, killing or making many homeless .
 Israeli forces also laid seige to Bethlehem, where several wanted Palestinians had taken refuge in the Church of the Nativity . Several wanted Palestinians were taken hostage in the church .
 Arafat’s compound in Ramallah was also surrounded, and he spent most of the last two years of his life under virtual house arrest . Arafat's compound is also surrounded by a wall of concrete, concrete walls .
 Israel also assassinated Sheik Ahmed Yassin and Abdul Aziz al-Rantissi, two key Hamas leaders . Sheik Yassin was assassinated by Israel in 2006 .
 The suicide attacks inside Israel continued, resulting in a number of civilian deaths . Yet the suicide attacks in Israel continued .
 Built entirely on Palestinian land occupied by Israel since the 1967 war, the wall separated Palestinians from one another . It also limited access to Jerusalem, and isolated some communities entirely .
 Following Arafat’s death in 2004, Mahmoud Abbas, known as Abu Mazen, became the new Palestinian president .
 Despite concerted efforts he failed to revive the peace process or to stop the suicide bombers . But in spite of concerted efforts to revive peace process he failed .
 Hamas won the free and open Palestinian elections in 2006 . Ismail Haniyeh, a popular and charismatic Hamas leader from the Gaza Strip, became the prime minister .
 Much-needed foreign aid was halted or constricted, and the economic situation in the territories became increasingly dire . The situation was so dire that some of the territories were forced to rely on aid from the UN .
 Prime Minister Sharon adopted a policy of sequential unilateral decisions . He made policy regarding the territories without consultation with the Palestinians .
 In 2005 he withdrew Israeli troops from the Gaza Strip and dismantled several Israeli settlements . Israel retained control over land, air, and sea entries into Gaza and periodically attacked .
 Ehud Olmert became the Israeli prime minister in 2006 after Sharon was incapacitated following a series of strokes . Ehud is a former mayor of Jerusalem and a former prime minister of Jerusalem .
 He pledged to continue Sharon’s policies . He supported a massive Israeli invasion into Lebanon in the summer of 2006 .
 The cycle of violence and retaliation continued to escalate and the lives of both Israelis and Palestinians became less safe . Hence the cycle of violent reprisals and violence escalated .
 The Islamic Republic of Iran was established in April 1979 after the revolution overthrew the monarchy of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi . The Islamic republic was overthrown in 1979 .
 Years of turbulence preceded the revolution, led by exiled Shi’i cleric Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini . The revolution overthrew the government of Iran in 1989 .
 Khomeini was an Islamic scholar from the conservative city of Qom . Under the shah’s regime he had been exiled to Iraq . He was exiled to the country under the Shah's regime .
 Khomeini coordinated a revolution using the press, radio, and audio cassettes to incite Iranians to rise up against the shah . After being expelled from Iraq, he moved to France, where he coordinated the revolution in France .
 The Ayatollah exhorted Iranian citizens (male and female) over 16 years of age to vote for the creation of an Islamic Republic . The ayatollah also exhorted Iranians to vote to create an Islamic republic .
 Many secularists were alarmed by the new government, which was controlled by the mullahs, or Shi’i clergy . Most Iranians were tired of rampant corruption, overspending, and the police state created by the shah .
 Under the new 1979 constitution a supreme leader ruled over a theocracy . Under the supreme leader a 12-member cabinet, or Council of Guardians, oversaw the constitution and had veto power over legislation .
 Khomeini sought to establish a government that adhered to a strict Shi’i code of law and conduct . He was assassinated in Iran's capital, Tehran, in November 1989 .
 Iranian women, who had the right to vote and work outside the home, nevertheless were restricted regarding dress and modes of behavior . Iranian women were not allowed to vote or to work outside of the home .
 secularists within the government who had struggled against the shah were marginalized by the new Islamist forces . Many fled the country for Europe and the U.S.
 Following the shah’s overthrow, Iranian relations with the United States deteriorated . The U.S. was a strong ally of the Pahlavi dynasty, but relations deteriorated .
 When the shah entered the U.S. for cancer treatment in 1979, riots broke out in Tehran . Angry students stormed the United States embassy and took many hostages .
 Many Iranians blame the United States for its support of the shah and his repressive regime . Many Iranians blamed the U.S. for its backing of Iran's shah .
 The students demanded that the shah be handed over to the new Islamic regime for trial in exchange for the release of the embassy hostages . The students were protesting against the government's decision to hand over the hostages .
 The United States refused to return the shah and severed diplomatic relations with the Islamic Republic . The U.S. refused to give up the throne of the Shah .
 The resulting crisis dragged on for more than a year before the hostages were released . Diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Iran had yet to be resumed .
 Neighboring Arab governments were alarmed at Khomeini’s attempts to export Islamic revolution to other Muslim nations . Neighboring governments were also alarmed at his attempts to spread Islamic revolution .
 Neighboring Iraq, with its large Shi’i population, was particularly concerned . Neighboring Iran, Iraq and Syria have been at odds with each other over the years .
 The Iraqi government led by Saddam Hussein, with at least the tacit support of other Arab states and the United States, decided to preempt the Islamic revolution by attacking Iran in 1980 .
 Hussein severely underestimated the national determination of Iran, and a long, eight-year war of attrition began . Although the Iranians were taken by surprise, Hussein underestimated his national determination .
 The Iran-Iraq War lasted from 1980 to 1988 and caused massive casualties and destruction on both sides . The war lasted between 1980 and 1988 and resulted in massive casualties .
 Western and Arab governments provided arms and assistance to Iraq, while several communistbloc countries provided support to Iran . Libya, Libya, and Syria provided support .
 By 1988 both nations were exhausted and agreed to a U.N.-brokered truce . By 1988, both nations had agreed to an end to hostilities .
 Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, a mullah who advocated resumption of relations with the West, was elected president . He purged many hardline members from his cabinet, purging them from the cabinet . He is now the president of Iran .
 Reformist governments elected by wide margins in the 1990s were thwarted in implementing reforms and liberalization by the hard-line Council of Guardians . Hard-line councils of Guardians retained final say on legislation .
 The young Iranian population wanted liberalization of the media, social life, and dress . But the conservative mullahs clung to power . Many young Iranians were born after the revolution .
 Iran signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1979 . It gave Iran the right to use and research nuclear energy for peaceful purposes . Prior to the 1979 revolution Iran had signed the nuclear non-proliferation treaty .
 Iran’s nuclear research appeared to escalate after the 2005 election of Mahmud Ahmadinejad, a conservative and controversial populist, as president .
 The United States threatened sanctions and military action were Iran to continue its nuclear ambitions, but Ahmadinejad appealed to Iranian nationalism . Iran had the right to develop nuclear weapons as other nations such as Israel, Pakistan, and India had done .
 Iran emerged as a major regional power after the occupation of Iraq in the Second Gulf War . After the occupation, Iran has become a major power in the region .
 It continued to lend financial and military support to Shi’i communities in Iraq and to Hizbollah in Lebanon .
 Iran threatened to switch from selling oil in dollar prices and move to gold or euro . This could devastate the dollar and weaken the United States economy . Iran's oil reserves also gave Iran considerable leverage economically .
 Mired in protracted conflict in Afghanistan and Iraq, the U.S. had few options to force Iran to drop its support for Islamist movements or its nuclear program . The United States protested Iran's policies but had little options .
 Iran-contra affair involved an attempt by the Reagan administration to circumvent congressional limitations on aid to the contras . Reagan administration tried to secure the release of U.S. hostages held in the Middle East through the sale of arms to Iran .
 The revelation of this attempt undercut the popularity of the president and led to the indictment of several aides . The revelation has undercut the president's popularity, led to several aides being indicted .
 The affair arose from parallel events in Central America and the Middle East . It arose from a series of events in the region and beyond .
 In Central America, the Reagan administration was supporting the contras . The contras were an amalgam of individuals and groups who opposed the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua .
 The contras were considered by the Reagan administration to be the best alternative to the Marxist Sandinistas . Despite a reputation for ineffectiveness and drug dealing, they were considered to be an effective alternative . Despite their reputation, the contras have been considered an ineffective government .
 At the same time in the Middle East, terrorist organizations such as Islamic Jihad were increasing their harassment of U.S. citizens in response to the Israeli invasion of Lebanon .
 Over a dozen U.S. citizens were kidnapped and taken hostage between 1982 and 1984 . The kidnapping took place in the United States in 1982-1984 .
 Reagan administration responded to this provocation by vowing never to negotiate with terrorists . Reagan administration blamed the Iranians for supporting these organizations . The Reagan administration refused to negotiate, blaming Iran .
 The Iranians were locked in a war with the Saddam HussEiN-led country of Iraq . Additionally the Iranian government was involved in the war with Iraq .
 Iran-Iraq War would be bloody but ultimately inconclusive . Running from 1980 to 88, the war would be inconclusive but ended inconclusive.
 The Iranians began to run into a significant problem in the course of the fighting . The Iranians are in the midst of a crisis in the Middle East .
 Most of their military hardware had been purchased from the U.S. before the 1979 overthrow of the shah . Most of the country's military hardware was bought from the United States before the overthrow .
 Iran began to run short of ammunition and spare parts, which they could not acquire from the United States because of a congressional ban on arms sales to the Iranians stemming from the hostage crisis of 1979-81 .
 The NSC led by John Poindexter and CIA director William Casey proposed the arrangement to the president and his advisers .
 Through private arms dealers and Israel, the U.S. would sell arms to the Iranians above cost . The United States would sell the arms to Iran above cost.
 In return, the United States expected Iran to pressure terrorists to free the U.S. hostages . The United States is expected to pressure the terrorists to release the hostages in return for their release .
 The profits from the arms sales would be secretly diverted to the contras to keep their activities afloat . The profits would be secret diverted to keep them afloat .
 Reagan approved the idea despite opposition from Secretary of State George Shultz and some dissent from Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger . Reagan approved of the plan despite opposition .
 Only one hostage and the body of a second were released . Despite pressure and apparent promises, only one hostage was released . The body of the second hostage was also found in the area .
 The money and additional supplies were funneled to the contras until October 1986, when a CIAchartered plane crashed in Nicaragua . The money was funneled through the CIA .
 On November 3 a Lebanese journal, Al-Sbira, revealed the existence of the arms sales to Iran .
 The Reagan administration acknowledged the existence of the arms sales and contra supplies in a speech by the president on November 13 . Reagan administration acknowledges the existence in the speech .
 Witnesses such as NSC staff member Colonel Oliver North testified before Congress and the Tower Commission . North testified to the arms sales and funding while portraying the president as a “handsoff” administrator . The president was portrayed as an incompetent administrator .
 Reagan's own appearance before the commission revealed the president’s shaky grasp of details and apparently poor memory of events . Reagan was the first president to appear before a commission .
 In the Tower Commission’s final report, the president was criticized for his lack of control over his staff . Most of the blame was placed on the National Security Council and its staff .
 Sandinista National Liberation Front. Sandinistas took control of Nicaragua in the 1980s . Controversy led to war with the government of Nicaragua .
 Islamic militants overran the United States embassy in Tehran and seized its staff as hostages . The Iran hostage crisis formally began on November 4, 1979, when Islamic militants seized the U.S. Embassy in Tehran .
 This situation lasted through the end of President Jimmy Carter’s term and hurt him politically in the presidential election against Ronald Reagan . The situation lasted for more than a decade and hurt the Carter administration .
 Relations between the U.S. and Iran began to break down during the Iranian revolution in early 1979 . Relations between Iran and the United States broke down in 1979 during the revolution .
 Iran’s ruler, Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, had been an ally of the U.S. Prior to this Iran had been a close ally with the United States . Iran's ruler had been the Shah of the Shah .
 In an attempt to blunt this backlash, the shah resorted to increasingly heavy-handed internal measures, but only succeeded in alienating the Iranian populace . The shah tried to blunt the backlash, but failed to do so and alienate the Iranian population .
 In January 1979 the shah was overthrown and forced into exile, and an Islamic-style theocracy, led by the Ayatollah Khomeini, assumed power .
 By this time the exiled shah had been legally deposed and formally sentenced to death in Iran . By the time this was in 1979, the shah was officially declared dead . The shah's death was the first death sentence in Iran since his exile .
 A mob of Iranian militants seized the United States embassy, detained 66 members of the staff as hostages, and demanded the extradition of the shah to Iran in return for the release of the hostages . Less than two weeks later the long-brewing crisis of anti-U.S.
 In December 1979 the shah left the United States, first for Panama and then to Egypt, where he died in 1980 . President Carter rejected this, but in December 1979 he left the U.S.
 Since the hostage taking violated diplomatic convention and international law, Carter was able to rally world opinion against Iran and impose an economic embargo . Carter was also able to impose an international embargo on Iran .
 The Ayatollah Khomeini had privately sanctioned the actions of the hostage takers . He refused to see U.S. emissaries and rebuffed diplomatic efforts . He had publicly sanctioned the action .
 Palestine Liberation Organization members gained the release of 13 female and African-American hostages . In the only successful diplomatic measure, the only diplomatic measure was to release 13 hostages .
 On April 7, 1980, the United States officially broke diplomatic ties with Iran . The U.S. broke diplomatic relations with Iran in 1980 . Iran was the first country to officially break diplomatic ties in the world since 1953 .
 Despite continued pressure on Iran, the hostages remained in captivity five months after the crisis began . Domestic pressure mounted on the Carter administration to find a solution to the crisis . The hostages were still held five months later .
 After much deliberation, President Carter decided that direct intervention was needed . President Carter called for direct intervention from the White House .
 President Carter authorized Operation Desert Claw, an ill-fated military rescue plan . Carter authorized Desert Claw plan, which led to the collapse of U.S. troops .
 The April 24, 1980, rescue mission suffered from having to traverse great distances by air, unexpected sandstorms, and untimely mechanical failures . The mission was the first time the rescue mission had to be airlifted .
 The final mishap came during a refueling stop, when a helicopter collided with a tanker plane loaded with high-octane aviation fuel . Eight U.S. servicemen were killed in the crash .
 The failure of the rescue mission did not end negotiations, but the Carter administration appeared to be paralyzed by the crisis .
 United States secretary of state Cyrus Vance quietly signed the Algiers Accord, which established the pre-November 4, 1979, situation . The Accord was signed by Vance and Vance in 1979 . Vance signed the accord in secret .
 The main clause was the restitution of frozen Iranian financial assets in the U.S. in the United States . The Iranian government has been accused of embezzling Iranian assets .
 The Iran Hostage Crisis and America’s First Encounter with Radical Islam. The Iran hostage crisis is the result of a hostage crisis in Iran . The crisis was the first time Americans had seen radical Islam .
 The Iranian revolution of 1979 overthrew the Pahlavi dynasty and established an Islamic republic . Keith Bukovich is the author of the book, "Iranian Revolution"
 Central Intelligence Agency helped orchestrate countercoup in 1953 . Countercoup kept Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi in power .
 Iran, under the shah, was closely allied with the United States . In the cold war Iran was a staunchly pro-Western buffer on the southern flank of the Soviet Union .
 Iran was used as a base for U.S. military and intelligence gathering aimed at the Soviet Union . Iran was once a base in Iran for intelligence and military operations .
 In 1961 the shah announced an ambitious plan of development known as the White Revolution . The shah was the prime minister of Iran's rule in 1961 .
 The sixpoint plan included improvements in women's rights, healthcare, and education . The plan also included privatization of state-owned factories and land reform .
 The proposed nationalization of land owned by the clergy and landed elites led to major demonstrations against the government . The proposed land nationalization led to demonstrations against government .
 Conservative businessmen in Tehran bazaar offended by lifestyles of the elite . The elite emulated Western dress, consumed alcohol, and practiced open relations between the sexes .
 Even the Iranian middle class was dismayed by the expenses of the 1967 formal coronation of the shah and his wife and the 1971 celebration of the 2,500th anniversary of the Peacock Throne .
 In the 1970s Iran became a regional power when the shah used increased revenues from petroleum to buy sophisticated armaments, mostly from the U.S. The shah spent most of the money on armaments from the United States .
 A number of Iranian intellectuals laid the groundwork for the revolution in books critical of the Pahlavi regime .
 Samad Behrangi wrote popular folktales that were in fact veiled critiques of the shah’s regime . Behrangian was born in Tehran, Iran, and lived in the country's capital, Tehran, during the Shah's rule .
 He also wrote against what he called “west struckedness,” or intoxication with all things Western .
 Jalal Al-e Ahmad, a writer from a clerical family, described Iranians who copied the West as diseased . Al-Ahmad: Iranians copying the West are 'diseased' and not healthy .
 He was familiar with Marxist thought but fused it with Islam . He argued that independent reasoning should be applied to interpreting the Qu’ran to create a new society .
 A prolific writer, Shari’ati was a major influence on a new generation of Iranian students . He was a prolific writer .
 The clergy opposed the shah’s efforts to undermine their authority . The clergy also opposed efforts to stop government subsidies for religious schools . The shah also opposed the government's efforts to end government subsidies .
 Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini was a leading cleric in Qom, a conservative center for the training of Shi’i mullahs . He was particularly outspoken in his hostility to the shah .
 Khomeini spoke against the acquisition of U.S. military equipment . He favored treatment in Iran, and was arrested several times in the 1960s .
 In 1964 he was sent into exile to Turkey, and then took up residence in the Shi’i holy city of Najaf in Iraq . His activities were closely monitored by the Iraqi government, which sent him into exile in 1964 . He was sent to Turkey in 1964, then took
 Khomeini moved to France in 1978, where he had access to the media and freedom of movement . He attracted a loyal following among dissident Iranians . In 1978 the shah convinced Saddam Hussein to oust Khomenei .
 The shah’s regime was accused of increased corruption and nepotism . The gap between the wealthy and the poor in the countryside and urban slums widened .
 The revolt against the regime began in January 1978, with riots in Qom protesting an anti-Khomeini article published in a newspaper . The revolt began in 1978, when the regime was overthrown .
 To commemorate their deaths as martyrs, protests took place in Tabriz and Yazd in March . Demonstrations led to more deaths when the police moved in to stop them .
 This initiated a 40-day cycle of riots and repression, with inevitable deaths . This initiated 40 days of rioting and repression . This is a cycle of violence, repression and riots, with inevitably deaths .
 The demonstrators were encouraged by speeches by Khomeini on cassette tapes that were smuggled into the country . They were encouraged to take part in the demonstrations . The demonstrations took place in Iran in the 1980s .
 This was followed by “Black Friday’s in September, when demonstrators were massacred in Tehran . This month, Iranian President Ayatollah Kham Khamenei was killed by his government forces .
 By the fall a new pattern of strikes by students, teachers, and their supporters emerged . Students, teachers and supporters took to the streets in protest .
 In December, government workers and employees in the petroleum industry as well as the army joined the protests . Government workers and government workers joined protests .
 Most of those who lost their lives were young Iranians, often from the Left . Most of the people who died in the Iranian protests were young people from the left .
 The clergy remained largely in the background but would emerge as the major political force after the fall of the monarchy . The clergy emerged as a major force in politics after the monarchy was toppled .
 The U.S. failed to find a substitute for the shah, who seemed convinced that Washington would step in to save his regime . The shah was convinced that the United States would step into his regime, but it failed .
 In the face of mounting violence and lack of support even within the military, the shah fled the country in 1979 . The shah, ill with cancer, fled in January 1979 . He was forced to flee the country amid mounting violence .
 He left a caretaker government under Shapour Baktiar, who had no base of support . He left the government under caretaker Prime Minister, who has no base in support .
 Baktiar fled Iran and was replaced by Mehdi Bazargan . Following Khomeini’s triumphal return, he fled the country .
 The shah was allowed into the U.S. for medical treatment in the fall of 1979 . This inflamed Iranians, who had demanded his return for trial .
 The shah, who had difficulty finding a country to grant him asylum, died in Egypt in 1980 . He died in 1980 in Egypt .
 In Tehran students stormed and took the United States embassy and held U.S. hostages for over a year . Many of them were members of newly formed, self-appointed committees .
 Khomeini used the resulting crisis and chaos to help cement the clergy’s control over the new government . The resulting chaos was used to cement his control over Iran .
 Right-wing groups supporting militant Islam also emerged . They were supported by some ayatollahs and bazaaris . Hojatieh groups supporting militants also emerged.
 1979 constitution provided for a Majlis (parliament), a president elected by direct representation, and a velayat e faqif, a spiritual leader, to act as the final authority in the nation . The 1979 constitution was set up by 1979 constitution .
 The Council of Guardians acted as a supreme court to review all legislation of the Majlis . The council of Guardians is the supreme court of Majlis, the most powerful body in the country .
 The council rejected parliamentary legislation such as trade nationalization and land reform as un-Islamic . The council frequently rejected parliamentary bills such as nationalization as unIslamic .
 Abolhassan Bani-Sadr was elected the first president by a wide margin in 1980 . But he was removed from office by Khomeini in the summer of 1981 .
 Khomeini repressed political opponents and purged members of the old regime as well as the leftist opposition, such as the Fedayin alKhalq . The former regime was overthrown in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The Iranian Revolution had a huge impact on the Islamic world, and many young Muslims looked to Iran as a model for future changes . Many young Muslims were discouraged by the corruption and ineffectiveness of the governments in their own countries .
 Khomeini’s open support for regime change in neighboring Arab nations aroused the fears of Saudi Arabia and other states . The Iran-Iraq War led to the Iran-Iran War .
 Despite internal contradictions, internal opposition, the Islamic regime proved to be remarkably flexible and long lasting . However, in spite of internal contradictions and domestic opposition, many international forces .
 The Algiers Treaty of March 6, 1975, was signed by Iran’s Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and then vice president of Iraq Saddam Hussein . It was intended to solve longstanding border and waterway disputes between the two neighboring countries .
 The overthrow of the shah in 1979, which put Iran in the hands of Islamic fundamentalists, changed the political dynamics of the country . However, with the overthrow of Iran's shah, Iran's political dynamics changed .
 Iran's new leaders started to hint that they did not feel obligated by the shah’s earlier commitments . Iraqi leaders were complaining that Iran still had not returned certain border areas promised under the 1975 treaty .
 In September 1980 Iraqi armed forces moved to reclaim those lands, and on September 22 they crossed the border into Iran . In 1980, the Iraqi government began to reclaim the lands .
 The invasion had consequences that Iraqi president Hussein had not expected . Hussein was not expecting the invasion of Iraq in 2003 .
 In launching the attack on Iran, Hussein thought the war would be brief and would lead to the downfall of Iran’s religious leader, the Ayatollah Khomeini, whom Hussein disliked . Hussein wanted the war to end in a brief war .
 The power of Khomeini and other Islamic revolutionaries increased as Iranians united and rallied to support the war . Instead, the power of the revolution was increased in Iran as Iranians rallied around Iran .
 Iran had three times the population and about four times the geographic area of Iraq . Iraq had better technology, more weapons, and a stronger air force, Iran had more than Iraq .
 Iran-raq War seesawed back and forth for eight grueling years . Iran-lraq War sawawed between Iran and Iran for eight years .
 Iran often conducted useless infantry attacks, using “human assault waves” made up in part by young, untrained conscripts . The Kerbala offensives were repulsed by the superior air and firepower of the Iraqis . Some methods of World War I were employed
 Iraq's reputation was tainted by U.N. reports that it had used deadly chemical weapons against Iranian troops in 1984 . Iraq was concerned with the war’s trench warfare and stalemate, but had its overtures for a peace agreement undercut .
 Iran and Iraq attacked each other’s oil-tanker shipping in the Persian Gulf . The U.S. and several Western European nations station battleships in the gulf to protect those tankers .
 As many as 1 million people died in the Iran-lraq War, approximately 1. million were wounded, about 1 million were forced to flee as refugees, and major cities were destroyed on both sides .
 The oil industries of both countries also suffered extensive damage due to the fighting . Oil exports, and earnings from those exports, naturally dropped .
 Iran and Iraq wasted $400 billion on the war and along with that the chance to build up their societies . More important, the large oil reserves of both countries represented the potential for significant international economic power . Both nations had together .
 Iran’s need for additional weapons led to a compromising relationship with the U.S. administration in 1985 . Iran's need for more weapons led the administration of Ronald Reagan in 1985 to negotiate a deal with Iran .
 Iran was able to obtain weapons from the U.S. in exchange for the release of hostages in Lebanon . Khomeini had called the United States "the great Satan" in Iran .
 The Soviet Union supplied about two-thirds of Iraq’s weapons . At about the same time U.S. aid of all types began to appear in Iraq .
 The Iran-lraq War also ended Khomeini’s attempts to spread his fundamentalist Islamic revolution abroad . The war ended the Iran-Lraq War, ending Khomni's attempt to spread the radicalism abroad .
 Iraqi president Hussein learned new fighting strategies that he would later use against another neighboring country, Kuwait, which had been his ally during the conflict . Hussein was stymied in his ambitions to make Iraq the leading power .
 The Iran-lraq War was the longest and most destructive conflict in the post-World War II era . None of the basic friction points between Iran and Iraq had been settled . A cease-fire finally arrived on August 20, 1988 .
 The Hashemite dynasty in Iraq was overthrown in a bloody revolution in 1958 . Keith Bukovich is the author of a book about the Iraq revolution . Iraq was ruled by the Hashemites until the fall of Saddam Hussein .
 Free Officers copied the takeover of the Egyptian government by the Free Officers, led by Gamal Abdel Nasser, in 1952 . A group of disgruntled nationalistic army officers headed by General Abdul Karim Qassem and Colonel Abd al-Salam Arif copied .
 Iraqi forces took over radio station, post office, royal palace, government centers in Baghdad in 1958 . Iraqi forces seized radio station and post office in Baghdad on July 14, 1958 .
 Nuri al-Said, the grand old man of Iraqi politics, was captured trying to escape disguised as a woman . He was torn apart by an angry mob after he was caught by a mob . He had served as prime minister on numerous occasions .
 As violence mounted in the capital, the officers declared martial law and established a three-person sovereignty council of one Kurd, one Sunni, and one Shi’i . The council is an attempt to include the main sectarian groups in Iraq .
 Show trials were held of members of the ancien regime, and the new government announced its intention to purge the system of corruption and imperial control .
 Qassem was a notable champion for the poor . He supported eradicating slum areas around Baghdad and providing low-cost housing . He was also a champion for eradicating the slum area .
 Property confiscated from old ruling class distributed to peasants . Property confiscated without formation of cooperatives or government planning as in Egypt .
 The new regime also focused on improving and widening access to education .
 Most of the oil industry, Iraq’s major source of income, was taken over . In a highly popular move most of Iraq's oil industry has been taken over by the government .
 The new Iraqi regime supported both the Palestinian and Algerian nationalist movements . It withdrew from the hated Western-dominated CENTO, or Baghdad Pact . The new regime withdrew from CENTO after the fall of the pact .
 The West viewed the Iraqi revolution as a victory for the Soviets and blamed Nasser for the overthrow of the old monarchy . In the era of cold war politics the West, especially the U.S. viewed the revolution .
 Nasser initially supported the new regime and was pleased at the collapse of the Hashemite monarchy . However, he had not actually been behind the takeover of Egypt .
 Nasser invited Qassem to Egypt on several occasions, but he refused . The relationship between the two nations grew increasingly hostile . Nasser tried to enlarge the pan-Arab movement and convince Iraq to join the United Arab Republic .
 Arif was arrested in late 1958, but Qassem pardoned his old ally and permitted him to leave for Europe . Suspected of plotting a coup, Arif left for Europe in 1958 .
 Several attempted coups and an attempted assassination of Qassem by Ba’athists failed in 1959 . Several attempts to assassinate Qasseem failed in the early years of 1959 .
 Saddam Hussein was one of the plotters behind the failed assassination, and he subsequently fled to Egypt . Saddam Hussein later fled the country to escape .
 By 1961 a full-scale war was being waged between the Iraqi army and Kurdish nationalist forces . Relationships between the government and the Kurds, led by Mustafa Barzani, also soured .
 In the face of mounting political instability, Qassem’s personal behavior became more erratic . In the past year, his personal behavior has become more erratic.
 After Britain declared Kuwait an independent country, Qassem claimed it as an integral part of Iraq in 1961 . He claimed the territory as a "part of Iraq" after Britain declared it independent .
 British and Saudi troops moved into Kuwait to protect it, and Iraq withdrew its claim . Iraq was forced to withdraw its claim and recognize Kuwait as an independent nation .
 In 1963 a coup by army officers, including Arif, overthrew Qassem, who was taken prisoner . In 1963, a coup was staged by the army, taking place in the country's capital .
 Qassem was executed on orders given by Arif Arif . Although he pleaded for his life, he was executed . Arif ordered him to be executed by his brother .
 Abd al-Salam Arif died in 1966, and his brother succeeded him . The regime was plagued by political instability and the ongoing conflict with the Kurds .
 To protect the new Ba’ath regime from domestic opposition, Bakr had his protege Hussein control the internal security forces . The new regime had to protect itself from the domestic opposition . Hussein was Hussein's protege .
 Hussein gradually consolidated his power within the party and ruthlessly eliminated potential enemies . Hussein gradually consolidated his power in the party .
 The new regime instituted a more far-reaching land reform program and nationalized the oil industry in 1972 . New regime instituted land reform, nationalized oil industry .
 Escalating oil revenues in the 1970s were used to build infrastructure, modernize education and health care systems . Oil revenues helped build infrastructure and modernize health and education systems .
 The regime negotiated a settlement with the Kurds, who obtained an autonomous region in the north . The regime also negotiated a deal with the Kurdish population .
 In 1979 Bakr, who had been in poor health for some time, stepped down in favor of Hussein . Hussein ruled Iraq until his regime was overthrown in a U.S.-led military invasion in 2003 .
 Greenwood Press, 1994; Fernea, Robert A., and William Roger Louis, eds. eds., 1994; . Fernea: "I was a good guy. I was a great guy," Fernea said .
 The Irish Republican Army is a clandestine paramilitary organization that devoted itself to the removal of the British presence from Northern Ireland and the ending of the partition of the island . The organization was founded by the Irish Republican Party .
 Though it was active since the Anglo-Irish War, it gained international notoriety only in the last four decades of the 20th century . It was active in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 This campaign was waged against a number of loyalist militias, as well as the British army itself .
 The group's aims were shared by the Sinn Fein political party, which was labeled the IRA’s “political wing” but that always disavowed any such connection . The Sinn Fein party was labeled by the IRA's "political wing" but that officially disavowed it .
 Both groups claimed to speak for all of Ireland . But neither enjoyed the support of more than a minority of Northern Ireland's Catholic population .
 Collins ordered the IRA against, first, the British intelligence and police forces in Ireland, and then the “Black and Tan” auxiliary forces that were deployed against them by the British government . The IRA fought back against the British forces deployed by the government .
 Ultimately the IRA succeeded in forcing a truce with the British, the result of which was the negotiation of an Anglo-Irish Treaty in December 1921 . The IRA was involved in the conflict between the British and the Irish .
 A minority of deputies led by President Eamon de Valera walked out of the Dail and vowed to continue fighting for a republic . Unhappy with the terms of this treaty, the majority of deputies walked out .
 Free State forces defeated the anti-treaty Republicans in the Irish Civil War . This led to the Free State winning the war . The Free State defeated the Republican Party .
 Free State forces became the regular Irish army after the civil war . The IRA was driven underground by the Free State after the war . After the war, the IRA became a regular army .
 Fianna Fail entered the Dail in 1927 and were elected to power in 1932 . This situation did not improve when de Valera and his new political party entered Dail . De Valera was elected to Dail power in 1927 .
 Relations between de Valera, now a constitutional Republican, and the IRA worsened . De Valera government declared the IRA an illegal organization in 1935 .
 The 1938 Irish constitution achieved many of de Valera’s stated objectives . The 1938 constitution was the result of a referendum on the constitution .
 IRA’s sole raison d’etre would be directed toward partitioning Ireland . However, it did not end partition, and thereafter the IRA would focus on partition .
 By the 1950s it was hard to view the IRA as anything but a spent force . Neither of these actions proved successful, and the IRA was seen as anything less than an IRA .
 The IRA was reborn out of the crisis that beset Northern Ireland in the late 1960s . It was the first IRA to emerge from the crisis in Northern Ireland .
 Catholics in Ulster demonstrate for better access to housing and fairer wages . Inspired by the U.S. Civil Rights movement, Catholics began to demonstrate . They were inspired by the United States Civil Rights Movement .
 In August 1969 the demonstrations deteriorated into rioting, police repression, and the eventual deployment of the British army . The British army was deployed in response to the demonstrations .
 A group calling itself the "Provisional IRA" broke off and rededicated itself to a united Ireland through terrorist activity . A group called the Provisional IRA called itself the “Provisionals IRA’s” broke off .
 Within two years the Provos had far surpassed the Officials in popular support . The three-decades-long war that came to be known euphemistically as ‘the Troubles’ had begun .
 In August 1971 the British government introduced a policy of internment of IRA suspects without charge for up to seven days . IRA suspects were interned for seven days without charge in 1971 .
 Foyalist parliament at Stormont fell; Britain introduced direct rule of Northern Ireland from Fondon . Internment was phased out and internment was also phased out in 1972 .
 Beginning with the Troubles, IRA prisoners had enjoyed the status of political prisoners . IRA prisoners have been held in Northern Ireland since 1983 .
 Bobby Sands’s 66-day hunger strike lasted until his death on May 5, 1981, attracted international publicity . Sands died in May 1981 at the age of 66 .
 The cycle of attacks by, and reprisals against, the IRA continued apace . Away from the world stage the cycle of . attacks by the . IRA continued . away from the . world stage .
 Hope for an end to the struggle surfaced in 1994, with a cease-fire brokered by Gerry Adams, British prime minister John Major, Irish taoiseach Albert Reynolds, and United States president Bill Clinton .
 After the ratification of the Good Friday accords in 1999 and the progress of the Northern Irish peace process, the relevance of the IRA was called into question . The IRA's relevance in Northern Ireland was questioned in 1999 .
 The organization surrendered its weapons under the supervision of United Nations inspectors . The group surrendered weapons to the U.N. inspectors .
 Islamist movements flourished in many parts of the Muslim world in the late 20th century . Andrew Kellett is the author of a new book, "Islamistism"
 Islam is the world’s secondlargest religion, with 1. billion adherents, compared to Christianity, with 2. billion . Islam is also the second largest religion in the world, followed by Christianity with 2 billion .
 The most predominantly Muslim states are in Africa and Asia, but substantial numbers of Muslims also live in the Western Hemisphere and Europe .
 Organization of Islamic Conference was established in 1969 to represent Muslim interests . With 57 member states, it represents 57 countries . Organization was established by 1969 .
 Islamist movements were particularly attractive to young people in Muslim states who were disillusioned by the failures of their governments to provide jobs or open up authoritarian regimes to meaningful political participation . Islamist movements are attractive to the large population of young people .
 During the cold war authoritarian regimes in predominantly Muslim countries systematically crushed—often with tacit support of Western nations, especially the United States—all political opposition from the left . The U.S. helped crush all political opposition to the left during the Cold War .
 For many young Muslims, both Western capitalism and the Soviet model of state capitalism seemed to have failed to reform and revitalize their countries . Western capitalism has failed to revitalize the country, many Muslims say .
 Many also faced a identity crisis brought on by sweeping cultural changes, globalization that threatened old traditions and made the youth feel alienated from their own societies .
 Most contemporary Islamist movements have been influenced by the Muslim Brotherhood . The Muslim Brotherhood was established in the 1920s in Egypt .
 Sayyid Qutb provided the philosophic underpinninninnings for many Islamist organizations . Qutbs was an Egyptian Muslim activist . He was the founder of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood .
 Qutb was executed by the Egyptian government in the 1960s and became a martyr in the eyes of many Muslims . He was executed in the same year as the government .
 By the latter part of the century, many young people considered the brotherhood too moderate and looked to a new generation of more radical activists . The brotherhood was considered to be too moderate .
 The 1979 Iranian revolution and the writings of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini also served as a model for future Islamic revolutions . The 1979 Iran revolution and writings of Ruhullah Khomeinis also served a model .
 The Iranian revolution sparked a revival of Shi’i political and religious activism in nations such as Lebanon and Iraq . The revolution was also sparked by the Iranian revolution in Iran .
 Saudi Arabia financed madrasas teaching Wahhabism, their particular militant and puritanical brand of Islam, in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and other nations . With its vast revenues from petroleum, Saudi Arabia funded madrasis .
 For many poor families these schools were the only way to provide any education for their children, who were then socialized in this narrow and inflexible interpretation of Islam . For poor families, these schools are only way of providing education for children .
 These schools provided recruits for radical Islamist organizations such as the Taliban and al-Qaeda in Afghanistan . These schools also provided recruits .
 Fiery imams used modern media of television, radio, and cassette tapes to proselytize converts to Islamist programs . Much like Christian televangelists in the West, fiery imams also used the modern media like radio, TV, radio .
 Disaffected youth in Europe, especially France and Great Britain, were heavily influenced by these leaders . Disaffected youths were influenced by the leaders of Europe's youth .
 Muslims angered by the failure to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict and perceived support of the U.S. and other Western nations for Israel over the rights of the Palestinians to self-determination . Many Muslims were also angered by failure to solve the conflict and support of Israel .
 Much opposition to the U.S. was based on what it did in the Middle East . Much opposition was based not so much on its values as on its actions in the Mideast .
 Following the killing of Muslims in Somalia, Bosnia, and Chechnya, many Muslims concluded that the West valued its own victims more than it valued Muslim victims .
 Negative stereotyping of Muslims in much of the Western media also contributed to mounting hostility . Negative stereotypes of Muslims contributed to the mounting hostility in the West .
 The war against the Soviets in Afghanistan in the 1980s was another factor in the rise of Islamist movements . The war in Afghanistan was also another factor .
 Many Muslim nations provided volunteers and financial support for the mujahideen . Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states provided financial and volunteer support for jihad . The jihad was fought against the Soviet occupation .
 In the midst of the cold war many mujahideen were supported, trained, and armed by the U.S. In the middle of the Cold War, many were supported and trained by the United States .
 Many of these volunteers returned to their own countries, such as Algeria, where they sought to establish Islamic regimes by force if necessary . After the defeat and withdrawal of the Soviet Union from Afghanistan in 1989, many of the volunteers returned .
 In Islam jihad is a defensive struggle to protect the community of believers from outside attack, as well as an internal struggle for spiritual enlightenment . Jihad is a struggle for the community from outside attacks and from within the community .
 The concept of jihad was sometimes used, or misused, by Islamists to justify violence and terrorism . The concept has been sometimes used to justify terrorism and violence .
 Some leading Muslim experts argued that the Qu’ran specifically forbids terrorism and suicide . These approaches were discredited and disavowed by some Muslim experts, who said they were discredited .
 In Egypt following the death of Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1970, Anwar al-Sadat attempted to undercut the power of liberal leftists in his government by releasing members of the Muslim Brotherhood from prison and allowing them access to print and electronic media .
 The brotherhood and more radical Islamists organizations such as the Islamic Liberation Organization and Holy Flight or Islamic Group soon turned against Sadat . Sadat's brotherhood turned against the brotherhood .
 They opposed Sadat’s negotiations with Israel that resulted in the 1979 Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty . They opposed the increasingly repressive regime as well as Sadat's negotiations .
 They gained members from among disaffected youth throughout the countryside, especially in upper Egypt . They gained membership from disaffected youths .
 In 1981 Khaled al-Islambuli and other Islamists, who had infiltrated the military, assassinated Sadat . Sadat was assassinated by Islamists in 1981 .
 Some riots broke out in upper Egypt, especially in the town of Asyut, a center of opposition . The regime under Hosni Mubarak maintained control, and Islamist organizations were brutally repressed .
 A long period of low-level warfare between government forces and Islamist rebels ensued . Government forces and rebels fought for control of the country's capital .
 Islamist rebels killed a number of tourists at Deir elBahari in 1997 . Many Egyptians who were heavily dependent on tourist revenues spoke out against the radicals .
 The Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamist movements remained major political forces in Egypt . However, the government failed to provide much-needed housing and economic reforms, the Muslim Brotherhood says .
 In Egypt the so-called new Islamists eschewed violence and argued that to combat extremism, social justice and educational reform were vital for the regeneration of Egyptian society . In Egypt, they argue that social justice, education reform and social justice are vital .
 The new Islamists demonstrated remarkable political and social flexibility . They supported reforms in education, gradualism, and peaceful dialogue . The Islamists have shown remarkable political flexibility .
 Yusuf alQaradawawy, Kamal Abul Magd, a lawyer and former government official, among others . They include Yusuf AlQararadwawy; Kamal . AlQaraadawy is a former government minister and a former
 New Islamists want Islamic states based on wassatteyya, or moderate Islamic tradition, without violence or terrorism . New Islamists wanted Islamic state based on moderate Islamic traditions .
 In the Sudan EIasan al-Turabi led the Islamist movement and was a major political force . He was removed from office by the military in the 1990s .
 In Tunisia the Islamic Tendency Movement led by Rashid al-Ghannouchi, who had been educated at the Sorbonne, actively opposed the well-entrenched regime of Habib Bourguiba in the 1980s .
 In 1987 a number of ITM members were arrested and tried, but after Bourguiba was removed from office in a bloodless military coup led by General Zine al Abidine ben Ali, many of them were released or allowed to go into exile .
 Ben Ali’s regime was able to provide some economic stability, but it too became increasingly authoritarian . Ben Ali tightened control over the Islamist parties in the 1990s .
 In Algeria the major Islamist party, the Islamic Salvation Front was led by Abbas Madani, a professor of psychology; Sheikh Ben Azzouz; and Ali Belhadj, a charismatic preacher . In Algeria, the party is led by a professor and popular preacher .
 When the FIS won the first round of free and democratic elections in 1991, the military regime of the National Liberation Front cancelled the elections, precipitating a civil war that resulted in tens of thousands of deaths . Tens of thousands died in the civil war .
 Madani then seemed to drop out of politics, but Belhadj remained unrepentant . Madani has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Algerian youth attracted to Islamist parties because of lack of jobs, housing, education, and education . Algerian government failed to solve the basic problems of jobs and housing, he says .
 During the 1980s Hizbollah emerged as a major force among Shi’i Lebanese, the largest but most disaffected Lebanese sect . During the 80s, it emerged as the most popular sect of Shi'i .
 Hizbollah actively fought against the continued Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon . Israel finally withdrew from most of Lebanon in 2000, when Israel finally left Lebanon .
 Hizbollah then transformed itself into a major political force, and its members were elected to a number of seats in Parliament . The group was elected to parliament in 2007 .
 Israel continued to attack Israeli forces in the disputed Lebanese territory of Shaaba Farms, which Israel argued was Syrian territory . Israel also continued to continue to attack Lebanese territory in disputed areas .
 Hizbollah was viewed by Israel and the U.S. as a terrorist organization . The group attacked within Israeli borders as well and was viewed as a terror group .
 Israeli launched major air, sea, and ground offensive into Lebanon in 2006 . In retaliation Israeli launched a major air and sea offensive in Lebanon .
 2006 attack inflicted heavy losses on Hizbollah but also devastated the Lebanese infrastructure and caused many civilian deaths . As in the 1982 Israeli war against the Palestine Liberation Organization in Lebanon, the 2006 attack also devastated infrastructure and killed many civilians .
 Many Lebanese and even secular Arabs were impressed by Hizbollah’s determined military defense against the Israeli attack . The war actually led to an increase of support and recruits among many Lebanese and Muslims .
 Hamas began in the late 1980s in the Gaza Strip as a reaction to the long Israeli occupation . Similarly Hamas, the major Palestinian Islamist organization, began in late 80s in Gaza Strip .
 Hamas was led by Sheikh Ahmad Yassin, who was blind and confined to a wheelchair, and Dr. Dr. Ahmed Yassin . Dr. Yassin was blind, confined to wheelchair .
 Many Palestinians hoped that the 1993 Oslo Accords would lead to a truly independent Palestinian state . Many Palestinians were overwhelmingly supportive of the secular PLO .
 Scores of Hizbollah and Lebanese national flags were waved at a ceremony to mark the first anniversary of the war with Israel . Many young Palestinians turned to Hamas and other more radical Islamist organizations .
 Suicide missions are directed not only against the Israeli military but against Israeli civilians inside Israel’s 1967 borders, or the so-called green line . Some adopted the tactic of suicide missions aimed at Israeli civilians in the area .
 Increased Israeli repression and refusal to deal with Hamas contributed to further disillusionment and anger . Hamas has a history of growing disillusionment with Israel and the West .
 During the 1980s-1990s even secular Turkey saw an Islamic revival . Islamic parties became increasingly influential and won democratic elections in the 1990s . Islamic political parties were increasingly influential .
 Islamic movement in Turkey and other Muslim states is not a coordinated monolith . However, it is not an isolated monolith, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Islamist parties vary greatly in their outlook regarding what sort of Islamic states they would like to see and their social and political programs . Islamist parties differ greatly in what they want to see in the Middle East .
 In some, like the Taliban and al-Qaeda, women play no political role whatsoever . For example, in some, it is not political .
 The Taliban was opposed to education for women and banned music and the depiction of the human form in books, even medical textbooks . The Taliban also banned music, and banned depictions of human form .
 As authoritarian regimes in Muslim nations as diverse as Egypt, Algeria, and Tunisia refused to liberalize the political system, Islamic movements and parties remained popular . Islamic parties and parties continued to attract large numbers of disaffected youth .
 It has attracted the sympathies of high-caste Hindus and has an electoral stronghold in the northern part of the country . The party has attracted support from high-profile Hindus .
 Its success in securing a larger following among the lower castes has not been complete . Its success has not yet been complete, however, with the success of its success in India .
 The fortunes of the party have been linked to the intensity of anti-Muslim feeling in the country . It has been repeatedly accused of political and religious extremism .
 The forerunner of the BJP was the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, or Indian People’s Association . It was established in 1951 as the political faction of the Hindu paramilitary group Rashtriya Swayamesevak Sangh (RSS)
 The Janata government collapsed in 1979, after only two years, because of factionalism . Morarji Desai, a veteran fighter for the country’s independence, became prime minister .
 It started to appeal to the Indian masses in the late 1980s, when it campaigned to build a Hindu temple in an area of Uttar Pradesh considered sacred but already occupied by the Muslim Babri Mosjid mosque .
 The demolition of the mosque caused widespread rioting throughout the nation . The mosque was demolished during the demolition of a mosque .
 The party obtained a surprising electoral victory in 1996, becoming the largest political party in the lower house of Parliament .
 In 1998 Vajpayee formed a coalition government, in power for only 13 months . In 1998, he formed a government, but it lasted just 13 months in power .
 Vajpayee contested the 1999 election, leading the BJP to become the first party of the National Democratic Alliance . He was the first member of the coalition of parties against the Congress .
 Luca Prono Al Jazeera was established in Qatar in 1996 . Al Jazeera is an Arab satellite TV news station .
 Start-up investment was provided by the Qatari emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani . The company is set to launch its first major project in Qatar .
 Al Jazeera quickly earned a reputation and a widespread global audience for its independent programming and content . In stark contrast to the government-controlled media throughout the Arab world, Al Jazeera has earned a global audience .
 Al Jazeera covered the activities and political philosophy of Osama bin Laden as early as 1999 . Al Jazeera has a motto of “the opinion and the other opinion,” Al Jazeera says .
 Following 9/11 terrorist attacks, bin Laden sent the station cassettes with his political messages . Following the attacks in the U.S. bin Laden's political messages were sent .
 Journalists and talk show hosts at Al Jazeera covered hitherto forbidden topics such as the human rights and political failures of Arab regimes . Al Jazeera also covered previously forbidden topics about human rights .
 Al Jazeera earned the enmity of Arab governments, many of which made no secret of their desire to preempt or stop its programs . Al Jazeera has been criticized by Arab governments in the past .
 Al Jazeera’s independent coverage was initially praised in the West, but after the station carried negative stories about the U.S. war and subsequent occupation in Iraq from 2003 onward, the station was criticized as biased by the Bush administration .
 The United States was accused of planting or paying for positive stories to be carried in the Iraqi media . At the same time, the U.S. was also accused of paying or planting positive stories in Iraq .
 The success of Al Jazeera in attracting a huge audience demonstrated the impact of technology and the importance of information sources in the 21st century .
 How the Free Arab News Network Scooped the World and Changed the Middle East. How the Arab World changed the region .
 Jesus movement flourished in the late 1960s and early 1970s in the U.S. and Europe . The Jesus movement was founded in the United States and Europe in the 1970s .
 Young people involved in the hippie, or counterculture, movement were targeted by unorthodox evangelists or found their own way to Christianity . The hippie movement was founded in 1960s and '60s .
 Previous experimentation with drugs, Eastern religion, the occult, and communal lifestyles affected the way these young Christians approached their faith . These young Christians approach their faith with the help of others .
 Many young people felt alienation toward ‘anyone over thirty’ and the traditional or conventional institutions, including the churches, they controlled, they said . Just as important was the deep alienation felt toward “anyone . over 30” and the institutions they controlled .
 Culturally quite conservative, older church people were often offended by the clothes and hairstyles favored by the young . Older church people often resisted making any concessions to their sensibilities .
 Jesus movement churches served as bases for vigorous evangelism on university campuses, beaches, and the streets . The Jesus movement was originally based in innovative churches, based on innovative churches .
 Many Jesus people joined more traditional churches, usually evangelical Protestant but also Catholic, Orthodox, or Episcopal . Jesus people are often found to be Jesus Christ followers .
 By the 1980s-1990s most evangelical churches had accommodated the worship styles and sensibilities pioneered by the Jesus movement . By the 1990s-2000s most churches had . accommodated . worship styles .
 For many the belief in an imminent apocalypse led to an interest in “prophecy,” which often became a conduit for conservative politics during the cold war . For many, belief in prophecy led to interest in 'prophece'
 Perhaps ironically, the Jesus movement helped lay the foundation for the New Christian Right . The Jesus movement laid the groundwork for the new Christian Right, says author .
 Contemporary evangelical Protestantism was deeply affected by the Jesus movement, absorbing its moral intensity . The Jesus movement absorbed the moral intensity of evangelical Christianity .
 The revolution in worship and popular Christian music has been seen in worship, worship and music . The latter can be seen most vividly in the revolution that has occurred in worship . The revolution is most clearly seen in the worship of Christian music .
 Jiang was appointed commercial counselor at the Chinese embassy in Moscow, a post he held until 1956 . At the end of the Chinese civil war he was appointed Commercial Counselor to the Chinese Embassy in Moscow .
 He was appointed assistant to the minister, First Ministry of Machine Building, running the Changchun First Automobile Plant . He is also the assistant of the minister to the First Ministry, First . Ministry of . Machine Building .
 In September 1978, he became vice chairman of the Society of Mechanical Engineering . He held the position before the Cultural Revolution .
 He was vice minister on the State Commission on Imports and Exports in 1980 . He then became vice minister of the electronics industries two years later . He was also vice minister for the electronics industry .
 In 1983 he became minister of electronics industries . In 1985 he became mayor of Shanghai . He held a post until 1985, when he was mayor .
 Jiang became a member of the Central Committee of the CCP in 1982 . In 1987 he joined the Politburo, he became one of the most powerful members of the party .
 Jiang was a supporter of China’s then paramount leader Deng Xiaoping . Jiang was also a political ally of the premier Li Peng during the suppression of the pro-democracy student demonstrations in 1989 .
 Jiang succeeded Zhao Ziyang as general secretary of the CCP on June 24, and was also elevated to the Politburo Standing Committee . Subsequently Jiang succeeded . Zhao succeeded Jiang as the general secretary and was elevated to a standing committee .
 Later that year he succeeded Deng as chairman of the CCP’s central military commission . He succeeded Deng in succeeding his appointment as chairman .
 Jiang became president of the National People’s Congress in 1993 . Four years later, he became the head of state of China . Jiang became China's first president in 1994 .
 When Deng Xiaoping died in 1997, Jiang rose to become paramount leader . Jiang became paramount leader in China after his father's death .
 He was economically more conservative than Deng, who had been critical of some reforms . Deng was critical of the slow pace of some reform .
 He started a program of privatization, which loosened state control over 300,000 industrial concerns . However, he started to privatize some of the country's largest industrial companies .
 In December 2001 China gained membership in the World Trade Organization . The move would have been unimaginable only 10 years earlier .
 Jiang improved Chinese relations with the United States and many other countries in the West . Jiang improved China's relations with many of the West, including the U.S. and China .
 In 1997 he took part in the first U.S.-China summit conference . At a follow-up meeting in the next year he openly defended China’s human-rights record .
 Beijing won the contest to host the 2008 Summer Olympics, a move that marked China’s emergence from the self-imposed policy of isolation of previous decades . Beijing has a long history of hosting the Olympics .
 Jiang resigned as general secretary of the CCP and, on March 15, 2003, from the presidency of the National People’s Congress . Jiang resigned on November 15, 2002, from presidency of China's National People's Congress .
 He was succeeded by Hu Jintao in a remarkably smooth transition . He remained the chair of the central military commission until September 2004 .
 Karol Jozef Wojtyla was born on May 18, 1920, to Emilia Kaczorowska and a lieutenant in the Polish army . John Paul II pope was born in Poland .
 Karol Jozef was born in Wadowice, Poland, in a flat owned by a Jewish family, directly across from St. Mary's Cathedral . Karol's family lived in the flat across from the Jewish family's home in the city .
 Karol and his father would live together until the latter’s death in Krakow at the start of the German occupation, while Karol was still a teenager . Karol would live with his father until he died at the beginning of the occupation .
 During his pontificate, 83 countries established diplomatic relations with the Holy See . The pope was a political leader as well as a politician as well .
 Professors who escaped deportation opened an underground university, which Wojtyla attended . Professors escaped deportation but were found to be in the country illegally . The underground university is located in Poland .
 To support himself, he worked in a rock quarry and later in a chemical plant . He surrounded himself with books and teaching himself languages .
 Wojtyla had learned the importance of prayer from his father and parish priests in Wadowice, Poland . From his father to parish priests, he was always aware of prayer .
 There young Wojtyla met Jan Tyranowski, a tailor, mystic, and spiritual director . The tailor, who was also a spiritual director, met Tyranowyla in the 1930s .
 From Tyranowski, Wojtyla learned contemplative prayer, especially the spirituality of St. St. Francis Francis Francis, the pope's first lady .
 Wojtyla joined Archbishop Sapieha’s underground seminary and was ordained by him in 1946 . He was ordained in November 1946 .
 Wojtyla earned the first of two doctoral degrees in theology . He was sent to Rome to study theology .
 Throughout the 1950s he published plays, poems, and articles under an alias . Chaperoned college students on hiking and kayaking trips to teach the faith without observation . Counseled engaged couples on marital sexuality .
 In 1958 Pius XII named Wojtyla auxiliary bishop of Krakow, and in 1963 Paul VI appointed him that city’s archbishop . In 1963 he was appointed archbishop of the city .
 The Second Vatican Council brought the young archbishop to Rome, into the company of bishops from everywhere . The archbishop was the first archbishop of the Roman Catholic Church .
 Wojtyla helped draft documents such as the Pastoral Constitution Gaudium etSpes (The Church in the Modern World), and published poetry and articles for the people back home describing what the council meant .
 Karol Wojtyla was made a cardinal in 1967 and remained archbishop of Krakow for 15 years . He was made cardinal in 1966 and was made archbishop in 1967 . Karol was made an archbishop at the end of his career in Poland . He remained arch
 Cardinal Wojtyla was elected the 264th successor of Peter and the first Polish pope ever . On October 16, 1978, he was elected to be the first successor to Peter and was elected in 1978 . He was the first pope to be elected in Poland .
 Within three months, his marathon series of international journeys began with a pastoral visit to Mexico . His first stop was in Mexico, where he spent three months in the country .
 In June 1979, much to the dismay of the communist government, he made the first of several visits to Poland . He made the visit to Poland in June 1979 to protest against the government .
 Mehmet Ali Agca was hired by Bulgarian secret police at the behest of the Soviet KGB . Agca shot John Paul as he rode through St. Paul's riding route in 1981 .
 The pope's recovery was slow and fraught with complications, but he resumed his travels as soon as he could . He visited Poland again in 1983, even visiting Poland again .
 First, he wished to implement Vatican II, a council full of hope for the church’s future, he said . Vatican II was a council of hope, but it was also a failure, he added .
 He promulgated in 1983 the revised Code of Canon Law for the Latin Church, and in 1990 the . revised Code for the Eastern Churches, both built on council teachings .
 To restore clarity to church teaching, he commissioned the publication of the Catechism of the Catholic Church .
 In 14 papal encyclicals, 15 apostolic exhortations, 45 “apostolic letters,” and numerous other writings, he taught on morality, life issues, the dignity of work . The role of the family, the nature of the Trinity, and the
 John Paul canonized 1,342 saints, more than the combined total of persons canonized since the 16th century . To provide models of holiness called for in Vatican II, he canonized more than 1,000 saints .
 A second goal was to prepare the church for the advent of the third millennium, an era John Paul saw as a springtime of hope, he said .
 His biennial World Youth Days attracted millions of young people from the world over . The event was held in New York City, New York, on June 26, 2013 .
 His first encyclical, published in 1979, had mentioned this jubilee as the beginning of a ‘new Advent’ of the Son of God in human history . The Pope's encyclic had mentioned it as the start of a new Advent .
 He is widely credited with a major role in the 1989 collapse of European communism .
 Diplomatic relations between the Holy See and the state of Israel were created in 1993 . The Holy See became the first state to have diplomatic relations with Israel in 1994 .
 83 countries established diplomatic relations with the Holy See during John Paul’s pontificate . During John Paul's pontificate, 83 countries set up diplomatic relations .
 Through dogged effort, his ambassadors at the U.N. forestall activist efforts to reshape marriage and promote abortion on demand .
 The number of priests and seminarians continued to decline during John Paul’s papacy . John Paul's papacy led to a decline in priests, seminarians .
 Radical feminists persisted in challenging the church’s refusal to ordain women to the priesthood .
 Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre was excommunicated in 1988 for ordaining bishops without authorization . He died unreconciled despite efforts to reinstate him . He was also ex-archbishop of the Netherlands .
 The pope was criticized for appointing weak bishops and for failing to reform religious orders . The pope has been criticized for appointing weak bishops . He has also failed to reform the religious orders of the past .
 John Paul’s decline in health appeared to begin after the 1981 assassination attempt . John Paul's decline began after the assassination attempt in 1981 .
 Intestinal disorders and a series of falls in the early 1990s led to repeated hospitalizations . The hospitalization was a result of intestinal disorders and falls from falls and intestinal falls .
 In 1994 he was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease, which gradually sapped his physical strength . He was diagnosed in 1994 .
 Karol Wojtyla’s reign as John Paul II lasted 26 years and 5 months, the thirdlongest papal tenure up to that time . John Paul's reign was the third longest papal reign in history .
 He was vice president during the presidency of John F Kennedy . Prior to that, he had been vice president . He was also vice president of the Kennedy administration .
 He is best remembered for presiding over the United States during the Vietnam War . He is also known for his efforts in promoting Civil Rights in the southern parts of the U.S. .
 Lyndon Johnson was born on August 27, 1908, at Gillespie County, Texas . He was the eldest of five children . Lyndon was born in 1908 .
 Sam Ealy Johnson Jr. was a member of the Texas House of Representatives . His mother was Rebekah Baines, who was the daughter of Joseph Baines .
 Johnson left high school in 1924, and taught at Cotulla, Texas . Johnson studied at Southwest Texas State Teachers College at San Marcos .
 In 1930 Johnson worked for Democrat Richard Kleberg, who was standing for Congress, accompanying him to Washington, D.C., when he was elected . Johnson was a Democrat who worked for Kleberg .
 It was in Washington that Johnson came to meet Sam Rayburn, the Texan chairman of the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce . It was the first time Johnson met Rayburn .
 Johnson won a seat in the Senate in 1948 and spent 12 years there . He was Democratic whip in 1951, minority leader in 1953, and majority leader in 1955 .
 Johnson survived a serious heart attack in 1955 . He became well known for his negotiating talent, using bluster, discipline, persuading, and ruthlessness .
 As vice president, Johnson found himself unable to do much of the negotiating that he had enjoyed . Johnson was vice president of the U.S. from 1964 to 1969 .
 Air Force One took the oath of office as president on November 22, 1963, when Kennedy was assassinated . The presidential plane took off from Love Field, Dallas, to take Kennedy’s body back to Washington .
 Johnson immediately set up a commission to investigate the assassination . Earl Warren, chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, was to chair it .
 Lyndon B Johnson takes the oath of office on Air Force One following the assassination of John F Kennedy . Johnson was sworn in as President of the United States .
 Johnson had a hard task maintaining the dignity and authority of the office of the president . Johnson had to maintain some form of continuity .
 He had long been a supporter of civil rights . In February 1964, he managed to get the Civil Rights Act introduced in Congress .
 After it was signed into law on July 2, 1964, ending segregation and any discrimination on grounds of race or sex, the law was challenged in the Supreme Court, which found it was valid . The law ended segregation and ended discrimination on any discrimination .
 The emerging problem for Johnson was, however, the growing war in Vietnam . The war was the growing problem for the president .
 In August 1964 news stories revealed that North Vietnamese gunboats had attacked a U.S. destroyer and then launched another attack several days later . North Vietnam gunboats attacked a United States destroyer .
 It subsequently emerged that the second attack had not taken place, and there are many doubts over the nature of the first attack .
 Johnson did believe that the U.S. destroyers had been attacked and launched a retaliatory air strike against North Vietnam . Nevertheless Johnson believed that the United States destroyers were attacked .
 Public support for the war effort fell as the U.S. suffered huge casualties . The war effort was a major source of American support in the war .
 By 1967 there were large demonstrations, and by 1968 Johnson had become increasingly unpopular . By 1968, Johnson was increasingly unpopular, and his government was unpopular .
 On January 23, 1968, the USS Pueblo was seized by North Korea after ending up in their waters . North Korea seized the U.S. intelligence-gathering ship in 1968 .
 The crew of 80 were captured and held for 11 months until the United States government apologized and obtained their release . The U.S. government later retracted their apology and released the crew .
 Johnson ordered the USS Enterprise into the region, but acted with caution . Johnson had ordered the . USS Enterprise in the region .
 In the week after the seizing of the Pueblo, the Vietcong launched the Tet Offensive, with television coverage of the capture of the U.S. embassy .
 General William Westmoreland had promised that the war was nearly over three months earlier . General Westmorelands had promised to end the war nearly three months later .
 The United States and South Vietnam quickly managed to defeat the Vietcong attacks . Most people refused to believe the administration’s protestations that victory was close .
 The 1968 election campaign saw the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., the African-American civil rights leader, on April 4, leading to rioting in Washington, D.C., and many other cities .
 The assassination of Robert F Kennedy in Los Angeles on June 6 resulted in widespread political unease . Kennedy was a presidential candidate and former attorney general . He was assassinated in June 1963 .
 Johnson tried to help Humphrey, who called for an unconditional U.S. halt to the bombing of North Vietnam . In October, Johnson announced the end of all United States bombing to open the way for peace talks .
 Johnson died January 22, 1973, in San Antonio, Texas, only five days before the Paris Peace Accords stopped the fighting in Vietnam . Johnson suffered a heart attack, and died five days after the Paris peace accords .
 David Barrett, David M Uncertain Warriors: Lyndon Johnson and His Vietnam Advisers . Barrett: "Uncertain Warriors" was Lyndon Johnson's Vietnam advisors . Barrett says the Vietnam War was 'a very difficult time' for LBJ .
 Paul Henggeler, Paul R In His Steps: Lyndon Johnson and the Kennedy Mystique. Seven Locks Press, 1993, . Henggeller: "His Steps" was Lyndon Johnson's first step to the presidency .
 Ivan R Dee, 1991; Herring, George C L.B.J. and Vietnam: A Different Kind of War. Vietnam: The Vietnam War is Vietnam. Vietnam. J. Herring: Vietnam. The Vietnam. War was Vietnam’s Vietnam War.
 Jordanians knew only one king as architect of the kingdom’s domestic development and of its foreign policy . Justin Corfield Jordan, Hashemite monarchy in Jordan, Jordan .
 King Hussein consolidated the Hashemite regime in Jordan and defended it against internal and external challenges, neither of which were in short supply .
 From the foundation of the Hashemite state onward, Jordan maintained close strategic ties to Britain and later the U.S. Jordan maintains close ties to the United States .
 After World War II, Jordan established stronger links with the United States . After the onset of the cold war, Jordan also established stronger ties with the U.S.
 Western powers came to view Jordan as a conservative bulwark against communism and radical forms of Pan-Arabism . Jordan was viewed as a moderating element in the Arab-Israeli conflict .
 From the beginning, Jordan had close ties to powerful Western states . Jordan depended heavily on foreign aid from these countries to keep the kingdom afloat . Jordan's relationship with the West has been strained by its isolation .
 Jordan’s centrality in Mideast politics and geography also carried with it a strategic vulnerability . Jordan is central in Middle East politics, geography and geography . Jordan has been a key player in the Middle East for decades .
 Some Jordanian officials feared that another regional conflict might eliminate the Hashemite state entirely . In the 1950s, when the kingdom was still young and viewed by many Pan-Arab nationalists as an artificial “paper tiger” some feared it might be eliminated .
 In 1957 Hussein headed off an attempted coup d’etat by pro-Nasserist military officers . Hussein used the opportunity to solidify Hashemite royal control .
 By the late 1960s the regime was forced to focus outward once again as regional tensions escalated especially between Israel and Gamal Abdel Nasser’s regime in Egypt .
 In 1967, Israeli forces launched what they viewed as a preemptive strike on Arab forces in Egypt, Jordan, and Syria, inflicting a devastating defeat on all three countries . In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Israel suffered a devastating loss to all three nations .
 The complete failure of the Arab war effort led to Israeli occupation of the Sinai from Egypt, the Golan Heights from Syria, and East Jerusalem and the West Bank from Jordan . The failure led to the occupation of East Jerusalem from Jordan and the Gland from Syria .
 Tens of thousands of Palestinian refugees poured across the border into Jordan in June 1967 . The refugees changed the demographics and ultimately the domestic stability of the kingdom .
 The situation collapsed in September 1970, when guerrilla forces fought royalist forces of the Hashemite government . The Palestinian Liberation Organization fought the royalist government in 1970s .
 This Jordanian civil war resulted in a bloody Hashemite victory and the expulsion of PLO guerrilla forces from Jordan . Hashemites defeated the PLO and expelled its guerrilla forces .
 More than half the population of Jordan today is of Palestinian origin . More than 50 per cent of Jordan's population is Palestinian .
 Although this West Bank/East Bank ethnic divide is sometimes overstated, it remains a significant feature of Jordan’s society, its political economy, and of the Jordanian state itself . Jordan's West Bank and East Bank ethnic divides are sometimes overstated .
 Much of the Jordanian government, public sector, and military is dominated by East Bank Jordanians . The private sector is also dominated by Palestinians, while much of the public sector is in the region .
 The Hashemite regime maintained its claim to the West Bank and East Jerusalem for two decades . Following the disastrous 1967 war, the Hashemites maintained their claim to East Jerusalem .
 In 1988 in the midst of the first Intifada, it renounced these claims and turned instead toward consolidating its rule east of the Jordan River . In 1988, the Arab state renounced its claims and instead focused on consolidating control of the region .
 Jordan remained under martial law from the 1967 war until it was lifted in 1992 as part of the overall political liberalization process . The country remained under military law from 1967 to 1992 . Jordan remained in martial law until 1992 .
 The regime’s concerns for stability were underscored dramatically in 1989 by domestic unrest triggered by an economic austerity program initiated under the aegis of the International Monetary Fund .
 King Hussein initiated measures to address public demands and to reestablish the stability of the regime . With the intifada raging west of the Jordan River, and domestic unrest erupting in Jordan itself, he initiated measures .
 The opening helped reestablish the regime’s base of domestic support, thereby shoring up its stability and allowing it to sign a controversial peace treaty with the State of Israel in 1994 .
 In a surprise move, the king had abruptly changed the line of succession weeks before his death . He had dismissed his brother Hasan as crown prince and appointed instead his eldest son Abdullah .
 His reign was marked by strong efforts to continue the economic liberalization process . He emphasized a neoliberal model of development and shoring up Jordan’s relations with key Western powers .
 The emphasis on economic development and stable foreign relations also forced political liberalization to a lower priority level . Political liberalization has been a priority for years, but it is still a priority in Russia .
 Under Abdullah, the kingdom survived still more regional unrest and even began battling terrorism within Jordan itself . The kingdom survived another regional unrest .
 Security concerns often provided the pretext for lack of progress in Jordan's political liberalization . The monarchy's emphasis on economic development did not dissuade the monarchy from its emphasis on the economic development . Jordan has been criticized for its lack of political reforms .
 Jordan, the U.S. and the Middle East Peace Process, 1974-1991. Jordan, Jordan and the Mideast Peace Process. The United States and Jordan were involved in the peace process. Jordan and Jordan have been involved in peace talks since 1991 .
 Lynne Reinner, 2002; Satloff, Robert B. From Abdullah to Hussein: Jordan in Transition . Lynne. Reinner: Jordan's transition to the Arab Spring was a major transition period .
 Babrak Karmal was an Afghan revolutionary figure, a politician, and an ambassador . Babrak was a revolutionary figure and an Afghan politician . He was an ambassador to Afghanistan .
 He served as the third president of Afghanistan from 1980 to 1986 . During the communist Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, he ruled the country . He was the third Afghan president .
 Karmal came from a wealthy Tajik military family . Born in Kamari, a small village east of Kabul on January 6, 1929, in 1929 .
 His father had close relations with the royal family, especially King Mohammad Zahir and Prime Minister General Mohammad Daoud . Hussain's father, Major General Mohammad Hussain, was a Major General of the Royal Family .
 While a student he was arrested and put in prison for five years for organizing demonstrations in support of an Afghani popular revolutionary figure, Abdul Rahman Mahmudi .
 In prison he befriended pro-Soviet Union leftist political figures like Mear Mohammad Siddeq Farhang . He was imprisoned in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Karmal increasingly became a staunch supporter of the Leninist-Stalinist form of Marxism . He identified the Soviet model as the best way to modernize Afghanistan as a model for Afghanistan .
 The friendship enabled him to play a major role in establishing the PDPA on January 1, 1965 . The PDPA was Afghanistan’s first major Marxist political party . The friendship allowed him to establish the first Marxist party .
 Karmal was elected to the National Assembly from 1965 to 1973 . He gained a reputation for his antireligious and anti-imperialistic views .
 The PDPA split into the Khalq and the Parcham factions in 1967 . Due to internal ideological differences, the factions split into two factions . The Khalq faction was the most successful faction in the organization .
 Karmal became the leader of the more cosmopolitan, moderate Parcham bloc . He was the first member of the party to win a seat in the parliamentary majority .
 Karmal's faction shared power with Mohammad Daoud’s regime after the coup d’etat of 1973, when the monarchy was overthrown . The former royalist faction of the Dictatorship of the late monarchs shared power .
 The alliance was short-lived, since Daoud dismissed the Parcham faction from the presidential cabinet . Karmal was able to reunite the PDPA after much Soviet pressure .
 When Nur Mohammad Taraki was pronounced the president of the new Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, he was a member of the Khalq bloc . The two factions of PDPA began internal fighting .
 Karmal and his mistress, Anahita Ratebzad, were sent into ‘exile’ as ambassadors to Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia . Hifizullah Amin, another major Khalq political leader, became the prime minister on March 28, 1979 .
 Karmal later left Prague for Moscow for fear of assassination or execution on his return to Kabul . He later moved to Russia for fear he would be executed or killed .
 Taraki’s radical reform projects for transforming Afghanistan from a traditional religious to a secular modern society led the way to the rise of the mujahideen (or Muslim fighters)
 Tensions between Taraki and Amin factions within the Khalq bloc led to the assassination of Taraki on October 10, 1979 . The assassination of the Afghan leader led to a Soviet invasion of Afghanistan on December 27, 1979.
 Karmal, the leader of the Parcham faction, returned to Kabul with the full support of the Soviets . He was declared the president of Afghanistan in Kabul .
 As the third president of the republic, Karmal’s most important accomplishments were his call for clemency for political prisoners, the change of the Marxist-style national flag, and the recognition of the Muslim clerical establishment .
 Karmal’s poor leadership skills and his inability to bring an end to the ongoing guerrilla warfare between the Soviet-backed government and the mujahideen gradually made him a highly unpopular figure .
 Karmal was regarded as a Soviet puppet, both domestically and internationally . With the full backing of Moscow throughout his presidency, he was seen as a puppet of Russia .
 In May 1986 Karmal was replaced as the communist leader by Mohammad Najibullah . In October 1986 he was relieved of the presidency . He was relieved in October 1986 .
 Karmal finally settled in Moscow, where he died of liver dysfunction on December 6, 1996 . After a number of trips between the Soviet Union and Afghanistan after his presidency, he moved to Moscow .
 Hamid Karzai was the first elected president of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan . Babak Rahimi Karzai is the first Afghan president to be elected in Afghanistan .
 At the conclusion of the presidential election on October 9, 2004, Karzai was declared its winner, with 55. percent of the vote . At the end of the 2004 election, he was declared the winner of the country's election .
 On December 7, 2004, Karzai took the oath of office as the first democratically elected leader of Afghanistan . Karzai was elected in December 2004 as Afghanistan's first democratically-elected leader .
 Hamid Karzai was born on December 24, 1957, in the village of Karz, near Kandahar in southern Afghanistan . He was born in December 1957 in Karz .
 His grandfather, Khair Mohammed Khan, was a key figure in Afghanistan’s war of independence . His grandfather was a major figure in the war of Afghan independence .
 Karzai’s father, Abdul Ahad Karzai, was a popular national figure who was also an influential member of the parliament during the 1960s . Karzai's father was also a popular member of parliament .
 The early education of Hamid Karzai took place in various Afghan schools, including Mahmood Hotaki Elementary School, Sayeed Jamaluddin Afghani School, and Habibia High School .
 After the formation of the muj ahideen government in 1989, Karzai was made the director of the Foreign Relations Section in the Office of the President, Burhauddin Rabbani . Karzai has been in charge of foreign relations since 1989 .
 When the civil war between the contending mujahideen groups engulfed Afghanistan in 1994, Karzai resigned from his official position . Karzai has been in office since 1994 .
 In August 2000, when the fundamentalist Taliban regime was ruling Afghanistan, Karzai formed resistance groups . He vowed to oust them from power . Karzai has vowed to overthrow the Taliban .
 There was an element of personal revenge to his actions, as his father had been assassinated by the Taliban . There was a personal revenge against his father, who was assassinated by Taliban .
 On December 5, 2001, exiled Afghanistan political leaders representing various ethnic tribes gathered in Bonn, Germany . They named Karzai the chair of a 29-member governing committee and the leader of Afghanistan’s interim government . Karzai is now the head of the Afghan government .
 Karzai has traveled extensively around the world and has pleaded for donations to rebuild infrastructure in his country . He has appealed for donations in order to rebuild his country's infrastructure .
 He has one sister and six brothers, including Ahmed Wali Karzai, who helps coordinate relief operations in the province of Kandahar . Karzai has a brother and sister, including one of his brothers .
 Kaunda was born in what was then Northern Rhodesia . Like many first-generation African nationalists, he was educated at Christian mission schools .
 He worked as a miner, as a teacher, and, for a short period of time, as an instructor in the army . He also worked as miner, teacher, miner, and teacher .
 He quit the ANC to form the Zambia African National Congress . When the British banned ZANC in 1959, Kaunda was imprisoned . He was imprisoned in 1959 .
 Kaunda became president of newly independent Zambia in 1964 and held the presidency until 1991 . He was the first president of the country to become president of Zambia .
 During his tenure in power, Kaunda became increasingly authoritarian . He declared Zambia a one-party state in 1972 . Zambia was one of many African nations during the 1970s-1980s .
 Kaunda was accused of corruption and responsibility for Zambia's economic problems . Zambia’s economy became dependent on copper exports .
 In face of mounting political opposition, Kaunda stepped down from power in 1991 . Frederick Chiluba replaced him as president in 1991 after a decade in power .
 Kaunda retired from politics in 1997 after being accused of involvement in an attempted coup d’etat . Chiluba maneuvered to prevent him from contesting further elections . He was accused of being involved in an attempt to overthrow his government .
 U.S. president John F Kennedy was the 35th president of the United States . He was assassinated in November 1963 .
 He served in the Senate from 1947 to 1960 . He was the youngest person to be elected president . Prior to that he had a prominent military career .
 He attended Dexter School, Riverdale Country School, Canterbury School and later Choate School . He attended Riverdale School and Canterbury School .
 He then went to Harvard College, spending the summer holidays in 1937, 1938, and 1939 in Europe . He then spent the holidays in Europe in Europe during his time at Harvard .
 John Kennedy was in Germany in August 1939, returning to London by September 1, 1939, when Germany invaded Poland . Kennedy returned to London in September 1939 .
 In 1940 Kennedy completed his honors thesis, “Appeasement in Munich,” which was subsequently published as Why England Slept . Kennedy's thesis, "Appeasment in Munich," was published in 1940 . He also wrote a book about the war, "Why England Sle
 He volunteered for the U.S. Army but was rejected because of his bad back . He volunteered to be in the military but was turned down because of a bad back.
 Using contacts in the Office of Naval Intelligence, he was accepted for the navy in September 1941 . When war broke out with Japan in December 1941, he served in the Pacific .
 On August 2, 1943, the boat which Kennedy was in, the PT-109, was rammed by the Japanese destroyer Amagiri . The boat was on a night-time patrol near New Georgia in the Solomon Islands .
 He towed a wounded man to safety and personally rescued two others . He was personally involved in rescuing two others in the fire .
 In 1946 he ran for a seat in the House of Representatives as a Democrat for Massachusetts, winning with a large majority . The death of his older brother, Joe, in 1944, propelled him into politics .
 In 1952 he defeated the incumbent Republican Henry Cabot Lodge for the United States Senate . He served in the Senate from 1953 to 1960 . He was elected to the Senate in 1953 .
 His book Profiles in to Courage was published in 1956, winning the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1957 . His book, Profiles In Courage, won the Pulitzer for biography .
 Kennedy’s connections with Senator Joe McCarthy were to damage his standing in the liberal establishment, but he did support the Civil Rights Act of 1957 . Kennedy's connections with Joe McCarthy damaged his standing as a liberal .
 An independent, Harry Byrd, picked up the remaining 15 electoral college seats . Byrd was an independent .
 The first controversy of his presidency concerned the government of Fidel Castro, which had come to power two years earlier . Fidel Castro's government was overthrown in 1961 .
 Eisenhower administration allowed anti-Castro Cubans to be secretly trained in the southern United States, mainly in Louisiana and Florida . They had planned to invade Cuba, and planned to do so .
 The plan had been drawn up before Kennedy came to power, and he approved it on April 17, 1961 . Kennedy approved the plan in 1961 .
 He cancelled air support that was to have been provided by the United States Air Force . However, he cancelled the air support .
 When the Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba, they were quickly overwhelmed by the Communists . The Cuban ex-cuba forces were overwhelmed by Communists in Cuba .
 The next major crisis, the Cuban missile crisis, took place from October 14, 1962, when American U2 spy planes photographed a Soviet Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile site under construction in Cuba .
 He decided that an attack on the site might result in nuclear war, but that inaction would be seen as a sign of weakness . He decided not to attack the site, but to take action would see it as weakness .
 In the end, he resolved to order a military blockade of the island . Eventually came to an agreement with the Soviet Union’s premier, Nikita Khrushchev . The United States would promise never to invade Cuba, and withdraw missiles from bases in Turkey .
 Kennedy was interested in rapprochement with the Soviet Union, but he had to be perceived as “tough,” especially in Europe . Kennedy was seen as "tough" in Europe, especially Europe .
 On June 26, 1963, he visited West Berlin and addressed a large public crowd with the famous “Ich bin ein Berliner” speech . The speech was one of the most famous in the world .
 In August 1963 Kennedy was able to sign into law the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty banned atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, and underwater, but did not prohibit testing underground .
 Another foreign policy problem that Kennedy faced was the increased fighting in Laos and Vietnam . The Vietnam War was one of the biggest problems Kennedy faced .
 The Kennedy administration backed a neutral government in Vietnam and South Vietnam . In the latter, the U.S. was heavily involved in supporting the anticommunist South Vietnamese government .
 By 1963 there were 15,000 U.S. military advisers in South Vietnam . By 1963 the United States military advisers were in the country .
 Diem had ruled South Vietnam since late 1954 and was becoming increasingly authoritarian . Diem ruled the South Vietnam from late 1954 to late 1980s .
 Kennedy felt that it was Diem’s brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, who was a major problem and wanted Diem to get rid of Nhu . Nhu was the brother of Diem's former president .
 Ngo Dinh Diem, along with Nhu, was murdered in Vietnam . This led the Kennedy administration to give the go-ahead for Buddhist generals to overthrow Diem . Diem was overthrown by Buddhist South Vietnamese generals .
 The new regime was inherently unstable, causing the U.S. to commit more combat soldiers, escalating the war . The U.K. has committed more combat troops to the Syrian regime .
 The domestic program introduced by Kennedy was known as the New Frontier . Kennedy introduced the domestic program in 1963 . Kennedy was president of the United States .
 He tried to legislate to prevent the continuance of racial discrimination, he says . He says he tried to pass legislation to prevent racial discrimination .
 He also promised federal funding for education, more medical care for the elderly, and government intervention to boost the economy . He also proposed tax reforms .
 Most of the measures were to be introduced by Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon B Johnson . Most of these measures were introduced by JFK's successor .
 It was Johnson who, in the Civil Rights Act of 1964, introduced the measures that Kennedy had supported . Johnson was the president of the White House .
 John Kennedy is also well known for his commitment to the space program . John Kennedy was also known as the father of the Kennedy family .
 The Soviet Union managed to win all the first stages of the space race . Kennedy pushed for greater effort from the U.S. from the American people .
 The moon landing took place on July 20, 1969, during Nixon’s presidency . The moon landings took place during the Nixon administration .
 As John Kennedy had only narrowly won the 1960 presidential election, he began his campaign for reelection early . John Kennedy began his reelection campaign in 1960 .
 He went to Texas in November 1963, where, on November 22, in Dallas, at 12:30m., he was assassinated .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, a loner, was arrested about 80 minutes later and charged with murdering a Texas policeman . Oswald was charged with the murder of a police officer .
 Oswald was shot dead by nightclub owner Jack Ruby on November 24, two days before he could be brought to trial . Jack Ruby shot Oswald dead by Jack Ruby two days later . Oswald's trial was set to begin in New York City .
 President's successor, Lyndon B Johnson, created the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, known as the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren .
 U.S. House of Representatives Select Committee on Assassinations reporting in 1979 . It concluded that Kennedy was killed by Lee Harvey Oswald acting alone . A view later endorsed by the Select Committee was later endorsed .
 Most people now view the Warren Commission report with disdain for evidence that it missed . Most people view the evidence that the report missed . The Warren Commission Report was released in 1998 .
 John F Kennedy was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia . He was buried in the Kennedy family's final resting place .
 The bodies of two of his children, his first daughter, and Patrick, his youngest son who died on August 9, 1963, were brought to Arlington and buried with him . His first daughter was buried with her husband .
 Present-day Kenya is a mix of colonial struggle and capitalist vigor . The country is now a place for the first time since independence .
 Kenya, under a state of emergency that would last seven years, began its march toward decolonization . Kenya was under a seven-year state-of-emergency . Kenya is now the first country in the world to decolonize .
 The Mau Mau rebellion against British colonial rule prompted the successful request for a state of emergency . Mau Mau rebels were fighting for independence from colonial rule .
 Britain rallied its own troops, in addition to African troops, to suppress the rebellion . Britain rallied itself troops, including African troops .
 Britain embarked on Operation Anvil on April 24, 1954, in hopes of ending a successful rebellion against General China . The operation was launched in 1954 after intelligence data gathered during the integration of China .
 Operation Anvil severely restricted the already limited freedoms of the citizens of Nairobi . The operation has been dubbed 'Operation Anvil' by the Kenyan government .
 Mau Mau supporters left in the capital were moved from the city to detention camps . Mau Mau's supporters were moved to a detention camp in the city of the capital . The camp was set up by the Mau Mau movement .
 The capture of Dedan Kimathi on October 21,1956, decreased the optimism of those fighting for the end of colonial rule . The Mau Mau rebellion was not officially over until 1959 .
 The end of the Mau Mau rebellion’s main military offensive in 1956 opened the door for voluntary British withdrawal . Mau Mau rebels’ main offensive opened the way for voluntary withdrawal .
 First direct elections for Africans to the Legislative Council were in 1957 . The first direct elections were held in Africa's Legislative Council . Africans were elected to the council in 1957.
 The British government hoped that power could be passed to those who wished to see a minimal British presence in Kenya .
 Kenya African National Union and extremist Jomo Kenyatta formed the government shortly before independence . Kenya became officially independent on December 12, 1963 . However, the government was formed before independence was officially declared .
 Single-party leadership continued after Kenyatta’s death in 1978 with Daniel arap Moi . Single party leadership continued in Kenya until Moi died in 1978 .
 President arap Moi survived an abortive military coup attempt on August 1, 1982, masterminded by air force serviceman Senior Private Hezekiah Ochuka . Moi survives an aborted coup attempt .
 Ochuka attempted to take the capital, but the coup was suppressed by loyalist forces led by the army, the general service unit, and later the regular police .
 arap Moi disbanded the Kenyan Air Force . Intimidated by the strength of the air force, he disbanded the force .
 Moi enacted constitutional reform during the 1988 elections . Sensing radical changes to Kenya’s government institutions, Moi signed a constitution in 1988 .
 Elections were opened to the mlolongo system, by which voters lined up behind their selected candidate . Voters were able to select their chosen candidate from the ballot box .
 Several clauses from the constitution were changed in order to reestablish Kenya’s failing political and economic systems . Over the course of the next years several clauses were changed . The constitution was designed to help Kenya's failing political systems .
 In 2002 elections, Moi was constitutionally barred from running, and Mwai Kibaki was elected for the National Rainbow Coalition . Moi is currently the president of the Kenya Stock Market .
 With the absence of civil war in Kenya, the country remained relatively stable . The country continued to be a single-party state until the 2002 elections .
 President Kibaki instituted long-needed reforms, but continued Kenya’s tradition of corruption at the highest levels . Kenya's corruption at highest levels continues despite reforms .
 A draft constitution put forth in November 2005 was defeated by the Kenyan electorate when it was discovered it would only decrease transparency in government . The Kenyan electorate rejected the constitution .
 In response, Kibaki dismissed his entire cabinet and appointed new ministers . Many of the new ministers belonged to political parties with which he was aligned . In response to the move, he appointed many new ministers to his cabinet .
 Natural disaster plagued Kenya in the late 1990s, compounding the already poor economic situation . Kenya's economy was hit hard by natural disasters in the 1990s .
 President Moi appointed his high-profile critic and political opponent, Richard Leakey, as head of the civil service in 1999 . Desperate to win back International Monetary Fund and World Bank funding to assist the millions in need .
 A third generation white Kenyan, Leakey was fired by Moi two years later for apparently engaging in corruption . A third-generation white Kenyan was fired for corruption .
 The ruling party put forth an anticorruption law in August 2001, but it failed to pass . Failure to pass ended Kenya’s chances for renewed international aid . This prompted the ruling party to put forth a law to prevent corruption .
 His anticorruption minister, John Githongo, resigned in February 2005 over frustrations that he was prevented from investigating scandals . He resigned over frustrations he was not allowed to investigate scandals .
 In early 2006 investigations showed that the government was linked to two corruption scandals .
 Economic devastation brought on by severe droughts compounded the systemic corruption . Economic devastation compounded by severe drought compounded the system of corruption .
 Elections in December 2007 sparked weeks of violence, resulting in more than 1,000 deaths . Elections were held in 2007 in the country's capital, Washington .
 Former UN secretary-general Kofi Annan brokened a deal to form a new government . The deal halted the possible threat of civil war . Former UN Secretary-General Annan brokered the deal .
 Jomo Kenyatta was born in Kenya and as a infant was named Kamau wa Ngengi . He took the name Jomo in 1938 . He was born as a baby .
 Kenyatta was keenly interested in local traditions and social customs, particularly those of the Kikuyu . He was keen to learn from local traditions, especially those of his native country .
 His study, Facing Mount Kenya, remains one of the definitive works on the Kikuyu . His work, Faced Mount Kenya , remains a study of his work .
 As a youngster Kenyatta helped his grandfather, he was a traditional healer . He converted to Christianity after being educated at a mission school in Kenya .
 As a young man, Kenyatta worked for an Indian Asian merchant and in a European business firm . As a youth he worked for Indian Asian merchants and in European business firms .
 In the 1920s Kenyatta became the leader of the Kikuyu Central Association . He represented them in land cases against the British, who had confiscated large swathes of land . The Association was led by Kenyata .
 Kenyatta represented the Kikuyu on negotiating missions to England and visited the Soviet Union in 1930 . He visited the USSR in 1930, visited the UK and visited Russia in 1931 .
 Upon his return to England as a teacher, Kenyatta was falsely accused of communist ties . Upon his back in Kenya he was accused of having communist ties to the East Coast .
 Kenyatta participated in the fifth Pan Africa Congress, which met in Manchester, England, in 1945 . He was the leader of the African continent's largest political party .
 Upon returning to Kenya after World War II, he assumed leadership of the Kenyan nationalist movement . He assumed leadership in Kenya after the war .
 In 1952 he was arrested and accused of managing the Kenya nationalist armed movement, known in the West as the Mau Mau . He served nine years in prison or under virtual house arrest . He was arrested in 1952 and later released from prison .
 Mau Mau was accused of terrorist acts against white settlers . The Mau Mau is the name of a group of mostly British settlers from the Mau Mau .
 Although the Mau Mau revolt was responsible for violence and the murder of some settlers, the Western media exaggerated the levels of violence . The Western media exaggerate the level of violence in Mau Mau .
 Uhuru. Kenyatta became president of the Kenya African National Union in 1961 . He led a delegation to London to negotiate full independence from the country .
 In 1964, Kenyatta became the president of the independent Kenyan, republic . In 1964 he became the first Kenyan president of independent Kenya .
 Known as Baba wa Taifa , father of the nation, Kenyatta maintained economic stability in Kenya . Known as "Baba wa Tafa," he maintained stability, but opponents charged him with cronyism .
 He died while still in power in 1978 and was succeeded by Daniel arap Moi . He faced increased opposition to his mounting dictatorial powers .
 Liaquat Ali was the first prime minister of Pakistan and founding father when it became independent on August 14, 1947 . Born on October 1, 1896, in the United Provinces of pre-partition India . Pakistan became independent in 1947 .
 He graduated from Aligarh College, and became interested in the Indian nationalist movement . He is a member of the Indian Nationalist Party .
 He joined the Muslim League, which sought to represent Muslims across the subcontinent . The Muslim League was founded by Muslim Muslims in India .
 Liaquat won his first election as a member in the United Provinces Legislative Assembly, although as an independent, in 1926 . Liaqat was an independent member of the U.S. Legislative Assembly .
 In 1940 he was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly, where he established a reputation as a successful politician of principle, integrity, and eloquence . In 1940, he became a member of the Central Assembly .
 He sought to promote the interests of Muslim Indians, but also worked to quell communal discord . He also tried to promote Muslim Indians' interests in India .
 In 1936 he was elected honorary secretary of the Muslim League . He held the office until independence in 1947 . In 1947 he held the position until independence from India .
 Liaquat accepted the prime ministership and also served as minister of defense under Jinnah, governor-general of Pakistan . Liaqat accepted partition and became prime minister of Pakistan after partition .
 The nation was not only divided into East and West Pakistan, it was also plagued by a refugee crisis . Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs fled across the subcontinent before and immediately after the partition .
 Liaquat became the dominant leader in Pakistan after Jinnah’s death in 1948 . Jinnah died in 1948, Liaqat took over as the country's dominant leader .
 Although Pakistan’s political establishments were strongly pro-Western, Islam began to broaden its influence . Islam was growing in influence in Pakistan . Pakistan's political establishments are pro-western .
 Pakistan’s disputes with India over trade and the division of Kashmir dominated foreign policy . Relations between the two nations remained tense . Pakistan and India are still at odds over Kashmir .
 His death ushered in a chaotic period, and democracy soon floundered . The military seized power in a coup in 1958, overthrowing democracy in the country .
 Khomeini was the driving force behind the movement that overthrew Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi in 1979 . He then became Iran’s highest political and religious authority for the next 10 years .
 The young Khomeini was then raised by his mother, later his aunt, and finally his older brother Murtaza . He was raised by both his mother and his aunt before his brother .
 Khomeini was educated in various Islamic schools and received the sort of instruction expected of a mullah’s son . He was educated at various schools .
 Khomeini was an attentive, intelligent, hardworking, and serious student . He was a serious student, his father says . He says he was attentive and intelligent .
 As a respected Shi’i scholar and teacher, Khomeini authored many works on Islamic philosophy, law, and ethics . He authored works on law, philosophy and law .
 His outspoken opposition to Iran’s ruler, Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, plus his advocacy of Islamic purity, garnered him support in Iran . Khomeini's resolute advocacy of . Islamic purity was his main reason for his support .
 In the 1950s Khomeini received the religious title of ayatollah by popular acclaim . In the early 1960s he had received the title of grand ayatullah, which made him one of the supreme religious leaders of the Shi’i community in Iran .
 In 1962-63 Khomeini publicly opposed the shah’s land-reform program; he also spoke out against the Western-style emancipation of women in Iran . In 1962 and 1963 he spoke against the land reform program and women's emancipation .
 Khomeini’s arrest, which quickly sparked antigovernment riots, sparked riots . These criticisms led to his arrest, and his arrest led to riots .
 After a year’s imprisonment Khomeini was forced into exile in November 1964 . He eventually settled in the Shi’i holy city of Najaf, Iraq, where he continued to call for the shah’�s removal from power .
 Khomeini's continued denunciations of the shah caused political difficulties in Iraq . Iraq’s ruler Saddam Hussein expelled him from the country in 1978 .
 Khomeini and his second wife then settled in Neauphle-le-Le-Chateau, a suburb of Paris . The couple were married in 1968 .
 Ayatollah Khomeini directed the movement to unseat the shah . From there he directed the unseatmentment of the Shah . The movement was led by the Ayatullah Khomenei .
 Khomeini’s call for a general strike in October 1978 led to a crippling strike in the Iranian oil fields in November . The strike in Iran's oil fields was the first in Iran to strike in 1978 .
 Strikes resulted in massive demonstrations, riots, and civil unrest . The shah was forced to leave the country on January 16, 1979 .
 Ayatollah Khomeini appointed a government on February 5 and then moved to live in the holy city of Qom . He appointed a new government and moved to Qom on February 6 .
 In December 1979 a new constitution was adopted, which created an Islamic republic in Iran . Iran is now the only country in the Islamic republic .
 Although the Ayatollah Khomeini held no official government office, he proved implacable in his determination to transform Iran into a theocratically ruled Islamic state . He proved implacable in his determination in Iran to become an Islamic state.
 He directed the revival of traditional, fundamentalist Islamic values, customs, laws, and legal procedures, explaining how they were to affect all public and private activities in Iran . Iran is now a state of Islamic law and Islamic law .
 Khomeini acted as arbiter among feuding secular and religious factions vying for power in the new revolutionary state of Iran . He was also arbiter between feuding factions vying to power .
 Khomeini made final decisions on important matters requiring his personal authority . Still, he made decisions requiring his own personal authority, he said .
 Khomeini's foreign policy was the total abandonment of the shah’s pro-Western position and the adoption of an attitude of hostility to both the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Khomeini’s Iran tried to export its version of Islamic fundamentalism to neighboring Muslim countries . At the same time, the government of Iran was trying to export it to neighboring countries .
 Iranian militants seized the United States embassy in Tehran on November 4, 1979 . Khomeini sanctioned the holding of United States diplomatic personnel as hostages for more than a year .
 Khomeini also refused to permit an early peaceful solution to the Iran-Iraq War, which had begun in 1980, by insisting that it be prolonged in hopes of overthrowing Iraq’s president, Saddam Hussein . The war began in 1980 and ended in 1991 .
 Khomeini finally approved a cease-fire in 1988 that effectively ended the conflict . The conflict ended in 1988 .
 Khomeini's pursuit of victory in the Iran-Iraq War proved pointless and costly to Iran . Iran’s path of economic development almost came to nothing under his rule, and he pursued the war with Iraq .
 Khomeini was able to retain, by sheer force of personality, his hold over Iran’s Shi’i masses, and until his death in 1989 he remained the supreme political and religious arbiter in the country .
 Khrushchev was a reformer whose shrewd intellect was frequently overshadowed by his impulsive personality . He was a highly controversial and highly controversial figure .
 He abolished the most ruthless aspects of the political system . He tried with limited success to catch up with and overtake the United States economy . He abolished most of the ruthless elements of the system .
 In foreign affairs he forcefully maintained the unity of the Eastern bloc . He veered between “peaceful coexistence” and several dangerous confrontations with the United States .
 "Without question, without question, one of the most important figures of the cold war," he said . "He was without question," he added. "I think he was a very important figure"
 Khrushchev was born in April 1894 in Kalinovka, Russia, near the border with Ukraine . He was the first Russian president of the Soviet Union .
 Nikita's parents were illiterate peasants, and Nikita was more familiar with hard labor than formal education . Nikita grew up in the family of peasants in Russia .
 The family relocated to Ukraine in 1908, where he worked various factory jobs . He got involved in the organized labor movement and got involved with the labor movement . The family moved to Russia in 1908 .
 In 1917 he joined the revolutionary Bolsheviks and later fought for the Red Army . He joined the revolution in 1917 and joined the Bolsheviks . He later fought in Russia in the Red Revolution .
 After the war he obtained some Marxist training at a technical college and was assigned a political post in the Ukraine . He obtained a political job in Ukraine .
 During World War II, he helped organize the defense of the Ukraine and the relocation of heavy industry into the Russian interior . He was at Stalingrad when the Red Army turned the tide against Germany .
 Khrushchev was influential member of the Politburo after Stalin died in March 1953 . He battled with Georgy Malenkov, Lavrenty Beria, and Nikolai Bulganin for the leadership of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev embarked on ambitious economic reforms in the early 1950s . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most powerful statesmen .
 Khrushchev also continued the policy of spending heavily on the military . The Soviet Union continued to spend heavily on military .
 The Soviet Union kept pace in the nuclear arms race with the United States . Under his leadership, the Soviet Union developed a space program that had significant successes .
 The launch of the Sputnik satellite in 1957 and the first manned space flight in 1961 were great technical triumphs for the Soviet Union . The first manned flight was made in 1961 .
 Khrushchev also decided, in a very risky move, to expose the horrors of the Stalinist era and to promote political reforms . The former Soviet leader also decided to expose Stalinist horrors .
 The speech sparked hopes that Khrushchev would tolerate autonomy and perhaps democracy within the Eastern bloc . The speech led to hopes for democracy in the Soviet Union .
 1956 uprising in Hungary was suppressed by a brutal military intervention authorized by Khrushchev . 1956 uprising was suppressed in Hungary by a military intervention authorised by the Soviet Union .
 This action shocked the West, which had welcomed the assurances of Khrushchev that the Soviet Union desired ‘peaceful coexistence” between capitalism and communism . The West was shocked by the move, which shocked the world .
 Khrushchev seemed unable to resist the temptation to taunt the West periodically . He had several alarming showdowns with the U.S. with the West .
 He tried fruitlessly to force the U.S. and its allies out of Berlin between 1958 and 1961 . The Berlin Wall eventually built the infamous Berlin Wall in 1961 .
 He also humiliated Eisenhower in 1960 by revealing the capture of a U.S. U.2 spy plane and its pilot .
 Khrushchev secretly placed nuclear missiles in communist Cuba in 1962 . The riskiest of all, in 1962, was that he secretly placed the missiles in Cuba .
 The purpose of this gamble was to protect Cuba from U.S. attack and provide the Soviet Union with instant strategic parity . The purpose was to . protect Cuba .
 U.S. spy planes detected the missiles, but a standoff resulted that brought the world alarmingly close to nuclear war . The standoff ended when the United States spotted the missiles .
 In the end the Cuban missile crisis was resolved through diplomatic back channels . The Soviets removed the missiles in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev was widely perceived to have backed down in the face of U.S. resolve . Both sides gained something, but both were perceived to be backing down . The incident occurred in the early 1950s .
 By this time he had already made too many enemies within the Soviet Union . By the time he'd been in the USSR, he'd already had enemies within his homeland .
 In late 1964, Khrushchev was removed from power by a conservative faction led by Leonid Brezhnev . In 1964, the Soviet Union was overthrown by the conservative faction of the government .
 Khrushchev spent the rest of his life under house arrest . His life was spared, perhaps a testament to the success of his political reforms, but his life was saved .
 Kim II Sung and Kim Jong II form a dynasty that has ruled the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, or Communist North Korea, since its creation in 1948 . Together, father and son have ruled the country since 1948 .
 Details about the lives of the two men remain scarce because of the personality cult established by Kim II Sung . Details about Korea remains a tightly closed society .
 "The information that is disseminated officially is so flattering that it is highly suspect," the president says . The information is "so flattering" that it's "highly suspect"
 Kim 11 Sung fought more than 100,000 times against the Japanese in seven years between 1932 and 1945 and was always victorious . One biography of the Korean leader reports that he fought more .
 His father was a schoolteacher who took his family to Chinese Manchuria in 1925 to escape Japan’s harsh colonization of their homeland . His father is a school teacher who moved to China in 1925 .
 In 1939 Kim went to the Soviet Union, where he received further military training . Kim was part of the Soviet military force that invaded and occupied Pyongyang in 1945 . Kim is believed to be the leader of North Korea's communist regime .
 The United States and the Soviet Union divided Korea into North and South . According to the terms of the Yalta agreement, the North and the South were divided by the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 Kim stayed in the north with the Soviets, who helped him prevail over other factions and become premier of the new Democratic People's Republic in 1948 . Kim was premier of North Korea's Democratic People’s Republic .
 Kim instigated the Korean War, which lasted until 1953 . Under Soviet and Chinese sponsorship he instigated it . Kim was assassinated by the Soviet-Chinese forces .
 A great admirer of Stalin, Kim patterned his rule after the Soviet leader . Kim was born in Seoul, South Korea, in 1989 .
 During the years following the Korean War, Kim solidified his power, purged his enemies, drove out foreign influences, and established himself as almost a god . During the . years following . the . Korean War . Kim solidifies his power and purged enemies .
 He also managed, through rigorous control of the press, to exalt his family, raising many of them to the status of national heroes . He managed to also raise many of his family to status as national heroes.
 He decreed that no newspaper could be published without his picture on the front page and without all the stories approved by government censors . No newspaper could have been published without him on front page .
 His pictures and statues were also in every public building in the nation . His pictures are also in public buildings across the country .
 Kim’s self-proclaimed doctrine of ]uchie, which encompassed the total economic, social, and political philosophy of the country . These and other actions were undertaken as part of the doctrine of [uchie , which included economic and social policy .
 North Korean citizens born after the Korean War had little or no knowledge of the outside world . Anything foreign was prohibited in North Korea, and anything foreign was forbidden .
 According to some reports, Korea went to extraordinary lengths to prolong Kim 11 Sung’s life . Korea went on to prolong his life, according to the reports .
 Purportedly a clinic staffed with 2,000 specialists was constructed solely for the purpose of caring for Kim and his son . The clinic was built for Kim to care for his son, who was taken to hospital .
 Staff experimented with diets and drugs on two teams of men who were similar to the leaders in age and body makeup . Staff at the clinic experimented with diet and drug treatments .
 The elder Kim died in 1994 after a series of unsuccessful attempts to extend his life . His son Kim was also a successful businessman and businessman .
 Kim Jong II, the eldest son of Kim 11 Sung, became his country’s next dictator . Kim Jong Jong II was born in Seoul, South Korea, in 1989 .
 The Soviets had established a school for the children of Korea’s guerrilla fighters, the Mangyongdae Revolutionary School, where Jong II received his early education . Jong II was born in Seoul, South Korea .
 He made official visits to China and the Soviet Union in the 1980s, further indicating that he would follow his father as ruler . He visited China and Russia in the 80s and indicated he would be a ruler .
 The title of the country’s president was reserved for his father by a constitutional amendment . His father is the current president of the Philippines .
 Some sources report that his halfbrother is being groomed as his successor . Other reports indicate that his sons are embroiled in a struggle to become heir . Some sources say that some of his sons may be embroiled in an heir struggle .
 Martin Luther King, Jr., was a civil rights leader whose campaigns for African-American racial equality made him an American icon . King's campaigns for racial equality in the U.S. made him a national icon .
 King was born in Atlanta, Georgia, on January 15, 1929 . He was the son of the Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr., and Alberta Williams King . King was also a son of MLK's wife, the Reverend, Alberta Williams .
 He was part of a ministerial dynasty at Atlanta’s Ebenezer Baptist Church . His grandfather served the church from 1914 to 1931 . The church was begun by his grandfather .
 He left high school at age 15 after gaining early acceptance at Atlanta’s prestigious Morehouse College . Morehouse is a prestigious college in Atlanta, Georgia .
 From Morehouse he went north to attend Crozer Theological Seminary in Pennsylvania . He was president of his senior class, and gaining his B.D. degree in 1951 .
 It was during this time that he met and married Coretta Scott on June 18, 1953 . It was his first marriage to Coretta, who he married in 1953 .
 Coretta King emerged as a promoter of civil rights and social justice in her own right . Coretta was an advocate of social justice and civil rights . She died in 1968 .
 In 1953 King became pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama, at age 26 . King condemned Jim Crow segregation in the course of promoting civil rights reform for AfricanAmerican citizens of Alabama .
 King faced retribution and death threats, including the bombing of his home . The boycott lasted for more than a year and King faced death threats . King's home was bombed by a bomb at the end of the boycott .
 In 1957 King took on the leadership of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference . The conference was the springboard for his authority and that of the emerging Civil Rights movement . King was the leader of the S.C. Conference .
 The movement began in black communities and churches but soon drew members from the broader population outside the south . The movement was formed in black churches and black communities .
 King shaped the SCLC philosophy toward nonviolent protest and pressure, drawing upon Christian teachings, but also inspired by Mohandas K Gandhi's successful protests .
 Through these leadership positions and through growing media attention, King became a national figure and a major force in U.S. politics . King was a leader in the 1960s and 1980s .
 The movement often faced a violent response to its activities, particularly as its agenda expanded to include a full range of civil rights issues . The movement was often violent, especially as it expanded its agenda .
 The speed of change proved dramatic and received national attention through events such as the 1963 March on Washington, which was inspired by and coordinated with other civil rights leaders but made famous by ‘I Have a Dream’ speech .
 It has been argued that the focus of this demonstration became less angry and more embracing because of pressure put on King by President John F Kennedy, who believed the wrong approach could damage support for civil rights legislation .
 King's ascendance to national prominence was revealed when he became Time magazine’s Man of the Year for 1963 . King was the first African-American to be named a national hero in the country .
 These protests helped in the passing of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act, 1965 . These protests led to the passage of the 1964 and 1965 voting rights acts .
 Martin Luther King, Jr., received recognition for his gigantic influence when he was made a Nobel laureate in 1964 . King was awarded the Peace Prize in recognition of his many efforts to achieve his many causes .
 It was in the mid-1960s that King tried to take the civil rights movement to the north, beginning in Chicago in 1966 . King was assassinated in 1968 in Chicago, Illinois .
 King and Ralph Abernathy made an effort to confront the poor’s living conditions by moving to the slums . King and Abernathom visited the slum in the hope of confronting poor living conditions .
 Mayor Richard J Daley’s Chicago political administration undercut reform activities whenever possible . Here he faced violence and discrimination .
 King and Abernathy returned to the South, but left a then-young follower, Jesse Jackson, in Chicago to carry on their work . The two men eventually left the South to carry out their work in Chicago .
 King started to reevaluate his positions on many areas and issues, including social and economic reform as well as the Vietnam War . King was re-evaluated his views on Vietnam War, social reform and Vietnam .
 His rhetoric and speeches took on new tones that seemed to challenge not only segregation, racial justice, and civil rights but also issues potentially more controversial to the mainstream .
 His turn to poverty led to his involvement in the ‘Poor People’s Campaign’ in 1968, which was to culminate in another major march on Washington . The march was to demand that the government address the needs of the poorest communities .
 In April 1968 his campaign took him to Memphis, Tennessee, where he offered his support to the Memphis Sanitation Workers’ strike for better wages .
 King saw the solution to many of these problems in government-driven job programs to reduce and reverse poverty in the nation in the form of a poor peoples’ bill of rights . King's solution was to reduce poverty in America in the way of job programs .
 President Johnson declared a day of national mourning, and the vice president, Hubert Humphrey, attended the funeral . A crowd estimated at 300,000 gathered at the funeral of President Johnson .
 A national and international manhunt was launched for the killer . James Earl Ray was apprehended on a passport violation in London, England, two months later . Ray confessed to the murder of King in March 1969 .
 Ray received a 99-year sentence and spent the rest of his life denying his guilt and requesting a trial . Ray was sentenced to 99 years in prison for his role in the crime .
 He argued that King had been killed by others and that he was only a fall guy in the midst of a larger conspiracy .
 Ray and several other inmates escaped from Brushy Mountain State Penitentiary in Petros, Tennessee, in June 1977 . Ray testified to the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Ray and others escaped not long after testifying .
 Controversy has surrounded the Ray conviction and there are many who believe that sinister forces manipulated and orchestrated the assassination plot . Ray Ray was convicted of the assassination of President Richard Nixon .
 In 1997 Ray was visited in prison by King’s son Dexter, who supported Ray's demand for a trial . In 1997, King's son Dexter visited Ray in prison and supported him .
 In 1999 the King family instigated a wrongful death civil action against Loyd Jowers, a local Memphis restaurant owner who claimed to have a role in the assassination . The King family is suing Jowers for wrongful death in 1999 .
 A local jury found that Jowers, even though he had failed a lie detector test in regard to his claim, was guilty . Jowers claimed that other government agencies were involved in the assassination . A jury found Jowers guilty and that government agencies involved .
 Department of Justice investigated the claims in 2000 . No evidence in support of the allegations was found . The claims were investigated in detail by the department of Justice .
 Initially they investigated communist associates of King and the organization, and maintained wiretaps at various times, including intruding on King’s privacy and threatening him with exposure of his extramarital affairs .
 These tapes were placed in the National Archives and will be sealed until 2027 . These tapes will remain sealed until the end of the decade .
 There were concerns expressed in the 1980s over plagiarism . Besides these attacks on the King legacy and honor, there were concerns about plagiarism, too .
 It was also argued that many of his other writings and speeches received the benefit of literary assistance in the form of ghostwriters .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. remains a major force in U.S. history whose name is one of the most easily recognized in the land . King was assassinated in 1968 in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1968 .
 Martin Luther King's boyhood home in Atlanta became a national historic site in 1980 . In 1983, President Ronald Reagan endorsed a bill creating a national holiday honoring King . King's Atlanta home became an historic site .
 King National Memorial in Washington, D.C., began with the purchase of land near the National Mall in 1999 . In addition his name has been added to many streets and other public buildings throughout the United States .
 He began his political career as a secretary to Takeo Fukuda, who later became prime minister . Fukuda was prime minister of Japan before he became president .
 He became minister of posts and telecommunications in 1992 . He served three terms as minister of health and welfare, the first beginning in 1996 . He has also served as health minister and telecommunications minister .
 He became prime minister of Japan on August 26, 2001 . He was reelected in 2003 and 2005; he stepped down in 2006 . He became Prime Minister of Japan in 2001 .
 His greatest efforts were directed at revitalizing the Japanese economy . His greatest effort was to revitalize the country's economy .
 Japan Post is a public corporation that offers banking and life insurance as well as postal and package delivery services . To this end he proposed privatizing the Japan Post, he proposed .
 One-third of all Japanese government employees feared the elimination of their jobs . This proposed privatization was a controversial issue in Japan for several reasons, not the least of which is the fact that it employed one third of all .
 Koizumi made several visits to the Yasakuni Shrine in Tokyo, which honors the Japanese war dead, beginning in 2001 . He visited the shrine in 2001, and visited it several times .
 Because 14 Class-A war criminals are honored at the shrine, these visits drew international criticism, especialy from China and South Korea, Japan's victims .
 Koizumi’s decision to send members of the Japan Self-Defence Force to Iraq in support of U.S. operations in 2003 was also controversial . Japanese troops were theoretically only involved in humanitarian activities .
 His personal appearance, complete with relatively long and unkempt hair and fashionable suits, suggested cultivation of this image . His interest in rock music, and his much-publicized interest in fashion, suggested cultivating this image, he said .
 With an area of 120,410 square kilometers, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea occupies slightly more than half of the northern part of the Korean Peninsula in northeast Asia .
 North Korea shares common borders with the Republic of Korea to the south, the People’s Republic of China to the north, and Russia to the northeast . North Korea is one of the world's most isolated countries .
 North Korea remained one of the most isolated states in the contemporary world . North Korea is one of North Korea's most isolated countries .
 Kim Jong II succeeded to the position of supreme leadership in 1994 after the death of his father, Kim II Sung, although this was not formalized until four years later . He succeeded his father as supreme leader in 1994 .
 Both father and son dominated the North Korean government since the inception of the country . North Korea has been ruled out of power by both men .
 A newly amended constitution in 1998 conferred on the deceased Kim the title of president for life and abolished the office of the president . The constitution was amended in 1998 .
 Kim Jong 11 heads the National Defense Commission, which functions as the chief administrative authority in the country . He heads the NDC, which is based in North Korea .
 When Japan surrendered in August 1945, the northern part of the peninsula was occupied by Soviet forces, while the southern half came under U.S. military authority .
 The peninsula was divided into two military occupation zones at the 38th parallel . Peninsula was divided between military occupation zone and zone of occupation zone . peninsula was then divided into military occupation areas .
 The Soviet occupation authority turned to Kim 11 Sung to provide leadership in its zone . He had fought the Japanese in Manchuria and fought for the Soviet government .
 In September 1948 Kim launched the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, with himself as the premier . Kim was the first Korean premier of the Korean peninsula .
 Kim 11 Sung lobbied his communist allies in the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China to support a North Korean effort to reunite the two Koreas in 1950 .
 North Korean forces quickly overwhelmed South Korean forces crossing the 38th parallel . They were then pushed back across the border by a United Nations force led by the United States .
 PRC sent “volunteers’ to fight alongside the North Koreans when UN forces neared the Yalu River, North Korea’s border with China . In November PRC also sent ‘volunteer’ forces to fight with North Koreans .
 The wartime situation gave Kim 11 Sung the opportunity to consolidate his position and establish himself as the absolute power in North Korea . During the wartime situation, he was the leader of the Korean peninsula .
 In a series of show trials and purges, potential rivals were eliminated . Potential rivals were also eliminated .
 In fact, some were made to shoulder the blame for the failure of the unification effort . Some of the blame was placed on the shoulders of those who failed the effort .
 The KWP announced that it had ended intra-party dissent in 2010 . Two years later the KWP said it had stopped intra-Party dissent . The party said it was ending internal dissent .
 Kim II Sung was now the undisputed leader of North Korea . He controlled virtually all aspects of North Korean society . The North Korean leader now controls virtually all of its society .
 A personality cult soon emerged around the person of Kim II Sung . His past as a guerrilla fighter against the Japanese, his defiance of the United States, and his exploits in building the nation were mythologized in song and poetry .
 Institutions such as universities and museums bear his name, and important places in his life are national shrines .
 A similar personality cult developed around his son and successor, Kim Jong II, with mythical events written into his biography . The cult of Kim Jong I is similar to that of his son, who was killed in 2009 .
 Revered as “Dear Leader,” the younger Kim is said to be imbued with extraordinary intellectual and artistic abilities . Revered to be ‘Dear Leader’, the younger leader of North Korea is believed to be the son of Kim Jong-won .
 Kim Il-Sungism is an amalgamation of Marxist-Leninist doctrines with Maoism and Confucianism . The concept emerged in the mid-1950s and emerged in mid-1949s . It is a mixture of Marxism-Leninism and Maoism with Conf
 Juch'e in operational terms involves the creation of a self-sustaining national economy and a strong military that can provide self-defense . Juch’e in terms of the country’s sovereignty, it involves creating a strong economy and strong military .
 North Korea at first appeared to be making great strides. With a centrally planned command economy, North Korea appeared to have made great strides . North Korea has a centrally-planned economy .
 In the spirit of juch’e, economic planners focused on industrialization and the collectivization of agriculture .
 North Korean goods received preferential treatment in the Soviet Union, PRC, and East European satellites through the late 1970s-80s .
 The changing geopolitical situation reduced such outside assistance to almost nothing and exposed the vulnerabilities in the North Korean economy . North Korea's economic vulnerability has been exposed in recent years, experts say .
 The consequences of a decades-old inefficient economic system could no longer be hidden . The consequences were no longer being hidden, the government says .
 North Korea has little arable land and no oil reserves . Energy and food shortages plagued North Korea in recent years .
 From the late 1990s onward North Korea had to rely on food aid from other countries, including South Korea, to stave off widespread famine . North Korea has relied heavily on aid from South Korea since the late 90s .
 The relationship between the two Koreas continued a seesaw trend in the Kim Jong II era . The relationship continued to be on the seesaw in the Korean peninsula .
 From the mid1990s onward there were intermittent talks between the two governments . The two governments have been at odds for decades .
 South Korean president Kim Dae Jung initiated his Sunshine Policy, which held out hope for reconciliation between the two Koreas . North Korea saw this as a means of securing economic assistance .
 In 2002 the North Korean government began to abandon some features of its tightly controlled command economy . In 2002, the North Korea government also began to begin abandoning some features .
 In addition, it adopted some market features, such as removing price and wage controls . In addition to removing price controls, it also removed wage and price controls .
 The government also began to court foreign investment and foreign trade, including from the Republic of Korea . The South Korean government is also courting foreign investment .
 North Korea once again garnered attention because of its nuclear weapons program, weapons sales to Iran, and its withdrawal from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, North Korea garnered attention due to its nuclear program .
 Six-party talks involving North Korea, South Korea, Japan, the PRC, Russia, and the U.S. failed to yield definitive results . North Korea and South Korea were involved in the talks .
 This approach increased the level of tension and raised the specter of a military confrontation in the Northeast Asia region . This approach has raised the prospect of a confrontation in Northeast Asia .
 In October 2007, North Korea agreed to disable its nuclear facilities by late 2008 in exchange for economic aid . North Korea has agreed to remove nuclear facilities in return for economic help . North Korean nuclear facilities have been disabled since 2008 .
 With an area of 98,480 square kilometers, the Republic of Korea occupies slightly less than half of the Korean Peninsula . Soo Chun Lu Korea, or South Korea, is located in the South Korean peninsula .
 A popularly elected president, who is the head of state, appoints a prime minister as well as other members of the cabinet . The prime minister is the most powerful person in the country to be elected .
 A unicameral National Assembly functions as the legislative branch of the country . The Supreme Court and Constitutional Court make up the judicial branch . The National Assembly and the Supreme Court are the legislative and judicial branches .
 In August 1945 Allied forces led by the United States landed on the Korean Peninsula in the south while Soviet forces moved down from the north . Allied forces eventually liberated Korea from Japanese colonial rule .
 The 38th parallel became the boundary dividing the occupation forces from 1945 to 1948 . The 38-paralleon was the boundary between the occupation and occupation forces in the US .
 The Yalta agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1945 led to the creation of two separate states . What began as the separation of two administrative units was dictated by the political and ideological divisions of the Cold War .
 Various Korean nationalist factions operating at home and in exile jostled to position themselves as representatives of an independent Korea .
 In the immediate postwar era, the U.S. turned to Syngman Rhee, an exiled anticommunist nationalist, to provide leadership in the south . The United States eventually turned to the exiled anti-communist nationalist in the South .
 In 1947 the newly formed United Nations created a commission to oversee national elections in Korea . The commission was created to oversee elections in the country .
 Commission oversaw the election of the National Assembly in the south in 1948 . Barred from access to the Soviet occupation zone, the commission oversaw elections in the area . Commission was banned from entering the Soviet occupied zone .
 North Korea crossed the 38th parallel in a failed attempt to reunify the nation under communist rule . War once again broke out on the Korean Peninsula when North Korean troops crossed the border .
 The United States promptly intervened in the conflict as part of a UN police action . The U.S. is the only nation to intervene in the Syrian conflict .
 The Korean War cemented the patron-client relationship between the United States and South Korea . U.S. and S. Korea were allies during the Korean War .
 In 1954 the two countries signed a mutual defense treaty that formalized their bilateral security arrangements . The treaty was signed in 1954 .
 U.S. troops were stationed in South Korea from the 1970s . Although their numbers were reduced, United States troops remained stationed there from then on .
 The U.S. continued to supply generous military aid to build up South Korea’s defense capabilities .
 South Korea contributed forces to help the U.S. in Vietnam from 1965 to 1973 . South Korea helped the United States in Vietnam .
 Rhee combined bellicose rhetoric against the north with repressive tactics at home to silence political opposition . Rhee's repressive tactics were used to silence opposition to the north .
 He pushed through a questionable constitutional amendment that permitted a lifelong presidency . Four years later, he pushed through an amendment that allowed a lifetime presidency . The amendment was a mistake .
 Domestic, social, and economic problems generated widespread student protests . Meanwhile, domestic, social and economic issues generated widespread protests .
 Rhee resigned and fled to Hawaii, where he lived in exile until his death in 1965 . Rhee lived there until he died in 1965, when he was forced to live in exile .
 Three military men followed as presidents in South Korea . After a short interregnum during which the country turned to a new constitution that established parliamentary democracy, three military men were presidents .
 General Park Chung Hee launched a coup in May 1961 to overthrow the nine-month-old parliamentary government . The Republic of Korea was placed under military rule for two years under General Park .
 Park was duly elected to the office in 1963 . At the end of 1963, the country adopted a new constitution that permitted presidents to serve two four-year terms . Park was elected to office in 1964 .
 He would continue to manipulate constitutional processes, or suspend them altogether, in order to remain in power . But he would continue in power, even if he was in office, he says .
 In 1971 he declared a state of emergency, suspended the constitution, dissolved the National Assembly, and then promulgated a new Yushin constitution . He declared a new constitution in 1971 .
 The Korean Central Intelligence Agency was used to intimidate South Korean dissenters . The agency was established in 1950s Korea .
 Park relied on emergency decrees to repress opposition to his regime . Protesters were given long jail terms, a number of students were executed, and the press faced increasingly harsh censorship . Park's regime used the power of emergency decree to suppress opposition .
 Park's regime finally came to an end when the director of the KCIA assassinated him in October 1979 . Park’s regime was finally ended when he was assassinated by the CIA director in 1979 .
 During the Park Chung Hee era, South Korea made its transition to a modern economy . South Korea's economy has been in decline since the late 1980s .
 Inspired by the Japanese economic miracle, the government adopted a series of five-year development plans . The plans are aimed at transforming an agrarian nation to an industrial power .
 South Korea's low labor costs allowed South Korea to compete effectively in such labor-intensive industries as textiles . Low labor costs helped South Korea compete well in textiles industry .
 In 1970s the country shifted its focus away from labor-intensive light industries to heavy industries . In the 1970s, the focus shifted to heavy industry .
 Government-controlled economic development effort bore fruit as economic growth rates increased . This government-controlled effort was successful .
 General Chun Doo Hwan, a veteran of the Vietnam War, came to power in a coup in December 1979 . General Chun Hwan is a former member of the South Korean parliament .
 He acquired emergency powers that would allow him to disregard any constitutionally recognized rights of the people . Charging that pro-democracy student demonstrations in Kwangju Province had been instigated by North Korean infiltrators, he acquired the powers .
 He embarked on a campaign to root out those who criticized his regime . He also embarked on an anti-government campaign .
 In 1987 Chun stepped aside in favor of his handpicked successor, Roh Tae Woo, who won a presidential election with only 36 percent of the vote . But protests persisted, and Roh Woo won the presidential election . Roh Woo's successor, Chun Woo, won the election in 1987 with
 Under Roh, South Korea began to pursue new directions in foreign policy in keeping with the geopolitical trend that hearkened the end of antagonistic camps in the cold war . Roh: South Korea's foreign policy is in line with a new geopolitical trend .
 Roh followed up on an earlier proposal to exchange visits between North and South Korea . Roh follows up on a proposal to swap visits between the two Koreas . Roh: "It's a good step for the North and the South"
 Following sports and cultural exchanges, the two countries signed the 1991 Basic Agreement on Reconciliation, Non-Aggression, and Cooperation of Exchanges . The two nations signed the Basic Agreement .
 Politics in South Korea followed a pattern of democraticization from the late 1980s onward . Politics in the South Korea has been democraticized since the 1980s .
 Kim Young Sam was a longtime critic of Park Chung Hee’s authoritarian rule . He emerged victorious in the 1992 presidential elections, becoming the first civilian president in three decades .
 Kim initiated a campaign to root out longtime corruption in government . Kim's government has been accused of corruption in recent years .
 Both former presidents Chun and Roh were indicted for corruption and their roles in the 1979 military coup . Both were accused of corruption in the wake of the military coup in 1979 .
 Kim Young Sam also faced pressure to liberalize the South Korean economy . The government has been criticized for not liberalizing the country's economy .
 By 1997 economic growth in South Korea showed signs of abatement due to the effects of the Asian financial crisis . South Korea's economic growth was abated by 1997 . By 1997 it had shown signs of slowing economic growth .
 The resulting labor and student protests eventually led to the victory of a longtime opposition leader, Kim Dae Jung, in the presidential elections . The resulting protests led to an opposition leader's election victory in 2008 .
 Kim Dae Jung presided over a country in the throes of an economic downturn . He presided over the country's economic downturn in the 1990s . He was forced to step down from office .
 The South Korean leadership worked with the International Monetary Fund in its rescue effort . South Korea's leadership has been working with the IMF to help the country's economy .
 President Kim Dae Jung would leave his mark in foreign relations . President of South Korea would be remembered for his foreign policy efforts . President's foreign policy would be his first major foreign policy initiative .
 He pursued efforts to build a more cordial relationship with his northern neighbor by providing economic assistance to the beleaguered north . North Korea has long sought economic assistance from the U.S.
 Kim hoped to end North Korean isolation and eventually change its governmental system . Such efforts, Kim hoped, would end North Korea isolation and change its government .
 Kim’s policy did not yield concrete results, but his summit meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong 11 in 2000 raised hopes about eventual reconciliation between the two Koreas .
 The first major conflict of the cold war began in June 1950 and ended in an inconclusive armistice on July 27, 1953 . Soo Chun Lu was the first Korean conflict to end in a war that ended in 1953 .
 The Korean conflict attracted increased academic and popular attention in the early 21st century . Almost 4 million people, including 136,000 U.S. citizens, were killed or wounded in the conflict .
 Korea was divided in 1945 at the 38th parallel . Occupied by Japan during the war, Korea was split in 1945 .
 The Soviets occupied the northern area while the United States supervised the southern sector . The U.S. supervised the northern part of the area .
 As the cold war between these former allies intensified, this partition line became a new “Iron Curtain” dividing Koreans from each other . As the Cold War intensified, the partition line was a new "Iron Curban" dividing Koreans .
 Truman feared that South Korean forces alone would be unable to stop apparent Soviet plans to make all of Korea a communist regime . President Harry S Truman feared South Korea would not be able to stop Soviet plans . North Korean forces crossed the 38th parallel into anticommunist South Korea in June
 Truman persuaded UN members to declare North Korea the aggressor . Taking advantage of a temporary Soviet boycott of the U.N. Security Council, Truman persuaded members of the UN to declare N. Korea aggressor.
 Joint UN force, dominated by U.S. officers and troops, to launch a “police action’ in Korea . This, rather than a congressional declaration of war, became the justification for fielding a joint UN force . The U.N. forces are dominated by United States
 General Douglas MacArthur executed a daring amphibious assault at Inchon, just west of South Korea’s capital of Seoul . UN forces were overwhelmed and pushed ever southward by the North Koreans until September .
 MacArthur assured Truman that neighboring China would not interfere if UN forces reunited Korea under U.S. protection . MacArthur met with Truman in October with the president .
 China, fresh from its own communist revolution in 1949, secretly armed by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, took exception . China took exception to being armed by the Soviet Union in 1949 .
 By the bitter winter of 1951 waves of Chinese soldiers had entered Korea and were again pushing UN troops southward . UN troops were forced to withdraw from the Korean peninsula in 1950 .
 President Truman fired MacArthur for insubordination in April . By the time the Korean conflict had settled into a violent stalemate centered on the original partition line .
 Peace negotiations began in June 1951, but foundered on the issue of repatriation . Peace negotiations foundered over repatriation of the Korean refugees .
 Many Chinese and North Korean war prisoners were unwilling to return to the regimes that had sent them into war . Many Chinese, North Korean prisoners refused to return home .
 The Korean stalemate became a venomous election issue in the United States . Republicans like Joe McCarthy of Minnesota questioned Truman’s and the Democrats’ patriotism .
 General Dwight D Eisenhower visited the Korean front lines after taking office, but no formal peace treaty ever resulted . Eisenhower was elected president by a large margin in 1952 .
 M-26 tank at Haengju, Korea. parallel, augmented by DMZ on either side, again marked the continuing division between North and South Korea .
 North Korea remained a secretive and fanatically communist regime . South Korea, despite difficulties adapting democratic political processes, became a major manufacturing power in Asia, rivaling Japan .
 Juscelino Kubitschek bequeathed a complex political and economic legacy . He is best remembered for the construction of the new capital city of Brasilia in Brasilia .
 Kubitschek was president of Mexico from 1930-45, 1951-54 . He distanced himself from the military while endeavoring to placate it . He retained many of his predecessor’s populist policies, including industrialization .
 His term saw rapid economic growth and major advances in all major industries . His term was his first term in office, ending in 2009 .
 It also left behind record government debt, a highly-mobilized and polarized civil society, and a disgruntled military . The country is now in a state of its own .
 Kubitschek de Oliviera was born in the small backcountry town of Diamantina in the state of Minas Gerais on September 12, 1902 .
 His father, a salesman, died when he was two; his mother, a schoolteacher of Slovak ancestry, raised him . His father was a salesman . His mother was a school teacher .
 On taking office, he and his technocrats drew up a Program of Goals, identifying specific growth targets for each economic sector .
 The idea was to bring private capital under state direction to achieve rapid economic growth by focusing on key industries and infrastructure . The basic idea was that private capital would be brought in by state .
 When he left office, Brazil had a sustainable automobile industry, built virtually from scratch . When he was president, Brazil's auto industry industry was built from scratch, he said .
 Similar growth targets were met in electrification, road construction, and related sectors . Similar goals were met for electrification and road construction .
 As state expenditures grew, Brazil’s foreign debt grew, inflation soared, and economic inequality increased . Brazil's economic inequality—already among the world's starkest—increased . Brazil is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Kubitschek ended up with far more adversaries than allies . Working to placate a resurgent left, a recalcitrant right, and an increasingly disenchanted military, he says .
 His administration met many of its targets for growth, investment, and industrialization, but left to his successor a macroeconomic mess . His successor left a macro economic mess and sharpened political divisions that culminated in a prolonged military takeover .
 After the 1964 coup he went into exile, living in Europe and North America, before returning to Brazil in 1967 .
 Alexander, Robert J. Juscelino Kubitschek and the Development of Brazil . Alexander . Alexander, . Robert J . Juskelino . Kubitschchek . Alexander and Robert Jusquelino. Alexander .
 The Kurds were most likely an Indo-European people who migrated from Central Asia to Asia Minor and northern Mesopotamian regions . They lived among Assyrian and Babylonian inhabitants sometime between the second and first millennium .
 For centuries the Kurds maintained their own civilization, establishing a number of kingdoms and tribal fiefdoms in the high mountain areas in the Iran-Mesopotamia regions .
 The modern Kurdish people are the descendants of the original Kurds who were living in the Zagros Mountains and northern Mesopotamia . They now populate territories known as Kurdistan, stretching from northwestern Iran to southeastern Turkey, northern Iraq, and northeastern Syria .
 Kurdish tribes can also be found in other countries such as Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Lebanon .
 Kurds are the fourth-largest ethnic population living in southwest Asia . Kurds are also the fourth largest ethnic population in the world . Kurds live in Turkey and Syria .
 Kurdish societal structure remains tribal, with loyalty of each Kurdish group directed toward an immediate family clan . Many modern Kurds now live in large cities, but many modern Kurds have moved to cities .
 They do share a common cultural heritage that goes beyond their tribal social structure . The two tribes have been in contact with each other for centuries .
 The distinct Kurdish language belongs to the Iranian subgroup of the Indo-European languages . Kurdish is a distinct Iranian language . Kurdish belongs to a group of languages that is part of the group of Iranian languages .
 Kurds are mainly Sunni Muslims of the Shafi’i theological school of thought . The Shafi'i school places more emphasis on the consensus of the community than on the authority of individual clerical scholars .
 Many Kurds in Iraq, Iran, and Turkey also adhere to Sufism, or the mystical branch of Islam . Many Kurds adhere to the mystical sect of Islam, or Sufiism, in the region .
 Kurdish Islam evolved into a distinct form of vernacular religion with unique Kurdish cultural characteristics . Kurdish Islam is a form of religion that has unique cultural characteristics in Kurdish culture .
 A minority of Kurds are also Shi’i Muslims, Smaller Baha’s, and Christian . Jewish communities can also be found among the Kurdish population . Jewish Kurds mainly live in Israel .
 The modern political history of the Kurds has been a quest for national autonomy . Kurds have long sought national autonomy in their quest for autonomy . The Kurds have a long history of seeking national autonomy, including autonomy .
 Kurdish nationalism made its first appearance with the 1880 revolt of the Kurdish League, led by the charismatic Sheikh ‘Ubaydallah of Nehri .
 Sheikh ‘Ubaydallah’s movement marked the first Kurdish national rebellion that included Kurds of the Ottoman Empire and Qajar Persia . Despite defeat by the Ottomans, the movement was not defeated .
 The Kurds began to form their own political parties after the Young Turks Revolution in 1908 . The revolution removed the rule of ‘Abu Abdul hamid and restored the 1887 constitution . The Kurds are Kurds who have a long history of independence .
 On August 10, 1920, Britain, France, and Italy designed the Treaty of Sevres, which officially recognized Kurdish claims for national autonomy and an independent Kurdistan . Following the demise of the Ottoman Empire, the treaty was designed to recognize Kurdish claims .
 The treaty was signed by the Allies and Turkey, recognizing that the Kurds have the right to exercise local autonomy . The treaty recognizes that the rights of the Kurds in Turkey are to exercise their autonomy .
 The newly founded Atatiirk government rejected the Treaty of Sevres and subsequently found an opportunity to suppress the Kurdish right for national independence . Following the signing of the Lausanne Treaty in 1923, the newly-founded Atatiir government suppressed the Kurdish rights for independence .
 The Kurds revolted against the Turkish state in 1925, 1930, and 1937, all three revolts led by Sheikh Sa‘id and Sayyid Reza of Dersim . All three were brutally defeated by the Turks .
 All Kurdish nationalist movements experienced the same fate. After that, all Kurdish nationalists were killed . The Kurdish nationalist movement was disbanded .
 The Marxist nationalist party was founded in 1973 and expanded its influence in the Kurdish regions of Turkey . The party used guerrilla warfare and terrorism as a way to destabilize the Turkish authority . The Marxist nationalists were formed in 1973 .
 The PKK proved to be the most violent of all Kurdish political groups in the modern history of Turkish nationalism . The group is the largest Kurdish political group in the history of Turkey .
 In return, the Turkish army used various violent means to put down the Kurdish rebellion . In return they used violence to try and get rid of the Kurds .
 These included the arbitrary murder and detention of Kurdish civilians, and the repression of Kurdish thinkers, journalists, and businessmen . The arbitrary murder, detention, and repression of Kurds included among them .
 The PKK lost much of its strength with the capture of the organization’s leader, Abullah Ocalan, in 1999 . The PKK was captured by the Turkish government in 1999, but has since regained strength .
 The struggle for Kurdish nationalism, however, was most fruitful in Iraq . Kurdish nationalism was most successful in Iraq, the Kurdish leader says .
 From 1919 to 1945 all the Kurdish rebellions against the British Army and the Iraqi regime were ruthlessly crushed . From 1919 until 1945 all of the Kurdish rebellion against the UK Army and Iraqi regime was brutally crushed .
 The republican coup raised the Kurdish expectation for more equal participation in the Iraqi state . The Kurdish people are expected to be more equal in Iraq's future .
 Mustafa Barzani led an armed struggle from 1961 to 1963 and from 1974 to 1975 . Mustafa led the armed struggle between 1961 and 1975 . He was arrested in 1974 and died in 1981 .
 Later in the 1970s Barzani went into exile in the United States, where he died in 1979 . He was also known for his work in Iran .
 With the help of thousands of armed fighters, the peshmargan gained control of major parts of northern Iraq . He gained control over northern Iraq with help of tens of thousands armed fighters .
 After the First Gulf War the KDP emerged as one of the most significant Kurdish political organizations, operating with relative freedom to govern sections of northern Iraq . The KDP achieved the first enduring semiautonomous Kurdish state in history .
 In the early 21st century Barzani continued to play a major role in Kurdish politics in Iraq . He shared power with his Kurdish rival Jalal Talabani, who he shared power .
 Talabani was a major Kurdish nationalist and the leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan . He was born in 1975 . He is one of the most prominent Kurdish nationalists in the world .
 PUK emerged as KDP’s main political competitor . Formed mainly by urban intellectuals and leftist thinkers, the PUK was formed in the 1980s .
 In the early 1990s, he helped the Kurdish uprising against the Ba’athist state . He helped establish the no-fly zone over northern Iraq to protect the Kurds from bombing .
 The PUK joined forces with the KDP and other Kurdish parties to create the Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan . The alliance represented the Kurds in the Iraqi National Assembly elections of 2005 and 2006 . After years of rivalry, the PUK and KDP joined forces .
 In post-Ba’athist Iraq, Talabani was named the president of Iraq on April 6, 2005, and again on April 22, 2006, by the Iraqi National Assembly . In Iraq, he was elected president in 2005 and again in 2006 .
 Kuwait is located at the head of the Persian Gulf, with Iraq to its north and east and Saudi Arabia to its south . Kuwait is one of the Gulf States, located at its north .
 The tiny nation became the center of world attention in the early 1990s after Iraq invaded it . Iraq invaded the Gulf waters in the 1990s .
 The geography of Kuwait is dominated by mostly flat deserts interspersed with a few oases in Kuwait’s 6,880 square miles of territory . The country is home to several oases and a few deserts .
 Kuwait developed as a thriving mercantile community with an economy based on foreign trade . From the 19th century onward the Sabah clan allied with the indigenous commercial elites, and Kuwait developed a thriving economy .
 The Al-Sabahs paid financial tributes to the Ottoman empire and recognized the sultan’s power . Ottoman threats to annex Kuwait pushed the Sabahs to ally with Britain .
 An 1899 treaty gave Britain control over Kuwait’s foreign affair, and Kuwait became a British protectorate . Kuwait is now a British protectedorate .
 The emir ruled the country through the council of ministers, which mostly consisted of family members appointed by the emir himself . The council was mostly made up of members of his own family .
 The judicial system was based on Islamic law, or sharia, particularly the Maliki school of jurisprudence . Many of the criminal and commercial laws were based on prior British laws . The judicial and commercial law was also based on sharia .
 The legislative branch was composed of a National Assembly , whose 50 members were elected to four-year terms . The 50 members of the National Assembly were elected in 2008 .
 Political parties are legally banned and instead, several organizations have representatives in parliament . Political parties have been banned from entering the country .
 Prior to 2005, voting was restricted to men who were able to prove that their ancestry in Kuwait dated prior to 1920 and who were not members of the armed forces .
 After 2005 the government granted citizenship to 5,000 biduns, people without documents, from Syria, Iraq, and Jordan . The government grants citizenship to people without papers per year . The biduns were originally from Iraq, Syria, Jordan, and Syria .
 Foreigners are needed to fill positions in the workforce and especially in the oil, construction, and service sectors . Foreigners, called expatriate workers in Kuwait, are needed .
 There is some hostility between the native Kuwaiti population and the majority immigrant population . Since these immigrant workers are not entitled to free government services and benefits, they cannot become citizens .
 In the 1970s the petroleum industry increased its extraction and processing capabilities . By the mid1980s 80 percent of the oil extracted in Kuwait was being refined there .
 Oil production led to a Kuwaiti economic boom, with both direct and indirect services and products . Kuwaiti oil production has led to an economic boom .
 Kyoto Treaty aims to reduce global warming by reducing greenhouse gas emissions . Randa A Kayyali is a member of the Kyoto Protocol . The Kyoto Protocol is the Kyoto Treaty, also known as the Kyoto Kyoto Protocol, to reduce emissions .
 Countries that ratify the Kyoto Treaty agree to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to 5 percent below their 1990 level by the year 2012 . Countries that sign the treaty must reduce their emissions to five percent below the 1990 level .
 The Kyoto Treaty took effect on February 16, 2005, after ratification by Russia . Russia met the requirement that the treaty be ratified by countries accounting for at least 55 percent of global carbon emissions .
 Developing countries such as China and Russia are exempt from the requirement that they reduce greenhouse gas emissions . Developing nations such as Russia and China will not be required to reduce emissions .
 The analogy refers to a greenhouse used for gardening, in which sun rays are allowed to penetrate the glass walls and ceiling and warm the air within the greenhouse . The warmed air is prevented from leaving the greenhouse by those same glass walls, and the same glass wall and ceiling .
 A proportion of radiation reflected off the Earth cannot escape back through the atmosphere due to its different wavelength . In the case of Earth, the planet is warmed by solar radiation which can penetrate the atmosphere .
 This means that a signatory may increase their carbon emissions and remain within compliance by purchasing “credits” from countries that have decreased their emissions . This is a way to avoid increasing emissions by purchasing credits from other countries .
 Countries can qualify for credits by engaging in clean energy programs and fostering forests and other natural systems referred to as “carbon sinks” because they remove carbon dioxide from the environment . Countries can also qualify for credit .
 The current concern with greenhouse gases has to do with the increasing quantities of those gases, and the role they are believed to play in global warming . That is, an increase in the average temperature of the Earth’s surface and atmosphere .
 Global temperature has risen 0.4-0.8°C since the late 19th century . Human activities are the cause of most of this change, scientists say .
 Scientists who endorse the global warming hypothesis predict that the rise in temperature will continue to intensify with increasing industrial development and the resultant increase in greenhouse gas emissions . Scientists say the rise of temperature will intensify with industrial development .
 Alternative explanations include the argument that the increase in temperature has not been clearly established, or that it is within the range of normal variation to be expected over time . Alternative explanations are that the rise in temperature is due to the period when measurement began having been unusually cold .
 Others argue that although the global temperature does seem to be rising, there is no proof that the rise in temperature was caused by human activity . Others argue there are no signs that human activity is causing the rise .
 Global warming is predicted to lead to a rise in sea levels and more frequent hurricanes . Global warming will lead to more frequent storms and sea levels .
 Latin American culture is as diverse as its people . Latin America is home to many of the world's most diverse cultures .
 Centuries of colonization created a rich ethnic mix, combining indigenous peoples with settlers from Europe and slaves from Africa . Europeans, slaves and slaves brought in from Africa and smaller populations of imported workers from Asia and Middle East .
 What is now seen as the common culture of the region is the result of generations of adaptation and change . The region's culture has been adapted by generations of people, say experts .
 Traditional music of early indigenous civilizations was mostly lost during the first violent decades of colonization . The traditional music was lost during first violent years of colonization.
 Early Spanish adventurers noted that the music of Mesoamericans was exclusively for religious ceremony, not for entertainment, not entertainment . Early Spanish explorers noted that .
 They played wind instruments, such as wooden panpipes and a clay flute called the tlapitzalli, or percussion instruments . They played woodpanpipes, wooden flutes and percussion instruments such as percussion instruments.
 Spanish brought with them stringed instruments and a mature musical style derived from their own multiethnic background . The Spanish brought along stringing instruments with them and their musical style .
 Later, African slaves added their unique vocal rhythms and their instruments . The marimba, the clave, conga drums, and maracas are among the instruments used by slaves .
 These elements were fused into a variety of new and different musical and vocal styles that came to worldwide acclaim in the 20th century . Together, these elements of music and singing styles were fused . Together they came to global acclaim .
 Music and dance grew together; most popular dance styles carry the same name as their musical styles . Popular dance styles are known as dance styles and dance styles .
 Latin dance tends to be highly physical, with steps and patterns drawn from different ethnic and cultural styles . Latin dance is a form of dance called "Latin dance"
 The tango, for example, developed in the port cities of Argentina in the early 20th century . It was first as a music form blending several ethnic styles, including the Argentine and Uruguayan milonga, the Cuban habanera and the Slavic polka .
 The tango became popular in Europe and America in the 1920s, spurred by the Italian-born film star Rudolph Valentino . Valentino was an exhibition dancer specializing in the tango before becoming the first sex symbol of the movies .
 It was the first in a long line of Latin dance styles to gain popularity both inside and outside of their native lands . The dance style is the first of its kind in Latin America .
 Other forms of Latin music and dance include the samba, the rumba, the cha-cha, the paso doble, the mambo, salsa, and merengue .
 Latin American painting was dominated by European styles from the colonial period to the 19th century .
 Local artists learned the techniques of Spanish, Portuguese, French, German, and Flemish masters . Local artists interlaced these styles with themes and traditions of their precolonial world .
 Latin American art began to move away from the baroque towards a more simple, neoclassical style in the early 19th century .
 Artists were on hand to memorialize revolutionary leaders and pivotal events . Artists were in attendance to commemorate revolutionary leaders .
 Latin art remained focused on portraiture, landscape and decorative art until the 1920s, missing out almost entirely on the Impressionist movement and its offshoots .
 Muralism was the first major art movement to bring Latin American artists world acclaim . Muralists were first major artists to have their work recognized .
 The movement arose in Mexico in the 1920s, when established artists began using public spaces for huge paintings . Artists usually focused on themes of social justice and equality .
 Diego Rivera, Jose Clemente, and David Alfaro Siqueiros were active participants in shaping the political and social movements of the time .
 Muralism quickly spread outside of Mexico, inspiring artists from the U.S. to the Chile . Muralists in Mexico have been inspired by artists in the United States .
 Many Latin artists were turning away from nationalistic themes and toward the international avantgarde and modernist movements . By 1945 many Latin artists had turned their attention to the modernist movement . This is the first time Latin American artists have seen a change in nationalism .
 In recent decades, artists have focused on the relationship between the modern era and the distant past . Artists often mix a variety of media, often drawing from the folk art traditions of indigenous peoples .
 Latin American literature began with the conquistadors and missionaries of the 16th century . It was dominated by Spanish and Portuguese styles and techniques for generations . It has been written in Latin America since then .
 Early Latin American writers benefited from the literary movements in Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries . Elements of French classicism were present by the early 1700s .
 Mexico City, Lima, Quito, Bogota, Caracas, and Buenos Aires grew into literary centers on a par with European salons . Buenos Aires, Mexico City and Lima, Lima and Quito became literary centers .
 With independence in the early 1800s most Latin American writers turned to nation-building . They joined the effort to create a national identity out of the ashes of colonialism .
 Politics and literature were closely intertwined throughout the 19th century . New works were written by essayists and historians but also poets, playwrights, and novelists .
 Romanticism also struck a deep chord in Latin American art and literature during the period . Romanticism was also a major influence in Latin America's culture .
 Contemporary Latin American literature runs the gamut from cosmopolitan intellectualism to magical realism drawn from traditions of the rural past . Modern Latin American fiction is a mix of realism and magical realism .
 Since the 1960s it has taken a prominent place in the international literary world . It has become a prominent feature in the world of literature .
 Poets Gabriela Mistral, Pablo Neruda, and Octavio Paz were awarded the Nobel Prize in literature in 1945, 1971, and 1990, respectively . Miguel Angel Asturias took the Nobel prize in 1967, and Gabriel Garcia Marquez won in 1982 . Miguel
 Cinema came to Latin America in the early years of the 20th century, but it took many years for it to spread evenly across the region . Cinema began to be seen in Latin America as cinema came to prominence in the 1920s .
 Only Mexico, Argentina, and Brazil had the kind of large, stable economies necessary to launch a film industry . Only Mexico and Argentina had the type of large and stable economies needed to launch an industry .
 Early directors were marginalized by European and American studios that dominated the film distribution systems and monopolized Latin markets . Even in Latin American countries, early directors have been marginalized by the studios .
 This did not change until the Great Depression and World War II, when financial and political concerns slowed down the flow of foreign films . Foreign films have never been released in the U.S.
 By the mid-1950s, the industry had drifted back toward the prewar status quo . However, by the mid-'60s, it had been back to the pre-1949s .
 Latin American film came into its own in the 1960s as native-born directors tapped into the new experimental film techniques coming out of Europe and the social and political movements sweeping across their countries to create a unique cinematic voice .
 The last 25 years have seen an expansion and maturation of Latin American cinema . This year marks the 25th anniversary of the birth of the first Latin American film festival .
 As in the United States, the industry is constantly trying to find a balance between popular entertainment and more artistic ventures .
 A small band of armed men pushed off from the shores of eastern Mexico with their eyes on Cuba . In 1956, Cuba was captured by the Cuban government .
 Fidel Castro and Ernesto “Che” Guevara dreamt of a new Cuba free from social classes, capitalism, and American imperialism . Fidel Castro was among a group of revolutionaries who dreamt about a new state of Cuba .
 After two years of guerrilla warfare, Castro and his band succeeded in overthrowing the Cuban government and seizing power . Castro's band overthrew the government and seized power in Cuba .
 Cuba's new regime expropriated foreign holdings, transferred industries to state ownership, and ‘volunteered’ citizens to work on state-run farms . Almost immediately their new vision of a socially just society unfolded .
 The struggle between rich and poor dominated the rhetoric of Latin American Marxism, but with a unique spin that included U.S. multinational corporations among the rich .
 Cuban revolution presented a new political paradigm to Latin America, one driven by Marxis ideology and armed revolution . The Cuban revolution was a new paradigm for Latin America .
 It would influence Latin American politics for the rest of the 20th century . It was the first time Latin America had seen a change in Latin America's politics .
 As the economic boom of World War II faded in the 1950s, international demand for Latin American exports waned . Latin America's agricultural exports, such as agricultural, waned during the boom .
 High machinery costs driven by postwar rebuilding in Europe held back industrialization and economic growth in Latin America . Latin America's economic growth has been slow since the 1950s .
 Economic hard times fused with the legacy of conquest and colonialism incited demands for sweeping, fundamental change . The country is now in a state of crisis that has been rocked by a series of violent protests .
 Some Latin Americans, including Fidel Castro, explored and then embraced Marxist ideology as a viable solution to ending the region’s poverty and economic dependency on industrialized nations . Fidel Castro: "Some Latin Americans ... explore and then embrace Marxist ideology" Fidel Castro .
 Castro’s involvement in the launching of the Organization of Latin American Solidarity in 1967 to encourage Marxist revolutions throughout the region . Even more distressing to U.S. policymakers was Castro's role in the launch of the organization .
 The United States sponsored a military alliance with anticommunist governments throughout Latin America . The U.S. sponsored an anti-communist alliance with anti-Communist governments .
 This national security doctrine increased the power of the military in Latin American societies . The U.S. encouraged military involvement in cracking down on Marxist guerrillas and their supporters .
 Some military leaders viewed civilian democratic governments as corrupt and a hindrance to social and economic change . Soon some military leaders saw civilian governments as a corrupt . The U.S. military saw civilian democracy as corrupt .
 These generals believed that the solution to Latin American problems lie in rapid social and economic development .
 During the 1970s almost every Latin American country succumbed to military rule . Almost every country in Latin America succumbed to the military rule of the decade .
 Many authoritarian governments looked to a free market economy as the means of change . They seized upon low interest rates to borrow heavily to finance development . Many of these authoritarian governments look to the free market as a means to change .
 Any protests or cries for change, which increasingly came from urban residents-turned-guerrillas, were vehemently suppressed . The protests and cries of change were also suppressed .
 Scholars estimate that as many as 20,000 people “disappeared” at the hands of the military . In Argentina, scholars estimate that 20,00 people were ‘disappearances’ in Argentina .
 The El Salvadoran military massacred peasants thought to be aiding leftist guerrillas . In Guatemala, tens of thousands of indigenous people suspected of similar actions were killed by the military .
 By the 1980s government deficit spending coupled with a wavering global economy resulted in skyrocketing inflation and foreign debts . Government deficit spending led to a rise in foreign debt and soaring inflation .
 This economic crisis provoked criticism of the status quo from citizens and accusations that military leadership represented incompetent government . The military has been accused of being incompetent government.
 One by one, Latin America’s military regimes retreated to the barracks and handed leadership back to civilians . Latin America's military regimes have handed leadership to civilians in recent years . The U.S. military has lost control of the world's most powerful institutions .
 The 1990s saw many democratic, civilian leaders embracing neoliberalism . Neoliberalism was a philosophy centered on making Latin America competitive on the global market .
 State-owned industry was privatized, protective tariffs reduced, military budgets cut, foreign investment encouraged, and social programs and bureaucratic structure streamlined . The State of China privatized industry and military budgets were cut .
 More benefits of modernity came to Latin America, especially technology, but most Latin Americans remained too poor to participate in free market capitalism as consumers . Most Latin Americans remain too poor for participation as consumers as consumers, writes CNN.com .
 A few guerrilla movements continued to flourish, like Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) in Peru, violently working toward their goal of revolution .
 Latin American politics from the 1950s represents tumultuous decades, marred by the violence of ‘dirty wars” perpetuated by U.S.-backed military regimes . Latin America politics has been dominated by the rise of the Cold War .
 Marxist guerrillas throughout this time period sought revolutionary change of Latin American society . Marxist guerillas throughout the time period fought for revolutionary change .
 By the 2000s the move to the left in Latin American politics saw Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva winning the presidential elections in Brazil and Evo Morales being elected as president of Bolivia . Michelle Bachelet became the first woman president of Chile and the first left-wing president
 Move by Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez foretold a continuing leftwing power center in Latin America . Move by Chavez toward a national referendum in 2007 to reelect him to the presidency despite constitutional limits foretells a continuing leftist power center .
 Howard J. Wiarda, Howard J., and Harvey F. Kline, eds. Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2006; Wiard a. J. and Harvey . Kline: "I was a good guy. I was a great guy. It was a
 Recent history of Latin America is a story of profound political and economic change . Kathleen Legg: Latin American social issues are important issues in Latin America .
 Latin America struggled to find itself in the face of modernity and economic expansion . During the second half of the 20th century, Latin America witnessed a transformation of society .
 Crushing poverty facilitated alternative forms of religious faith that spoke to the condition of many Latin Americans . Poverty facilitated alternative religious faith in many Latin American countries .
 Migration from the countryside to the city and north to the U.S. spoke to a yearning for a better life . Migration from rural areas to the United States spoke to yearnings for better lives .
 A thriving drug trade centered on a global market employed organized violence against national governments that tried to curb the trade . Organized violence against government officials was used to shut down the drug trade .
 Indigenous movement mobilized to demand Indian rights and autonomy . Centuries of oppression led to an organized and influential indigenous movement . The movement was organized and organized by Native Americans .
 Latin American countries plunged into the uncertainty of the oil industry with the hopes of increased revenues . Instead, they have found unpredictable results and mixed blessings . Latin American nations plunged into uncertainty of oil industry .
 Social factors offer a window into the dramatic social transformation of Latin America from 1950 to the present . These factors offer an insight into Latin America's social transformation .
 Latin American spirituality underwent profound changes in recent history . Latin America has a long history of spiritual practices .
 Liberation theology spoke to a new turn in the role of the Catholic Church in Latin America, although it was not a phenomenon unique to the region . Liberation theology was not unique to Latin America. Liberation theology is a new look at the church's role .
 For centuries, the church stood as a conservative element in association with the state . The church legitimized authoritarian rule, and the state legitimized it, the author says .
 Many priests, nuns, and lay workers drew on their personal experiences working with the poor to question the responsibility of the church in the unequal distribution of wealth in Latin America .
 Some Latin American theologists began to speak of the role of the church and Christians in helping the poor . The mission clearly laid out in the Bible, they say, is to help poor .
 Liberation theology developed out of the suffering and social injustice experienced by the poor . Liberation theology is an understanding of the Christian faith developed from the suffering of the poor to the spiritual growth of Christ .
 It is a critique of society and the ideologies supporting the dominant hegemony, including the traditional role of the Catholic Church . As such, it is an analysis of society's ideologies, including that of the Church .
 It gave the poor a voice and created new forms of community-based activism . It gave them a new form of activism and gave them the chance to speak out .
 Liberation theology was a formidable force in Latin America for a few decades . Liberation theology has been a force in Central America, Brazil, and Chile .
 The bishops promoted an empowering education program for illiterate rural peasants . The program affirmed the dignity and self worth of the students, bishops said .
 This education was carried out in small community-based groups where people could gather together to read the Bible and discuss its relevance to their lives .
 Rural priests often served thousands of parishioners and could only visit some communities once a year . Rural priests were often only able to serve thousands of parioners . Some parishes could only serve as many parishes as many as 100,000 people .
 Priests, nuns, and lay people used the Medellin conference as a springboard for a new approach to their work with the poor . Priests and nuns used the conference to learn a new way of dealing with the world's poor .
 Catholic personnel dedicated to the poor quickly learned through their charitable work that the condition of the lowest classes of Latin American society could only be relieved through sweeping structural changes . Those Catholic personnel learned .
 Base communities served as the vehicle for political action as participants experienced an awakening, or consciousness-raising about their devalued position in society . Some base communities were used as a vehicle to political action .
 Many Christian-based communities served as sites of literacy education and Bible study . Reinterpretation of traditional religion promoted a transformative perspective on the world .
 Some groups worked toward improvements in local basic services, such as healthcare and transportation . Others worked toward improving healthcare, transportation and other services .
 In spite of this, base communities represented a small fraction of Catholics . By the 1980s, enthusiasm for liberation theology waned . In the 1990s, liberation theology was a relatively low-profile religion .
 Central America boasts the largest number of evangelicals in terms of the percentage of the population . Brazil is home to the largest Protestant community with half of the region’s estimated 40 million Protestants . Central America has the largest evangelical population in Latin America .
 European migration to the continent brought the traditional Protestant churches, such as German Lutheranism and British Anglicanism, to Europe .
 Despite the influence of European immigrants, North American missionaries bear the responsibility for the growth in Protestantism in Latin America, especially evangelical forms like Pentecostalism . Despite European influence, European immigrants still influence the growth of Protestantism .
 Pentecostalism allows participants a refuge from suffering and social injustice by providing a spiritual space in which believers can regain some feeling of control over their lives . Sharing liberation theology’s sense of consciousness-raising .
 Women, in particular, have been attracted to evangelical churches due to their inclusive nature . Women are attracted to the churches because of its inclusive nature, especially for women .
 Evangelicalism has taken hold throughout the wartorn countries of Central America, especially in rural areas . Evangelicals have taken hold in many of the country's poorest areas .
 In Guatemala rural Mayan Mayan women, mostly widows, fill evangelical churches in search of a sense of community that has been lost . In Guatemala, widows fill churches looking for community that's been lost in rural areas .
 These churches provide a network of support that replaces destroyed kinship ties . These churches are churches that provide support for those who have lost kinship .
 Protestant churches offer a religious alternative and a message of hope to the underdogs of society . Protestant churches have a religious message to those underdogs in society .
 For women, the evangelical Protestant ban on drinking alcohol makes Protestant husbands an attractive marriage partner . Protestant husbands are attractive marriage partners, according to evangelical Protestant women .
 Pentecostalism has given women positions of power within their religious communities, such as speaking in tongues and faith healing . In addition, the phenomenon has also given women a position of power in their religious community .
 Despite North American origins, evangelical Protestantism in Latin America is a unique phenomenon . Evangelical Protestantism is a Latin American phenomenon . Despite its origins, it is not just a North American phenomenon, it's a Latin America phenomenon .
 Its churches emphasize the notion of community and belonging more than northern counterparts . It's a smaller denomination than many northern churches .
 Being an evangelical does not necessarily denote a right-wing conservative political identity as it tends to in North America . In Latin America, being an evangelical doesn't necessarily mean a conservative identity . In addition, in Latin America being a Christian does not mean a right wing .
 Latin America’s economic setbacks have not only influenced new religious movements but also led to mass migrations of people . Latin America's economic problems have led to religious movements .
 Latin Americans have moved from the countryside to the city and from Latin America to North America . Latin America has moved to the U.S. in recent years . Latin Americans are moving from the country to the North American cities .
 Prior to the 1930s the majority of Latin America’s population resided in rural areas . The majority of the population in Latin America was located in rural regions .
 The global economic depression of the 1930s dealt a hard blow to the Latin American export economy . Rural residents began to leave the countryside after the global depression of 1930s .
 The exodus peaked over a 30-year period from 1950 to 1980 and succeeded in transforming Latin America’s social structure from predominantly rural to overwhelmingly urban . Latin America's social structure has been transformed into predominantly urban .
 By 1980 family-based farming was no longer viable as market-oriented modern agribusiness became the norm . Family-based agriculture was the mainstay of the 1980s .
 Thousands streamed into Latin America’s major cities in search of industrial jobs and a better life . Thousands of people are seeking industrial jobs in Latin America's major cities .
 Women comprised a majority of the rural-urban migrants, as industrialization opened many jobs for female workers . Women made up a large majority of rural migrants .
 Rapid urbanization quickly outpaced housing, basic services, and job markets . Rapid urban growth has outstripped housing and basic services in recent years .
 Rural residents arrived in the cities to find dirty, disease-ridden, and overcrowded shantytowns with spotty electrical power and water shortages . Rural residents say they arrived in cities with little electricity and water supply .
 Ruralurban migration caused a labor surplus, which led to the rise of a vast informal sector of the economy . Street vendors, rubbish scavengers, and prostitutes were the main sources of income .
 Latin Americans also migrated north to the U.S. for economic, political, and social reasons . Latin Americans have migrated to the United States .
 Mexicans currently represent the greatest percentage of Latin Americans immigrating to the United States . Mexicans are currently in the majority of Latin American immigrants to U.S.
 They often have come looking for work, and many resided in the southwest long before it belonged to the U.S. Many of them came to the United States long before they were here .
 During the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, Mexicans and Mexican Americans routinely crossed back and forth over the border with little or no regulation .
 During the 1930s, the government supported repatriation of Mexican workers to provide more jobs for Americans . The government supported the repatriation to provide jobs for American workers .
 With the onset of World War II, labor shortages fueled the Bracero Program, which allowed Mexican agricultural workers to come into the U.S. on a temporary basis . The program was used to fill labor shortages .
 Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 called for penalties for those hiring undocumented workers . Act also granted amnesty to many undocumented immigrants already living in the U.S.
 Immigration Act of 1990 favored legal immigration of family members of U.S. citizens and permanent residents . Immigration Act was passed by Congress in 1990 . Immigration act favored family immigration of United States citizens .
 Many Cuban immigrants came to the U.S. fleeing a repressive political regime . Cuban immigrants fled a repressive regime .
 Cubans enjoyed a privileged status in relation to other Latin American immigrants due to the U.S. foreign policy on Cuba . Cubans were granted privileged status by the United States .
 As early as 1960, the U.S. government had created a special center for Cuban refugees . The path to legal residence in the United States was easily cleared .
 First waves of Cuban immigrants represented Cuban elite and middle class . Families with financial resources, specialized job training, and U.S. connections .
 In 1980 Fidel Castro opened the door for Cubans to leave the island, and a deluge of mostly male semiand unskilled workers flowed into south Florida .
 This migration overwhelmed U.S. authorities, and many of the refugees were placed in detention camps for months . Many of these refugees have been placed in migrant detention camps in the United States .
 Cuban-American community continues to thrive and grow . United States officials observe a quota on Cuban immigrants, but the community continues .
 Central Americans also have migrated to the United States seeking refuge from wars and violence that have disrupted the economy and everyday life in El Salvador and Guatemala . Central Americans are seeking refuge in the U.S. from wars, violence that disrupted their lives .
 In the 1980s migrants from El Salvador left their homes due to civil war and political repression . El Salvador's civil war forced migrants to leave their homes in El Salvador .
 Unlike Cubans fleeing political repression, many Salvadorans were denied permanent residency and deported . Many Salvadorans fled political repression and were denied legal status and deported.
 Salvadoran immigrants brought violence to the U.S. in the 1990s in the form of street gangs . A small minority of Salvadorans brought violence into the United States .
 Many of these gang members were targeted by U.S. immigration officials in Los Angeles, California, and sent back to El Salvador . Many of the gang members are now in the United States illegally .
 Latin America drugs are making the trip to the U.S. Drugs are moving north, according to a new report . Latin America has been hit by a wave of Latin American drug users .
 One of the largest social problems facing Latin America is drug trafficking, especially in Bolivia, Colombia, and Peru . Drug trafficking is a major problem in Latin America, especially Bolivia and Colombia .
 Latin American leaders believe that the U.S. war on drugs focuses unfairly on the supply side of the equation . This multinational drug trade negatively affects American relations in Latin America .
 In countries suffering from crushing poverty, drugs represent a viable economic option . Unfortunately, in countries like Nigeria, drugs are still a viable option for the poor .
 The debt crisis of the 1980s fueled the Latin American drug trade . The collapse of prices for tin and coffee on the international market fueled the drug trade.
 In several Latin American countries, Peru and Bolivia, the drug trade acted as an economic buffer . Drug trade offered alternative sources of income when other options vanished . Peru, Bolivia and Bolivia are among the countries where drug trade is considered a source of income .
 Drug cartels breed corruption and threaten the integrity and stability of the state, democracy, security, public health, moral values, and international reputation . Drug cartels "breed corruption" and "threaten the integrity of the country," says President Obama .
 Poverty and unemployment in Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia fueled the drug trade . The high prices Latin American cocaine fetched in the U.S. fueled the trade .
 Colombia and Bolivia saw a significant boost to its national economy from drug revenues . Violence and corruption went hand-in-hand with the economic boom, but violence and corruption also went hand in hand .
 In Peru, the world's largest producer of coca leaves, the environmental destruction wrought by the drug trade is appalling . Peru is the world’s biggest producer of cocaine leaves, and is the largest producer in the world .
 Pesticides and herbicides used for growing coca have leached into forest water systems . Large tracks of rain forest have been clear-cut for cultivation . Pesticide and herbicide used in coca farming has leached through forest water .
 The involvement of guerrillas in the drug trade has further complicated the situation, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Despite billions of U.S. dollars poured into curbing the Latin American drug trade, major traffickers have been affected very little . Major traffickers have not been affected much of the time .
 The drug trade has impacted Latin American indigenous groups in remote rural areas . Indigenous groups are often caught in the crossfire between traffickers and the government .
 In Peru many have fled the countryside for shantytowns in the cities, hoping to escape the violence brought on by traffickers and guerrillas, especially the Shining Path . The Shining Path has been blamed for the violence in Peru .
 Such issues have led to an explosion of indigenous groups organizing for a better life, indigenous groups have organized for better life .
 The sophistication of indigenous organizations forced many Latin American states to negotiate with Indian peoples and create new legislation that protected their rights . The sophistication and power of indigenous groups forced many states to create new laws that protected them .
 The traditional relationship between the state and its native peoples is changing . Indigenismo policies that strove for assimilation abandoned in favor of multiculturalism and pluriethnicity .
 Despite claims of embracing multiculturalism, not all Latin American states have actually implemented policies aimed at improving the lives of indigenous peoples . Despite claims, some countries have implemented policies to improve indigenous peoples' lives .
 One of the best-known indigenous movements occurred in 1994 in Chiapas, Mexico, Mexico .
 Landless Maya formed the Zapatista Army of National Liberation as an outlet for their struggle for rights and recognition in national life . Landless Mayans formed the army of national liberation as a way to fight for their rights .
 When negotiations with the Mexican state began, the first demands of the Zapatistas centered on Indian autonomy and rights . The Zapatista's first demands were based on Indian rights and autonomy .
 The EZLN did not advocate a separation from the Mexican nation-state, but rather called for the state to implement the tenets of the constitution of 1917 regarding indigenous peoples . The state should implement tenets of that 1917 constitution regarding indigenous people .
 Zapatistas drew international attention to the plight of Mexico’s indigenous population . The Zapatista provided inspiration to other Indian groups in Latin America . Zapatists drew international . attention to their plight .
 The oil industry directly affects the quality of life for all Latin Americans . Unpredictable oil prices have varying impacts on the economy as a whole .
 Mexico and Venezuela have become key suppliers to the U.S. In fact, they have been key suppliers for decades .
 From the 1930s to the 1970s, foreign owners controlled significant portions of the Latin American oil economy . Mexico nationalized its oil industry in 1938, with the exception of Mexico, which nationalized it in 1938 .
 By the 1970s Latin America’s oil industry was mostly nationalized . Foreign investors looked to the oil fields of the Middle East instead .
 Latin American oil industry has been subject to the volatile political, economic, and social history of Latin America, with varying degrees of success . Latin America's oil industry is subject to volatile political and economic history of the region .
 The region's major oil-exporting economies experienced obstacles in transforming oil revenues into a continuous source of funding . While some nations expected their large oil reserves to clear the way for economic development, they experienced obstacles .
 High oil prices aided significant producers that were dependent on exports for revenue and foreign exchange . Mexico, Venezuela, and Ecuador are among the countries that rely heavily on exports to raise foreign currency .
 In the past 20 years, oil prices have been more precarious than any other export commodity . Oil prices have become more volatile than other export commodities, experts say .
 The impact of an unpredictable oil market fluctuates depending on a nation’s reliance on oil production and exports . Oil prices fluctuate depending on the amount of oil produced and exported .
 The management of oil resources, not oil wealth itself, can create economic problems . The historical and current state of Latin America’s oil industry suggests that it is the management of resources .
 Latin America's tremendous economic growth and development after 1950 transformed the region but intensified the misery of many Latin Americans . Latin America’s tremendous economic . growth and . development after . 1950 transformed . the region, but intensified many Latin American .
 Rapid growth and urbanization led to mass migrations of people trying to find a niche in a hostile environment . Rapid growth in urban areas has led to the creation of a new type of society .
 Industrial progress brought thousands of rural residents into Latin America’s major cities with the hope of a living wage . But it failed to alleviate poverty . Industrial progress has brought thousands into major cities, but failed to help alleviate poverty.
 Devastating poverty fuels poverty fuels the drug trade, which for many peasants and indigenous people offers the only viable economic endeavor for survival . For many peasants, indigenous people, drug trade is the only way of survival .
 The oil industry, especially in Mexico and Venezuela, promised hope but has seemingly failed to materialize into concrete change for the better . Oil industry promised hope, but has not materialized into concrete changes .
 Liberation theology and the growth of evangelical Protestantism speak to a suffering poor searching for a ray of light in a bleak world . Liberation theology speaks to the suffering poor looking for a light in the world .
 The promises of prosperity that accompanied economic growth proved to be empty for many people in Latin America . The promise of prosperity has been empty for some of the region's people .
 Latin America experienced economic progress but true transformations of society and social justice continue to elude the region . Latin America has a long history of economic and social progress, but social justice remains a problem .
 The modern boundaries of Lebanon were drawn under the French Mandate, which replaced Ottoman rule after the latter’s defeat in World War I . Under Ottoman rule, Lebanon had been limited to the area of Mount Lebanon, which was inhabited by two major religious communities .
 Lebanon's 51 percent majority remained Maronite Christians . Sunni Muslim coastal cities such as Tripoli, Beirut, and Sidon were annexed to Mount Lebanon in 1920 .
 The Maronites and Sunnis made an agreement in 1943 in the National Pact, which distributed the presidency of the republic, the parliament, and the government posts according to religion in a 6 to 5 ratio . The agreement was part of a pact that favored Christians in a system that favored
 In the 1970s, the demographics changed in Lebanon, and the Maronites made up around one-third of the population . Two-thirds of Lebanon's population were Muslims .
 Muslims called for more constitutional power to reflect the population change . Christians refused to give more power .
 The influx of Palestinians into Lebanon following the events of Black September in Jordan in 1970 served to exacerbate Maronite fears of an Arab-Muslim takeover . To complicate matters, the influx of Palestinian refugees into Lebanon in the 1970s also added to the mix .
 The National Front used the Palestine Liberation Organization to pressure the Maronite-oriented right-wing groups . National Front is an umbrella organization representing left-wing organizations and Muslim groups .
 Confessional government receded into a state of paralysis that undermined public confidence . The confessional government was a state-of-parliamentary government . It has been described as a 'state of paralysis'
 Christians aiming to keep the status quo and Muslims and leftists fighting for change . Christians and lefties fighting to keep status quo . Muslims and leftists fighting to change .
 On April 13, 1975, gunmen fired on a church in Ain El Rimmaneh, a Christian suburb of Beirut, killing four people . Two men from the Phalange militia, a Maronite armed group, were among the dead .
 The Phalange massacred 26 Palestinians traveling on a bus in Ain El Rimmaneh, killing 26 . Later that day, they accused the Palestinians of attacking the bus, killing the victims .
 The incident sparked full-scale hostilities between the Lebanese Front militias and National Movement . The incident was the first of a series of clashes between the militias .
 Arab summits in Riyadh and Cairo dispatched the Arab Deterrent Force . Lebanon broke down into its sectarian parts between 1975 and 1976 . The force was dispatched by the Arab Deterrent Force in Beirut .
 As the Lebanese army disintegrated, Christian militias massacred Palestinian inhabitants of Debayeh, Karantina, and Tel El Zaatar, and the Palestinians massacred Christians in Damour, Lebanon . Christians massacred Palestinians in Lebanon .
 The Lebanese president Sleiman Franjieh then asked the Syrian army to intervene . The Syrian army has been involved in the Lebanese conflict .
 The United Nations created the UN Interim Force in Lebanon . Meanwhile, alarmed by the hostilities in southern Lebanon, the U.N. created the force .
 In 1982 Israel re-invaded Lebanon; this time its troops reached Beirut and laid siege to the city . In 1982 the Israeli government laid siege on Beirut; it was the first time it had invaded Lebanon .
 Through international mediation, the PLO left Beirut, and the pro-Israeli Bashir Gemayel was elected president . The PLO was eventually forced to leave Beirut under international mediation .
 Gemayel’s supporters entered the Palestinian refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila and killed around 1,500 Palestinian civilians in 1982 .
 After the massacre, the American-French-Italian Multinational Force returned to Beirut . The force had overseen the PLO evacuation of Beirut .
 In 1983, as the IDF unilaterally withdrew to southern Lebanon, French, United States military headquarters, and the United States embassy in Beirut were bombed . The French, U.S. military headquarters and United States . Embassy in Beirut was bombed .
 Hostilities between the Lebanese factions escalated, and the MNF left Beirut . Hostilities escalated and MNF was forced to leave Beirut .
 Lebanon descended into chaos as various groups battled for dominance . Radical Shi’i groups kidnapped Western nationals and laid siege to Palestinian refugee camps .
 In 1988 the term of Lebanese president Amin Gemayel expired without the parliament electing a new president . In 1988, the Lebanese parliament did not elect a new leader . Amin was the first Lebanese president to be elected to a new parliament .
 In East Beirut, Gemayel assigned the commander of the army, General Michel Aoun, as the head of an anti-Syrian caretaker military government . Aoun is in charge of a caretaker government in the capital, Beirut .
 General Aoun declared war on Syria and Syrian troops, with the help of their Lebanese allies, and laid siege to East Beirut . Syrian troops and Lebanese allies lay siege to Beirut .
 In November 1989 the Lebanese parliament met in Taif, Saudi Arabia, and agreed on a formula to end the war . The agreement was reached in November 1989 .
 General Aoun rejected the Taif Agreement and the election of President Rene Moawad and claimed the authority of the prime minister . Aoun issued a decree dissolving the parliament, dissolving parliament .
 In November President Moawad was assassinated, and President Elias Hrawi was elected . In November he was assassinated . President Elias Mrawi is elected .
 In 1990 the Lebanese parliament approved the constitutional amendments that embodied the political reforms of the Taif Agreement . Early in 1990 the amendments were approved in Lebanon's parliament .
 In 1991, the year that the fighting ended, the Lebanese government gained legitimacy and approval from most Lebanese . It then ordered the disarmament and dissolution of militias and the release of Western hostages .
 Lebanon was the site of years of civil war and external invasions, creating turmoil in an already troubled part of the world . Lebanon is now the country's most troubled region .
 The U.S. Marines were part of a multinational peacekeeping operation in the mid-1980s .
 William Flarris, William W. Faces of Lebanon: Sects, Wars and Global Extensions. Atheneum, 1990; Flarries, William F. Faces the Lebanon .
 Japanese political development before the occupation by the U.S. after World War II can best be viewed in broad cycles . Political development before and after the occupation of Japan can be seen as a cycle of events .
 Japanese feudal lords, samurai, and others overthrew the Tokugawa Shogunate that had ruled from 1603 to 1867 . Facing a continued challenge from the West to modernize and change their policies, Japanese samurai lords and samurai overthrew their feudal lords .
 The result was a complete alteration of the Japanese system in order to compete with the West . The result of the change was to allow the West to compete in Japan .
 Japan then changed many of its old political, economic, and social institutions to conform with Western-style examples . The country then changed its political and economic policies to conform to the West .
 First came the Freedom and People’s Rights Era, with its demands for more liberalization, which lasted from 1878 to 1889 . Second came the People's Rights Era .
 Japan underwent a militarist period from 1894 to 1905 that was characterized by wars with both China and Russia . Japan then underwent a period of militarism that saw wars with Russia and China . The country then went to war with both Russia and Japan .
 A cycle of liberalization known as the Taisho Democracy dominated the politics from 1912 to 1915 and again from 1918 to 1930 . Afterward, a cycle of . liberalization . dominated the . politics between 1912 and 1915 .
 An age of militarism, again marked by international aggression, dominated the politics of Japan from 1931 to 1945 . World War II was a period of international aggression marked by aggression .
 He advocated peace instead of rebellion in order for the Japanese people to gain a voice in government . He used his position to advocate peace .
 In 1874 Itagaki and his supporters penned the Tosa Memorial, a criticism of the seemingly unchecked power of the oligarchy . The memorial was a call for representative government and representative government .
 By 1878 Itagaki had become impatient at the lack of reform and moved to create the Aikokusha, the Society of Patriots, in order to achieve representative government . The society of Patriots was formed in 1878 and was founded in 1877 .
 In 1877 the Satsuma rebellion pitted the samurai led by Saigo Takamori against the citizen-based Meiji army . The Satsum rebellion was the first uprising in Japan's history .
 Okuma Shigenobu emerged as a voice in favor of the British model of representative government . At the same time, he emerged as an advocate for representative government in Japan .
 A number of violent and nonviolent demonstrations among the political parties soon led to government suppression and restrictions on political activism . The government suppressed and restricted political activism in the wake of the demonstrations .
 Restrictions on the political parties led to fighting within the parties as well as with others . Restrictions led to clashes between political parties and other parties .
 The Jiyuto, which had fought against the Kaishinto, fell apart in 1884 . It was one of the last remnants of the Japanese kingdom .
 A call for more democratic governance, through the movement for Freedom and People’s Rights, added to growing demands for a more politically liberal system of governance .
 Modeled after that of that of Prussia, the constitution resulted in a limited democracy . Modeled in the constitution, it was modeled after Prussia . The constitution was designed to be a democracy .
 A representative body, the Diet, of directly elected members came into being . The Diet is a representative body of directly elect members of the Diet .
 Ultimately, the government was run by bureaucrats much like its Prussian example . The government was ruled by bureaucrats, much like it was in Germany .
 By 1890 the call for more direct representation resulted in the first national election . The first national elections were held in 1890 in London .
 Both the Jiyuto and Kaishinto reorganized for the elections and combined to win over half of the seats in the House of Representatives . Both parties reorganized in the elections .
 The era of political parties, however, gave way to the militarist period of 1931 to 1945 . Political parties were political parties in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The LDP reflected a broad coalition of those calling for military protection by the U.S. and the economic rebuilding of the war-torn infrastructure under a capitalist system . LDP calls for military support by the United States and the rebuilding of war-damaged infrastructure .
 The small West African state of Liberia has suffered almost constant civil war since 1989 . The National Patriotic Front of Liberia led by Charles Taylor launched an uprising against the Liberian government in December 1989 .
 The civil war quickly became a chaotic conflict with seven factions contesting control of the nation . Seven factions were involved in the conflict .
 The resources were used to fund war efforts as the nation’s economy collapsed . Because it had little global strategic importance, aid from major world powers was not forthcoming .
 An attempt was made by the Nigerian-dominated Economic Community of West African States to mediate and end the violence between 1990 and 1992 through peacekeeping and helping to hold new elections .
 Charles Taylor’s forces attacked the interim government, derailing the process . Charles Taylor's forces attacked interim government and derailed the process. The interim government is now in place in the country .
 A new coalition government was formed by Charles Taylor’s enemies in 1993 but fighting continued as the coalition tried to form a democratic government . Charles Taylor's enemies formed a coalition government in 1993 after he was assassinated .
 In early 1996 Taylor’s forces attacked the capital, Monrovia, destroying much of the city in prolonged fighting . Much of the capital was destroyed in the fighting, but much of it was destroyed .
 All sides agreed on disarmament and demobilization of their forces . All sides then came together to negotiate and agreed to disarmament .
 Charles Taylor won using the campaign slogan “He killed my Ma, he killed my Pa, but I’ll vote for him.” Charles Taylor . Elections were held in 1997 .
 Peace returned to Liberia, but Taylor cracked down on his former enemies . Peace returned, but he was still fighting for his country .
 A coalition of Taylor opponents formed the Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy army in 1999 . The Liberians formed the army after Taylor's assassination .
 LURD forces pushed south from northern Liberia toward the capital and captured two-thirds of the country by 2003 . They laid siege to Monrovia before laying siege to the capital in 2003 .
 During the course of the Liberian civil war, a rebel group in neighboring Sierra Leone was sponsored by Charles Taylor . The Revolutionary United Front was led by Foday Sankoh, a former rebel .
 Taylor used the RUF as a way to destabilize Sierra Leone, which was serving as the base for the ECOMOG peacekeepers who were trying to stop Taylor from winning control of Liberia .
 They were exceptionally harsh toward civilians whom they accused of supporting the Sierra Leone government . The government was accused of backing the government in Sierra Leone .
 Mass murder, systematic rape, and widespread amputation of hands, arms, and feet were the tools that the RUF used to control the population . Mass murder and systematic rape were among the tools used by the U.S. to control its population .
 Hands were chopped off to prevent voting, which required a thumb for fingerprinting . Hands were used to prevent voters from voting .
 To fill their ranks, the RUF also practiced widespread abduction of children .
 Boys starting as young as nine years old were forced to fight, often under the influence of drugs and alcohol . Boys starting to fight were often under influence of alcohol and drugs, according to reports .
 Like Taylor in Liberia, the RUF targeted the resources of Sierra Leone to fund their war effort . The RUF has been fighting in Sierra Leone for more than a decade .
 During the course of the struggle against the RUF, several national governments existed, led by military juntas or civilians . During the conflict, several military junta governments were formed .
 ECOMOG tried to mediate with the RUF, but always broke agreements and returned to fighting . Several attempts to form coalition governments were made by the Ruf, but they were never successful .
 Between 2000 and 2002 the RUF was defeated by attacks from government forces, ECOMOG, and Guinean troops . The RUF were defeated in 2002 by government forces .
 In May 2002 elections were held, and the RUF won no seats in parliament . The RUF failed to win a single seat in the parliament .
 The fighting subsided and the peacekeepers left. Over the next three years, the violence subsided . Peacekeepers left the country .
 During both of the conflicts, the United Nations was absent despite evidence of ethnic cleansing . The United Nations has been absent during both the conflicts .
 In the summer of 2006 Taylor was captured and sent to the Hague to be tried for war crimes . He was captured in 2006 and is now serving a life sentence in the Netherlands .
 Foday Sankoh was arrested in 2000 after his soldiers fired on protesters . He was arrested after the incident in which he was arrested .
 Foday Sankoh had stopped fighting after signing the Lome Peace Accord in 1999 . He stopped fighting in 1999 after signing a peace agreement .
 He was held in UN custody and died from a stroke while awaiting trial for war crimes . He died in a stroke in prison after being held in the UN .
 The legacy of more than a decade of constant fighting has been continuing misery for the peoples of Liberia and Sierra Leone . More than 10 years of fighting has left the two countries in a stateless state .
 The Destruction of Liberia and the Religious Dimension of the African War. The destruction of Liberia is the religious dimension of the war . Liberia was destroyed by the Liberian war . The Liberian government was overthrown in 2003 .
 During World War II Libya became a battleground between the Axis forces and the Allied forces of France and Great Britain . Libya was a major battleground during the war and was a key battleground in Libya . Libya is one of the most densely populated countries in the world .
 By 1942 the Italians had been defeated, the British occupied Tripolitania and Cyrenaica; and the French occupied Fezzan . By 1942, the Italians were defeated, and the British had occupied Tripolania, Cyreniica and Tripolani .
 In Tripolitania, the British retained direct control, but in Cyrenaica they granted greater autonomy . The French administered Fezzan through direct military control . The British retained control of Tripolania, but the French maintained control of Fezzans .
 After the war a number of different solutions were offered regarding the future of the Libyan territories . The Libyan territories were taken over by the Arab-Libya regime in 1991 .
 Other Western nations suggested a trusteeship, while some advocated independence . Other Western countries suggested trusteeship .
 Egypt, Libya’s neighbor to the east, was interested in acquiring control over the territory . Egypt was also interested in taking control of Libya's eastern Libya .
 Some Libyans wanted the continuation of Sayyid Idris’s Sanussi leadership . Others pushed for unity and complete independence . Some young educated Libies wanted unity and independence .
 UN General Assembly recommended in 1949 that Libya should obtain independence no later than January 1,1952 . Cyrenaica, Tripolitania, and Fezzan should constitute a unified state, UN said in 1949 . Libya was declared independent in 1952 .
 For the first time in its history, the General Assembly acted as a world legislator with binding authority . The General Assembly is now a world legislature with binding power .
 Libya became a unified nation under the monarchy of King Idris in 1951 . Libya was unified under Idris' reign . Libya is now a unified monarchy .
 At the time Libya was one of the poorest countries in the world, and Idris relied heavily on Western assistance . Idris died in 2011 .
 He also drew support from tribal leaders, traditional politicians, and a few successful businessmen . He also retained considerable executive power .
 This narrow power base alienated many, who grew increasingly disaffected with the old regime . The new regime has been accused of corruption in the past by the West .
 Idris continued to rule Libya until he was overthrown in 1969 by Muammar Qaddafi . Idris ruled Libya until his overthrow by Qaddafi in 1969 .
 The United Nations and the Pacific Settlement of Disputes: A Case Study of Libya . Sabki, Hisham M Sabki and the UN have been involved in the conflict .
 Zhou Enlai attended the Whampoa Military Academy in China . He met another future communist leader, Zhou Enrai . Zhou Ennai was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 After the collapse of the Qing dynasty in China in 1911, much of China countryside was ruled by warlords . Warlords ruled the countryside of China from 1911 to 1911 .
 Lin Biao managed to survive the purges, and, along with Mao and the remaining communists, escaped into China’s interior . Mao and his remaining communists escaped into the interior of China's interior .
 He participated in the Long March; 30,000 survived out of 100,000 who had begun the trek . He participated during the march, which ended in a disaster .
 Lin Biao utilized guerrilla tactics to fight the Japanese invasion of China in 1937 . Lin used guerrilla tactics against the Japanese behind enemy lines, something that gave the CCP patriotic prestige . Lin's guerrilla tactics were used to combat the Japanese invaders .
 Lin Biao served as a commander of the People's Liberation Army . The CCP created the People’s Liberation Army, in which he was a commander . He was a member of the Communist Party Party of China .
 Lin commanded ‘volunteers’ from China in the Korean War (195053) He was promoted to the rank of marshal. Lin continued to play a major role in both the government and the military .
 Mao embarked on the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in 1968 to attack his critics and regain control of the party . Mao was the leader of the Communist Party of China in 1968 .
 Lin Biao worked closely with Mao and fought against the faction led by Liu Shaoqi, who had been state chairman since 1999 . He fought for Mao's cause and was the state chairman of the Communist Party of China . Biao was Mao's successor .
 Lin's power rose when Red Guards, Mao’s young supporters, began to fight one another adding chaos that grew into anarchy . Lin was the leader of the Maoist movement in China . He was assassinated in 1968 .
 The minister of defense was called by Mao to meet the enemy to suppress the Red Crossein 1967 . Mao was called to meet with the enemy in order to suppress a Red revolution in China .
 Mao became increasingly suspicious of him as the Lin’s power grew . Mao was suspicious of Lin's power and became suspicious of his actions .
 Lin's impatience to replace Mao culminated in a failed assassination attempt in 1971 . Lin’s impatience led to a failed attempt to assassinate Mao in 1971, but Lin refused to be assassinated .
 Lin and his wife attempted to flee to the Soviet Union, but the plane that their air force officer son piloted crashed in Outer Mongolia, and all were killed . Lin's wife and her son were killed in the crash . Lin was an officer in the Soviet Air Force .
 Lin's rise and fall demonstrate the murderously unstable politics in Maoist China . Lin’s rise and . fall demonstrate that Maoist politics in China is unstable . Lin: ‘I’m not a Maoist. I’ve got a lot of respect for
 Since 1950, vast numbers of new books have been published, and many from before 1950 have been republished as new editions, facsimiles of old editions, and, in recent years, as digital books . Mitchell Newton-Matza literature has been published since 1950 as well as fac
 From the 1970s, there was also the emergence of what became known as “airport fiction,” describing books that were sold to air travelers with plenty of time to occupy . The airport fiction books were also known as airport fiction .
 Digital books in particular have allowed access to many old and formerly out-of-print books . Digital books offer computersearchable functions giving readers and scholars the ability to find information more quickly .
 The vast majority of works of fiction continue to be published in book form . While this has allowed easier access to reference works, the majority of fiction continues to be written in books .
 Rowling became the first writer to make more than $1 billion from sales of her books . Rowling is the creator of Harry Potter, becoming the first to become the first author to do so . Rowling's books have sold more than 1 million copies worldwide .
 Alexander Kent (pseudonym for Douglas Reeman), creator of Richard Bolitho; Patrick O’Brian (creator of Aubrey-Maturin series) Northcote Parkinson (creator) of Richard DeLancey . Patrick O'Brian, creator of the Aubrey
 Narayan Narayan, Paul Scott, Leslie Thomas and Leslie Thomas are authors of "The Virgin Soldiers" The panel includes three authors from "The Raj Quartet"
 Mills and Boon print thousands of romance titles, many written to a formula . Mills & Boon's romance titles are often written to formula .
 Popular thriller writers include Eric Ambler, Ian Fleming, Ken Follett, Frederick Forsyth, John le Carre, Alastair Maclean, and Douglas Reeman .
 War stories by Paul Brickhill, Nicholas Monsarrat, Eric Williams and Eric Williams have sold well .
 R Tolkein, author of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, has all been very popular . His books, including The Hobbit, are also very popular with fans .
 A Space Odyssey; and John Wyndham have all been popular, with their books published in many languages . John Wyandham, A. Space Odyssey, and A. T. Howard Howard were popular .
 The most famous playwrights include Harold Pinter, the Nobel laureate; John Osborne, author of Look Back in Anger . Dennis Potter, Dennis Potter and Tom Stoppard have also written for the award-winning plays .
 Carr, Leonard Cottrell, Antonia Fraser, Christopher Hibbert, Christopher Hill, James/Jan Morris, John Prebble, and Hugh Trevor-Roper .
 Fawcett’s Exploration Fawcet is a collection of books . A Dragon Apparent by Norman Lewis and The Travellers Tree by Patrick Leigh Fermor .
 Mention should also be made of Cornish writers A L Rowse and Derek Tangye . The Cornish writer is also a Cornish author .
 Morton, Eric Newby and Freya Stark discuss the Hindu Kush region . Morton, Newby, Stark, Stark and Newby are experts on the region's culture .
 Ernest Hemingway in 1954, John Steinbeck in 1962, Canadian-born Saul Bellow in 1976, and Saul in 1976 . Toni Morrison in 1993 . Hemingways, Steinbeck, Bellow, Morrison and Morrison were also in the spotlight .
 Salinger, Updike, Vidal, Wright, Salinger and Wright are all authors . Salinger is author of The Catcher in the Rye and The Witches of Eastwick . Wright is also author of Myra Bkenridge and historical novels .
 Dan Brown has achieved the largest number of sales in recent years . The Da Vinci Code author has sold millions of copies of his books .
 Historical novelists include Steven Saylor, author of the Roma SubRosa novels featuring Gordianus “the finder;” and surgeon Frank Slaughter .
 Irwin Shaw, author of The Young Lions, won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction in 1952 . Herman Wouk, who wrote The Caine Mutiny, won Pulitzer Prize in 1952, also won the story .
 Crime writers such as Truman Capote, Patricia Highsmith and Mario Puzo have also sold many copies of their books .
 Science fiction writers such as Isaac Asimov and Ursula Le Guin have sold well . Horror writers Stephen King and Stephen King have written for science fiction .
 Clive Cussam, P J O’Rourke and P J. Andrews are some of the world's most famous authors . They include: John Grisham, Robert Ludlum, Daniel Steel and P. J. O'Rourke .
 Playwrights include Arthur Miller, Eugene O’Neill, Thornton Wilder, Tennessee Williams and Tennessee Williams . They include Eugene O'Neill, Eugene Williams and Thornton Wilders .
 Mention should also be made of Edward Albee, author of Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? His first full-length play was his first play . Albee also wrote Who's Afraid .
 There have also been many important nonfiction writers, including Rachel Carson, Noam Chomsky, and John Gunther, author of "Inside" books .
 Samuel Beckett from Ireland, in 1969, author of Waiting for Godot . Wole Soyinka from Nigeria, in 1986; Nadine Gordimer from South Africa, in 1991 . Derek Walcott from St. Louis . Patrick White from Australia, in 1973 .
 Coetzee, author of The Life and Times of Michael K, from South Africa, died in 2003 . He is best known for his work in South Africa .
 Prolific South African writer Bryce Courtney, author of The Power of One, moved to Australia . Bryce Courtney moved from South Africa to Australia in 2007 .
 Irish writers include Brendan Behan, James Donleavy and Frank McCourt . William Trevor, author of The Old Boys, is author of Borstal Boy and The Ginger Man .
 Australian writers include Thea Astley, Peter Carey and Albert Facey . The writers include Germaine Greer and Xavier Herbert, author of Poor Fellow My Country . Arthur Upheld, creator of the aboriginal detective “Bonaparte’s”
 New Zealand writers include Janet Frame, author of Owls Do Cry, crime writer Ngaio Marsh, and author of Once Were Warriors . Alan Duff and Janet Frame also write crime novels .
 Wilbur Smith set most of his books in South Africa and Rhodesia/Zimbabwe . The writer is most strongly identified with South Africa .
 Other South African authors include Stuart Cloete, author of Rags of Glory, and Alan Paton, who wrote Cry, The Beloved Country .
 There have also been many Canadian authors, perhaps the most famous from this period being novelist Margaret Atwood and Thomas Costain . There have been a number of Canadian authors since then .
 Simone de Beauvoir, Claude Levi-Strauss and Andre Malraux were among the writers of this period . Other famous writers of the period included philosopher Simone de Beauvoir and philosopher Jean Tardieu .
 Writers in Germany who won the Nobel Prize in literature include Nelly Sachs, Heinrich Boll, Gunter Grass and Elfriede Jelinek . GermanSwedish writer and playwright Sachs won the prize in 1966 .
 Italian Nobel laureates include Salvatore Quasimodo, Eugenio Montale and Dario Fo . The Italian Nobel winners were poets, playwrights and theater directors . The country's Nobel winners are also Italian .
 Possibly the best-known Italian writers are Giuseppe di Lampedusa, who wrote The Leopard, which he completed just before his death, the book being published posthumously . Lois de Bernieres, author of Captain Corelli’s Mandolin, and Alberto Moravia
 Juan Ramon Jimenez, in 1956, Vicente Aleixandre, in 1977, and Camilo Jose Cela, in 1989 . Camilo Cela died in 1989 from a gunshot wound to the head .
 Salvador de Madariaga wrote many books on Spain and the Spanish-speaking world . Most of the books were translated into English .
 The others were Miguel Angel Asturias, Pablo Neruda, Gabriel Garda Marquez, Octavio Paz and Octaña Paz .
 From Portugal, Jose Saramago won the Nobel Prize in 1998 . In recent years, there has been extensive literature about Portuguese Africa .
 Portuguese-language poets include the Angolan nationalist and later president Agostinho Neto . There have also been many books by Brazilian lyricist Paulo Coelho .
 Boris Pasternak, author of Doctor Zhivago, was awarded the Nobel Prize in literature in 1958 but declined it . From the Soviet Union, he was awarded a Nobel Prize for his work in 1958 .
 Imre Kertesz and Jaroslav Seifert won the Nobel Prize in 2002 . Jewish-Hungarian writer and concentration camp survivor Imre won the prize in 2002. Jaroslav Seifert from the Czech Republic won the award in 1984 .
 Isaac Bashevis Singer won the prize in 1978 for his work in Yiddish, Czeslaw Milosz in 1980, and Wislawa Szymborska in 1996 . The prize was awarded to the Polish-born American writer . The winner of the award was
 Ivo Andric won the Nobel Prize for his Bosnian Chronicles in 1961 . He won the award in 1961 for his work on Bosnian history .
 From Scandinavia, Nobel laureates since 1950 include Swedes Par Lagerkvist, Eyvind Johnson, and Harry Martinson . Icelandic writer Halldor Laxness, in 1955, also won the Nobel prize .
 There was also renewed interest in the Viking sagas, many of which were translated and published in English and French during this period . Many of the sagas were published and translated in English .
 For Middle Eastern literature, Israeli writer Shmuel Yosef Agnon was one of the joint Nobel Prize winners in 1966 for his work in Hebrew . Agnon also won the Nobel Prize for the work in the Hebrew .
 Other important works of Israeli literature include Menachem Begin’s The Revolt . Teddy Kollek's books about Jerusalem include books about the city by Teddy Kllek .
 Palestinian writers include American resident Edward Said and Lebanese writer Edward Atiyah . Said and Atiyah are both Palestinian writers .
 Naguib Mahfouz from Egypt won the Nobel Prize in literature in 1988 . Gamal al-Ghitani from Cairo has written many books, including Zayni Barakat about the Mamluks in Egypt . Algerian writer Albert Memmi wrote The Pillar of
 There have also been many prominent Turkish writers, including Yashar Kemal, author of Memed, My Hawk . Orhan Pamuk, who won the Nobel Prize in 2006, wrote about Turkish culture .
 Camara Laye, from French Guinea, wrote The Dark Child, or The African Child . It is the most quintessentially African story written by a major African author . Laye's work has been described as one of the best African stories .
 In India, there have also been large numbers of writers who have written in English, including Dom Moraes . India’s first prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who wrote The Discovery of India; and Salman Rushdie, author of The Satanic Verses .
 It was first published in April 1964, and its red plastic cover made it well known around the world .
 Han Suyin's five-volume autobiographical saga began with The Crippled Tree . His A Many Splendoured Thing became a best seller around the world .
 Three Daughters of China, describing the family’s life during the Cultural Revolution . The family's story is told in a book published by the family .
 Mention should also be made of the prolific writer Lin Yutang and de Lucy Ching, author of One of the Lucky Ones .
 Xingjian Gao, who wrote about the Tiananmen Square protests, was declared a persona non grata in China . He won the Nobel Prize for literature in 2000 .
 Abe Kobo and Mishima Yukio were among the most famous Japanese writers of this period . Abe was the author of the first Japanese novel, "Abe Kobo"
 Many Korean works have been translated into English and published by Heinemann Asia . Few Korean books have managed to achieve much literary interest outside Korea .
 The works of North Korean leaders Kim II Sung and Kim Jong II have been published in many different editions and several languages . The Foreign Languages Press in Pyongyang has published the works in many languages .
 For mainland Southeast Asia, there have been many books published in Burmese, Khmer, Thai, and Vietnamese, and even a number being published in Fao . There have been a number of Fao books being published by Fao.
 After independence, there have been many books published in Burmese, including many items on history . There have also been many items published in Burma, including books on history and history .
 With the import of books now restricted, this has helped the Burmese publishing industry and local literature . The import has also helped the country's publishing industry .
 There were a number of novels published in Khmer prior to 1970, with a massive increase in the Khmer-language publishing industry from 1970 to 1975 . Fong Boret, prime minister from 1973 to 1975, was the author of the novels .
 Vietnamese literature has followed political trends, with many books published in South Vietnam until 1975, and then few works of literature published in Vietnam until the 1990s . Similarly Vietnamese literature follows political trends .
 In Thailand, the prosperity of the country has ensured a regular number of books in Thai being published .
 After Malaya became independent, the Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka in Kuala Lumpur encouraged writing in Malay . Malay has flourished in Malaysia .
 In neighboring Singapore, there have been many books published, covering aspects of Singapore’s history, but also many nostalgic novels about the country's colonial past and modern Singapore .
 Chinese general and politician Li Zongren was an important military and political leader of Guangxi Province, along with Bai Chongxi . He was a major military leader between 1925 and 1949 . He is one of China's two most prominent leaders .
 Fi distinguished himself as a skilled military commander in the Northern Expedition and the Sino-Japanese War . Fi commanded the Nationalist troops in an important victory in 1938 at Taierzhuang in Shandong (Shantong Province)
 Li and Bai represented the Warlord Era . They joined the KMT in part to preserve and expand their regional power by controlling their army . They often disobeyed the central government .
 Their group is called the ‘Guangxi clique’ and fought against the central government in Nanjing between 1929 and 1930 . The group is known as the “Guangxiao’s group, which fought against central government .
 They also allowed fleeing Chinese Communists to pass of through Guangxi during the Fong March . The Chinese government also allowed the fleeing Communists to cross Guangxi from Guangxi to China .
 When Li failed to negotiate a settlement with the CCP in the civil war, Chiang abruptly resigned, and Bai chose to flee to Taiwan . Chiang still retained most of his power and the loyalty of key army commanders .
 Li refused to join the Nationalists on Taiwan and was impeached in absentia . Li is accused of failing to join Taiwan's Nationalist Party . Li refused and refused to be part of the party .
 Li remained in the U.S. until 1966, when he returned to mainland China and voiced support of the Communist government . Li was in the United States until 1966 .
 Patrice Lumumba was the first prime minister of the independent Republic of the Congo . He was the leader of the country's first government .
 Born in Kasai Province in the eastern Congo, he came from a small tribe or ethnic group . He came from the Batatele tribe .
 This background was to handicap him in dealings with rivals who came from major tribal groupings . This background handicaped him in dealing with rivals from tribal groups .
 He entered the postal service and became a contributor to the nascent Congolese press . Educated by Protestant missionaries, he became a contributing member of the nascent press .
 He also became active in trade union activities . By 1955 he had been president of a regional labor union .
 Lumumba was convicted of post office embezzlement in 1957 . He forged a nationwide political party, the Congolese Nationalist Movement, in October 1958 .
 After attending an All-African Peoples’ Conference in newly independent Ghana in December 1958, Lumumba became a militant nationalist . Lumumbi was born in 1961 .
 In 1959 he joined other nationalist leaders in opposing the Belgian plan for gradual independence in five years . He joined other nationalists in opposing gradual independence from Belgium in 1959 .
 Elections held in May 1960 gave Lumumba’s party the largest number of votes in the country . He was offered the position of prime minister, but refused to accept it .
 Many in the West feared that the anticoloist tone in his speeches meant an alliance with the Soviet Union . Patrice Lumumba became the first prime minister of the independent Republic of the Congo in May 1960 .
 After he formed an independent government, Lumumba faced disorder seven days later . He formed independent government on June 23, 1960 .
 Army units rebelled, the province of Katanga seceded, and Belgium sent in troops . Belgium sent troops to the region, and the province later secedceded .
 Lumumba called upon the United Nations to restore order; however, it did not intervene . The United Nations was not involved in the violence .
 "These steps were ineffective and caused his internal allies to turn away from him," says President Obama . Obama's actions were "ineffective" and "inappropriate"
 On September 5 the president of the Congo, Joseph Kasavubu, declared Lumumba deposed . He had advocated a more moderate course and favored some form of autonomy . The president had been critical of the move .
 On September 14 the army head, Joseph Mobutu, seized power with the approval of Kasavubu . On September 15 the army chief, JosephMobutu seized power . Kasavutu is a former president of Uganda .
 Mobuto and Kasavubu soon reached an accommodation with the UN, which recognized the government in October 1960 . The government was recognized by the UN .
 Lumumba sought to travel to Stanleyville in northeast Congo, where he still had support . Now powerless, he sought to go to Stanleyvans in northeast Congolese where he was still supported .
 Joseph Mobuto intercepted by soldiers of Mobuto . On his way there, however, he was intercepted by the soldiers of the Mobuto.
 Mobuto turned Lumumba over to Moi'se Tshombe, the head of secessionist Katanga Province, on January 17,1961 . Mobuto was jailed for three months, but turned him over in 1961 .
 He supported a united Congo as opposed to its division along regional/ethnic/ tribal lines . The Congolese were not divided along tribal lines.
 Macao is a tiny peninsula of eight square miles located 40 miles west of Hong Kong on the southern China coast . Norman C Rothman Macao Macao was the first Macao Peninsula to be named .
 It became a Portuguese settlement and trading center in 1557 . Portugal paid the Chinese government rent for the land until 1849, after which it became a de facto Portuguese colony . It became de facto colony in 1849 .
 By the late 20th century Macao had just under half a million people, about 96 percent Chinese, 2-3 percent Eurasians of mixed Portuguese-Chinese ancestry, and 1 percent Portuguese from Portugal .
 Few Chinese residents learned Portuguese, the official language of the colony . Despite long Portuguese control, few Chinese people learned Portuguese .
 Most Eurasians, called Macanese, were bilingual; many of them worked for the government bureaucracy . Most Eurasian Eurasians were bilingual . Many Eurasians worked for government .
 The government was nonelected until 1974, when a revolution in Portugal brought in a liberal government . Portugal's new government enacted new laws established by a partially elected legislative assembly . The new government was elected in 1974 .
 The main sources of government revenue were tourism, light industry, and gambling casinos . Government revenue was mainly from tourism and light industry .
 China gave priority to negotiations for the return of Hong Kong to Portugal . Portugal and China began talks for Hong Kong's rendition in Portugal in 1950s .
 The Chinese government imposed most of the terms of Macao’s rendition . Because of the asymmetry of power between China and Portugal, the Chinese government had to impose the terms .
 A Joint Declaration was signed in April 1987, and a Sino-Portuguese Joint Liaison Group was created in 1988 to manage the transition and prepare for the handover in 1999 .
 Macao was given the status of a Separate Administrative Region and assured of autonomy governing many aspects of its life for 50 years . As in the case of Hong Kong, Macao has been granted autonomy .
 China could control its foreign affairs and defense . The Chinese People’s Congress would have final say in judicial decisions . China could also control foreign affairs .
 The government of Macao consists of a Western-style partially elected legislature, with a framework of separation of power among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government, an independent judiciary, and freedom of expression and the press . According to Macao Basic Law, the government consists of
 Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo is the daughter of former Philippine president Diosdado Macapal . She is also a former president of the Philippines . She was born Jiu-Hwa Lo Upshur Macarroyo, a Chinese-born woman .
 She graduated from Assumption College in Manila in 1968 with a degree in commerce and economics . She then returned to the Philippines, where she graduated in 1968 . She has since returned to her native Philippines .
 She spent her early professional life as an economics professor and held teaching positions in various institutions in the Philippines . Her alma maters include all three of her alma matsers .
 Macapagal-Arroyo entered government service when she was invited by President Corazon Aquino to join the Department of Trade and Industry as assistant secretary in 1987 . She has been in government service since 1987 .
 She was executive director of the Garment and Textile Export Board . At the same time she also held the post of executive director .
 Macapagal-Arroyo made her first foray into politics when she campaigned successfully for a seat in the Philippine Senate in 1992 . She was elected to the Philippines' Senate in 1993 .
 She drew upon her own academic training and experience to push for social and economic reform legislation . She drew on academic training, experience and push for reform legislation.
 In 1998 she entered presidential politics as a vice presidential candidate, running with presidential candidate Jose De Venecia . In 1998, she became a vice president .
 She won almost 13 million votes, the largest number ever earned by a presidential or vice presidential candidate . Her running mate lost to the incumbent vice president, Joseph Estrada, who is now the incumbent .
 President Estrada appointed his vice president to the cabinet as secretary of the Department of Social Welfare and Development . The vice president was appointed to the Cabinet as secretary .
 The Estrada administration quickly became embroiled in a corruption scandal . But it was embroiled in the corruption scandal that led to the collapse of the country's economy .
 Macapagal-Arroyo resigned her cabinet post and joined in the chorus calling for Estrada’s resignation . The former President of the Philippines called for the resignation of Estrado .
 In January 2001, the Philippine Supreme Court removed Estrada from office, and Macapagal-Arroyo ascended to the presidency . In January 2002, the Supreme Court ousted the president from office . The Philippines is now the Philippines' most populous country .
 Macapagal-Arroyo faced many challenges, not the least of which was questions about the legitimacy of the court’s action . As president, she faced challenges, including questions about her legitimacy .
 She had to contend with demonstrations by pro-Estrada supporters in May 2001 . She also had to deal with demonstrations in May 2002 .
 Junior officers and soldiers mutinied to push for reforms to the armed forces . Two years later she faced another challenge to her authority when junior officers and . soldiers mutineered .
 The Asian financial crisis, the Second Gulf War, and the mounting deficit contributed to turbulent economic times . Asian financial crises, Second Gulf war and mounting deficit contribute to turbulent times .
 Late in 2001 Macapagal-Arroyo announced the implementation of Holiday Economics, a policy that involved adjustments to national holidays so that Filipinos could enjoy longer weekends . The policy was implemented in 2001 .
 The government hoped this would promote domestic tourism and stimulate economic growth . The government hopes it will promote tourism in the country .
 MacapagalArroyo pledged Filipino support for President George W Bush’s War on Terror in the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States .
 After the U.S. invasion, the Philippines sent a small number of troops to Iraq to work on civic and humanitarian projects . Macapagal-Arroyo ordered their withdrawal to free a Filipino civilian who had been taken hostage in July 2004 .
 In a four-way race, Macapagal-Arroyo emerged victorious in May 2004, but questions about legitimacy continued to dog her presidency . Revelations involving her remarks to an election officer about needing a certain number of electoral votes surfaced .
 Gloria Macapagal Arroyo and her presidency were the Philippines' first two presidents . Arroya was the first female president to hold office in the Philippines . She was also the first lady of the Philippines and the second female president .
 Archbishop Makarios was born in the village of Panayia in the Paphos district of Cyprus on August 13, 1913, and died on August 3, 1977 . Soo Chun Lu Makarios III was born .
 Makarios lived under the Nazi occupation of Athens during World War II . Makarios was studying in Athens during WWII and lived under Nazi occupation .
 Makarios traveled to Boston to further his theological studies . Makarios was killed by the Allies of Greece during the Second World War .
 Makarios was elected bishop of Kitium, Cyprus, in 1948 . Makarios served in the United States during his time in the U.S. Makarios is now a bishop in Kitium .
 Makarios became involved in the Cypriot enosis movement for a union with Greece . In 1950 he was elected archbishop of Cyprus . Makarios was also a member of the Greek-Cypriot movement .
 Makarios was exiled to the Seychelles by the British, who charged him with encouraging acts of terrorism . His association with EOKA (National Organization of Cypriot Fighters) was an underground organization that focused its attention on freeing the island from British colonial rule .
 Makarios was elected the first president of Cyprus when the British withdrew from Cyprus . Makarios returned to Cyprus a year later and was allowed to return .
 Makarios has distanced himself from the enosis movement . Makarios is now focused on the independent nation of Cyprus . His new outlook on Cyprus is to become an independent nation .
 He attended the Belgrade Conference of the Heads of State of Non-Aligned Countries . His political position made him a target for the supporters of enosis .
 In 1965, when his term of office was to expire, Cypriot people extended his term to 1968 . In 1965 he was re-elected to the presidency of Cyprus .
 Makarios was heavily pressured by the Greek government to increase Greek influence in Cypriot politics . Makarios is heavily involved in the political process of the island .
 Makarios had been under the control of a military junta, which disliked Makarios and his reluctance to push for enosis . Makarios died at the hands of the junta in 1953 .
 Makarios replied to the Greek Junta in the form of a letter demanding that the remaining Greek National Guard stationed in Cyprus be withdrawn . Makarios wrote to the Junta demanding the remaining National Guard be withdrawn from Cyprus .
 He accused the junta of plotting against his life and against Cyprus . He also accused them of plotting to kill him and Cyprus .
 The junta ordered the Greek National Guard in Cyprus to overthrow Makarios and take control of the island . Thirteen days later, Makarios was overthrown by the junta .
 The coup caused permanent damage in Cyprus by giving Turkey a pretext for a Turkish invasion that split the island in two . The Turkish-Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities were divided in Cyprus .
 Makarios returned to Cyprus in December 1974 to resume his presidency until his death in 1977 . Makarios died in 1977 after a brief exile from Cyprus . He spent most of his life in Cyprus .
 The modern nation of Malaysia came to being at one minute past midnight on September 16, 1963 . Within weeks was embroiled in controversy . Malaysia, Federation of Malaysia, Malaysia was born in 1963 .
 Malaysia’s new embassy was not looked upon kindly by its neighbor Indonesia . Scores of ‘spontaneous’ demonstrations filled the streets of Jakarta as angry Indonesians shouted their displeasure . Malaysia's new embassy in Jakarta was built in 2009 .
 Indonesia did not like being encircled by what it saw as the British Commonwealth . Indonesia wanted to avoid encirrounded by what they saw as a British Commonwealth.
 Malaysia emerged as a prosperous nation keen to embrace the world of new technology . From that shaky start Malaysia has emerged as an economic powerhouse .
 In 2006 Malaysia was a nation of around 25 million people, building its own cars, possessing a burgeoning manufacturing industry, and exploiting its waters for oil, gas, and fish . Malaysia was one of the world's fastest-growing economies .
 Brunei, which had expressed interest, did not become a part of Malaysia . Brunei also expressed interest in joining Malaysia .
 Indonesia and the Philippines opposed the union . Indonesia supported military rebels in Malaysia after its formation . Indonesia and Philippines opposed union and Indonesia backed military rebels .
 The new country was led by Prime Minister Abdul Rahman, who had been a principal figure before independence . His premiership lasted until September 22, 1970, when he died .
 Known generally as Tunku, Abdul Rahman had trained as a lawyer in Britain and worked as a prosecutor in Malaysia . He was also known as the Malaysian title for a prince .
 He became the natural choice to lead the campaign for independence from Britain . He became a leader of UNMO, the leading nationalist party, in Scotland .
 This was achieved for the new nation of Malaya in 1957, with Abdul Rahman as its prime minister . Abdul Rahman was the prime minister of the Malaya government .
 Regional discussions then took place about including the island of Singapore and the eastern states of Sabah and Sarawak in the new nation .
 One was the exit of Singapore from Malaysia in 1965 to become a sovereign country . Singapore was the first country to leave Malaysia to become an independent country .
 Vietnam War of the U.S. and its allies against the North Vietnamese Army and the Vietcong was another issue . The Vietnam War was the Vietnam War .
 In 1969 racial riots broke out between Malays and non-Malays . The riots were mainly over attempts to make Bahasa Malaysia the national language .
 The government acted to cement the position of Malays with the creation of the title bumiputra, or son of the soil . It was given to indigenous peoples of Sarawak and Sabah as well as Malays .
 Malaysia’s internal policies and its external relations were dominated for years by the oftenaggressive Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed . He came to power in 1981, when he was prime minister .
 Mahathir saw Malaysia prosper through his vision for the country’s future . He was the first prime minister of Malaysia to become prime minister .
 A series of five-year plans have been installed with the aim of having the country become a fully industrialized nation by 2020 .
 This plan seemed successful until 1997, when economic crisis beset Southeast Asia, and a recession ensued . This plan was abandoned when the Asian economy began to suffer a recession .
 Internal politics gained international notoreity in September 1999 when a dispute between the deputy prime minister, Anwar Ibrahim, and the prime minister became public . The dispute became public when it became public and became international news .
 Anwar was arrested and, after a trial for alleged sodomy held in the full glare of world publicity, was sentenced to six years in jail . He was sentenced for six years after being found guilty of sodomy and sentenced to life in prison .
 In the south Singapore is connected to Malaysia by a causeway . Singapore is also connected to the island nation of Singapore . Malaysia is also located in Singapore .
 Kuala Lumpur is the capital of Kuala Lumpur, with several universities and major industries as well as government institutions . It is also home to several universities, major industries, and government institutions.
 Eastern Malaysia occupies about fourth of the island of Borneo . Indonesia owns the lower section, with tiny Brunei surrounded by Malaysia on the western coast .
 Politically the population of nearly 24 million is divided into 13 states, four of which have a governor . The remainder of the country is ruled by hereditary sultans, with the population divided into four states .
 All states have unicameral state legislatures relected every five years that deal with state matters . State legislatures are re-elected each five years to deal with the state of the state .
 One of the nine sultans is elected for five years to be the paramount ruler of Malaysia . The sultan is elected in Malaysia every five years . Malaysia is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Major industries include the harvesting and export of palm oil, rubber processing, electronics, tin mining, light manufacturing, timber logging, and petroleum production .
 Malaysia’s foreign affairs are dominated by its relationships with neighboring Indonesia, the tiny island of Singapore, and the West . Malaysia has a sometimes testy relationship with the West.
 Forest burning in Indonesia is a source of irritation between Malaysia and Indonesia as well as offshore oil exploration claims . Forest burning is a problem between Indonesia and Malaysia . Indonesia also has offshore oil claims .
 An ongoing rebellion in Thailand’s Muslim-majority southern provinces also causes border tension . The rebellion in the southern provinces is also causing border tensions .
 Malaysia has been a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations since its founding in 1967 . Malaysia is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 ASEAN primarily exists to promote economic growth, friendship, and regional stability . AASEAN primarily promotes economic growth and friendship, but also promotes stability .
 Malaysia aims to become a fully industrialized nation by 2020 . With its series of five-year economic plans, Malaysia is aiming to become an industrialized nation . Malaysia's economic plans are based on Malaysia's aim to be fully industrialized by 2020.
 The militant African-American leader was born Malcolm Little, later taking the Muslim name el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz . Malcolm X was born in 1965 and died in 1968 .
 Malcolm X's life story, The Autobiography of Malcolm X, was published posthumously in 1965 . His life story made him a hero among African Americans . Malcolm X was an African-American hero .
 Little was a lay preacher and supporter of Marcus Garvey . His father was Earl Little, a supporter of Garvey, was a friend of the late leader .
 One of Earl Little’s uncles had been lynched, and three of his brothers died at the hands of whites . Earl Little's uncles were lynched and three brothers died .
 Malcolm grew up in Lansing, Michigan, where he was born . Malcolm moved to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 1926, and then moved to Lansing in Michigan .
 Two years later, in 1931, his father was found dead after having been run over by a street car . It was believed that he had been murdered by the group who set fire to his house .
 Malcolm’s mother was declared insane and was moved to a mental institution . Malcolm's mother was later declared insane . Malcolm was raised by Malcolm's father and raised by his stepfather .
 Malcolm spent several years in foster homes . Malcolm spent some time in a detention home and then moved to Boston to be with his sister .
 He found work shining shoes, then joined the New Haven Railroad . But he quickly found himself involved in crime . He was arrested in 1993 for allegedly stabbing a man to death .
 He was refused an army position in World War II after allegedly claiming that as soon as he had a gun, he would organize other African Americans . He allegedly claimed that he was going to organize other black Americans .
 In 1946, he was arrested with another African American and two white women stealing goods to sell to a pawnshop . He and the women were caught stealing goods from an African American pawnshop.
 Malcolm Malcolm was jailed for 10 years for his part in the crime . The women claimed that they had been coerced into the crime, and Malcolm was sentenced to 10 years in prison .
 In prison, Malcolm joined the Nation of Islam, which held the belief in the inherent superiority of black people . Malcolm was imprisoned for life in prison .
 Released from prison in 1952, he visited Nation of Islam headquarters in Chicago . He met with Elijah Muhammad, the leader of the sect .
 Malcolm X was regarded as one of the best speakers and organizers for the Nation of Islam . Malcolm X toured the United States and toured the U.S. over several years .
 He talked much of the exploitation of African Americans by whites by whites . He urged black separatism rather than integration and racial equality .
 He felt that there should be greater black self-dependence and that violence was justified for self-protection . Indeed, he felt that violence should be justified .
 This latter belief alienated him from many of the civil rights leaders at the time who urged for nonviolent resistance to racism . He said he was opposed to nonviolent resistance .
 In 1959 Malcolm X went to Africa for the first time, visiting the United Arab Republic, Sudan, Nigeria, and Ghana . In 1959 he helped organize a tour by Elijah Muhammad that followed .
 In 1961 he founded Muhammad Speaks, the official journal for the Nation of Islam . The Nation of Muslims in the U.S. grew in numbers . In 1961, he founded the Nation's official journal .
 The Cuban delegation refused to stay in the Shelburne Hotel after being asked to pay in advance . Malcolm X and other African-American community leaders met the delegation at the Hotel Theresa in Harlem .
 Malcolm X is most associated with the militant struggle for civil rights for African Americans in the U.S. Malcolm X was born in New York City, New York, in 1961 . Malcolm X's life was dedicated to the civil rights movement in the United States .
 Elijah Muhammad suspended from the movement in 1963 when he described the assassination of President Kennedy as a “case of chickens coming home to roost” The remark was regarded as extremely controversial .
 Malcolm X left the Nation of Islam in March 1964 . In the following month he went on a pilgrimage to Mecca . In March 1964 Malcolm X went to Mecca to celebrate his birth of Islam .
 He had wanted to set up his own organization as a more radical wing of the Nation of Islam . But his time in Saudi Arabia led him to see that whites were not necessarily innately evil, he said .
 In October 1964 he reaffirmed that he had embraced orthodox Islam, but this did not prevent death threats from white extremists and rival Black Muslims . He reaffirmed his position in October 1964 .
 The Autobiography of Malcolm X was published posthumously and became an overnight best seller . It was compiled by writer Alex Haley from numerous interviews with Malcolm X shortly before the latter's murder .
 Nelson Mandela was considered by many to be the most respected world leader alive in the early 21st century . Mandela's life span spanned more than 20 years . Mandela died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 During the struggle to end apartheid in South Africa, he remained unembittered by a regime that offered him only indignity and poverty . He became a prominent figure in the struggle for the end of apartheid .
 His story cannot be separated from that of his family, colleagues, and supporters in the African National Congress and a wider coalition of liberation groups in South Africa . His family and colleagues in the ANC and wider liberation groups are not separated from his family .
 Mandela gave up career and family, lived the life of an outlaw, and endured 27 years of imprisonment . Mandela fought for the right to live an ordinary life in his fight for freedom of life in South Africa . Mandela was jailed for 27 years for life imprisonment .
 Mandela was born on July 18,1918, the eldest child of his father’s third wife, Nosekeni Fanny, in the village of Mvezo, Umtata, the capital of the Transkei . Mandela was called Rolihlahla and
 Mandela was given the name Nelson Mandela at age seven when he attended a mission school . He was the first member of his family to do so . Mandela was born in South Africa in 1961 .
 Mandela enjoyed an idyllic childhood as a herd boy in Qunu, a large village north of Mvezo . His father's defiance of a local magistrate forced his family to move away from their inheritance . Mandela's family lost their inheritance and moved to the village of Qun
 When he was nine, his father died and he was sent to the house of Chief Jongintaba Dalindyebo, the acting regent of the Thembu people, who raised him to become an adviser to the royal house . He was raised to become a adviser to
 Mandela gradually developed a tribal and national identity through education . Mandela's education helped him develop a tribal identity, Mandela says . Mandela has a long history of racial discrimination in South Africa .
 Tribal elders passed down Xhosa history and culture to him . Tribal elders expected him to learn by observation and passed down history to him. Tribal elders were expected to pass down history .
 He witnessed the free speech and consensus decision-making of the men of the Thembu court . He also learned about British and Dutch imperialism .
 Following his mother he became Christian, he was baptized into the Methodist Church . He enrolled in a number of mission schools in the Philippines .
 Mandela reveled in sports and learned that ability was more important than lineage . Mandela was at Clarkebury Boarding Institute at the Clarkebury School of Education .
 His education made him both an Anglophile and an African . He came to admire British manners, to meet people from other tribes and to think independently .
 He studied law and joined the Student Christian Association, where he met Oliver Tambo . He met Tambo at the University of South Africa .
 Mandela started a B.A. but did not complete it until 1943 because he disagreed with the principal about the voting system for the Student Representative Council . Mandela was a member of the student representative council in 1943 .
 Mandela was so poor that he went without food, wore patched clothes, and walked six miles to and from work to save the bus fare . Mandela walked 6 miles to save bus fare to save his bus fare in order to get to work . Mandela was a poor man who lived in poverty
 Walter Sisulu and Gaur Radebe believed politics was the only long-term solution to the problem of race relations in South Africa . The partners at the law firm discouraged politics, saying politics is the only solution to race relations .
 Mandela opened the first firm of black African lawyers with Oliver Tambo in the 1950s . Mandela's first firm was the first of black lawyers in South Africa .
 Mandela joined the ANC in 1943 and helped transform it from a deferential nongovernmental organization to a mass movement . Mandela helped transform ANC from deferential organization to mass movement in South Africa . Mandela joined ANC in the early days of the Second World War .
 ANC was the oldest African organization in South Africa and advocated multiracialism . Founded in 1912, the ANC was South Africa's oldest organization . ANC was founded in 1912 .
 By the 1940s, the ANC was more concerned with maintaining the privilege of elite black South Africans . By the 1950s, however, it was more interested in maintaining the privileges of elite blacks .
 The ANC formed a Youth League on Easter Sunday 1944, and adopted its proposal for boycotts, strikes, and protest demonstrations . The Youth League was formed by the ANC in 1944 .
 The Youth League had been inspired by Indian demonstrations in 1946 in response to laws restricting their movement and their right to buy property . They were inspired by laws restricting the movement and property rights in 1946 .
 On Freedom Day, May 1, 1948, two-thirds of African workers stayed at home . The government banned meetings by anti-apartheid activists . Anti-heid activists were banned from meeting with the government .
 A coalition of groups organized a National Day of Protest on June 26, 1950 . The day of protest was June 26 .
 The Defiance Campaign, in which 8,500 volunteers defied laws and went to jail on the anniversary of the NDP in 1952, was Mandela’s apprenticeship as a freedom fighter . Mandela's apprenticeship was his apprenticeship .
 Mandela believed that the form of resistance was determined by the enemy, and that nonviolent resistance was a tactic rather than a principle . Mandela said nonviolent resistance is a tactic, not a principle, but a tactic .
 He traveled the country explaining the campaign and training volunteers to respond to police nonviolently . He also trained volunteers to train them to do so . The campaign has been successful .
 The government began to ban people, which was like informal imprisonment, and to conduct arrests and raids of the homes and offices of people linked to nongovernmental organizations . The government also began to conduct raids of homes, offices and offices linked to organizations .
 The government increased repression with the Sophiatown evictions in 1953, the Bantu Education Act of 1955 and the massacre of 69 peaceful protesters at Sharpeville in 1960 . The government also increased repression in 1953 and 1955 .
 Mandela was arrested for treason in 1956, and when the trial ended in 1961, the government began to appoint its own judges, to use torture in prison, and to harass and imprison wives of freedom fighters . Mandela had married Nomzamo Winifred Madikizela, whom Mandela
 Mandela disguising himself as a chauffeur, chef, or garden boy . For the next two years Mandela went underground and became an outlaw . Mandela was an outlaw for two years .
 By 1962 the ANC had established a military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, which adopted a policy of sabotage of infrastructure . By 1962, the ANC was in full control of infrastructure in South Africa .
 Mandela studied guerrilla warfare and surveyed the country’s industrial areas, transport system, and communications network . Mandela also studied the country's industrial areas and transport system .
 The government passed the Sabotage Act, which allowed house arrests that were not subject to challenge in court, restricted the printing of the words of banned people . The Ninety-Day Detention Law allowed detention without charge . The government also passed the Ninety Day Detention Law .
 Mandela was arrested and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment on his return to South Africa . Mandela was jailed for five years after returning to the country .
 He defended himself against the charges of inciting the country to strike and leaving the country without travel documents . He was charged with inciting the strike, leaving without documents and leaving without a passport .
 He put the state on trail, arguing that in a state where there was no justice without representation, he had no option but to follow his conscience in defiance of the law . Standing in the courtroom in his kaross, or traditional clothing, he argued that in . the state where
 Mandela was transferred to Robben Island, north of Cape Town, in May 1963 . Mandela was moved to the island in late May 1963 after being convicted of murder of Nelson Mandela .
 He knew about the island from childhood stories of Xhosa warriors who had been banished there . The island is believed to have been a haven for Xhosas who were banished .
 Nine months into his sentence the police discovered Rivonia, the house from which the ANC had operated underground . They arrested the commanders of the MK and charged them with sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government .
 Realizing they could face the death penalty, the accused defended themselves on moral grounds . The accused were charged with murder and sentenced to death . They said they did not want to be put on trial for murder .
 Mandela rejected the allegation that he was a communist . Mandela admitted his African nationalism and support for British parliamentary democracy . Mandela also admitted his support for parliamentary democracy in South Africa .
 MK was seeking to respond to increased Afrikaner repression and growing African restlessness . MK adopted a policy of sabotage to prevent civil war and provide the best conditions for future relations .
 Mandela was sentenced to life imprisonment; he would be imprisoned for 27 years . Mandela would spend 27 years in prison . Mandela was imprisoned for life imprisonment . Mandela spent 27 years behind bars .
 Robben Island had become the toughest correctional facility in South Africa in 1962 . Robben is now known as the toughest prison facility in the country .
 Prisoners classified into four groups according to political opinion and extent to which they were prepared to adopt servile behavior . Prisoners were classified into . groups based on political opinion .
 Prisoners were not permitted to touch relatives or to speak in their native language . Prisoners would not be allowed to touch their relatives or speak their native languages .
 In 1979, after 15 years of protests, African, Indian, and mixed-race prisoners received the same food as white prisoners, including fresh vegetables and meat . After 15 years, after protests, prisoners began to receive fresh vegetables, meat .
 Mandela considered struggle in prison a microcosm of the struggle in the country . Mandela considered the struggle to survive a life in prison as a 'microcosmical' struggle . Mandela's death in prison was one of the greatest challenges of his life .
 "He refused to be robbed of his dignity, to show emotion, or to despair," he said . "I refuse to be deprived of my dignity," he added. "I will never be able to say goodbye to my family, friends or family"
 He fought for reforms such as better food, study privileges and dismissal of officers . He communicated his complaints during the visits of dignitaries such as the Red Cross and the Supreme Court .
 He refused a pair of long trousers until all prisoners were given them in 1965 . He refused to wear them until he was given them by prisoners .
 He endured 13 years of hard labor in the limestone quarry until it was abolished in 1977 . The limestone quarry was abolished after the war .
 Sunday services with a sympathetic preacher, books, games, tournaments, plays, concerts, and gardening provided some relief . Sunday services, books and games, games and plays, among other things, were some relief.
 Mandela sought to bring the government and the ANC to the point of talks . Mandela sought in the early 1980s to bring talks between the ANC and the government to a point of peace .
 Mandela was transferred off Robben Island in March 1982 . In 1988 he was relocated to a cottage in Victor Verster prison, in the town of Paarl, northeast of Cape Town . Mandela was moved from Robben in March 1988 to Victor Verstster prison .
 He seemed prepared to negotiate with Mandela, but often sought to secure his own power through the guise of equality . He seemed willing to negotiate, but was often willing to take advantage of Mandela .
 Mandela was released on February 3, 1990, greeted by a great crowd in Cape Town . Mandela was freed by South African President Nelson Mandela in February 1990 .
 He challenged the people to bring the government to the negotiating table . The government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Mandela knew that his dream of a simple family life would again be sacrificed as he worked for a new South Africa . After his release Mandela knew he would again sacrifice his family to work for his country . Mandela knew his dream was to live a simple life with his family .
 Mandela was elected president for a five-year term . He embarked upon an ambitious program of reconstruction, which remained the struggle for South Africans into the 21st century . Mandela died in 1994 at the age of 94 .
 Michael Norman Manley dominated Jamaican politics from the time of his father’s death in 1969 until his retirement from politics in 1992 . A leading spokesperson for Third World socialist movements and social justice .
 Likened in his impact on global affairs to Indira Gandhi of India, Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, and other prominent Third World figures of the cold war era . Manley was born in Kingston, Jamaica on December 10, 1924
 His Jamaican-born black father, an Oxford-trained attorney, was a leading figure in the island’s political life from the 1930s until his death . His England-born white mother, Edna Swithenbank Manley, was highly regarded artist and sculptor
 In 1942 Manley enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force, serving in the European theater but seeing no combat . In 1942 at age 18, Manley was a major airman in the Canadian air force .
 After the war he attended the London School of Economics . He became a protege of prominent British socialist Harold Laski .
 Manley promoted a pragmatic left-socialist democratic populism that resonated among large sectors of the Jamaican electorate . Described as “tall, handsome, charismatic, and a spellbinding orator,” Manley was described as ‘tall, . handsome and charismatic�
 During his first term as prime minister he increased the state's role in the country’s bauxite industry . Bauxite is Jamaica's principal export commodity and a major source of foreign exchange .
 He also instituted a range of leftpopulist policies in the arenas of health, education, and unemployment .
 A shrewd politician, he cast himself as an authentic expression of the needs and aspirations of Jamaica’s poor and dispossessed . He allied himself with the religio-nationalist Rastafarian movement and integrating reggae music and other forms of AfroCarib
 Manley recast his policies during his third and final term in office . privatizing some industries, cutting government spending, and pursuing more orthodox monetary, trade, and investment policies .
 Ferdinand Marcos and his wife, Imelda, transformed the Philippines into a police state during the early 1970s . Marcos was popularly elected at first, but his wife turned him into a dictator .
 The Marcoses ruled for 15 years before being forced from power by popular protest in mid-1986 . With the financial and political backing of the U.S., the Marcoses had strong anticommunist policies . They were forced out of power in 1986 .
 Ferdinand Marcos was born in Llocos Norte Province at the northwestern tip of Luzon, a riceand tobacco-growing region . Marcos was the first Philippine president to take office in the Philippines .
 His father was a politician and educator, his mother a teacher from a prominent local family . His father and mother were politicians and educators .
 Marcos was a brilliant law student in the 1930s . He successfully convinced the Philippine Supreme Court to drop a murder conviction against him for shooting a political rival of his father . Marcos was convicted of shooting his father's political rival .
 Marcos claimed to have led a guerrilla unit, the Maharlikas, against Japan during World War II . Marcos fought in the Battle of Bataan and claimed to be a hero in the Philippines . Marcos was also a war hero in World War Two .
 In 1954, he married Imelda Romualdez, a well-connected former beauty queen . He is survived by his wife, who is now a successful businessman .
 He became a senator in 1959 and served as president of the senate from 1963 to 1965 . He was also a member of the Senate from 1959 to 1965, when he was first elected .
 During his first term, Marcos championed a number of large-scale development projects that earned him the support of both elites and peasants . Marcos was the first president of the Philippines to be elected to office .
 Marcos had made land reform a key part of his campaign . Politically, such programs fared far better than the land reform agenda .
 Much of the money for these projects came from the United States . The U.S. was eager for the support of Asian nations in its struggle against communism .
 Soon after, the situation within the country deteriorated; economic stagnation, crime, and political instability came to characterize national life . The situation in the country was characterized by economic stagnation and crime .
 Marcos used instability as pretext, and, as later accounts would reveal, actually engineering much of it . Marcos began arrogating more powers to himself. Marcos began taking advantage of instability in order to gain more powers .
 Imelda Marcos would rule by decree for much of the next decade and a half . Martial law was imposed in the Philippines during the early 1960s .
 Marcos proclaimed the beginning of a New Society, which would cast away the personal and political values of colonialism in favor of modern values . During this period Marcos proclaimed a New society, which cast aside the personal . and political . values .
 Marcos and his supporters called for self-sacrifice but began to pocket enormous sums of money from the public till . Even as Marcos and supporters said for self sacrifice they pocketed millions of dollars . Marcos' supporters pocketed huge sums from public till, including millions of millions of pounds of
 Marcos broke up many of the business conglomerates run by some of the country’s leading families . Marcos handed these profitable enterprises to his own family members and loyal supporters . Marcos was the first president of the Philippines to take over many of these businesses .
 He also nationalized industries and created monopolies to enrich himself and his supporters, he says . "He also nationalizes industries and creates monopolies"
 The New Republic proved to be little more than a repackaged version of the corrupt and repressive New Society . Although he appeared to loosen his grip on power, the New Republic was little more .
 Because of a boycott by the main opposition parties, Marcos won a large victory in the June 1981 presidential election . Marcos won the election because of the boycott by opposition parties .
 Years of corruption began to affect the economy as its national debt climbed to $25 billion by early 1985 . However, years of corruption also affected the country's economy .
 His wife Imelda took on more responsibilities, including meeting foreign dignitaries . Because he suffered from what was believed to be kidney disease, his wife took more responsibilities .
 The assassination of Benigno “Ninoy ‘Ninoy’ Aquino Jr., the main opposition leader, in August 1983 ignited a people’s movement that would result in the exile of the Marcoses three years later .
 It is widely believed that had martial law not been declared, Aquino would have won the 1972 presidential election . Martial law declared in 1972 would have allowed Aquino to win the election .
 A commission blamed Marcos loyalists for the killing, the government ignored its findings . The government ignored the commission's findings . Marcos loyalistists were responsible for Marcos' death .
 Aquino's murder and the subsequent cover-up became the rallying point for a diverse group of opponents . Aquino’s murder and subsequent cover up became the . rallying point .
 Marcos called a “snap” election for February 1986, 16 months before the end of his term . Still confident of his popularity, in November 1985 Marcos called for a ‘snap’ election . The election was held in February 1986 .
 After the Marcoscontrolled National Assembly declared him the victor, Catholic Primate of the Philippines Cardinal Jaime Sin, Minister of Defense Juan Ponce Enrile, and Lieutenant General Fidel V Ramos rallied around the legitimate winner . Corazon Cojuango Aquino’s widow Corazon
 The People Power Movement forced Marcos out of office on the day of his inauguration . Marcos was forced to step down from office by the People's Power Movement .
 He fled in a U.S. Air Force plane with his family and closest supporters . He eventually settled in Honolulu, Hawaii, after fleeing the country .
 In ensuing months details emerged about how he had used his office to accumulate vast amounts of wealth .
 Officials estimated Marcos and his wife and supporters stole between $5 and $10 billion . Marcos and supporters estimated to have swindled up to $5 billion . Officials estimated that Marcos and wife stole as much as $10billion .
 The great symbol of this corruption amid poverty became Imelda Marcos’s collection of shoes, handbags, and formal gowns, which numbered in the thousands . Marcos's collection was a symbol of poverty amid poverty . Marcos was a leader of the Philippines, but his wife was
 Imelda Marcos returned to the Philippines in 1992, served in the House of Representatives from 1995 to 2001, and lost two bids for the presidency . Marcos returned in 1992 and served as a member of Congress until 2001 . Marcos lost two presidential bids .
 Thurgood Marshall was special counsel for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . Marshall was a United States Supreme Court justice during the 20th-century Civil Rights movement of the U.S.
 Marshall is lionized for his argument before the Supreme Court in the case Brown Board of Education . The case ended the federal sanction of segregation in public schools . Marshall was lionized in the Brown Board case .
 Thurgood Marshall was born Thoroughgood Marshall on June 2, 1908, in Baltimore, Maryland . He was born in 1908 . Marshall was a prominent advocate for civil rights .
 His father was a steward at a country club, and his mother was an elementary school teacher . His mother was also a teacher .
 Marshall was named for his paternal grandfather, a slave from the Congo who won his freedom . Marshall's paternal grandfather was a slave and a slave . He was named Marshall after his grandfather, who was freed from slavery in the Congo .
 His grandfather chose the name Thoroughgood when he enlisted in the Union Army during the Civil War . His grandfather had chosen the name when he was a Union soldier .
 At age six, Marshall legally had his name changed to Thurgood due to criticism from his peers . Marshall legally changed his name at age six due to his peers' criticism from peers .
 Marshall was a self-proclaimed hell-raiser in elementary school . He was forced to read the Constitution of the United States as a punishment . Marshall was first introduced to the Constitution as a child .
 He took great interest in Article III of Article III, which concerned the judiciary branch, and also in the Bill of Rights, he said . He said: "He was very keen on Article III"
 Marshall met Charles Hamilton Houston, the vice dean of the Howard law school . Marshall met Houston at the Howard Law School . Houston was the vigorous vice dean at Howard .
 Houston inspired Marshall’s interest in constitutional law . He instilled in him the idea of lawyers as ‘social engineers’ capable of effecting change for the AfricanAmerican community .
 Murray was the first African-American student to enter a state law school below the Mason-Dixon Line . Murray was also the first black student to study in the U.S. state .
 Marshall founded the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund to attack segregation through judicial and legislative means . Marshall founded a legal defense and education fund to fight segregation . Marshall was the leader of the NAACP in the 1950s .
 Throughout the 1950s Marshall traveled the South arguing civil rights cases before state and federal courts . Marshall was a pioneer of civil rights in the South .
 He received several death threats during this tour and narrowly avoided a lynching . The tour was interrupted by several lynching threats .
 Of the 32 cases Marshall argued before the Supreme Court on behalf of the NAACP, he won 29 . Marshall won 29 of his 32 cases before the court .
 In 1954 Marshall won the landmark case for the NAACP, Brown Board of Education of Topeka . In 1954 he won the case for Brown Board, Brown School of Education .
 The unanimous Supreme Court decision overruled the Plessy Ferguson precedent . The unanimous decision was overruled by the court .
 A year after the Brown Board decision, Marshall’s wife, Vivian Burey, died; Marshall remarried the same year . The Brown Board made the decision a year after .
 In 1962 President John F Kennedy appointed Thurgood Marshall to the United States Court of Appeals, 2nd Circuit . Marshall was appointed to the court of Appeals in 1962 by President Kennedy . Marshall is a former Supreme Court Justice on the 2nd circuit .
 Marshall struggled with the decision to leave behind 23 years as NAACP head counsel, but ultimately followed his sense of duty to his country . Marshall struggled to make the decision .
 After serving three years on the Court of Appeals, Marshall was appointed by President Lyndon B Johnson as solicitor general of the United States . Marshall was the third-highest office in the Justice Department .
 President Johnson proceeded to nominate Marshall to the Supreme Court in 1967 . Marshall was nominated by President Johnson for Supreme Court nomination in 1968 .
 Marshall’s nomination was confirmed in the Senate 69 to 11, and he was sworn in as the first African-American Supreme Court justice on October 2, 1967 . Marshall was confirmed by the Senate in 1967 .
 Marshall joined a majority in favor of civil rights for minorities and the expansion of rights for all citizens . Marshall joined the liberal Warren court, joining a majority of the court's liberal majority .
 Marshall focused his energy on negotiating unanimity among his fellow justices to increase the weight of the Warren Court’s rulings . Marshall is a former Supreme Court Justice . Marshall was elected to the Supreme Court in 1973 .
 Marshall became famous for his minority dissents in the 1970s and 1980s . He argued in favor of affirmative process, due process, and First Amendment rights .
 Thurgood Marshall died of heart failure in Bethesda, Maryland, on January 24, 1993 . Marshall was a prominent civil rights advocate .
 His legacy as Mr Civil Rights marked him in history alongside activists such as Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. His legacy included Malcolm X .
 World War II decimated Europe’s infrastructure and economy, leaving bombed and gutted buildings, destroyed factories and businesses, and high unemployment . Anna Brown Marshall Plan was the Marshall Plan's first attempt to rebuild the economy .
 With Europe debt-ridden and financial reserves depleted by the war, the problems could not be easily fixed . Europe is already deeply in debt and is struggling to find a way to cope with it .
 Both United States and European officials put forth several plans, all of which were rejected . Both U.S. and European plans were rejected.
 The United States initiated the European Recovery Program . The Marshall Plan is generally referred to as the Marshall Plan . The European Recovery Plan was initiated by the United States .
 Marshall called for Europeans to create a plan that the U.S. would subsidize . Marshall: Europe's economy had grown rapidly during the war and the one major power whose infrastructure remained intact, remained intact . Marshall called on Europeans to come up with a plan .
 State Department officials would work with the nations of Europe to develop the program . The program is named for Marshall Marshall .
 The Soviet Union attended the conference as a sign of good faith . Western powers were invited by the Soviet Union as a gesture of goodwill .
 Foreign Minister Vyacheslav M Molotov walked out, calling for Soviet rejection of the plan . Foreign Minister walked out of the Soviet Union meeting in protest .
 Soviet premier Joseph Stalin pressured Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Hungary into rejecting it as well . Seeing it as a U.S. scheme to subjugate Europe, Stalin pressured them to reject it . The Soviet premier saw it as an attempt to promote free trade and economic unity .
 In September the CEEC approved the formation of the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation to oversee the European side of the recovery program . The organisation will oversee the EU's recovery program in the EU .
 Except for Germany and Spain, every nation outside the Soviet sphere joined . Except for Spain and Germany, every member of the Soviet bloc joined .
 On April 2,1948, the United States Congress formally authorized the ERP through passage of the Economic Cooperation Act, which President Truman signed the next day .
 W Averell Harriman, a Lend-Lease representative to Britain and secretary of commerce under Truman under Truman, was made special representative to the participating countries to advise them .
 The ECA had the objectives of strengthening European currencies, encouraging the development of industrial production, and facilitating international trade within Europe and its partners, especially the U.S.
 The OEEC met to determine European needs prior to any distribution of appropriations under the act . Meanwhile, the European Parliament met to discuss European needs .
 The revitalization plan proposed to the U.S. asked for $22 billion in aid from the United States . It was proposed to be funded by more than $25 billion .
 Congress approved a Truman-backed $ 17-billion aid package with strong bipartisan support . Congress passed the bill in 1945 . The bill is expected to reach $17 billion .
 Great Britain received an approximate total of $3. billion while Iceland received only $43 million . Great Britain got $3 billion, Iceland got $43 billion . Iceland received $43million .
 Allied nations and major industrial powers were given priority aid over those that had sided with the Axis powers or had remained neutral during the war . Allied nations were given preference aid over the Axis nations .
 The same went for countries seen as strategic in the fight against communism, like West Germany . West Germany was one of the most strategic countries in the Cold War era .
 The United States gave monetary grants to participating countries, which then utilized that aid to buy materials needed for recovery . The U.S. gave the money to countries involved in the recovery effort .
 The ECA and local governments jointly administered and processed the exchange, examining and distributing the aid where needed . The exchange took place in a joint effort by the ECA, local governments .
 As a result the United States economy flourished as the European recovery effort grew . The U.S. economy thrived as a result of the EU recovery effort .
 As western Europe stabilized and the cold war heated up, aid went more toward rebuilding military capabilities to defend against communist expansion . Early on, imports consisted of essential items like food, fuel and materials for reconstruction .
 Eastern Europe’s forced rejection of the Marshall Plan clearly showed the division in Europe leading toward the cold war . On the other hand, eastern Europe rejected the plan, which was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 Unlike its former allies, the Soviet Union imposed large reparations on former Axis nations in its sphere of influence . Unlike its ex-Axis allies, it imposed large payments to former Axis countries . The Soviet Union was one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Finland, Hungary, Romania, and East Germany were forced to pay large stipends to the Soviet Union as well as provide supplies and raw materials . East Germany was forced to provide supplies to Finland and Hungary in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The economies of eastern Europe did not recover as quickly, if at all, under Soviet rule . Under Soviet rule, the economies of east Europe were not as quickly as they were under the Soviet rule.
 Over the four years of the Marshall Plan’s existence, participating countries received in total close to $13 billion in economic aid . With the exception of West Germany, the economies of all surpassed prewar levels when the program ended .
 Under the provisions of the plan none of the aid had to be repaid, as it was absorbed and reinvested in the economies of Europe and the U.S. The aid was absorbed by the European and American economies . The plan was agreed with the United States and the European governments .
 West Germany had to repay the United States a reduced amount of $1 billion; the final payment came in 1971 . The lone exception was West Germany, which had to pay the U.S. less than $2 billion .
 The European Recovery Program removed tariff barriers, ended protectionism and established institutions that could control the economy on a continental level . Seen as the first instrument of sustained European economic integration, the program was seen as an idea European leaders had sought in the past .
 America, Britain, and the Reconstruction of 'Western Europe, 1947-1952. America, . Britain and . Britain, . and the reconstruction of . Western Europe. 1947-52. The Reconstruction of Western Europe .
 McCarthyism defined a period of U.S. history during the 1950s when there was intense concern about Communist infiltration of American society . Steve Sagarra: McCarthyism is a form of American nationalism .
 It took its name from Senator Joseph McCarthy, a Republican from Wisconsin . McCarthy was involved in accusing many people of being Communist or having Communist sympathies .
 These people were often subjected to aggressive investigations, questioning by congressional committees . These people are then often subject to aggressive inquiries by Congress .
 After World War II, the U.S. became increasingly worried about the establishment of Communist or pro-Communist governments in eastern Europe . The United States became increasingly concerned about the creation of pro-communist governments throughout the region .
 Many people in the U.S. started to feel threatened by the Soviet Union . Many Americans in the United States felt threatened by it .
 This increased in 1949, when the Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb and the Communists were victorious in the Chinese civil war in the same year .
 With the start of the Korean War the following year, the idea of communism seeking to expand over the whole world was seen in many circles in the U.S. as a very real possibility .
 Alger Hiss, a high-level official in the State Department, was convicted of perjury in 1950 . Hiss was convicted in January 1950 of perjury . In January 1950 he was convicted .
 He would have been charged with espionage, but the statute of limitations had run out . He would be charged with spying, but he would not have faced charges .
 He was charged with lying when he testified before the House Committee on Un-American Activities . The committee was the major group involved in questioning suspected Communists . He was never charged with perjury .
 The Rosenbergs were charged with stealing atomic bomb secrets for the Soviet Union . They were found guilty of stealing secrets from the Soviets . The Rosenberg brothers were arrested in 1945 .
 The Rosenbergs were found guilty, although doubts were cast on the constitutionality and the applicability of the Espionage Act of 1917, under which they were tried .
 The Rosenbergs were executed on June 19, 1953, being the first U.S. civilians to be executed for espionage for espionage . They were the first Americans ever to be killed for espionage in peacetime . Rosenbergs are the first American civilians to have been executed for spying .
 FBI director, J Edgar Hoover, started assigning increasingly large numbers of his agents to investigating Communists and suspected Communists . With many high-profile cases like those of Alger Hiss and the Rosenbergs, it was not long before the FBI director started assigning more agents to investigate Communists .
 FBI were found to have been involved in burglaries, opening mail, and installing illegal wiretaps . In this, the FBI were subsequently found to be involved in burglary and wiretapping .
 From 1947 on, the House Un-American Activities Committee had started to question people connected with Hollywood, serving subpoenas on film actors, directors, and screenwriters .
 The first 10, known as the ‘Hollywood Ten, refused to cooperate . They pleaded the First Amendment’s guarantee of free speech and free assembly . The ‘10’ were known as ‘The Hollywood Ten’
 The defense was rejected, and eight of the 10 were jailed for a year, and two for six months . Eight of 10 were sentenced to a year in prison .
 Thereafter, witnesses tended to plead the protection of the Fifth Amendment, refusing to give any evidence that might incriminate them . Thereafter witnesses tend to plead for the protection .
 Those questioned could either use this as a defense or name other Communists . Those questioned will either be able to use this to either defend themselves or name others .
 Senator McCarthy came to head the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations . McCarthy was head of the subcommittee on investigations . McCarthy is a Republican senator in the Senate .
 The State Department removed books deemed to be communist or pro-communist . He then started searching through the card catalogs of the overseas library program of the State Department .
 The Waldorf Statement was issued by the Motion Picture Association of America in 1947 . The blacklists then started, although in many ways these had been operating since 1947 .
 A few scholars, such as John D’Emilio, have managed to show that more people were targeted for homosexuality than communism . More people targeted for homosexual than communism, he says .
 Arthur Miller launched his attack on McCarthyism in his play The Crucible . Miller used the Salem witch trials of 1692 as a metaphor in which the accusation was tantamount, in the public mind, to guilt .
 Edward R Murrow criticized McCarthy on March 9,1954, on his “Report on Joseph R McCarthy,” stating that the senator had been abusive toward witnesses . Murrow said McCarthy was abusive to witnesses, and that he was abusive .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower began to see McCarthy as extremely distasteful . Even President Eisenhower saw McCarthy's views as distressing .
 McCarthy was dumped from the Government Committee on Operations of the Senate in 1954 . McCarthy was dropped from the committee when the Republicans lost control of the U.S. Senate .
 He had always been a heavy drinker and died on May 2, 1957, from cirrhosis of the liver .
 Known for most of her life as Goldie Mabovitch, Golda Meir spent her formative years in Kiev, Ukraine . Meir was noted for both her idealism and her practical nature .
 Golda's only memories of this time were of being afraid, hungry, and cold . Golda’s only memories were being hungry, hungry and cold. Golda was forced to flee to hide in the desert .
 Mabovitch family moved to Byelorussia in 1903 and then to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 1906 . Tired of their lives in Kiev, they moved to Milwaukee in 1903 .
 Meir Meir pleaded with her parents to allow her to attend high school and become a teacher . Upon graduation as valedictorian from junior high school, Meir said she wanted to be a teacher.
 She attended high school and worked at a restaurant, where she overheard debates about Zionism, anarchism, socialism, and suffrage . She overheard discussions about Zionism and socialism .
 Meir met Morris Meirson in 1915, and they moved back to Wisconsin so she could finish high school . She met Morris in 1915 and married him in 1915 . She moved to New York to marry him .
 She enrolled in Wisconsin’s normal school for teaching in 1916 and taught Yiddish the following year . With her parents’ support, she was able to earn a full degree in the state of Wisconsin .
 Meirsen began working with the Poalei Tzion movement in 1917 . She was married to Rabbi Meir Meirson and later became a prominent figure in Israel . She died in 1994 .
 That same year Meir was elected as an officer of Histadrut . Meir met influential Zionists including David Ben-Gurion, with whom she would be professionally connected for much of her career .
 Meir helped found Mapai, Israel’s major labor party, Mapai . Mapai led every coalition government for the first three decades of its existence . Meir is Israel's most prominent labor party .
 In the mid-1930s Meir was elected to the executive board of Histadrut, became the fundraiser for the Jewish Agency, and was elected as the head of the agency’s Political Department . Meir became a member of the Historical Association .
 Ben-Gurion appointed Meir as Israel’s ambassador to the Soviet Union in 1948 . Meir was appointed as the country's ambassador to Soviet Union . He was Israel's first ambassador to Russia .
 Unhappy to leave the newly established Israel, she returned and was appointed minister of labor and national insurance . She remained in her post until 1956, when she was forced to quit .
 As foreign minister from 1956 to 1966, she attempted to build bridges with emerging independent countries in Africa via an assistance program based on Israel’s nation-building experience .
 Diagnosed with cancer in 1963, Meir retired from the Knesset . Meir was diagnosed with cancer at the age of 50 .
 Golda Meir became the world’s third female prime minister in 1969 . Meir was the prime minister of Israel from 1967 to 1969 .
 Meir Meir led a full professional and personal life . Combining idealism and practicality, Meir .
 She dedicated her career to leading Israel’s struggle in survival and peace and peace . She dedicated herself to leading Israeli's struggle for survival .
 Egypt and Syria attacked Israel during Yom Kippur in 1973 . Both of these objectives were thwarted when Egypt, Syria and Egypt attacked Israel .
 Meir was blamed for overestimating the strength of the Israel Defense Forces and misjudging the surrounding Arab countries’ intentions . Meir died in 1973 at the age of 65 .
 In 1974 she resigned and during the following four years worked on her autobiography and spent time with her family until her death in 1978 . She spent the last four years working on an autobiography .
 Jenna Levin Menchu was born on January 9, 1959, to a poor family of Quiche-Maya Guatemalan Indians, among the largest of Guatemala’s 26 indigenous ethno-linguistic groups . She was catapulted to international fame by her moving testimonial,
 Her gripping narrative of her life, her community, and their struggles for peace and justice in the highlands, coffee plantations, and cities of Guatemala was the principal impetus behind her receipt of the Peace Prize in 1992 .
 The allegations opened up a wide-ranging debate about the veracity of her account and the nature of truth in testimonial narratives . The allegations have sparked a debate on the nature and scope of the allegations .
 Challenges to specific episodes in her account did not question the genocidal nature of the Guatemalan government’s anti-insurgency campaigns . Or the extremes of exploitation, oppression, and violence suffered by the country's indigenous peoples . Or Menchu's moral courage .
 The Nobel Prize Committee reaffirmed its decision to award the Nobel Prize Prize in 1998 .
 As a vast anthropological and historical literature attests, Guatemala’s indigenous population has been subject to centuries of victimization and oppression by more powerful groups . The indigenous population is subject of centuries of oppression and victimization .
 This is the context for understanding Rigoberta Menchu’s narrative, life, and struggles for justice . Menchu's struggle for justice is the subject of this article .
 In her teens she became involved in the social justice initiatives of the Catholic Church and in the women’s rights movement . She became involved with the women's rights movement in her teens .
 Her father, Vicente Menchu, was jailed and tortured for his alleged involvement in the death of a plantation owner . Her father was a political activist, jailed for his role in a plantation death .
 Upon his release he joined the Peasant Union Committee . Rigoberta did the same in 1979 . He was released from prison in 1977 .
 The next year Vicente was killed by security forces during a peaceful protest action at the Spanish embassy in Guatemala City . Vicente died the next year after being killed during a protest at the embassy .
 In 1981, she became involved in a strike by farm workers on the Pacific coast and in other anti-government actions . Soon after, she was compelled to flee the country .
 In exile she became a leading figure in the international movement for indigenous rights in Guatemala . In exile, she became an international leader in the indigenous movement .
 In 1983 she narrated her testimony to a Venezuelan anthropologist, who published her account in the following year .
 The book proved enormously influential, used in colleges and universities worldwide . The book was used in college and university libraries .
 In 1999 a U.S. anthropologist detailed numerous discrepancies in her account . In 1999 an anthropologist said there were numerous discrepancies between her account and hers .
 A predominant consensus acknowledges many of the discrepancies while affirming the essential veracity of Menchu’s account . Menchu's account has been widely debated .
 Since 1992 she has received many honors and prizes . In 2007 she remained active in the struggle for the rights of indigenous peoples and women in Guatemala and Latin America .
 Montejo, Victor D Maya Intellectual Renaissance: Identity, Representation, and Leadership . Montejo: "The Intellectual Renaissance" is an attempt to create a new identity and leadership model .
 Article 27 stipulated that only ejidos (inalienable village-owned collective lands, generally distributed by villages to individual heads of households) and individual Mexican citizens could own Mexican land .
 Article 27 was watered down in a series of constitutional amendments to permit foreign firms, most notably U.S. oil companies, to be granted concessions on Mexican territory for the exploitation of natural resources . In the early 1920s, under intense international pressure, the constitutional amendments were watered down .
 Actual implementation of Article 27 varied greatly in accordance with the proclivities of individual presidents . Article 27 varies greatly according to the president's personal circumstances .
 In the 23 years from 1917 and 1940, approximately 30. million hectares were redistributed to villages and individuals . Around 30 million hectares of land were redistributed .
 Around one-third of this total was redistributed from 1917 to 1934 under the presidencies of Venustiano Carranza , Alvaro Obregon , and Plutarco Calles and his subordinates . Amounts to a little over 10 million hectares .
 After 1940, the popular clamor for land declined substantially, in consequence of the implementation of the constitution’s land reform provisions under Cardenas . The growth of rural-urban migration and the attendant shift in the nation's demographic structure contributed to this decline .
 After 1940, the national government under the PRI favored large commercial agricultural enterprises at the expense of smaller production units, resulting in growing impoverishment among rural dwellers . The PRI was founded in 1940 .
 The government again emphasized the ejido sector, adding some 17 million hectares to the total . Under President Luis Echevvarfa, the government added 17 million hectare of land . The government added some 17million hectares of land to the country .
 In 1992 the government radically altered the nature of the ejido, in effect privatizing it by permitting e/zdo-holders to sell, rent, lease, or mortgage their properties .
 The neoliberal, free market, privatization-oriented reforms under President Vicente Fox continued to erode the ejido . The institution remained important in many rural areas, while local struggles for land (as waged by the Zapatista movement) promised to continue into the foreseeable future .
 Mobutu Sese Seko was born in Lisala, Belgian Congo, in 1930 . He is a member of the Ngbandi ethnic group . He was born on December 31, 1930 .
 He was appointed chief of staff of the Congolese Army by Patrice Lumumba . He was a colonel by 1960 and was appointed by the then-independent Prime Minister of the Congo .
 The struggle for Congolese independence left behind ethnic fighting and soon civil war . Congo's struggle for independence came to an end after independence from Belgium .
 By September 1961 fighting erupted between Congolese troops and the United Nations forces sent to quiet the growing civil discontent in the country .
 Mobutu seized power on November 24, 1965, in a successful coup over President Kasavubu . The coup followed a power struggle between the president and his prime minister, Moise Tshombe . Sensing growing political disarray in the Congo, he seized power in
 Mobutu declared himself president for a five-year term, placed Moise Tshombe on trial for treason, and condemned him to death . Moise was executed for treason by the government of the late president .
 The coup marked the beginning of the Second Congolese Republic and the reestablishment of minimal law and order . The Second Congo was founded by President Laurent Laurent Laurent Gnouou .
 Mobutu appointed Colonel Leonard Mulamba as his prime minister . Colonel Mulamba was the first African African leader to become a prime minister in the country .
 This was highlighted by the 1966 establishment of the Movement de la Revolution , with himself as president .
 Mobutu went on to eliminate all opposition to his control . He centralized all decision making into his own presidency . Mobutus was one of the most powerful men in the country .
 Mobutu’s rule was not made official until 1967 when he instituted a new constitution . He instituted the new constitution in 1967 .
 Years between 1967 and 1970 saw substantial clashes with students who had become disillusioned with Mobutu and his authoritarian rule .
 Mobutu embarked on a campaign of pro-African cultural awareness, renaming the country the Republic of Zaire in October 1971 .
 He ordered all Africans to drop their Christian names, and priests were warned that they would face five years’ imprisonment if they were caught baptizing a Zairois child with a Christian name .
 The Shaba Wars of 1977 and 1978 threatened Mobutu’s constitutionally entrenched presidency . Mobutus was overthrown in 1978 after the war in Somalia . The conflict threatened the constitutionally entrenched president's rule .
 Several thousand soldiers of ex-prime minister Tshombe’s former Katanga army exiled in Angola had become suspicious of the offers of amnesty . Mobutu had offered amnesty to thousands of soldiers who had been in exile in Angola .
 The continuing economic slump, combined with the attack by the Katanga troops, forced Mobutu to solicit foreign aid to restabilize the country . The economic slump forced the president to solicit help from foreign aid for restabilization .
 France airlifted 1,500 elite Moroccan paratroopers into the Shaba region . France was motivated by the opportunity to defeat Communist-backed troops in Africa .
 The rebel army retreated but advanced again a year later in greater numbers . The rebels were defeated by the British army but retreated again .
 Mobutu persisted in his requests for international assistance and this time received helped from Belgium and France, with logistical support from the United States . The United States also provided logistical support for the mission .
 In return for their assistance, France and Morocco urged Mobutu to democratize his increasingly hostile regime . In return, the French and Moroccan helped him overthrow his regime .
 Mobutu’s presidency would focus on high-profile foreign relations efforts meant to polish the tarnished image of his nation . The remainder of Mobutus’ presidency would be focused on foreign relations . The rest of the time would be spent trying to clean up the tarn
 He restored relations with Israel in 1982 and sent troops into Chad as part of a peacekeeping mission in 1983 . In 1982 he restored relations between Israel and Chad .
 Mobutu suspended Zaire's membership in the Organization of African Unity in 1984 in support of Morocco’s walkout over the Western Sahara question . Zaire went on to suspend its membership in OAU in 1984 over the issue .
 In 1990 Mobutu called for a dialogue between the state and the people of Zaire . In 1990 he called for the state to engage in a dialogue with people in Zaire.
 Mobutu announced his resignation as chair of the MPR in an attempt to rise above the problems within the party . He announced the resignation in a bid to help the party rise above its problems . The former president of the U.N. had been in charge of the party for
 He went on to establish a special commission to draft a new constitution by April 1991 that finally allowed free operation of political parties . He established a commission that drafted the constitution .
 Mobutu was declared guilty of treason by the High Council of the Republic in 1993 . The High Council threatened to impeach him unless he recognized the legitimacy of the transitional parliament set up by the new constitution of 1991 . In January 1993 he was accused of treason and threatened impeachment .
 Mobutu attempted to reassert his authority in the country . Strikes and disorder followed while Mobutus attempted to re-establish his authority .
 He reconvened the dormant national assembly as a rival to the High Council of the Republic . He created a conclave that appointed Faustin Birindwa as prime minister . The conclave created a new national assembly .
 He announced the dissolution of the High Council and the dismissal of the Birindwa government in January 1994 . The former prime minister was the first president of the country to take office in 1994 .
 When Mobutu’s government issued an order in November 1996 forcing Tutsis to leave Zaire on penalty of death, they erupted in rebellion . The Tutsi were forced to leave the country on the death penalty in 1996 . The order was followed by a revolt against
 From eastern Zaire, with the support of presidents Paul Kagame of Rwanda and Yoweri Meseveni of Uganda, they launched an offensive to overthrow Mobutu . The Rwandan president and Ugandan president were assassinated in 1994 .
 Ailing with prostate cancer, Mobutu was unable to coordinate the resistance . Mobutus was ailing with his prostate cancer . He died at the age of 92 .
 Jeanne Haskin, Jeanne M The Tragic State of Congo: From Decolonization to Dictatorship . Haskins: Congo is a nation of people who have been in power for decades .
 The bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama, served as the most prominent example of effective grassroots activism within the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s . It was also the most successful example of grassroots activism in the absence of support from the federal government .
 The Montgomery bus boycott centered on the Jim Crow laws that governed the Montgomery bus system . The boycott was centered around the laws that govern the Montgomery school system .
 The buses were segregated, with white riders allowed to sit in the front while black riders were limited to the back of the bus . White riders were allowed to the front of the buses, with black riders limited to back of them .
 The bus drivers, all of whom were white, were empowered to order black riders out of their seats to allow whites to sit if necessary . White riders were able to sit in order to allow white riders to sit .
 The immediate catalyst for the boycott was the arrest of Rosa Parks, the secretary for the Montgomery chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to vacate her seat to allow a white man to sit down .
 Parks’s arrest on Friday, December 5, 1955, became a rallying point for the African-American community . Parks was arrested in 1955, and his arrest became a symbol for African-Americans .
 A committee called the Montgomery Improvement Association was formed that weekend . The group decided to boycott the bus system until a set of limited demands were met .
 The association chose the 26-year-old pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, Dr. Dr. David Johnson . Dr. Johnson is the church's youngest pastor .
 White leaders in Montgomery initially believed that the boycott would fizzle out due to the winter season and the fact that most of the African Americans in Montgomery utilized the buses to travel to work .
 City officials, with the support of racist organizations, decided to try to break the boycott through legal pressure, harassment, and intimidation . City officials say they are trying to break up the boycott with legal pressure and intimidation.
 The leaders of the association were arrested on felony conspiracy charges . The city threatened to cancel insurance of black-owned taxi companies, ticketed cars containing more than one passenger .
 The NAACP led a legal challenge to Montgomery’s laws segregating public transportation . The NAACP, although somewhat critical of the boycott, led a lawsuit against the laws .
 On November 13, 1956, the Court ruled that the segregation of public transportation violated the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause . The decision was made in 1956 .
 The rest of the Jim Crow laws governing race relations in Montgomery remained intact, as did the segregation of transportation across most of the South .
 Montgomery leaders provided an indication of the willingness of many whites to resist even limited African-American attempts to obtain civil rights . Furthermore, the response of Montgomery leaders demonstrated that many whites were willing to resist attempts to get civil rights in the South .
 Demonstrators demonstrate effectiveness of nonviolent protest with aggressive legal action . "It demonstrated the potential effectiveness of nonviolent protest with legal action," activist says .
 It also launched the public career of Martin Luther King Jr. who later founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference to continue to organize protests across the South .
 The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the People who Broke the Back of Jim Crow. The Montgomery bus boycott. The people who broke the back of the Montgomery bus .
 Left-wing urban guerrillas formed in the early 1970s in response to the military dictatorship in Argentina .
 The most audacious and active of these groups was the Montoneros, which engaged in a number of high-profile kidnappings, bank robberies, bombings, and assassinations from 1970 to 1977 . They were crushed by the military as part of a broader crackdown on “subversion
 Many were also women, in keeping with the sexual revolution then transforming much of North America and Europe . Many of the women in the 1960s and '60s were women .
 In previous decades, leftist guerrilla groups had formed in the Argentine backcountry, though most had had little impact on the country's political life .
 These included the Tigermen in 1959, modeled on Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro’s July 26 Movement, and the People's Guerrilla Army, active in the early 1960s . The 17th of October group was formed in 1968 .
 In March 1970 a new group, the Argentine Liberation Front kidnapped the Paraguayan consul . Paraguayan consul was kidnapped by the group in Paraguay .
 In June 1970 another group, claiming the mantle of the deposed president Juan Peron and calling itself the Montoneros, kidnapped and executed former Argentine president Pedro E Aramburu . The former president was executed in reprisal for the 1956 execution of the Peronist general Juan Jose
 By the end of 1970 at least four leftist guerrilla organizations, three Peronist and one Trostsyist, were active in Argentina . Each with fewer than several hundred members .
 In 1971-72 the Peronist groups staged a number of sensational, Robin Hood-like operations in Buenos Aires . Peronists were active mostly in and around Buenos Aires, with some of the most dramatic operations .
 In addition to bank robberies and assassinations, the guerrillas kidnapped government officials, prominent businessmen, and executives of multinational corporations . Guerrillas were released for cash payments to Buenos Aires’ poorest residents .
 In 1973 the Peronist guerrilla groups coalesced into the Montoneros, led by Mario Firmenich, leader of the original Montonero formed in June 1970 . In 1973, the Peroneros were formed into the group that led to the death of many Peronists
 The group aimed to precipitate a generalized crisis that would usher in a period of radical social transformation, empowering the poor and redistributing the country’s wealth in favor of workers and peasants . Proclaiming traditional unions decadent and corrupt, and popular social revolution as their goal
 Montoneros stepped up their attacks against Peronist unions after Peron’s reelection as president in September 1973 . They assassinated general secretary of the Confederacion General del Trabajo .
 In September 1974 they received an estimated $60 million in cash and $1.1 million in charity distributed to the poor as ransom for the release of several businessmen .
 The army, police, and affiliated right-wing paramilitary groups responded to the upsurge in Montonero violence with a generalized crackdown on organized dissent . The army and police have responded with a general crackdown .
 A year later, the organization ceased to exist as a viable guerrilla force . A year after the organization was founded, it was forced to close .
 After World War II these parties mobilized opposition to the French regime . Istiqlal led by Allal al-Yusuf mobilized opposition .
 The Sultan Muhammad Ben Yusuf, the king of the old Alaouite dynasty, supported the nationalist demands . The king supported the nationalists' demands .
 In 1947 he gave a rousing speech in the international city of Tangier in which he pointedly did not declare his loyalty to the French . In 1947, he made a speech in Tangier, where he said he would not declare loyalty to France .
 This was seen as support for the nationalist cause and was a turning point in the struggle . This was the first time the British government had been able to win support in the war .
 After riots broke out in the major port city of Casablanca, the French promptly appointed a hard-line military man to restore order . The French appointed the man to take over the country's most populous region .
 As discontent continued to escalate, the sultan demanded the establishment of his own government . The sultan's government was overthrown in the early 1900s .
 The French attempted to install Muhammad Ben Arafa, a prince of the Glawi house, as their puppet ruler . The prince barely escaped an assassination attempt by Moroccan nationalists .
 The French granted Morocco independence in 1956 . Faced with mounting violence and an ongoing war in Algeria, the French granted it independence . Morocco was granted independence from Algeria in 1956.
 In 1959 Tangier lost its special status and was integrated into Morocco as a free port . Tangier became a Moroccan free port in 1959 . The city is now a tourist destination .
 Muhammad V had widespread governmental authority and enjoyed popular support as well as religious respect based on baraka , or good fortune . Although the Istiqlal remained a key force in the Cabinet, Muhammad V enjoyed widespread government support .
 Hassan instituted a new constitution in 1962 but continued to exercise wide executive powers . Hassan instituted the new constitution but still exercises wide executive power . Hassan died of a heart attack in 1992 .
 The Istiqlal split in 1959, and a new group, the Union Nationale des Forces Populaire, emerged . Ben Barka was the leader of the Istriqlal, which was supported by the French government .
 Hassan proclaimed a state of emergency with full legislative and executive powers in 1965 . Following increased political opposition, Hassan proclaimed an emergency . Hassan's government was overthrown in 1965 after he was elected to power .
 Ben Barka went into exile in France, where he was kidnapped and presumably killed with the complicity of the Moroccan government in 1965 .
 Political demonstrations against the regime continued in major cities throughout Morocco in the late 1960s . Hassan remained in power owing to a combination of loyal courtiers, army officers and security police .
 In 1971 armed cadets stormed the royal palace during Hassan’s birthday party, but when they failed to kill the king the attempted coup collapsed . The attempted coup in 1971 collapsed after the king was killed .
 Hassan survived an airplane attack orchestrated by the former loyal general Mohammad Oufkir . Hassan survived a plane attack in 1972 . Hassan was killed in the attack by a loyal general .
 Hassan remained in power in spite of ongoing charges of corruption and nepotism . Hassan's government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Economically, Morocco was predominately an agricultural country but phosphates were its primary export and source of hard currency . Phosphates were the country's primary export .
 Morocco, like many poor countries in the global south, has struggled to provide adequate education or jobs for its youth . With a growing young population, Morocco has found it increasingly difficult to provide enough education and jobs .
 Many attempted to flee the poverty of the countryside by moving to the cities, where they joined the ranks of the unemployed, or by traveling to Europe as migrant workers . Many tried to escape poverty by joining the unemployed or traveling to the European Union as migrants .
 In the 1990s and afterward, disaffected youth often sympathized with or joined Islamist movements . In the 90s and after afterward, these disaffected youths often sympathize with or join Islamist movements.
 In 1975 Hassan claimed the territory of the Western Sahara, formerly held by Spain, as part of Morocco . Hassan launched the so-called “Green March’s” of hundreds of thousands of Moroccans to take the territory .
 U.N. demanded a referendum to settle the issue, but Morocco has consistently delayed the election . The matter remains unresolved until the present day .
 United States secretary of defense Caspar Weinberger meets with King Hassan of Morocco . U.S. Secretary of Defense Caspar W Weinberger is in Morocco to meet King Hassan .
 Morocco has had some success in furthering education and welfare projects . But wide disparities between urban and rural areas and differing population and tribal groups remain .
 Mohammed VI was keen to modernize the country . He liberalized the political system, releasing many political prisoners from his father’s regime .
 In 2004 he instituted a new family code to grant women more power . In 2004, he also instituted a family code for women to be more powerful .
 Islamists opposed Morocco’s close ties with the West and modernizing programs . Islamists, many of whom opposed Morocco's close ties to the West, remained major opponents .
 Iranian nationalist Mohammad Mossadeq led the oil nationalization movement in Iran in the early 1950s . He led the nationalization of Iran's oil industry in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Mirza Mohammad Khan was born in 1882 into a wealthy aristocratic family . He was closely connected to the royal family of the Qajar dynasty . Khan was the son of Mohammad Khan, who was assassinated in 1918 .
 His father, Mirza Hedayat Ashtiyani, served the Qajar government as the minister of budget and finance from 1874 to 1895 . His father also served as the budget minister of Qajary government .
 Mossadeq was deeply influenced by his mother’s progressive opinions about female roles in society . He tried to extend the rights of women in Iran in the 1970s .
 He was appointed chief mostowfi in the province of Khorasan at the age of 14 . He has been in charge of the province since then . He is one of the most powerful men in Iran .
 Mossadeq was elected to the First National Assembly as a deputy from Isfahan . He supported the Constitutional Revolution and supported the reform . Mossadek is a former deputy member of the Iranian parliament .
 His credentials were rejected because he had not yet attained the minimum legal age to serve as a deputy in Parliament . However, he was not yet eligible to be a deputy .
 After returning to Iran, he held several important posts successively, including vice minister of finance, governor of Fars, and foreign minister . He also held several posts in Azerbaijan, Iran, Fars and Fars .
 Mossadeq was a leader in the nationalist opposition to the Pahlavi dynasty . Mossadek was a key figure in the opposition to Reza Khan's regime . He became a leader of the opposition against the shah regime .
 Reza Shah was dethroned by the Allies in 1941 for sympathizing with the Nazis . His son Mohammad Reza was installed as the new shah . Mossadeq was released when Reza's son was installed in 1941 as Reza .
 Mossadeq was elected as a deputy from Tehran to the 14th Parliament in 1944 . He was elected in 1944 as a member of Tehran's parliament . Mossadek was elected to the Tehran parliament in 1945 .
 During that time, he played a significant role in enacting the Single-Article Bill . The bill forbade the government from granting foreign concessions without the approval of parliament .
 In October 1949 a group of politicians, university students, merchants, and guilds in the Tehran bazaar gathered in front of the shah’s palace to protest the rigging of the 16th parliamentary election .
 Under Mossadeq’s leadership, the National Front drove the movement to nationalize the British-run petroleum industry . The National Front won the French presidency in 1968 .
 The oil nationalization law was approved by both the Senate and Parliament in March 1951 . The law was passed by both chambers of parliament and the Senate .
 The British government and the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company opposed the oil nationalization law . They sued the Iranian government in the International Court in the Hague . The law was passed by Iran in 2007 .
 Mossadeq attempted to establish Iranian political and economic independence and to democratize the system established by the Pahlavis . He favored both the nationalization of the oil industry and domestic reforms . He also favored both nationalization and domestic reform .
 Mossadeq's government fell in August 1953 as the result of a coup d’etat that was backed by the United States . The U.S. backed the coup d'etat, which opposed the oil nationalization and Mossadek’s alleged communist ties
 Mossadeq was imprisoned on charges of acting against Iran . Mohammad Reza returned to power and returned to Iran in 1979 . Reza was re-elected to power in 1980 .
 Mossadeq died at age 85 on March 5, 1967 . He was subsequently placed under house arrest . Mossadek died in 1967 at the age 85 .
 Lord Louis Mountbatten was the youngest son of Prince Louis of Battenburg and Princess Victoria of Hesse . He was born Mari Nuki, Louis, Lord (earl Mountbatten of Burma) Lord Louis of Burma was the British political leader .
 The Battenberg family was descended through morganatic marriage from the grand duke of Hesse and by Rhine . The family of the Battenbergs is descended from the Hesse, Rhine and Hesse .
 Lord Mountbatten was born on June 25,1900, at Frogmore House, Windsor, England . He was born in June 1900 .
 His family included his sisters Princess Alice, the mother of Philip, duke of Edinburgh, and Queen Louise of Sweden . His brother, George Mountbatten, later the second marquess of Milford Haven .
 His father was first sea lord at the outbreak of conflict, but because of his German ancestry was forced to resign . Following in his father’s footsteps, Mountbatten entered the navy in 1913 and saw service on the Lion and the Elizabeth .
 Anti-German feeling grew during the course of the war, and this led King George V to relinquish all German names and titles . George V relinquished all German titles and titles during the war .
 The royal family name became Windsor, and Battenburg became Mountbatten . The name of the royal family became Windsor and the name of Mountbattatten .
 Mountbatten’s marriage lasted until the death of his wife in 1960 . There remained claims of adultery and sensational affairs on both parts throughout the marriage .
 A captain at the start of World War II, Mountbatten commanded destroyers . He lost the destroyer Kelly in battle off Crete in 1940, losing his ship in battle .
 During the early years of conflict he saw action in the North Sea, the Mediterranean, and the Western Approaches . During these early years he fought in the Mediterranean and North Sea .
 He became a commodore in 1941 and rose to become, in a relatively short period, chief of combined operations . He was also chief of Combined Operations .
 In this post he took on a key role in planning for the Allied invasion of continental Europe . In the post he was a key member of the Allied planning team .
 His appointment as supreme allied commander, South East Asia Command, in 1943 gave him the rank of acting admiral . His appointment in 1943 was given him the title of supreme Allied commander in Asia .
 In 1945 he accepted the Japanese surrender in Malaya . Consequently he was instrumental in Allied operations to drive the Japanese from Burma .
 His command required diplomatic skills to balance the different Allied commanders in this theatre of operations . His command was required to balance Allied commanders .
 Mountbatten’s distinguished wartime service was awarded with nobility . He became first Viscount Mountbattatten of Burma in 1946 and then Earl Mountbatta of Burma and Baron Romsey in 1947 .
 In the same year Mountbatten was appointed viceroy of India, and after partition he remained governor-general until 1948 . After partition he was appointed governor general of India .
 This meant overseeing the Indian and Pakistan drive to independence . He became a close friend of Indian National Congress leader Jawaharlal Nehru . He oversaw the independence process in India and Pakistan .
 Pakistan's Muslim League leader Mohammed Ali Jinnah had a close relationship with Jinnah . Jinnah was the leader of the Muslim League during his early days .
 The partition of India was not an easy affair, and much violence and death came as a result . The partition was not easy, and there was a great deal of violence .
 Some critics held Mountbatten responsible for these difficulties because he rushed partition and independence without proper security arrangements being put in place .
 After India, Mountbatten remained in the navy and performed a number of critical duties . He remained with the navy until the end of the war .
 He became first sea lord in 1955 and served in the important post of chief of defense staff from 1959 to 1965 . He also served as first sea lords in 1955 . He was first chief of defence staff in 1959 .
 Mountbatten was assassinated by the Provisional Irish Republican Army on August 27, 1979, while on vacation in County Sligo in the Republic of Ireland . The former British Prime Minister was assassinated in 1979 .
 The explosion killed his eldest daughter’s mother-in-law, the Dowager Baroness Baroness Brabourne . The explosion also killed his daughter's fourth son, Nicholas Knatchbull; and a crew member .
 The murder was widely condemned by both the president and the prime minister of Ireland . The murder of the teenager was widely criticised by both of Ireland's leaders .
 The investigation that followed led to the arrest and conviction of Thomas McMahon in 1979 for the murders . Although given a life sentence, he was released from prison following the Good Friday Agreement of 1998 .
 As a young man, he joined the Zimbabwe African People’s Union with Joshua Nkomo . He split off to form Zimbabwe African National Union, which led a guerrilla warfare struggle against Ian Smith regime .
 Zimbabwe finally attained full independence under a one-person, one-vote rubric in 1979 . After protracted negotiations with Great Britain, Zimbabwe finally achieved full independence .
 Mugabe initially led a coalition government with his rival Nkomo, but gradually evolved a one-party state under his sole rule . Mugabe's rule gradually evolved into a one party state under him .
 Zimbabwe had a biracial government and made economic progress . Mugabe’s regime was successful in raising educational levels for boys and girls . Zimbabwe had one of the highest literacy rates in Africa .
 In the 1990s Mugabe became increasingly dictatorial and refused to cede power even in face of the 2000 elections, when the opposition electoral vote was clearly the majority . Mugabe's government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Mugabe’s ZANU party declared victory in the spring 2005 elections in Zimbabwe . Amid widespread charges of corruption and vote rigging, Mugabe's party claimed victory in 2005 elections .
 Mugabe retained the right personally to select two dozen members of parliament . Mugabe also retains the right to choose two dozen new members of the parliament .
 He also ordered the confiscation of white-owned land that was then distributed to his supporters . The land confiscation was part of a plan to distribute to supporters .
 On pretext of urban renewal, he also tore down urban shanty towns that were centers of political opposition to his regime .
 The resultant political crisis contributed to economic chaos and declining productivity as well as wide-spread condemnation from European nations . Mugabe announced his determination to remain in power, despite on apparent victory by the opposition in the March 29, 2008, elections .
 Pakistani leader Pervez Musharraf was born in Delhi on August 11, 1943, to an educated middle-class family . Born in 1943, he was born to a middle-aged family in India .
 Musharraf’s education included enrollment at the Pakistan Military Academy, the Staff College in Quetta, and the National Defence College . He was educated at the National Defense College and Pakistan's National Military Academy .
 He rose very quickly through the Pakistani military ranks despite the fact that he and his family were not members of the Punjab upper class, which dominated the Pakistani officer corps . He rose quickly through Pakistan's military ranks .
 His military career began in 1964 with various commands that included artillery, infantry units and then leadership over commando units . He was first in commando commandos in 1964 .
 Musharraf graduated from the Royal College of Defence Studies in the United Kingdom before being named the director-general of the military by Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto . Mushrraf participated in the Indo-Pakistani Wars of 1965 and 1971 . He was the director general of
 In 1998 Musharraf became the army chief two days after the resignation of General Jehangir Karamat, the first army chief of staff to ever step down . In 1998 he became the first general to resign from the Pakistani army .
 Some analysts suggested that the appointment of non-Punjab Musharraf by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was designed to prevent him from becoming too powerful .
 Musharraf became frustrated with the prime minister’s diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis with India . He was frustrated with his efforts to solve the crisis . The prime minister's diplomatic efforts failed to do so .
 General Musharraf took over the government of Pakistan in a bloodless coup on October 12, 1999 . He became the 12th president of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan on June 20, 2001 .
 Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif attempted to fire Musharraf and replace him with the director of the Pakistani Intelligence Services, or the ISI, Khwaja Ziauddin .
 Musharraf was out of the country when the crisis began, but returned to Pakistan . With the support of senior military officials, he landed and assumed control of the government . He ultimately exiled Sharif .
 In April 2002 Musharraf held a national referendum in order to legitimize his rule, which was extended for five years . In April 2003 he held a vote to extend his five-year rule, but his rule was extended .
 The majority of Pakistani political parties boycotted the election, and voter participation was believed to have been about 3 percent . The election was held in Pakistan's capital, Islamabad .
 In October 2002 general elections were held, and the pro-Musharraf PML-Q party won a number of seats . The pro- Musharraf party won several seats in the parliament .
 On December 14, 2003, a bomb exploded just minutes after Musharraf’s motorcade crossed a bridge in Rawalpindi . A bomb exploded minutes after the former president's motorcade entered a bridge .
 Another attempt to assassinate him resulted in the death of 16 people nearby . Eleven days later another attempt to kill him ended up killing 16 people .
 Musharraf temporarily broke the deadlock in December of 2004 in order to pass the Seventeenth Amendment, which legalized his 1999 coup . The amendment was passed in December 2004 to legalize his 1999 military coup .
 In January 2004 another referendum extended his presidency until October 2007 . He was re-elected to the presidency in January 2004 . His presidency was extended to October 2007 after a second referendum .
 Musharraf allied with the United States in the War on Terrorism . After the September 11, 2001, attacks on the U.S. Musharra allied with U.K. after 9/11 attacks .
 Musharraf declared emergency rule and dismissed the Supreme Court in November . The Supreme Court was also dismissed in November following the emergency rule declaration . The Pakistani president has been accused of corruption .
 Musharraf renounced his military role in late November . In late November his new, personally appointed Supreme Court dropped all challenges to his legitimacy as president . The new Supreme Court also dropped all legal challenges to the former president .
 Musharraf ended the state of emergency on December 15, 2007, ahead of the scheduled January 8 elections . On December 17, 2007 he ended the emergency ahead of January 8, 2007 .
 Since 1950 there have been many styles of music and large numbers of important musicians who have influenced people throughout the world . Matthew H Wahlert music Since 1950 .
 Music was heard on the radio, television, played on record players, tape recorders, video players, CD players and also on Walkmans, MP3 players, and iPods . It has also been a period where—although concerts continued to be held—for many people, music
 HMV, Sony, CBS, and others have been quick to move with the changes in technology .
 With large numbers of countries becoming independent, there has also been the composing of many national anthems, and the active encouragement of local music, both traditional and contemporary .
 The period from 1950 also saw the emergence of film music by many famous film music composers, including Erich Wolfgang Korngold, and also other musicians and singers .
 There have also been more developments, including the increasing importance of music in schools, with most primary and secondary schools around the world teaching music, and many millions of students learning to play musical instruments .
 Classical music during this period has remained strong . Beethoven’s ‘Ode to Joy’ has become the European anthem . Bach, Mozart, Wagner and others remain popular .
 There have been important conductors of classical music such as Herbert von Karajan of the Vienna State Orchestra . Daniel Barenboim (b. 1962) was a conductor of the Berlin Symphony Orchestra .
 Mention should also be made of miminalist compositions made by Terry Riley, Steve Reich, and Philip Glass . Early 21st-century composers being Oliver Knussen, Thomas Ades, and Michael Daugherty .
 Singing had a resurgence of interest with the Eurovision Song Contest and other events . Singing, which had been very popular before the 1950s, was very popular .
 Australian-born operatic soprano and concert singer Joan Sutherland is internationally acclaimed for her coloratura roles . New Zealander Dame Kiri Te Kanawa is also a popular opera singer .
 There has also been a revival of interest in musicals with Andrew Lloyd Webber’s Jesus Christ Superstar and Evita . Evita, Cats and The Phantom of the Opera playing to packed audiences .
 Composer Richard Rodgers and lyricist Oscar Hammerstein were extremely influential . Rodgers and Hammerstein both were influential in the musicals .
 Protest music has had an important role, with many lyric writers and singers having a major political message . Protest music is a form of protest music .
 Raul Alarcon led the ‘No Waltz’ in a protest against the Chilean dictator General Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, adapting music from Blue Danube by Strauss . Peter Garrett of Midnight Oil, now a politician, is a former politician .
 Folk music has long been popular throughout the world and has had a revival . Traditional folk music from Bob Dylan and other singer-songwriters attracting large audiences .
 The early 1950s saw country and bluegrass music come into the mainstream . It was the first time country music was mainstream .
 At the same time, rock and roll was taking shape from the musical intersection of blues, rhythm and blues, and some injections of that same country music .
 At times the listeners and marketers of country and rock music would seem demographically and geographically different . As the decades progressed musical creativity would spark lively interconnections and fusions .
 Country and rock would each return to their beginnings in the music of earlier days . With each new generation of musicians and listeners through the latter half of the 20th century and the start of the 21st, the music would return to its roots .
 In the 1950s and 1960s much of that earlier music was being brought back to popular attention by the artists of the folk music revival . In the 1960s and '60s, folk music was revived by folk musicians .
 Pete Seeger, Woody Guthrie, the Weavers, and Feadbelly inspire newer generations of singers, songwriters, and players . Artists such as Seeger and Guthrie had taken up music as a tool of social protest during the Great Depression and World War II .
 These musicians would find in music a tool not only for political comment but for personal introspection . They would find it a tool to not only comment but also a tool for personal reflection .
 The blues is often of a much rawer and rowdier nature, such personal emotional expression is a defining factor in the blues . Though it is often often of an emotional nature, it's often of the rawer nature .
 Folk revival musicians of the 1960s revered blues heroes such as Son House and Robert Johnson . Son House, Robert Johnson and Son House were among those revered folk revival musicians .
 A decade earlier in the Mississippi Delta, where that music had its genesis, a white singer had started making records that would cross the boundaries of country, blues, pop, and folk in a way no one had done before before .
 He was working as a truck driver in Memphis when he stopped by Sun Studios one day to record a birthday song for his mother . He stopped by to record the song for her birthday .
 His voice remained distinctive, however far from the energy of those roots he sometimes strayed . His voice, too, remained distinctive .
 An occasional drop-in at Presley’s early Memphis sessions was another singer with a distinctive voice . He would go on to become a towering presence in country, folk, gospel, and rock and roll .
 The fusion of blues, country, rock, and gospel with an uptempo danceable beat appealed to teenagers across the country and across the races in the 1950s . By the end of that decade it had begun to die off as a style of music .
 Rosie Flores and others would revive it beginning in the 1980s . It would be a temporary lull, though, as San Antonio native and . California transplant Rosie . Flores would go on to revive it in the 1990s .
 His music intermingled the rivers of sound that flowed from country, rock, and folk during that decade and beyond . He had a far briefer career than either Presley or Cash .
 Hank Williams fused blues and longing and honky-tonk country melodies with country music . His rural-themed images helped his music cross over to pop and rock listeners .
 Songs such as “I'm So Fonesome I Could Cry’ and “Hey Good Fookin’’s” became standards in the 1950s . They remained so well into the 21st century, for audiences across pop, bluegrass, and
 The late 1950s and early 1960s saw country music become sugar-coated with strings and choral arrangements . The Nashville sound was known as the Nashville sound .
 Producers were going after a pop market that valued sound over substance, producers say . Producers went after a market that was mired in productions that valued music over substance .
 Detroit saw the birth of the Motown sound and the popularity of artists such as Smokey Robinson, the Temptations, and the Supremes . White listeners came in droves to hear black artists, and it was the beginning of musical integration .
 Many artists drew from the folk music revival and expanded on it . Many artists have expanded on the revival of folk music .
 The strongest of these were the evolution of the folk songwriter from balladeer who told stories of events or history to one who wrote and sang powerfully of his own emotions . The parallel return of musician as social rebel and commentator on social injustice .
 The decade of the 1960s saw the emergence of the songwriter as a major force in country and popular music . The songwriter was a major and lasting force in the country .
 The time was filled with good, passionate, and original tunesmiths such as Tom Paxton and Ian and Sylvia Tyson, as well as singers and players whose gift was to interpret others .
 Bob Dylan’s poetic, iconoclastic imagery was for many the defining music of the decade . Bob Dylan's poetic and iconococentric imagery is for many to have defined the decade of Dylan's music .
 Dylan was not a powerhouse singer himself, but the power of his ideas nonetheless drew people to buy his records and come to his concerts . Dylan died at the age of 50 at the end of his career .
 Joan Baez, Judy Collins, and Carolyn Hester were among those who made Dylan’s songs an integral part of their work .
 The Minnesota-born Dylan counted dust-bowl folk troubadour Woody Guthrie as an essential hero . Dylan was not willing to be bound by some-one else’s idea of who or what he should be as an artist .
 In 1965 he played an electric guitar onstage at the famed Newport Folk Festival in Newport, New York .
 That shook things up at the time and raised questions about the limits and bounds of folk, rock, and country that still prompt vital discussion today . The album was released in November 2013 .
 Gram Parsons was another songwriter of the 1960s with a legacy that has endured despite his early death . Gram Parsons blurred the boundaries between rock and country, a legacy has endured .
 Harvard dropout found his way out to California not long after Dylan’s tradition-breaking set at Newport . Raised in Florida and Georgia, he was raised in Georgia and Florida .
 Parsons joined the Byrds, a rock band that quickly became more folk and country oriented under Parsons’s influence . The Byrds became more country-oriented under the influence of Parsons .
 The Byrds’ 1968 release, Sweetheart of the Rodeo, contained another, “Hickory Wind,” which is perhaps the song that best shows Parsons’s love for and understanding of traditional country .
 Country music was a door Parsons opened for Emmylou Harris, who was his duet partner during the last years of his life . Parsons opened the door to Emmy L.A. to the world of country music, Parsons said .
 Harris was singing at folk clubs in the Washington, D.C., area when Parsons first heard her . She was singing in folk clubs .
 A year later, with a recording contract for his solo debut in hand, he hired her to sing on the project . He hired her a year later to sing .
 Parsons’s return to drug and alcohol abuse he thought he’d conquered led to his death . Parsons died two years later, a return to alcohol abuse led to Parsons's death .
 While Harris was forging ways to stay true to her vision of country music, Springsteen was moving closer to folk . Country artists such as Uncle Tupelo, the Tractors and Marty Stuart were moving toward rock rhythms and styles .
 The lines between roots rock and alternative country in band settings continued to blur . The lines were defined more by volume and dress, and occasionally by lyrical content .
 Singers and songwriters like Stuart, Gretchen Peters, and Mark Selby also found chart success with songs recorded by pop, blues, and rock artists .
 Peters moved from Colorado to Nashville in the mid-1980s, just about the time Marty Stuart was scoring chart hits . She wrote music that found her equally at home performing at the Folk Alliance convention, and seeing her tunes cut by Patty Loveless, Bonnie Raitt and Shania
 The more rock-laced they got the more controversy followed her country music career, but it was a clearly a combination that fueled millions of dollars in music sales .
 Twain reached pop and rock audiences with a blend of lyrics and style . Twain's style crossed both those boundaries . Twain was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey . Twain died Sunday at age 50 at age 81 .
 Krauss built her foundation on traditional bluegrass and continued to play it . Krauss took listeners to true bluegrass versions of pop and rock songs they would likely not have encountered .
 The period since 1950 has seen a massive increase in popular music, or “Pop Music,” as it has come to be known . Pop Music has been the subject of much of the world's most popular music .
 The blues, evolving from African-American traditions, gained popularity in the U.S. during the 1930s . Jazz took over as an art form characterized by blue notes and improvisation .
 There have also been a number of major political figures who have played jazz in public . Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, King Rama IX of Thailand, and former U.S. president Bill Clinton have also played .
 Country music officially started in Tennessee in 1927 with Jimmie Rodgers . Country and western music became popular with the increased sale of records .
 This style of music remained popular in the U.S. and Australia . It was also popular in Australia .
 Australian country musicians include Slim Dusty . Australian country and western music enthusiasts meet regularly at Tamworth, New South Wales, each year .
 Some of the traditions of rock and roll go back to the late 1920s . Rock and roll period is usually regarded as the late 1950s and 1960s .
 Elvis Presley came to prominence in the U.S. in the 1950s . The Beatles, which included Paul McCartney, John Lennon and George Harrison .
 Jim Morrison, of The Doors, used tempo and lyrics that had the ability to tap the mood of American youth in 1967 . Jim Morrison used tempo, lyrics to tap American youth's mood .
 He left the United States in 1971 to move to Paris, where he died three months later . He moved to Paris three months after his death .
 Other pop groups include Abba, Adam and the Ants, the Boomtown Rats, the Dead Kennedys, NXS, The Osmonds, The Rolling Stones, the Spice Girls, U2, and U2 . The Who .
 The British television series Top of the Pops helped promote many of the groups . Bono from U2, Bob Geldof, Boy George, Gary Glitter and Jimi Hendrix were all stars .
 Progressive rock came about largely from the 1960s in Britain and Europe, with bands such as Alice Cooper, Pink Floyd, Genesis and Alice Cooper .
 The mid-1970s saw the emergence of punk rock, with hard rock music played at fast speeds with simple lyrics and fewer than three chords . Hard rock music was played at high speed with few lyrics and simple lyrics .
 Television, the Ramones, and the Sex Pistols are some of the most famous groups in rock and punk rock . The groups include Television, The Ramones and Television .
 These generally used electric guitars, electric bass, and drums, with other subtypes developing, such as grunge, with Nirvana’s Kurt Cobain, pop punk; Emo (emotionally charged punk rock); and Gothic rock .
 Other types of music of the period from 1950 include funk, hip hop, salsa, soul, and disco .
 Some early developments in African-American music included gospel and steel bands . In the Caribbean, steel bands were also popular .
 Funk music originated from African Americans, with the most famous musician being James Brown . James Brown was the “Godfather of Soul”
 Salsa music largely came from the Caribbean and became popular in many Latin countries in Central and South America and in the Mediterranean . Salsa is a form of Latin music popular in Latin America .
 Soul music grew out of the African-American gospel singing and blues tradition from the 1950s . Aretha Franklin became well known for her contributions to soul music .
 Disco music, for dance, essentially drew from funk, salsa, and from the Caribbean soul music, being popular in night clubs .
 Reggae music, some associated with the Rastafarian movement, has also become popular in Britain and other places with large expatriate West Indian communities .
 The most famous reggae musician, Bob Marley, incorporated a rock-influenced hybrid, making Marley an international superstar . Marley was born in Jamaica, Jamaica, in 1963 .
 In the 1990s, there was a development of New Age music, representing some form of connection to Mother Earth or Gaia . In the 90s, the music represented a connection to the Earth .
 This included the sound of animals, as well as quiet songs that had the idea of aiding meditation and helping energize yoga sessions, having a calming influence, and representing essentially a cultural backlash and alternative to punk rock .
 This has also been reflected in a rise in interest in choir music by the King’s College Choir from Cambridge, England . The Mormon Tabernacle Choir is from Utah; the Welsh male voice choirs; and British marching bands from the coal mines .
 There has also been a resurgence of the massive Estonian choirs, and renewed interest in Australian Aboriginal music .
 There has been a revival of Zulu and other African chants, and also music from remote places such as Paraguay and Tibetan music .
 There have also been many internationally acclaimed African singers and musicians . Ali Farka Toure from Mali is one of the most famous musicians .
 In India, music played on a sitar by Ravi Shankar and others has been popular in its own right and in Bollywood films . The sitar is a popular instrument in India and has been used in many Indian films .
 Chinese operatic music has remained, in spite of China becoming communist . There were major changes in Chinese music during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 . Jiang Qing took part in promoting new revolutionary themes in music .
 Gamelan music in Java and Bali continues, and there has been much interest in pop music . ‘45’ records of the music of Sim Sisamouth of Cambodia and others were popular during the 1970s .
 Namibia’s government is a multiparty, multiracial democracy . Namibia is a multi-racial democracy . The Namibia government is multiparty democracy .
 The country is bounded on the north by Angola and Zambia, on the east by Botswana and South Africa . It is also on the south by South Africa, and on the west by the Atlantic Ocean .
 The dominant religion is Christianity, mostly Lutheran, with English and Afrikaans as the common languages .
 The rebellion was crushed, and most of the indigenous people were stripped of their land . Most of the land was stripped of . land .
 On July 19, 1915, the last German troops surrendered to the South African expeditionary corps at Khorab . The South African military occupation of Namibia began .
 Namibia seen as valuable asset to whoever controlled it because of its mineral wealth and agricultural potential . Namibia was seen as a valuable asset because of the mineral wealth .
 On December 17, 1920, South Africa received official approval from the League of Nations to rule Namibia under a “C” mandate . South Africa was granted the "C" mandate in 1920 . Namibia was ruled by South Africa under a 'C' mandate .
 This type of mandate was designated for former German territories that were not considered to be likely to pass into independence in the foreseeable future . Former German territories were designated for ex-German territories not expected to pass independence .
 South Africans claimed that the mandate should be viewed as a position of great trust and honor . But in practice it offered profits and advantages to South African nationals .
 For all essential purposes, Namibia had been annexed to South Africa, with the interests of Namibians subordinate to those of whites . Namibia was annexed to apartheid-era South Africa .
 The South-West Africa People's Organization began fighting for Namibia’s independence in 1966 . It was a Marxist guerrilla group founded in 1960 . Namibia is now Namibia's first country to become independent .
 In 1966 the United Nations passed Resolution 2145, which revoked South Africa’s mandate and changed Namibia's name to Namibia . In 1966, the U.N. voted to change the country's name from South Africa to Namibia .
 The UN brokered a peace agreement in 1977 in which South Africa accepted UN control over Namibia . Namibia was ruled by the UN in 1977 after a war between South Africa and South Africa .
 In 1988, South Africa agreed to withdraw from Namibia . Only in 1988, however, did South Africa agree to do so .
 The new government held UN-supervised elections in 1989, which SWAPO won decisively . New government came to power in 1989 after the elections .
 Sam Nujomo was one of the leaders of the independence movement . He became Namibia’s first president . He was the leader of the liberation movement in Namibia .
 After independence, the government pursued a policy of compromise with opposition groups . The government worked to address racial inequalities in Kenya .
 There is an extreme disparity between the income levels of blacks and whites, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The major economic resources in the country are no longer controlled exclusively by whites . However, the living standards of blacks have been steadily improving, according to the Census .
 The country’s modern market sector produces most of its wealth, while a traditional subsistence agricultural sector supports most of the labor force . The country's modern market sectors produce most of their wealth .
 The principal exports are diamonds, copper, uranium, gold, lead, cattle, and fish . The country's main exports are diamond, copper and uranium .
 Ranching still controlled largely by white citizens and foreign interests . Ranching is still controlled by white people and foreign investors .
 The unemployment rate of nearly 40 percent in 2000 primarily affected the black majority . Unemployment rates in 2000 were about 40 percent, mostly black people .
 In 2005, black Africans made up 87. percent of the population, with white Africans numbering 6 percent and people of mixed race making up 6. percent .
 By law, all indigenous groups participate equally in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and allocations of natural resources . All indigenous groups have to participate equally .
 Namibia’s indigenous citizens were unable to fully exercise these rights as a result of minimal access to education, limited economic opportunities under colonial rule, and their isolation .
 Virtually all of the country’s minorities are represented in Parliament, in senior positions in the cabinet, and at other levels of government . Virtually every country's minority population is represented in the country's Parliament .
 The government took numerous measures to end societal discrimination against the San.com . The government also took steps to end social discrimination against them .
 Many San children do not attend school, making advancement difficult . However, many San children don't attend school .
 The future of Namibia remained in doubt at the start of the 21st century . Namibia's future of the country remained uncertain at the beginning of the 20th century .
 The spread of the human immunodeficiency virus held the possibility of devastating the country . The spread was held the . possibility of . devastating the . country .
 The presence of refugees from nearby war-torn nations held the potential to drag down the economy and involve Namibians in cross-border conflicts . Additionally the presence of numerous refugees from neighboring war-ravaged nations had the potential of dragging down the Namibian economy .
 Desertification, land degradation, and wildlife poaching are likely to remain issues of concern in the foreseeable future, experts say . Desertification and land degradation will likely remain an issue of concern, they say .
 Canadian Council for International Cooperation, 1984; Jaster, Robert S. S. South Africa in Namibia: The Botha Strategy. Botha strategy.
 Gamal Abdel Nasser led the 1952 Egyptian revolution that overthrew the corrupt monarchy of King Farouk . The revolution overthrew a corrupt and ineffective monarar .
 Nasser graduated from the Royal Military Academy in Cairo and served in the Sudan . Nasser served in Sudan .
 He fought in the 1948 Arab-Israeli War at Falluja, where Egyptian forces held out against Israel until the war’s end .
 After the 1948 war, Nasser and other junior officers blamed King Farouk for the war’s substandard weaponry and lack of military strategy . After the war, senior officers blamed Farouk's military strategy and substandard weapons .
 Nasser was one of the founders of the secret Free Officers group . He was determined to oust Farouk and set Egypt on a different path . Nasser founded the Free Officers Group .
 Brigadier-General Muhammad Naguib was put forward to the public as the head of the officers’ group . Although the older and better-known Brigadier General Muhammad . Naguir was in fact the acknowledged leader, Nasser was acknowledged leader .
 He was known for carefully listening to all viewpoints and then making decisions . He said he would carefully listen and then make a decision .
 On July 22, 1952, the Free Officers overthrew the monarchy in a practically bloodless coup d’etat . The Free Officers ousted the monarchy .
 A Revolutionary Command Council was established with Naguib as its head . The council was formed with the head of the Revolutionary Council . A Revolutionary command council was established .
 Nasser and Naguib clashed over whether to keep a parliamentary system or establish a one-party state with populist support . Nasser favored a course he favored, but Naguibi favored a one party state .
 A single party, the Fibera tion Rally, was established in 1953 . The majority of the officers favored Nasser, and the majority of officers favored him .
 Nasser was elected president by a huge majority of Egyptian voters in 1956 . A new constitution was implemented in 1956 and Nasser became president . Nasser ruled Egypt from 1956 to 1958 .
 Nasser was extremely popular with the majority of Egyptians and among average Arabs everywhere . He was a highly charismatic figure and a brilliant speaker in colloquial Arabic . Nasser died at the age of 50 in a Cairo hospital on December 18, 1961 .
 Nasser was a pragmatic political leader who sought to develop Egypt economically and socially . Not an ideologue, Nasser sought to be a pragmatic leader, not ideologue .
 He moved toward socialism and the Soviet Union after his requests for military aid had been rebuffed by the U.S. He moved to socialism after his request for military help had been rejected .
 After attending the Bandung Conference in 1955, Nasser joined with Jawaharlal Nehru of India and Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia in championing positive neutralism . Third World nations would not forge solid alliances with either the U.S. or the Soviet Union in the cold war
 Neither of the superpowers liked this approach, but the United States was particularly hostile to it . The U.S. was especially hostile to this approach .
 Nasser opposed the Western-led CENTO/Baghdad Pact and opposed Arab regimes such as the Hashemite monarchies in Iraq and Jordan . He opposed the conservative, extremely pro-Western Saudi Arabian monarchy .
 Under Nasser, Egypt became a center for African and Arab political leaders and students . Egypt was center for political leaders, students and political leaders .
 Nasser committed to secular government and persecuted Islamists, particularly the Muslim Brotherhood . Nasser was personally a devout Muslim, but was committed to a secular government .
 Like all Arab leaders, Nasser supported the Palestinian cause and their right to self-determination . Nasser: "I am proud to be a proud Arab leader and proud of my country's achievements"
 He permitted some fedayeen guerrilla attacks from the Egyptian-administered Gaza Strip in Israel . But he also recognized the superiority of Israel’s military, he said .
 He initially sought, through back channels, to negotiate settlements to the conflict with Israel . Consequently he initially sought to negotiate settlement settlements to Israel .
 Israel insisted on face-to-face negotiations, and the attempts all failed . Israel insists on face to-face talks, and attempts to negotiate failed .
 Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal in 1956 after the U.S. refused to grant aid for building the Aswan Dam . The canal was nationalized after the United States refused aid to build the dam .
 The nationalization led to the 1956 Arab-Israeli War . Great Britain, France, and Israel jointly attacked Egypt in 1956 .
 The war was a military loss for Egypt but a political victory after which Nasser became indisputably the most popular man in the entire Arab world . Nasser's victory in Egypt was a political triumph after which he became indisputedably the .
 During the so-called Arab cold war Nasser’s influence dominated the liberal, progressive, and socialist governments in Syria and elsewhere, versus the conservative pro-Western monarchies, including Jordan and Saudi Arabia . During the Cold War Nasser's influence dominated .
 With the formation of the United Arab Republic of Egypt and Syria in 1958, Nasser perhaps reached the peak of his popularity . Nasser's popularity peaked in 1958 .
 Nasser accepted responsibility for losses in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War . Following the devastating military losses, he accepted responsibility and resigned .
 He never regained the unquestioning support throughout the Arab world that he had previously enjoyed . Massive and generally spontaneous public demonstrations calling for his return led him to resume the Egyptian presidency .
 In 1970 Nasser was called upon to mediate a truce between the Palestine Liberation Organization and King Hussein of Jordan in the bloody war between the two . Nasser mediated a truce in the 1970s between the PLO and Jordan in a bloody war .
 Shortly thereafter he suffered a massive heart attack, in part brought on by the tensions of the negotiations, and died in late September . Shortly thereafter, he died of a heart attack .
 Nasser was mistrusted and opposed in most of the West and Israel . Millions of mourning Egyptians joined his funeral cortege . Nasser's funeral was attended by millions of mourners .
 The legacy of Nasserism, secular pan-Arab nationalism, and state-directed socialism, spread throughout most of the Arab world during Nasser’s lifetime, but declined and, except in Lebanon, largely diminished after his death . In Lebanon, the legacy of the Nasser
 Janice J Terry NeWin was one of the central figures in 20th-century Burmese history . U Ne Win bears a heavy responsibility for creating the most vicious despotic regimes of the modern world .
 Ne Win was born into a middle-class family in Burma as it was becoming more firmly integrated into the British Empire . Ne Win is one of the world's most famous women .
 When Japanese troops invaded Burma in World War II, he was one of many Burmese who welcomed their defeat of the British .
 He became one of the ‘30 Comrades’ who received secret military training from the Japanese . He subsequently led the Burma Independence Army into Rangoon .
 He switched the allegiance of the BIA to the Allied forces . However, he became disillusioned with Japanese rule and switched allegiance to them .
 When Burma won independence in 1948, he was appointed to command the military forces of the country . He played an important role in dealing with the conflict between the central government and ethnic minority groups .
 U Nu was ruling the country during the early postindependence years as head of the Anti-Fascist People’s Freedom League . Aung San was the leader of the League, which had been created by aung San . U Nu ruled the country in the early years of the
 Ne Win yielded power at the 1960 general election but then seized power in 1962 . Ne Win claimed power on the grounds that the policies of U Nu’s new government had led to a renewal of fighting and religious conflict .
 Ne Win announced the Burmese Way of Socialism, which combined elements of socialism, antiimperialism, and forced puritanism . Ne Win was ruler of the country for decades .
 The results were increasingly disastrous for Burma’s economy and society . The results have been increasingly disastrous . Burma's economy has been hit hard by the fall of Burma's political turmoil .
 His government was never fully able to suppress the opposition . Despite progressive strengthening of control over power, intensive censorship, isolationism, and mass arrests, his government never fully suppressed the opposition.
 The international community was critical of his rule, but he was able to gain support from China to maintain his rule . His rule was criticized by the international community, but China supported him .
 As time went on his personal idiosyncrasies became more prominent, which included increasing reliance on mysticism and superstition . As time as went on, he became increasingly reliant on superstitious beliefs .
 He insisted that all currency be issued in denominations divisible by nine or in other numbers he considered auspicious . One bizarre move was his insistence on currency being issued in numbers that he considers auspicious numbers .
 In 1987 rioting intensified across the country and led to Ne Win’s resignation the following year . Ne Win resigned from the post in 1987 .
 Power passed to the State Law and Order Restoration Committee . The committee renamed Myanmar . Myanmar is now Myanmar .
 Indian leader Jawaharlal Nehru came from a distinguished Kashmiri Brahmin family . John Walsh Nehru was born in Kashmiri and Kashmiri .
 His father, Motilal Nehru (1861— 1931), was a successful lawyer who joined the Indian National Congress . He was president of the party in 1920, and was a lawyer .
 The elder Nehru founded a nationalist newspaper named The Independent . He was elected to the Indian Legislative Assembly in accordance with the India Act .
 He was also the author of the 1918 Nehru Report, which advocated dominion status for India . Nehru was also a leading advocate for dominion status .
 He had a brief career as a barrister but soon gave up the legal profession . He joined the Indian National Congress and became a member of the party .
 He became a follower of Mohandas Gandhi, accompanying him in civil disobedience campaigns for self-government for India . He served many terms in jail for his role in India's civil disobedience .
 He rose quickly in the Congress, becoming leader of its left wing . He was secretary between 1929 and 1939, and also president of it .
 He used five months of internment in Ahmadnagar Fort in 1944 to write a book titled The Discovery of India that explored India’s cultural heritage .
 When freed from prison, he participated in negotiating sessions with British authorities in attempts to find mutually acceptable formulas for advancing India’s quest for independence .
 He condemned the provisions of the India Act of 1935 as totally inadequate . He campaigned for the legislative elections that it authorized, winning impressive majorities in all non-Muslim provinces in 1937 .
 Mohammed Ali Jinnah was president of the All India Muslim League (which won in the Muslim majority provinces) to rally Indian Muslims to work toward a separate nation, Pakistan .
 League ministries cooperated with British authorities throughout the war and thereby gained valuable governing experience . League ministers cooperated in the war with the British government . League ministries cooperate with British officials throughout the conflict .
 Nehru spent the war years in jail for leading campaigns of noncooperation . Out of jail negotiating with British missions on the timetable for the transfer of power to Indians .
 Prime Minister Clement Attlee appointed Louis, Lord Mountbatten, Allied supreme commander in the Southeast Asia war theater, the last viceroy to complete the handover of power in August 1947 .
 By that time the Muslim League had become firmly committed to Pakistan . Gandhi and Nehru were forced to concede to a partition of the subcontinent into India and Pakistan . The partition was accompanied by communal rioting and large-scale movement of refugees .
 Nehru was committed to industrial expansion and adopted many features of the planned economy of communist nations . Nehru also allowed free enterprise, although he also encouraged free enterprise .
 Both Communist and Western blocs gave large amounts of economic aid to India . India’s neutral stance and leadership among the nonaligned nations resulted in large economic aid from both the Communist and the Western bloc .
 Farming remained private hands, and there was no state-sponsored land distribution to the peasants . Farming remained in private hands and there were no state sponsored land distribution .
 Economic development was stymied by rapid population growth, spurred by medical advances that increased life expectancy . Economic development in the 1950s and '60s was stifled by rapid growth .
 Nehru conceded that India had to run fast in order to stand still . Despite steady gains in gross national product, per capita income showed little growth . Most of the population remained very poor, and most of the country remained poor .
 The two newly independent nations went to war immediately over control of Kashmir . Kashmir is a princely state in the north with a Muslim majority population but ruled by a Hindu prince .
 The ruler of Kashmir opted to join India, which immediately sent in its military . Under the terms of the partition, all princely states had to choose to join either India or Pakistan .
 Pakistani forces also crossed into Kashmir, touching off the first IndoPakistani War . The first Indo-Pakistani war was fought in Kashmir, starting in 1947 .
 A cease-fire under a U.N. mandate went into effect in 1948, but the dispute remained unsettled . Kashmir remained partitioned in 2006, and Kashmir remained divided in 2006 .
 A small war in 1961 expelled the Portuguese from their enclave, called Goa, in southwestern coastal India . The Portuguese were expelled from the enclave, known as Goa .
 Nehru’s foreign policy was aimed at securing Indian leadership among the nonaligned nations in the cold war . Most of them were newly independent countries in Asia and Africa . Nehru's foreign policy aims to secure Indian leadership in the world in the Cold War .
 He found his quest for leadership challenged by the People’s Republic of China . China also sought to lead the Third World . However, he found himself challenged by China .
 Nehru’s friendship with China hit a roadblock over Tibet, a Chinese territory that Great Britain had sought to draw into its sphere of influence since the late 19th century . Great Britain wanted to draw in Tibet, an area of China's territory .
 Tibet had enjoyed autonomy under the weak Chinese republican governments after 1912 . It ended when the communist government of China took control of Tibet and began consolidating its power there .
 A disputed boundary between the two nations remained unresolved . China contending that the McMahon Line drawn by the British in 1914 included 52,000 square miles of Chinese territory .
 Relations were exacerbated when a failed Tibetan revolt against China led to the flight of the Tibetan leader, the Dalai Lama, to India, which gave him and his followers political asylum . The Dalai Lama was exiled from China after a failed revolt against the country .
 A brief war broke out between India and China in which the Indian army was decisively defeated . The war was a brief war between the Indian and Chinese armies .
 The victorious Chinese army, however, did not advance beyond the area in dispute . The Chinese army was victorious in the battle .
 See also Bandung Conference (Asian-African Conference) and Gandhi, Indira Gandhi . Indira. Gandhi. Gandhi . Gandhi .
 Nepal started out as a monarchy in the 17th century under the Shah dynasty . The country came under British rule in 1816 as a result of defeat in the AngloNepalese War .
 During this period, some Nepalese became interested in communism while others favored democracy . During this time, some Nepalis were interested in democracy .
 In 1959 an experimental democratic government was instituted, but it was overthrown by King Mahendra in 1961 . In 1959, an experimental democracy was instituted in India .
 Communists were present in Nepal in the 1960s, but King Mahendra had banned political parties . Communists were in Nepal at the time .
 Tensions in the country, because of corruption and controversy in elections, led the CPN to decide that an armed uprising was the only way to achieve their goals . The CPN decided to take advantage of the situation in order to win the election .
 On February 13, 1996, the CPN launched simultaneous attacks on police and government targets . The attacks were carried out on police, government targets in the country's capital .
 The Royal Nepal Army fought the communist forces in what they called a police action, and have not declared war . The Nepal Army has not declared a war, but has fought communist forces .
 Kilo Sera 2, launched in June-August 1998, was a government operation cracking down on the communist rebels . The operation was launched in the summer of 1998, when the government cracked down on rebels .
 The government believed that enforcement of law and order was all that was needed to quell the rebellion . The government was determined to keep the rebels in check .
 The operation is considered to have added fuel to the rebellion instead of discouraging it . The people were more sympathetic to the rebels, since the people were sympathetic to them .
 In June 2001, Crown Prince Dipendra went on a shooting rampage and killed most of the royal family . His father, King Birendra, and his mother, Queen Aishwarya, were killed .
 As a result, Gyanendra, the late king’s brother, took the kingship, although he let the parliamentary government continue operating . He let it continue operating as a result .
 Conspiracy theories circulated that made King Gyanendra the mastermind of the killings for the purpose of seizing power in Nepal . disagreement on the prince’s choice of wife was considered to be the reason for the rampage . Conspiracy theories were circulated on the king's wife .
 In 2002, under the banner of the War on Terror after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the United States, Europe and India began supporting the Nepalese government with supplies and financial aid .
 On February 1, 2005, King Gyanendra dismissed Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba, restoring an absolute monarchy in Nepal . The move further fueled suspicions that he had masterminded the 2001 royal family killings .
 This action caused further aid from other countries to cease . This action, however, caused further assistance to cease from other nations .
 In May 2006 the Nepalese government called a cease-fire and started peace talks with the rebels . The rebels participated in talks without agreeing to lay down their arms . The government has called for peace talks between the rebels and the government .
 In July, a United Nations delegation came to mediate peace terms . Both the government and the rebels agreed to let the UN team mediate . The government and rebels have been fighting for years .
 As of 2006 more than 12,700 casualties had been reported, and 150,000 people had been displaced as a result of the war . 150,00 people were displaced in the war as of 2006, and 12,000 casualties were reported .
 On November 21, 2006, a peace accord was signed between the rebel forces led by the mysterious Prachanda and Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala, officially ending hostilities .
 But it remains to be seen whether this will be the end of long-term tensions in the country .
 Martin Chautari, Centre for Social Research and Development, 2003; Deepak Thapa, Deepak, and Bandira Sijapati.
 Ngo Dinh Diem was president of South Vietnam from 1955 until his death in 1963 . He was president from 1955 to 1963 . Diem died in 1963 at the age of 65 .
 Ngo Dinh Diem’s ancestors were among the first to convert Vietnamese to Catholicism in the 17th century . Diem's ancestors converted to Catholicism .
 As a Catholic, he was closely aligned with the French colonial rule in Vietnam . He was a Catholic who opposed colonial rule .
 In 1933 Ngo Dinh Diem was appointed to the Ministry of the Interior under the emperor Bao Dai, who ruled under French tutelage . He was appointed in 1933 under the French-controlled government .
 French opposed his proposed reforms . However, he was soon forced to resign from the French .
 He did not return to power until 1954, when Bao Dai invited him to join his new government . He was invited to join the new government of China .
 Within a year he had engineered the ousting of the emperor and established himself as president of South Vietnam with dictatorial powers . Nevertheless, within a year after the emperor's ousting, he had established himself .
 U.S. supported Vietnam's anti-communist leader because of his opposition to communism . He was able to achieve this because of the support of the United States, which believed he would be the best candidate to lead a pro-Western united Vietnam .
 The United States was frustrated by Ngo Dinh Diem’s intransigence and refusal to accede to the terms under which the U.S. had backed him . Diem was soon frustrated by the terms he had agreed to .
 These included most notably the implementation of the Geneva Accords, which required general elections throughout the country in 1956 . The Geneva Accord was the basis for the Geneva accords .
 He appointed members of his family to senior positions within the administration . Instead he appointed relatives of his former colleagues to top positions in administration .
 U.S. authorities withdrew their support when it became clear that he had no intention of following United States policies . Vietnamese army officers assassinated him in November 1963 .
 Nguyen Van Thieu was president of South Vietnam from 1967 until it fell to Communist North Vietnamese forces in 1975 . He was president from 1967 to 1975, when the country fell to communist North Vietnam .
 He played a major part in the U.S. war in Vietnam and lived the remainder of his life in exile . He spent most of the time in exile in Vietnam .
 Nguyen Van Thieu was the son of a small landowning family in a Vietnam colonized by the French . He was born in a family of landowners in a small country in Vietnam .
 He aspired to freedom for his country and joined Ho Chi Minh’s liberation struggle in 1945 . He was born in Hành, Vietnam, and died in 1968 .
 He defected to fight on the side of the French against his former allies . However, he subsequently defected from the French to fight against the French .
 His ability as a military leader was soon recognized and, from 1954, he took command of the Vietnamese Military Academy of South Vietnam after it won independence from France .
 He served under Ngo Dinh Diem but also took part in Ngo’s assassination in 1963, with the tacit support of U.S. authorities . He was assassinated in 1963 with the support of the United States .
 He was elected president of the Republic of Vietnam in 1967 and then reelected unopposed in 1971 . He subsequently took a leading role in Nguyen Cao Ky’s military government .
 Nguyen Van Theiu’s administration tended toward authoritarianism, with U.S. support possibly because the United States had no alternatives . The United States has no alternatives to authoritarianism in Vietnam .
 Nguyen Van Thieu was nevertheless critical of U.S. policies and politicians . He was critical of the United States policies in Vietnam and Vietnam .
 He resented their lack of interest in Vietnamese culture and history, refusal to learn the Vietnamese language, and demands for democracy, he said . He said he resented them for not learning Vietnamese language .
 Even as he was airlifted out of Saigon in 1975 just before it fell to communism, he accused the United States of running away and abandoning his country . He accused the U.S. of running from Saigon .
 He was as an ally of U.S. president Lyndon B Johnson and then Richard Nixon . He led the South Vietnamese state against the Communist forces .
 He worked with U.S. military advisers and then with the large-scale deployment of United States and allied forces .
 As the Communists gained ground, he agreed to participate in negotiations that resulted in the peace agreement of 1973 . He was one of the most prominent figures in the Soviet Union .
 As U.S. forces withdrew from South Vietnam and the North Vietnamese advanced, he ordered all South Vietnamese forces to protect Saigon, but was unsuccessful . As United States forces withdrew, he tried to keep Saigon under control .
 As the city fell he resigned as president and fled to exile, first in London and then in the U.S. He fled to the United States, where he spent most of his life .
 On July 19, 1979, a coalition led by the Sandinista National Liberation Front overthrew the 43-year Somoza dictatorship, inaugurating the period of the Nicaraguan (or Sandinistas) revolution .
 Nicaragua, under the FSLN, is considered the last major battleground of the cold war in the Western Hemisphere . Nicaragua is considered a major battleground in the Cold War .
 In the early 1980s the revolutionary regime embarked on a series of successful programs in health care, literacy, and related arenas . The regime enjoyed wide spread support .
 By the mid1980s the regime and revolutionary process began to weaken, largely the result of a crippling United States trade embargo and the U.S.-supported contra war under Ronald Reagan .
 On February 25, 1990, a coalition of anti-Sandinista political parties defeated the ruling regime at the polls . It effectively ended the 11-year revolutionary experiment in Cuba .
 The FSLN was founded in 1961 by Carlos Fonseca Amador, Tomas Borge, and other Nicaraguans inspired by the example of Fidel Castro and the Cuban revolution . Named after Augusto C Sandino, the nationalist rebel fought the United States Marines to a
 Their political program emphasized opposition to the Somoza dictatorship (Somocismo) and United States imperialism . nationalism, democracy, and social justice at home; and political nonalignment abroad .
 In 1979 a divided elite, the intransigence and corruption of the regime of Anastasio Somoza Debayle combined to create a strategic political opening . The FSLN exploited this opening to defeat the National Guard and seize state power in 1979 .
 An estimated 50,000 Nicaraguans died in the uprisings and insurrections against the Somoza regime . Around 1.5 percent of the country’s population of 3 million died in those uprisins .
 The economy was devastated, with GDP declining 7. percent in 1978 and 25 percent in 1979 . The country was saddled with $1.1 billion in foreign debt and severe shortages of food, medicine, and other basic commodities .
 After ousting Somoza, the Sandinistas embarked on a far-reaching program of social and economic reform . The Sandinista ruled the country for more than 30 years .
 The Governing Junta of National Reconstruction was established in early 1979 and the country’s supreme political authority . The pree-existing national government was abolished .
 After national elections in November 1984, the National Assembly replaced the Council of State, and the JGRN was dissolved, replaced by elected president Daniel Ortega . The National Assembly was replaced by the National Socialist Party .
 In January 1987 a new constitution was promulgated codifying these and other changes . The constitution was published in 1987 .
 Popular organizations helped bring the Sandinistas to power, helped bring them to power . They continued to play a key role in the revolution after 1979 . Promoting democracy from below, the revolutionary regime found much of its legitimacy .
 The FSLN focused considerable attention on women’s issues, including maternal health, child care, political equality, and others . Critics later charged that the party largely reproduced the patriarchal norms of the larger society .
 The new government abolished the National Guard and police forces . In their stead created the Popular Sandinista Army (Ejercito Popular Sandiniista, or EPS)
 One of the major tasks of the new regime was to launch extensive land reforms . The Ministry of Agricultural Development and Agrarian Reform is headed by DN member Jaime Wheelock . The new regime has launched extensive land reform efforts .
 Sandinista agrarian reform efforts in the 1980s, like those of Cuba in the 1960s, have been the topic of enormous controversy . Sandinistas have been criticized for trying to reform Cuba's economy .
 On seizing power, the government expropriated all land owned by Somoza and his allies, a total of some 800,000 hectares, or 20 percent of the country’s arable land . The government took over the land from the former president and seized control of Som
 In the realm of popular welfare, the revolutionary government embarked on a wide range of reforms . In the social and cultural aspects of the revolution, the government has been reforming its welfare system .
 These included a more extensive social security system; large state subsidies for housing and staple foods; the creation of a national health care system; and a Literacy Crusade that earned the UNESCO Literacy Prize in 1980 .
 A major issue through the 1980s was the relationship between the Sandinista regime and the ethnic minorities of the region . The region had a very different history and culture from mestizo-dominated, Spanish-speaking western Nicaragua .
 The revolution’s relationship to the Roman Catholic Church was a major issue . Another major issue was the relationship between the revolution and the church .
 Critics of the regime emphasized disrespect shown to Pope John Paul II in his visit to Managua in March 1983 . Supporters stressed the influence of liberation theology on Sandinista efforts to promote equal rights and social justice .
 On November 4,1984, the Sandinistas held national elections . They garnered 67 percent of the vote and won 61 of 96 seats in the newly created assembly .
 The elections were denounced as fraudulent by the United States but judged as fair by international observers . The United States denounced the elections as fraudulent, but international observers said they were fair .
 Sandinista government pursued a policy of nonalignment, garnering the support of the Nonaligned Movement, and forging alliances with and receiving foreign assistance from western Europe . Cuba, Cuba, the East bloc, and the Soviet Union were allies .
 The United States interpreted the regime as a Cuban and Soviet beachhead and bulwark of communism . The U.S. under President Reagan, the regime was interpreted as a communist beachhead . President Reagan said it was a bulwark against communism .
 On April 1, 1981, the Reagan administration announced a cutoff of aid . The Reagan administration successfully deprives the regime of credits and loans from the InterAmerican Development Bank .
 “ Nicaragua” included support for contra forces . It was composed of several thousand former members of Somoza’s National Guard exiled in Honduras .
 In February and March 1984 the United States mined the harbor at Puerto Corinto, western Nicaragua’s largest port, in western Nicaragua . In May 1985 Reagan announced a United States trade embargo against Nicaragua .
 These and related hostile acts galvanized a growing peace and justice movement, in the U.S., Europe, and Latin America . The United States and Europe are in solidarity with the revolution, in support of the revolution .
 By the late 1980s the regime was beleaguered by the combined effects of the trade embargo, the contra war, hyperinflation, and growing popular discontent in consequence of the devastation of the . contra war .
 Losing the February 1990 elections to Violeta Chamorro and the National Opposition Union, the regime peacefully ceded power . The regime left the country with some $12 billion in debt . The country is now in a state of debt .
 After 1990 the legacy of the revolution continued to exercise a major influence on the country’s social, political, and cultural life . A retooled FSLN wielded considerable political power in a series of coalition governments .
 Nigeria is located in western Africa on the Gulf of Guinea between Benin and Cameroon . The country is located on the coast of western Africa .
 It occupies 923,768 square kilometers, making it one-third larger than the United States state of Texas . The island nation is one of the world's largest cities .
 Nigeria stretches 1,600 kilometers from north to south, and is 1,100 kilometers wide from the Atlantic coast to its eastern border . Nigeria is also 1,200 kilometers wide and 1,400 kilometers wide . Nigeria's population is estimated to be at the highest level in the world .
 The major population divisions include the Hausa (29 percent) who live in the north; the Yoruba (21 percent), who occupy the southwest; the Igbo or Ibo (18 percent) are in the southeast . The Ijaw (10 percent) reside in the
 There is also a divide of religion, with the north heavily Muslim and the south largely Christian .
 English was adopted as the nation’s official language . English is now the only language spoken in the country .
 Fifty percent of the population now has a basic command, although there are many more who speak a smattering of broken or ‘pidgin’ English .
 Administratively the nation is currently divided into 36 states and one capital territory . The nation has one capital city, one state and one state .
 Abuja, located in the center of the country, became the nation’s capital in 1991 . It replaced the large port city of Lagos, Lagos with its over 13 million people . Abuja is now the country's capital .
 Modern Nigeria is a product of the late 19th-century British Empire builders . Modern Nigeria was built by the British Empire in the early 19th century .
 Before this time it was part of a wide-ranging section of West Africa made up of many peoples and territories, all occupying much smaller tribal areas . The area is now home to a large number of people .
 All of West Africa, including Nigeria, was the subject of even earlier European interest . All of the continent was also subject of interest in Nigeria .
 The Portuguese came to the area in the late 15th century, attracted by the lucrative slave trade with local tribes . The Portuguese were attracted to the region by the trade of slaves .
 The profits were such that the Portuguese slave trading monopoly was broken in the 16th century . Other Europeans, including the British, also wanted a share of the riches .
 Lagos and Badagry became important markets for the exchange of a variety of products, particularly gin and firearms . Lagos became an important market for gin, firearms and other products .
 The slave trade was abolished in the British Empire and in the United States after 1807 . British commercial interest in the area didn’t decline, and the penetration of the interior rivers by steamships began in earnest after the 1840s .
 In 1886, the National African Company, later the Royal Niger Company, received a royal charter to oversee trade in the Niger Delta, which included governing rights . Lagos became a key base and, in 1883, Lagos was a key part of the royal charter .
 In 1897, the company’s governing provisions were removed, and the British government asserted its authority, creating in 1900 a North Nigeria Protectorate . The company's operations became too expensive and, in 1897, it was removed .
 By 1902 after a time of armed resistance, the Sokoto Caliphate and Kano submitted to British authority . Kano and Sokoto were ruled by the British government .
 Lugard combined all the protectorates with Lagos to form the Federation of Nigeria . Lugard became governor-general of Nigeria in 1914 . He was governor general of Lagos .
 A policy of indirect rule followed during which local tribal leaders, emirs, and sultans administered their areas in conjunction with the colonial civil service .
 As late as the 1930s only a few hundred British officers were in country . Only a handful of British officers remained in the UK .
 Education in Muslim areas lagged behind Christian-led efforts in the south . Infrastructure was improved, including railroad construction to the north, but education lagged .
 Nationalism became an increasing factor during the 1930s . It was essentially motivated by the notion of Pan-Africanism . Nationalism was a growing factor in African nations .
 A Nigerian sense of nationalism is made more difficult by the area’s many regional and tribal divides . Yet a sense of national unity is made difficult by many of the country's many tribal and regional divides .
 The end of World War II left Britain weary of the demands and costs of empire, and moves toward change occurred as early as 1946 .
 At this time a constitutional reform was introduced that created in the first instance three regional legislatures . At the time, the country was in the midst of a crisis .
 The desired goal was the formation of a federal legislative structure for all of Nigeria . The north finally agreed to join in 1959 to form a federal system in 1959 .
 Direct elections occurred in 1959, and a federal government was founded . Direct elections were held in the United States .
 This new government, meeting for the first time in 1960, declared Nigeria’s independence on October 1 . The new government met with the first government meeting in 1960 .
 Yoruba opposing western regional reorganizations . The Yoruba are Yoruba people of western Yoruba .
 This lack of stability undermined the national government, creating a pattern for the future that would include ethnic fighting and massive corruption . The future would be filled with ethnic fighting, corruption and ethnic fighting . This is the future of the country, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 In 1963 Nigeria became a federal republic with an elected president in an effort to strengthen central authority . In 1963, Nigeria became the first country to have a president elected .
 The elections in 1964 produced more arguments and rioting over suspected electoral fraud . The elections were held in 1964 and 1965 .
 The Nigerian National Alliance took control of parliament, and the United Progressive Grand Alliance of eastern and western groups became their main opposition .
 This unsettled situation led eastern Igbo-dominated army officers to stage a coup in January 1966 . Eastern Igbo dominated army officers staged a coup against the government .
 Major General Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi took command and instituted bloody purges of the political establishment .
 After only four months in charge General Ironsi was dead, Yakubu Gowon had taken over as leader of the military government . After just four months he had been in charge of the Nigerian government .
 The situation failed to settle, particularly after the Hausa murdered approximately 20,000 Igbo who lived in the north . The situation continued to worsen after the deaths of approximately 20-000 Igbians .
 This situation led to a bloody civil war, perhaps the worst in modern African history . This led to the worst civil war in modern history, with a bloody history of violence .
 At war's end the victorious Federal side declared a period of reconciliation and launched a campaign to reconstruct the devastated area . At war’s end, the victorious side launched a reconstruction campaign .
 Nigeria was now firmly in the hands of Gowon’s Supreme Military Council, which did promise a return to civilian rule in 1976 . Nigeria was still in the grip of the military council, which promised to return civilian rule .
 Efforts to transform the economy from its agricultural base to a more modern mixed economy . Efforts were made to transform it from an agricultural base into a more mixed economy.
 There were serious attacks on corruption and moves to control the government’s role in the expanding oil industry . The late 1960s saw Nigeria become one of the world's largest exporters . Nigeria is now one of Africa's biggest exporters of oil .
 While attending a 1975 Organization of African Unity conference, Gowan was the victim of another coup led by the Sandhurst-trained brigadier general Murtala Mohammed .
 General Mohammed consolidated his authority, purged government offices, created more administrative states, and put military governors in control of the media . General Mohammed also purged the government offices and purged many government offices .
 His replacement was General Olusegun Obasanjo, a Yoruba, who would years later become Nigeria’s president . His replacement would be General Olusanjo .
 In 1979 Obasanjo produced a new constitution based on the U.S. model . In 1979, he prepared for elections to return the country to civilian rule .
 The fall in oil prices in 1981 brought problems for the new government as debts mounted . The fall of oil prices led to problems for new government .
 Violence was frequent, violence was frequent and foreign workers were expelled . Blame was projected onto many quarters, and violence was often frequent .
 The unrest also brought an end to the Shehu Shagari presidency, which again saw a disgruntled military react, cancelling the 1983 election . The unrest ended the Shagarari presidency and the military cancelled the election .
 Mohammed Buhari, the chief of the army, took over the government with the standard promises to end corruption and reverse the fortunes of the state . He took over from the former President of Nigeria, President Ol Ol Oladeji, in March .
 Buhari didn't last long, and was overthrown by General Ibrahim Babangida in 1985 . He was ousted from power in August 1985 . General Ibrahim Baku was also overthrown in the same year .
 General Sani Abacha gave his support to this coup, and positioned himself for later rule when he became minister of defense in 1990 . Sani was a key ally of Abacha when he was in charge of the military .
 Currency devaluation was demanded as a term for continued International Monetary Fund and World Bank financial support in the form of loans . The currency devaluation demand was demanded by the IMF and the World Bank for continued financial support .
 State elections were scheduled for 1991, with a presidential election to follow in 1993 . Again a return to civilian rule was planned, with state elections for 1991 and 1993 .
 Babangida imprisoned Abiola, but the military rejected the result . General Sani Abacha took over as military president in the midst of confusion .
 Corruption, mismanagement, inefficiency, and waste are continuing factors in government and civilian life . Corruption is a continuing factor in government, civilian life, according to the U.S. government .
 Nigeria became by the late 1990s one of the world’s poorest countries . Opponents were persecuted, foreign debt increased enormously, and all reforms failed as poverty increased .
 The government punished the Ogoni people who occupied the southeastern oil areas, suppressing their politicians and executing many of them . Many of them were executed . The government particularly punished them .
 The political situation did not loosen until Abacha’s death in 1998 of a suspected heart attack . International condemnation of Abacha's many rights abuses was considerable . Although international condemnation of these rights abuses, the political situation remained tight .
 His successor, General Abdulsalam Abubar, once again said that civilian rule would return . His successor has vowed to restore civilian rule in Nigeria .
 The new government attempted to reverse Nigeria’s deep-seated economic and social problems . It gave particular attention to reclaiming the billions that were stolen during the rule of General Abacha .
 Corruption and waste remain major factors in Nigeria’s continued poor economic and social performance . However, reform proved illusory, and corruption and waste remained a major factor in the country's continued poor performance .
 Violence mounted between Muslim and Christian sections of society . Violence also mounted between Christian and Muslim groups .
 This situation became worse after 2000 following the institution of sharia law in the Muslim-dominated north . Sharia law was introduced in 2000 after the formation of the sharia state .
 The 2003 elections represented the first time in Nigeria’s history that one civilian government gave way to another without military intervention . The 2003 election was the first in the country's history that a civilian government had given way to a military government without intervention .
 The elections even included the former Biafran leader, Colonel Emeka Odumegwu-Ojukwu . The elections were held in Naija, Igboland .
 Voting irregularities were also considerable, and violence and ethnic fighting were frequent . Violence and ethnic violence was also frequent .
 There were attempts to make the presidential election more national in focus to reflect more broadly based issues . The election was held on a national scale to reflect national issues .
 With 60 percent of the vote he secured a second fouryear term as president . Obasanjo’s party won a majority in both houses, and with a 60 percent majority he secured the vote .
 It remained to be seen whether a more democratic government could cope with Nigeria’s significant number of problems . The country's problems remain a major problem, according to the report .
 In the Niger Delta, the Ijaw people campaigned for a bigger share from the oil industry, which led to serious disruptions, kidnappings, and strikes . The Ijw people led to a series of kidnappings and strikes, leading to kidnappings .
 The vast wealth that oil was supposed to bring has not filtered through Nigerian society . Oil wealth has not yet filtered through Nigeria's society, says Fem Fem Femi .
 Tradewinds on the Niger: Saga of the Royal Niger Company , 1830-1971 . Baker, Geoffrey L. Baker, . Geoffrey L . Baker .
 Richard M Nixon was the 36th vice president of the United States from 1953 to 1961 . He was the 37th president of United States, serving from January 20, 1969 to August 9, 1974 . He served as vice president between 1953 and 1961 .
 He was the only person ever elected twice as vice president and twice as president . He was also the only president to have resigned the presidency .
 Richard Milhous Nixon was born on January 9, 1913, at Yorba Linda, California . He was the son of Frank Nixon, an owner of a service station, and a strong Quaker . Nixon was also known for his role in the World War II .
 He then returned to Whittier where he practiced law . He also met Thelma Catherine Ryan when the two were cast in the same play at a local community theater .
 In August 1942, Nixon joined the United States Navy, becoming an aviation ground officer in the Pacific and ending up as a lieutenant commander at the end of the war . Nixon later moved to Washington, D.C., where he worked in the Office of Price Administration .
 In 1946 he was elected to the United States House of Representatives for the 12th district of California . He defeated the incumbent, Democratic Congressman Jerry Voorhis . He then entered politics .
 Nixon was critical of Voorhis for his liberal views . He had been elected for five consecutive terms, and Nixon had been critical of him .
 In 1948 Nixon was able to win both the Democratic and Republican primaries . On his return to Washington he became a leading member of the House Un-American Activities Committee until 1950 .
 He rose to national, if not international, attention in his investigation of Alger Hiss . His investigation of Hiss was one of the world's biggest unsolved mysteries .
 Nixon’s cross-examination of Hiss before the HUAC established his anticommunist credentials, and in 1950, Nixon ran for the Senate against the Democrat Helen Gahagan Douglas .
 Nixon earned his nickname “Tricky Dick,” coined by a small Californian newspaper, the Independent Review . This nickname was taken up by Douglas Douglas, who was a friend of Nixon .
 In 1952 Nixon managed to win the vice presidential nomination on a ticket with Dwight D Eisenhower . Nixon won the nomination for the 1952 presidential election in 1952 .
 Nixon was seen as an uncompromising anticommunist, but was tainted with allegations of corruption . Nixon seen as uncompromising anti-communist, seen as tainted with corruption .
 Journalists discovered that Nixon had operated a slush fund with money from Southern Californian businessmen . Nixon went on the attack after journalists discovered that he had operated the fund .
 He listed his family’s assets, admitting that his six-year-old daughter Tricia had received, as a gift, a cocker spaniel called Checkers, and he announced that the family would be keeping it .
 Nixon had two terms as vice president and during that time he redefined the role of the office . Nixon's two terms in office are said to have redefined role of office .
 He became a prominent spokesman for the Eisenhower administration, particularly on aspects of foreign policy . He was also a spokesman for Eisenhower administration .
 Nixon chaired a number of cabinet sessions when Eisenhower was incapacitated owing to illness . Eisenhower left most power with some advisers, with Nixon always excluded from the inner circle .
 He also went on a tour of Latin America in 1958, followed by anti-American demonstrators . In 1959 he met with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev in the Soviet Union .
 The campaign has become bestknown for the first television debates between the two candidates . The debates have become best known for their first televised debates .
 Kennedy was able to portray himself as representing a generational change in leadership, looking younger and ‘fresher” than Nixon . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1968 .
 Nixon lost by fewer than 120,000 votes in the 1970s election . The election was close, with Nixon losing by less than a quarter of votes .
 Nixon chose not to challenge the results too much, and his dignity won him the support of many . Nixon chose to remain silent on the matter of his election .
 Nixon wrote a book, Six Crises, in which he described his role facing six crises in his career as a congressman, senator, and then vice president . Retiring to private life in California, Nixon then wrote about the crises he faced in his life .
 Mao Zedong was to read the book in preparation for Nixon’s 1972 visit to China . It was influential, and was to be read by Nixon in preparation to visit China in 1972 .
 Nixon contested the governorship of California in 1962, losing to the incumbent, Democrat Edmund G Brown . Nixon lost to Brown in 1962 .
 By 1968 Nixon had put together a coalition of supporters that managed to ally itself with Southern conservatives led by Strom Thurmond of South Carolina . By 1968, Nixon had allied himself with Thurmond .
 Nixon promised to name a Southerner to the Supreme Court, oppose court-ordered ‘busing’ urged by the civil rights movement . Nixon also chose a hard-line vice-presidential candidate who would have Southern support .
 Robert Kennedy’s assassination resulted in Humphrey being chosen as the candidate after a torrid party gathering at Chicago which led to fighting in the streets . Robert Kennedy's assassination had resulted in the candidate being chosen after a party gathering .
 Nixon promised that he would get ‘peace with honor’ in Vietnam but was not specific about how he was going to achieve this . Nixon promised to get peace with honor but didn't specify how he would achieve this in Vietnam .
 Vice President Humphrey was blamed for increasing casualties in Vietnam . He was part of the Lyndon B Johnson administration during the Vietnam War .
 Nixon was more worried that Wallace's candidacy might split his vote in the South . Wallace was a pro-segregationist party, but Nixon was worried he might split the vote .
 After the election, Nixon was determined to introduce a number of reforms . Nixon's reforms included the introduction of a series of reforms into the White House .
 "As soon as he became president, he changed the civil rights and law enforcement legislation," says President Obama . "He changed the law enforcement and civil rights legislation," he says .
 He established the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Railroad Passenger Corporation . The Drug Enforcement Administration, the Office of Minority Business Enterprise, also established .
 Neil Armstrong landed on the Moon on July 20, 1969, and spoke to Nixon from the Moon . Nixon pushed through the space project, with Neil Armstrong landing on the moon in 1969 .
 The move was defeated in the Senate, but it did lead to the Supplemental Security Income program and many other related programs .
 Nixon’s aim was to reduce inflation by limiting government spending . From 1971 the government ran up what was then the biggest deficit in U.S. history . Nixon's aim to cut inflation was to cut government spending by limiting spending .
 Nixon’s main aim was to achieve an “honorable” settlement to the conflict in Vietnam . Nixon's main aim: To achieve an "honorable" settlement to end the conflict .
 The U.S. reduced the number of its soldiers in Vietnam while increasing the South Vietnamese soldiers . To achieve this, the United States reduced its soldiers while increasing its South Vietnamese troops in Vietnam .
 The bombing of North Vietnam had been suspended by Lyndon Johnson just before the 1968 elections . The United States command worried about the state of readiness of the South Vietnamese troops, Nixon resumed bombing .
 In fact, Nixon expanded the war by organizing the secret bombing of Cambodia in March 1969, and supporting the overthrow of Cambodia’s ruler, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, in March 1970 .
 Nixon ordered U.S. soldiers and South Vietnamese forces to attack Viet Cong sanctuaries in Cambodia . The Vietnamese Communists tried to gain control of Cambodia, and soon afterwards Nixon ordered United States soldiers to attack them .
 Nixon also started a series of initially secret negotiations with the North Vietnamese through his National Security Advisor, Henry Kissinger, who met with North Vietnamese foreign minister, Le Due Tho . Nixon and China were the first two countries to meet in secret .
 Nixon began establishing links with the People’s Republic of China . As these progressed, Nixon also established links with China .
 The United States and Chinese table-tennis teams took part in reciprocal visits, with Kissinger visiting China . Nixon made his own visit to China in February-March 1972—the first by a U.S. president while in office .
 Nixon felt that better relations with China would put pressure on the Soviet Union . Nixon felt it would help push back pressure from the Soviets .
 Before Nixon left China, the Shanghai Communique recorded that Nixon acknowledged the “one China” policy . The U.S. accepted that Taiwan is a part of one China .
 By October 1972 Nixon was close to reaching an agreement with the North Vietnamese . Nixon achieved most of his objectives just before the U.S. presidential elections .
 The South Vietnamese raised objections, while the North Vietnamese refused to compromise, knowing how much Nixon wanted the agreement . The North Vietnamese were unwilling to compromise .
 No agreement was reached by the elections, with the Christmas bombings of North Vietnam forcing the North Vietnamese back to the negotiation tables . The final agreement was signed in January 1973 in Paris .
 All U.S. military personnel were to be withdrawn, all prisoners of war to be released, and there would be a ceasefire, along with a heavy rearming of the South Vietnamese . A heavy rearmament of South Vietnamese forces was also to be rearmed .
 Kissinger and Le Due Tho were awarded the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize, but Tho declined to receive it . Kissinger and Tho received the award in 1973 .
 He oversaw the channeling of millions of dollars to the Chilean opposition . He supported the military overthrow of Salvador Allende in Chile in 1973, allying itself to the subsequent government of General Augusto Pinochet .
 In the Middle East, Nixon supported Israel during the Yom Kippur War, an action that led to the 1973 oil crisis . In the Mideast, he supported Israel in the war, which led to an oil crisis in the 1970s .
 The administration supported General Yahya Khan in the Indo-Pakistan War of 1971, seriously affecting relations between India and the U.S. for many years . The administration also supported General Khan in 1971, and the war of 1971 .
 In 1972 Nixon was renominated for the presidential election along with Spiro Agnew . Nixon renominated along with Agnew for the 1972 presidential election .
 It soon emerged that these men had been hired by the CRP and were charged . The men were charged after they were found guilty of the crime .
 In February 1973 the Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities, chaired by Senator Sam Ervin, was established to investigate the Watergate affair . John Dean was interviewed in televised hearings .
 It became evident that Nixon had installed a recording system in the Oval Office soon after he became president, but Nixon refused to comply with a subpoena .
 Nixon ordered his attorney general to fire Archibald Cox, the special prosecutor who was investigating Watergate . Nixon ordered the firing of Cox, a special prosecutor investigating the Watergate scandal . Cox was one of the Watergate special agents investigating the White House .
 Nixon fired Richardson’s assistant when he also refused to fire Cox . When the attorney general, Elliot Richardson, resigned, Nixon fired his assistant . Nixon also fired Richardson's assistant after Cox refused to remove Cox .
 The Supreme Court ruled unanimously in July 1974 that Nixon’s claim of “executive privilege” was no excuse . Nixon's claim of executive privilege was not an excuse for Watergate .
 A transcript of one of Nixon’s conversations, made available on August 5, 1974, showed that the president had discussed the use of the Central Intelligence Agency to block the FBI investigation of the Watergate breakin . The transcript was made available in August 1974 .
 Nixon faced with the prospect of impeachment by the House of Representatives and conviction in the Senate . Three days later Nixon announced his resignation effective at noon the following day . Nixon resigned as president of the United States .
 Nixon’s vice president, Spiro Agnew, resigned his office in 1973 after facing charges of bribery, extortion, and tax evasion . Agnew resigned in 1973 from office in office after being charged with bribery and extortion .
 In retirement, Nixon and his wife settled at San Clemente, California, and he wrote his memoirs . Nixon's memoirs were published by Nixon's publisher, The Washington Post .
 He then spent most of the rest of his life writing about foreign policy .
 He was partly able to restore some of his reputation as an elder statesman . He was able to return to prominence as an important figure in the world of politics .
 In 1980 he flew to Egypt, where he was present at the funeral of the former shah of Iran, being highly critical of the Jimmy Carter administration’s handling of Iran . In 1980, he traveled to Egypt to be critical of Carter's handling of the country .
 Ghanaian prime minister Kwame Nkrumah was born in the British-controlled Gold Coast in West Africa . He was born on the Gold Coast .
 He trained as a teacher and studied in both the U.S. and England . He trained in both countries .
 Nkrumah helped to organize the 1945 Pan Africa Congress and remained a staunch supporter of African union and cooperation . He was a staunch advocate of African unity and cooperation in the 1930s .
 His book, I Speak for Freedom, was an impassioned defense of African independence . His book was published in Africa's first attempt at independence .
 Nkrumah was jailed by the British for his activist campaigns . He was freed in 1951 after he was freed by his release from prison .
 The newly independent nation of Ghana had a sound economy and under Nkrumah’s leadership was looked to for direction by other African states . The newly-independent nation had an economy that was looked after by other countries .
 He also was an outspoken opponent of the apartheid white-dominated regime in South Africa . He was also an outspoken critic of the white regime .
 Nkrumah established Ghana as a one-party state in 1964 when he took the title of president for life . However, he became increasingly dictatorial and established Ghana a one party state .
 A cult of personality arose around Nkrumah, and a trend of one-party states under dictatorial ‘rulers for life” emerged in many African states during the 1970s .
 Nkrumah was overthrown in a military coup d’etat in 1966 . In subsequent years he lived in exile and died in Romania in 1972 . He was later exiled to Romania .
 General Manuel Noriega was the dictator of Panama from 1983 to 1989 . He was a close ally of the U.S. military and intelligence establishment from the late 1950s to the late 1980s .
 The former Panamanian leader was flown to the U.S. to overthrow the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua and to combat leftist revolutionary movements elsewhere in Central America . Noriega ran afoul of United States policymakers in the aftermath of the Iran-contra affair . He was
 He surrendered to U.S. officials in early January 1990; was transported to the United States; tried for drug trafficking in April 1992; found guilty in September . He was sentenced to 40 years in prison, where he has remained .
 Convicted in France for money laundering, and in Panama in absentia for murder, he will never be freed . Convicted of money laundering in France and Panama for murder in absenceia .
 Manuel Antonio Noriega Moreno was born on February 11, 1938, in Panama City, Panama City . He was the illegitimate child of a poor single woman who died when he was a small boy .
 Raised by his godmother in Panama City, he entered the military and was trained at the Military School of Chorrillos in Peru . In the late 1950s he was recruited by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency .
 His relationship with U.S. intelligence agencies deepened during his training at the School of the Americas in Panama in 1967 .
 Commissioned as an intelligence officer in the Panama National Guard the same year, he rose rapidly in rank . Commissioned for intelligence in Panama in 1996, he became a top intelligence officer .
 In 1969 he helped dictator General Omar Torrijos fend off a coup attempt, and soon after was appointed the country’s Chief of Military Intelligence .
 Through the 1970s he received hundreds of thousands of dollars as a CIA informant, and passed United States secrets to Fidel Castro and other U.S. adversaries . A shrewd political operator who deftly played both sides of the fence .
 Torrijos became de facto head of state in August 1983 . Allegedly complied in the July 1981 plane crash that resulted in his death . With United States backing he became the country’s de facto leader in 1983 .
 He also used Panama’s strict secrecy laws to launch drug money-laundering operations . He actively collaborated with the drug cartels of Medellin, Colombia, and Panama .
 Panama was given the Drug Enforcement Agency’s “highest commendation” for its anti-narcotics efforts in 1987 . Despite mounting evidence of Noriega's involvement in the drug trade, in 1987 Attorney General Edwin Meese issued Panama the highest commendation . Panama
 Noriega’s base of support, in Washington and at home, had eroded . Meanwhile Noriegas’ support in Washington, home, eroded .
 The Iran-contra scandal purged Washington of many of his top supporters, while opposition in Panama mounted, mainly in consequence of his brutality in dealing with his opponents .
 The ax fell in February 1988 with a 12count indictment on racketeering and narcotics charges issued by U.S. federal prosecutors .
 The invasion had a negligible impact on the hemispheric drug trade, which has grown rapidly since . Launched in the name of the “war on drugs,” the invasion had no impact on drugs .
 The North American Free Trade Agreement is a trilateral trade pact among the United States, Mexico, and Canada . Michael J Schroeder is the author of the book, "North American Trade Talks"
 The agreement is intended to foster open and unrestricted commercial relations among its three signatories . Implemented on January 1, 1994, the agreement was signed by the U.S. and three other countries .
 NAFTA is one of several regional trading blocs in the Western Hemisphere . Administered in the United States by the International Trade Administration of the Department of Commerce .
 NAFTA’s supporters conceive of the agreement as an important stepping stone in the creation of a Free Trade Area of the Americas . The agreement would include the 34 nation-states and territories of the Western Hemisphere . NAFTA supporters say it would be a stepping stone to a Free trade Area of
 Its principal supporters in the private sector consist of the hemisphere’s largest corporations, most of which are based in the U.S. Most of the world's largest corporations are in the United States .
 NAFTA will increase living standards, create new jobs, protect the environment, and ensure compliance with labor laws, NAFTA advocates say . They argue that in all three countries NAFTA will create jobs, increase living conditions .
 Opponents include labor, environmental, faithbased, indigenous rights, and consumer rights groups . Opponents of the legislation include labor and environmental groups .
 NAFTA, like the WTO, promotes a “race to the bottom” by favoring large corporations over smaller enterprises, benefiting the rich more than the poor; increasing inequality, causing a net loss of jobs, fostering environmental degradation and failing to adequately protect the rights of workers .
 The Zapatistas of Chiapas, Mexico, are a group whose rebellion against the Mexican government was timed to coincide with NAFTA’s implementation . The communiques of sub-commander Marcos, a spokesperson of the Zapatista, convey many of the principal arguments of NAFTA
 NAFTA failed to meet expectations with regard to employment, poverty, inequality, the environment, and labor rights, the authors say . NAFTA has increased trade dramatically while failing to meet its supporters’ expectations, they say .
 In Mexico, poverty, inequality and unemployment have all increased substantially since NAFTA’s implementation . Poverty, inequality, and unemployment in Mexico have all been increased since the implementation .
 The NATO alliance is dedicated to the maintenance of the democratic freedoms and territorial integrity of its 26 European and North American member countries through collective defense . Michael J Schroeder is the leader of the NATO alliance .
 This alliance has been the dominant structure of European defense and security since 1949 . It continues to serve as the most formal symbol of the United States’ commitment to defend Europe against aggression .
 Following the end of the cold war, the organization also took on a peacekeeping and stabilizing role within Eurasia .
 NATO was founded with the Washington Treaty of April 4, 1949 . The Washington Treaty was signed by Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Great Britain, and the United States . NATO was formed in 1949 .
 The 12 founding members were later joined by 14 others, including Greece and Turkey . The alliance allowed the alliance to secure the Mediterranean . Turkey and Greece were the first to join the alliance .
 NATO was intended to deter Soviet expansion into central and western Europe . NATO was formed in response to Soviet expansion of central and eastern Europe .
 The Washington Treaty reflected the will of the signatories to further democratic values and economic cooperation . Signatories agreed to share obligations of defense individually and collectively, to consult together in the face of threats, to regard an attack against one member as an attack on all members .
 The treaty also delineated the geographic boundaries of the alliance . It created the North Atlantic Council to implement the treaty . It governed ratification according to constitutional processes .
 The basic structures developed during this period remained into the 21st century . The basic structure of the structures were developed in the 1930s .
 Hungarian troops under NATO command stand on guard at NATO headquarters in Kosovo . The civilian headquarters for the North Atlantic Council is located in Brussels, Belgium .
 The council serves as a forum for frank and open diplomatic consultation . It is the coordination of strategic, defense, and foreign policy among the alliance members . The council is based in Washington, D.C.
 Action agreed upon on the basis of common consensus rather than majority vote . Action is agreed upon by common consensus, rather than a majority vote. Action agreed to be agreed on by a common consensus .
 Twice a year the defense ministers of the member countries meet at the NAC . Summit meetings involving the heads of state of each member country occur .
 NATO and Russian Federation coordinate cooperation between NATO and former Warsaw Pact allies . New bodies facilitate peaceful coordination and cooperation . NATO and the Russian Federation are former members of the Warsaw Pact alliance .
 The secretary-general of NATO also chairs the Defence Planning Committee . The committee is tasked with planning for the collective defense of the member countries .
 DPC provides guidance to the alliance’s military authorities to improve common measures of collective defense and military integration . The DPC is based in Washington, D.C.
 The DPC consists of the permanent representatives; like the NAC, the DPC also serves as a forum for meetings between the defense ministers of the member states twice a year . The NAC is the body of the European Parliamentary Parliamentary Assembly .
 The senior military representatives of the member states form the Military Committee . Senior military representatives form the Senior Military Committee.
 The committee is supported by the International Military Staff . It meets at chiefs of staff level and more often at national military representatives level .
 Until 2003 operational control of military forces operating under the NATO flag fell to Allied Command Europe and Allied Command Atlantic . Operational control of NATO forces under NATO's NATO flag was until 2003 .
 ACT is tasked with driving transformation in NATO and establishing future capabilities, while ACO is responsible for current operations . ACT is also tasked with developing future capabilities in NATO . ACO will be responsible for the future of NATO operations .
 Throughout the cold war NATO faced a powerful counter-alliance in the Warsaw Pact and turmoil within the organization itself . The organization was in turmoil during the Cold War and during the 1960s .
 At the NAC meeting in 1952, the members established a goal of fielding 50 divisions backed up by several thousand aircraft by the end of the year and 96 divisions by 1955 . The NAC is now fielding 96 divisions and 50 divisions .
 Cost of raising 96 divisions required to implement this strategy proved too great, and it was quickly abandoned . The cost of raising the 96 divisions needed to implement the strategy was too great .
 In 1953 Dwight Eisenhower put forward a new strategy, which focused more on nuclear deterrence . Eisenhower's new strategy was focused more than nuclear deterrence, he said .
 The new strategy came to be known as “massive retaliation’s’ massive retaliation . It would have involved extensive use of nuclear weapons against the Soviet Union and eastern Europe if their forces had broken through NATO's conventional defenses .
 Nuclear crises over Berlin and Cuba in the late 1950s and early 1960s suggested a more gradual strategy than massive retaliation . The U.S. responded to the crises with a gradual approach to nuclear weapons .
 President John F Kennedy endorsed a strategy of “flexible response” in 1961-63, which favored deploying more conventional forces in central and northern Europe from both the United States and NATO members .
 France withdraws from NATO's integrated military command structure in 1967 . Disagreement over this new strategy led France to withdraw from NATO’s integrated military structure .
 NATO adopted a new doctrine in December 1967, which endorsed a flexible conventional and nuclear response to Soviet aggression . NATO's new doctrine was adopted by the United States in December 1968 .
 The NAC adopted a new grand strategy favoring stable and peaceful relations with the Warsaw Pact countries . At the same time, the NAC has a new strategy favoring stability and peace in relations with Poland .
 NATO was challenged in the mid-1970s when the Soviet Union deployed large numbers of intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe that were capable of striking all of the European NATO allies . NATO was further challenged by the Soviets' presence of nuclear missiles .
 In response the members agreed to deploy Pershing II and cruise missiles in West Germany, the United Kingdom, the Low Countries, and Italy . In response to the threat, the members of the U.K. and the UK agreed to use the missiles .
 A more cordial relationship between the alliance and the Warsaw Pact during the 1980s led to the dismantling of these intermediate weapons at the end of that decade . However, the alliance's relationship with the Soviet-Russian-led alliance was less cordial .
 NATO retained several important formal and informal functions after the end of the cold war . NATO was founded in 1945 after the Cold War ended .
 First, it serves as a permanent and institutionalized link between the U.S. and an ever-growing number of European allies . Second, it is a permanent link between U.N. and the United States and Europe's allies .
 In addition, it prevents the renationalization of European defense policies, it also prevents renationalizing of EU defense policies .
 NATO allows an institutionalized relationship with Russia and several of the former Warsaw Pact countries that have yet to join the alliance . NATO has institutionalized ties with Russia, several former Warsaw-Pasasary Pact countries .
 It serves peacekeeping and stability functions in Europe and Asia . Finally, it also provides peacekeeping for Europe, Asia and Africa .
 NATO invoked article 5 of the Washington Treaty for the first time following the September 11, 2001, attacks against the United States . Article 5 was invoked following the 9/11 attacks on the U.S. on September 11 .
 NATO nations participated in the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan against al-Qaeda and the Taliban . Many NATO countries participated in Afghanistan .
 NATO Divided, NATO United: The Evolution of the Alliance. Ashgate, 2004; Kaplan, Lawrence S. S. Kaplan, 2004 . Kaplan, 2006, 2004, and Kaplan, 2007, respectively .
 NATO, the European Union, and the Atlantic Community: The Transatlantic Bargain Challenged . Sloan, Stanley R Sloan . Sloan: NATO, European Union and the . Atlantic community: The . Transatlantic . Bargain .
 Sudanese leader Jaafar Numeiri was born in January 1930 in Omdurman, the Sudan . Scott Fitzsimmons was the leader of the Sudanese National Council of Sudan .
 Numeiri joined a group of military officers sympathetic to pan-Arab, socialist ideas . Influenced by Gamal Abdel Nasser’s Free Officers Movement in Egypt, he joined the group .
 In 1969 Numeiri orchestrated a coup to overthrow the Sudanese government . In 1969 he orchestrated the coup with the help of four others .
 He then became the new prime minister and chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council . He then renamed the country the Democratic Republic of the Sudan .
 In July 1971 Sudanese communists staged a coup, and Numeiri was imprisoned . He was imprisoned in July 1971 .
 Numeiri escaped and rallied loyal forces to put down the revolt and brutally crush the communists . Shortly after his escape, Numeir rallied loyal troops to crush the communist party .
 Numeiri quickly moved to strengthen his base of political support by changing domestic and foreign policies . He has also changed his policies by changing his stance on foreign policy .
 In the 1971 referendum on the presidency, Numeiri received a 98.9 percent affirmative vote . He was sworn in for a six-year term as president . In the 1970s, he was elected to the presidency .
 In 1969 the Sudan agreed in the Tripoli Charter to coordinate foreign policies with Libya and Egypt . Numeiri’s view of Arab socialism was inspired by his view of the Arab socialism .
 This union, which developed into a federation of Arab Republics, was extremely short-lived and was never implemented . This union was never really implemented . The union was a union of Arab republics, but it was never fully implemented .
 Numeiri inherited the problem of civil war in the southern Sudan, which had begun in 1955, even before Sudanese independence . Civil war in southern Sudan had begun before independence .
 A positive step toward resolving the war was taken in 1972 with the signing of the Addis Ababa Agreement . The Addisababa Agreement was signed in 1972 .
 A cease-fire was declared in the south, and autonomy was granted to the nonMuslim southern region of the Sudan . The nonMuslim south was granted autonomy in 2011 .
 In an effort to bolster support for his regime, Numeiri imposed sharia, Islamic law, over all of the Sudan in 1983 . In a bid to bolster his regime's support, he imposed Islamic law in Sudan .
 He also unilaterally decreed the division of the south into three regions corresponding to the old provinces . These decisions led to the resumption of the civil war .
 The mounting economic crisis led to urban riots, and spreading famines in rural areas . The Numeiri era marked the final phase of the Numeir era . The rising economic crisis marked the end of the era .
 In April 1985, while Numeiri was out of the country on official business, the military launched a successful coup against his regime . The coup was carried out while he was in the country .
 Numeiri remained in exile in Egypt while the Sudan continued to suffer through civil war, drought, famines, and mounting political repression from Islamist forces . Until 1999, when he was allowed to return to the Sudan, he remained behind bars .
 Pearson Education Limited, 2000; Rothchild, Donald, and John W Harbeson, eds., eds. Pearson Education. 2000 .
 Eastern Inuit (formerly called Eskimos) sought to control more aspects of their Arctic lives above the tree line . In particular the eastern Inuit sought control of their lives in the Arctic .
 Not until 1999 was Nunavut separated from other northern territories by an act of Parliament . Nun Inuit was separated from the rest of the world's northern territories in 1999 .
 Nunavut was born with Iqaluit, a city of 6,000, as its capital . The Territory was born in April 1999 . Nunuk is now the Territory of Nunuk, a Canadian territory of Greenland .
 Canada's creation of Nunavut was a dramatic example of the growing awareness of indigenous rights in several nations . Canada’s creation was an example of a dramatic change in attitudes to indigenous rights .
 In 1973 after a long period of refusing to abide by most treaty rights, Canada changed course and signed six major treaties, including Nunavut’s . In 1973, Canada agreed to sign six major treaty treaties, which included the treaty .
 Nunavut has a population of 29,500, 80 percent of it Inuit, in 26 settlements spread across 770,000 square miles . Ununavut is a fifth of Canada’s total land mass, including Ellesmere and Baffin islands .
 Most of this vast territory is inaccessible by road or rail; everything arrives, expensively, by air . Most of the world's most populous cities are inaccessible by by air or by road .
 Nunavut's first premier was lawyer Paul Okalik . The government oversees an annual budget of about $500 million, more than $18,000 per resident . The first premier of Nunavuta was lawyer and lawyer Paul O'Alik .
 Most Inuit Inuit were still leading traditional lives based on hunting and fishing . Prior to the 1950s most Inuit still led traditional lives .
 In an agreement with Canada, the United States built the Distant Early Warning, or DEW, Line, a system of radar installations . The DEW Line was designed to detect Soviet invasion across the North Pole .
 DEW Line was useless against nuclear submarines or intercontinental ballistic missiles . It remained in place for 30 years . The DEW line remained useless against submarines and intercontinental missiles .
 In 1985 Canadian prime minister Brian Mulroney and U.S. president Ronald Reagan signed a new defense agreement . The agreement was signed in 1985 . The two countries signed the agreement in 1985 in a joint agreement .
 Canada’s government began to move Inuit families into permanent settlements where they were offered health care, education, and other services, but at a price . The DEW Line was installed around the same time as the DEW line's installation .
 Inuit communities from subsistence hunting to fur trapping for the cash needed to buy newly available "southern" goods . The new lifestyle pushed many communities from hunting to trapping to buying new goods .
 Reliable sources of income remain scarce in Nunavut . Mining, fisheries, tourism, and cultural products are being aggressively explored .
 Nunavut leaders hope to replace expensive satellite hookups with fiber-optic installations . The Internet plays a significant role in the region's communication with the world .
 The emergence of global warming patterns in the Arctic poses both threats and opportunities . Global warming patterns pose both threats to the Arctic and to the environment .
 Some believe that the storied Northwest Passage, now frozen most of the year, will soon be navigable in summer . Some believe it could cut almost 5,000 miles from a sea voyage between Europe and Asia . The Northwest Passage is now frozen in winter, but could open in summer
 Climate change would likely further endanger Inuit ecology and traditions of self-sufficiency, scientists say . On the other hand, climate change would probably further endanger the Inuit .
 He returned to teach at a Roman Catholic school near Dar es Salaam . He was known as Mwalimu, or teacher .
 In 1954 he organized the Tanganyika African National Union . In 1961 he was elected to the legislature . He was in charge of the legislature during the country's transition to independence in 1961 .
 Nyerere was elected as the first prime minister of the newly independent state and became President of the Republic in 1962 . He was elected to be the first Prime Minister of the country .
 When Tanganyika and Zanzibar unified as Tanzania, Nyerere became the nation’s first president in 1964 . He was the first president of the country .
 In the 1967 Arusha Declaration, Nyerere instituted a state program of ujamaa ffamilyhood) based on collective sharing, collective sharing and traditional African values of the family .
 Nyerere’s ujamaa failed to bring economic growth, and in 1976 he was forced to admit defeat and end the program . The People's Republic of China supported the program, but in the global economic system, it failed .
 He hosted the African National Congress and Pan-African Congress . He hosted other African nationalist movements that struggled against imperial forces in Mozambique and Rhodesia .
 He was also a sharp critic of African dictatorships . He publicly condemned Idi Amin’s dictatorship in Uganda .
 In the first contemporary military intervention by an African state against other, under Nyerere’s leadership, the Tanzania military attacked Amin and forced him out of power . Amin was the first African state to intervene against other African states .
 He was succeeded by Ali Hassan Mwinyi and served as a sort of elder statesman in Africa until his death in 1999 .
 Baron Pierre de Coubertin was the founder of the modern Olympic Games and organizer of the first modern games in 1896 . Janice J Terry was one of the founders of the Olympic Games . The Olympic Games was intended to encourage international understanding through sports .
 After 50 years and two world wars, the Olympic dream of de Coubertin seemed very distant indeed . But after 50 years after the war, the dream was still very distant .
 Too often the competition between nations would overshadow the competition of the athletes, and occasionally even the athletes themselves would be the center of controversy .
 Olympic Games found themselves, in 1948, in the middle of the geopolitics of the cold war . In fact the Olympic Games were in the midst of the Cold War .
 de Coubertin’s vision of peace now more than ever . The world was on the brink of nuclear confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Olympic Games were held in France in 1968 .
 Often, the Games would be just another proxy in the ideological battle between liberal democracy and communism . Often, however, the games would be used as a proxy in an ideological battle .
 The water polo match between the Soviet Union and Hungary was one of the most famous incidents of the 1956 Melbourne Games . The match was played between the Soviets and Hungary at the 1956 Games .
 This match followed the Soviet quashing of the Hungarian uprising . Because of political tension between the countries, the match was contested with such intensity that blood was seen .
 Olympic Stadium in Montreal, Canada, was built for the 1976 Summer Olympics . Towering over the city, the stadium was built to host the games .
 For the 1960 Summer Games, the games were broadcast live on television throughout Europe . The games were held at Rome, Italy, for the first time in a decade .
 The 1968 Winter Olympics were held at Grenoble, France, with many events spread around the region . Many events were held in the region, including the Olympics .
 French skier Jean-Claude Killy won all three Alpine skiing gold medals . The 24-year-old won the all three gold medals at the Winter Olympics in Sochi .
 The 1968 Summer Games were held at Mexico City, Mexico City . The high altitude brought athletes in as much as a month early to acclimitize . Athletes were brought in to compete in the games .
 Bob Beamon broke the world long jump record at the games; his record stood until 1991 . Beamon was the first person to break the world record in the long jump .
 The 1972 Summer Olympics were held at Munich, Germany . United States swimmer Mark Spitz won seven gold medals . The Soviet Union’s gymnast Olga Korbut won three golds .
 These games also featured the controversial results of men’s basketball in which the American team believed that it had been cheated out of the gold medal .
 The games are best remembered for the attack by Palestinian terrorists on the Israeli team, which resulted in the death of 17 people . The games were best remembered, however, for the attacks by terrorists on Israeli team .
 At the 1976 Olympics held at Montreal, Canada, extra security was introduced . Extra security measures were introduced at the Montreal Olympics .
 African nations boycott the games against New Zealand . African nations protested the presence of New Zealand in the games .
 The cause was a match between a New Zealand rugby team and a team from South Africa . The match took place in New Zealand's rugby match against the South African team .
 Romanian gymnast Nadia Comaneci, aged 14, won gold medals with the first-ever perfect score in Olympic gymnastic competition . Ease Viren won both the 5,000 m and the 10,000m again at the Games in Rio .
 At the 1980 Fake Placid Winter Olympics, artificial snow was used, and the United States speed skater Eric Heiden won five gold medals .
 For the United States, these games will always be remembered for the “Miracle on Ice,” the victory of the American ice hockey team over the superior Soviet squad . For many, the American victory was seen as a win over communism .
 The 1980 Summer Games were held at Moscow, USSR, with 100,000 people at the opening ceremony . The Games were the first to be held in the Soviet Union .
 The United States led a boycott over the Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan in the previous year . However, the U.S. led a boycotts of Afghanistan after the Soviet invasion of the country invaded .
 British runners Sebastian Coe and Steve Ovett won one gold medal at the London Olympics . The games were best remembered for the rivalry between the two runners . Each won a gold medal in the Games .
 The Soviet Union and its close allies organized a boycott in retaliation for the U.S.-led one four years earlier . Four years earlier, the Soviet Union had organized a similar boycott .
 The Eos Angeles Olympics was also the first summer games to which China sent a team since 1948 . China is the first country to send a team to the summer games since 1948 in Los Angeles .
 There was also some international concern over the high level of advertising and commercial endorsements during the games . There were also concerns over the amount of commercial endorsements .
 There were no major boycotts or security problems at the 1988 Summer Games held at Seoul, South Korea . The games were held in spite of North Korea’s hostility to the games .
 Florence Griffith-Joyner won three gold medals for sprinting . Kristin Otto of East German won six gold medals . Florence Griffiths Joyner won 3 gold medals in track events .
 The 1992 Summer Olympic Games saw the athletes of the former Soviet Union contesting as a single team for the last time . South Africa, South Africa and Germany also competed for the first time at the Games .
 In 1994 the Olympic Winter Games were held at Fillehammer, Norway, beginning a different timetable for the Winter Olympics . In 1994, the Winter Games took place in the same place as the 1994 Winter Olympics in the Netherlands .
 A bomb killed two people in the Centennial Olympic Park in Atlanta in 1996 . Fears of international terrorists proved unfounded with a local man arrested for the bombing .
 Curling, women’s ice hockey, and snow boarding were introduced as new Olympic sports at the Nagano Winter Olympics held in 1998 . Curling was introduced as a new Olympic sport at the 1998 Winter Olympics .
 The Sydney Olympic Games in 2000 saw the summer games return to the Southern Hemisphere for the first time since 1956 . The Sydney Olympics were held in Sydney in 2000 . The summer games were the first to be held in the southern hemisphere since 1956.
 The public cheered the presence of the team from East Timor at the Opening Ceremony, and also the North Korean and South Korean athletes who marched together .
 The U.S. team won 40 gold medals, 24 silver medals, and 33 bronze medals . Australia’s team won 16 golds, 25 silver medals and 17 bronze medals.
 The choice of Salt Lake City saw accusations of corruption and bribery that had first occurred following Atlanta being awarded the Olympics in 1989 . Atlanta was chosen to host the Games in Atlanta in 1996 .
 IOC members were found to have received bribes in exchange for their votes . Files held in Salt Lake City revealed demands for and expectations of bribes by IOC delegates .
 In a similar story, a judge was accused of collusion in awarding the gold medal to the Russian pair over the Canadian skaters . The situation was resolved when both figure skating pairs were awarded the gold medals .
 In 2004 the Summer Olympic Games were held at Athens, Greece, the site of the first of the modern Olympic Games held in 1896 . Athens was the first Olympic Games to be held at the Olympic Games in 1896, with the first in 1896 being held .
 These games witnessed several scandals, the majority of them involving performanceenhancing drugs . The majority of the scandals were involving performance enhancing drugs .
 The issue of athletes taking drugs to gain an edge over rivals has become one of the dominant concerns of the games in the 21st century .
 The International Olympic Committee must also deal with the issue of letting professional athletes into the competition that was originally designed just for amateurs . In addition to the issue, the IOC must also also address the issue .
 Some critics contend that allowing professional athletes will give developed nations an unfair advantage over underdeveloped nations . Others contend that the records set at the Olympics will mean little unless the best athletes are allowed to compete .
 The Olympic Games have proved to be a tempting avenue for nations to express a political point of view, or commit violence in the name of one cause or another .
 Organization of American States was founded on April 30, 1948, in Bogota, Colombia, by 21 member states . Organization was founded in 1948 by 21 states .
 The OAS was founded as a regional agency of the United Nations . Successor organization to the PanAmerican Union and retooled to correspond to the changed security environment of the post-World War II era .
 Its purposes are “to strengthen the peace and security of the continent; to promote and consolidate representative democracy, with due respect for the principle of non-intervention; to seek the solution of political, juridical, and economic problems . Its charter is to eradicate extreme poverty,
 In 2007 the OAS counted 35 member states, with Cuba suspended from participation since 1962, making 34 active member states . Headquartered in Washington, D.C., since its founding, in 2007 counted 35 members .
 The OAS is governed by a General Assembly and Permanent Council and led by a secretary-general elected every five years . Mirroring the organizational structures of the United Nations, the OAS has a Secretary-General-general-elect .
 The InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights (IACHR, 1959), the InterAmerican Drug Abuse Control Commission ; Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism ; and many others . It has numerous affiliated organizations, organs, and entities, such as InterAmerican .
 In 1994 the OAS organized the first Summit of the Americas, an event henceforth held every few years . The OAS is now organized by the United States and other Latin American nations .
 During the the the cold war era, its overriding concern was limiting Soviet and communist influence in the Western Hemisphere . During the Cold War era, the U.S. was trying to limit Soviet and . communist influence .
 More often, OAS member states cooperated with U.S. anticommunist efforts or sought to pursue a nonaligned stance in international affairs .
 The United States most commonly interpreted the latter as alignment with international communism and therefore a direct threat to its national security . The U.S. most commonly . interpreted the . latter as aligning with . international communism . therefore therefore, therefore, the . United States .
 In the post-cold war era, the OAS has exerted a greater degree of autonomy from U.S. domination . OAS exerts greater autonomy from United States domination .
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries was established in 1960 . Organization established in 1961 . Organization of Oil Exporporations is based in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait .
 Its first meeting was held in 1961, and, beginning in 1965, it was headquartered in Vienna, Austria .
 The charter members included Venezuela, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia . The charter was formed in Venezuela in 1994 .
 Abd Allah al-Tariki, the Saudi director of petroleum affairs, played a leading role in the organization’s inception .
 OPEC membership was later expanded to include Libya, Algeria, Indonesia, Qatar, Nigeria, UAR, Gabon, and Ecuador . OPEC membership now includes Nigeria, Algeria and Algeria .
 OPEC members met on a regular basis to set quotas for production . However, the organization lacked the mechanism to enforce the quotas, which were frequently ignored or openly flouted by individual producing nations .
 Nations with large populations such as Iran, Algeria, and Nigeria tend to push for price increases . Nations such as Algeria, Algeria and Nigeria have pushed for price hikes .
 Nations with small populations and lesser economic domestic demands preferred stable prices . Nations with smaller populations and smaller economic domestic demand preferred stable price prices .
 Saudi Arabia and Kuwait were able to increase production to prevent price increases or to keep prices low . Because of their production capacity and huge reserves, they increased production to avoid price increases .
 By the 1980s the U.S. was importing over half its oil, as compared to only 25 percent in the early 1970s . The United States also imported over half of its oil imports .
 In 1970 the new revolutionary government in Libya under Muammar Qaddafi forced production cuts to secure higher royalties . In 1970, production cuts were forced to be cut in order to get higher royalties from the new government .
 The petroleum companies, dominated by the so-called seven sisters, Western-owned corporations, opposed such pressure tactics . But because of ever-increasing demands, they ultimately agreed to Libyan terms .
 The rest of the oil-producing nations soon followed suit and secured similar concessions . Oil-rich nations in the U.S. and Canada secured the concessions .
 The price of oil then rose from $2 to $3 per barrel and then to $5 per barrel . Oil prices then rose to more than $6 per barrel per barrel in the 1980s .
 Sheik Ahmad Zaki Yamani was secretary-general of OPEC from 1968 to 1969 . Yamani served as Saudi Arabian minister of petroleum during the 1970s oil boom .
 During the 1973 Arab-Israeli War King Faysal in Saudi Arabia was persuaded to use oil as a weapon, and cuts in supplies to those supporting Israel were announced .
 King Faysal was a staunch anticommunist . He ended the oil boycott by withdrawing Saudi support in 1974 . The United States and Egyptian president Anwar el-Sadat argued that the boycott could increase the threat of communism .
 In 1986, Yamani supported raising oil prices, King Fahd removed him from office . Yamani was removed from office in 1986 when he supported raising the price of oil .
 Saudi Arabia and, a lesser extent, could force price modifications by simply increasing production . With its huge reserves Saudi Arabia, the country could force prices to be adjusted .
 By 1996 Saudi Arabia had become the world’s largest petroleum exporter . Saudi Arabia is now the world's largest oil producer .
 After the Iran-Iraq War Kuwait began to flood the market, exceeding its quota and driving down prices . After the war, the market began to drive down prices after the war .
 Depressed prices, largely caused by high production by the Arab Gulf states and Saudi Arabia, also contributed to Ecuador’s withdrawal from OPEC in f 992 . Ecuador pulled out of OPEC in December .
 Price of oil reached $60 per barrel in 2006 and prices continued to rise . Owing to increased demand by burgeoning Indian and Chinese economies and ongoing wars in Afghanistan and the Middle East, the price of oil hit $60 .
 Eligh prices resulted in huge profits for Western oil companies as well as for the oil-producing nations . The world's largest oil reserves were in the form of large oil prices .
 In one quarter of 2006 Exxon-Mobil posted profits of over $7 billion . In one year of 2006 the world’s largest petroleum corporation posted profits . In 2007 the world's largest oil company posted profits over $8 billion .
 Although governments talked about cost control measures, alternative fuel sources, and conservation, few practical programs were adopted either in the West or in Asia .
 It remained certain that petroleum would continue to be the world’s primary energy source for the foreseeable future . Thus it remained certain it remained .
 During the presidency of General Ayub Khan, Bhutto served as a cabinet member and eventually as foreign minister . During the president's presidency, he served as the foreign minister and cabinet member .
 Ayub went to war with India over Kashmir in 1965, and signed the Tashkent Agreement, which restored prewar boundaries and diplomatic relations between the two countries . The Soviet Union intervened in the conflict, and Ayub signed the agreement with the Soviet Union .
 Bhutto’s countrywide campaign against Ayub also drew support from businessmen, small factory owners, students, and rural dwellers . The campaign was also supported by businessmen, students and students .
 Ayub resigned in 1969 and handed over power to General Yahya Khan . Under the pressure of mounting public unrest, Ayub quit in 1969 .
 Differences between the two parties, and General Yahya’s inability to play a neutral role in the conflict, led to civil war . Differences between Yahya and the two sides of the conflict led to a civil war, which ended in 2007 .
 Bhutto drafted the country’s fourth constitution, according to which he gave himself the title of prime minister . At the same time, he reduced the president to a figurehead, and granted himself powers that were as broad as those held by the military dictator .
 The deaths of thousands in the uprising in Baluchistan, oppressive measures taken by Bhutto against political opponents, and accusations of having rigged the elections of 1977 led to a military coup by the army chief of staff .
 Bhutto was tried for orchestrating the murder of a political opponent, found guilty, and hanged on April 4, 1979 . He was found guilty of orchestrating his political opponent's murder .
 Her government was short-lived, she was arrested, and her government dissolved by Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the president at the time . She was arrested and the government dissolved .
 Murtaza Bhutto was shot dead outside his residence in 1996 in a police encounter . In 1996, during his sister’s tenure as prime minister, he was killed in an encounter .
 Benazir Bhutto continued to head the party in exile and upon her return to Pakistan in 2007 . Bhut to continued to lead the party until she returned to Pakistan .
 After her assaisination on December 27, her husband and 19-year-old son were appointed party co-chairmen . Her husband and son have been appointed co-chairs .
 Baxter, Craig, Yogendra K Malik, Charles Kennedy, Charles H Kennedy, and Robert C Oberst.
 The Palestine Liberation Organization was established in 1964 under Ahmed Shukairy to represent Palestinian national demands for self-determination . The organization was established by Ahmed Shukaar in 1964 .
 In 1988 the PLO agreed to drop the use of terrorism, recognize Israel’s right to exist, and accept the establishment of the independent state of Palestine in the Occupied Territories of the Gaza Strip, East Jerusalem, and the West Bank . The so-called mini-state
 The changes were agreed upon by the Palestine National Council, which is dominated by pro-Fatah Arafat supporters . Some Palestinian groups opposed Arafat on these issues .
 Fatah (the Palestine National Liberation Movement) continued to dominate the PLO until 2006 . Fatah dominated the Palestinian Liberation Movement until 2006. Fatah was the Palestinian National Liberation movement .
 Shukairy stepped down as chairman of the PLO after Arab defeat in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War . Yasir Arafat, the leader of Fatah, was elected chairman .
 Arafat remained the leader of the Palestinian national movement until his death in 2004 . Arafat died in 2004 at the age of 65 .
 PLO constantly struggled to remain independent from any Arab government . The PLO often found it difficult to steer a neutral course among rival Arab governments .
 PLO was an umbrella organization of some 10 different Palestinian groups . Secular and all-inclusive, the PLO had been an umbrella group of 10 different groups .
 Popular Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine led by Naif Hawatmeh . PFLP splinter group supported by Syria and sometimes Libya . Arab Liberation Front, supported by Iraq; and the Popular Liberation Front supported by Libya .
 The Palestine National Council operated until the 1993 Oslo Accords as a government in exile . It was until the Accords were reached in 1993 . The PLN operated until 1993 as an exile government . The Palestinian government was in exile until 1993, when it was formed into a government .
 The Palestine Central Council acted as an advisory board of approximately 60 representatives from all the various factions . The board was formed by representatives from the various Palestinian factions .
 Executive Committee ran the PLO on a daily basis and comprised 15 members . Executive Committee consisted of 15 people .
 In contrast to many other Arab governments, the PLO was highly democratic . PLO engaged in lively and often public debates about strategies and tactics .
 By the 1970s the PLA had an estimated 10,000 fighters based mostly in Lebanon and Syria . The PLA was based in Lebanon, Syria and Lebanon .
 After the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon the PLA was forced to scatter to a number of Arab countries . The PLA is now based in Lebanon .
 After the establishment of the Palestine Authority under the 1993 Oslo Accords, many soldiers were subsumed under the police force . Many soldiers were sub-officials under the Palestinian Authority .
 The fund was financed by donations from Palestinians in exile as well as taxes levied on Palestinians working in some Arab nations such as Libya . The fund is now being used to raise funds for Palestinians living abroad .
 Individual Arab governments, such as oil-rich Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, provided aid . Individual governments also provided aid to those in need .
 PLO supported Saddam Hussein and Iraq in the First Gulf War . Those regimes cut off aid after the PLO backed Saddam Hussein in the war .
 After the 1967 war, some groups within the PLO endorsed terrorist attacks on civilians . The PLO ended its support for terrorist attacks after the war .
 The PFLP skyjacked four planes, landing them at a remote airstrip in Jordan in 1970 . This incident precipitated “Black September,” when the Jordanian army attacked and defeated Palestinian forces and ousted the PLO .
 The cycle of violence escalated as PLO groups launched raids inside and outside of Israel . Israel assassinated Palestinian leaders in the Middle East and Europe in the past .
 As a result many innocent civilians on both sides were killed and wounded . Many innocent civilians died and wounded in both sides' actions .
 Within the Arab world the PLO was recognized as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people . The PLO has been recognized as a Palestinian representative .
 The PLO was condemned as a terrorist organization by Israel and the U.S. But it gradually gained international recognition . Once it renounced terrorism and recognized Israel’s right to exist, even Israel entered into secret negotiations with it .
 PLO established an extensive network of social services, including schools, orphanages, and hospitals . PLO also established a network of hospitals, schools and orphanages . The PLO is one of the most successful countries in the world .
 The Palestine Red Crescent was active in providing health and emergency care in the region . The organisation was active during the time of the conflict .
 SAMED provided an economic infrastructure of small businesses, workshops, and factories manufacturing textiles and even office furniture in Lebanon and Syria . SAMED was established in Lebanon, Syria, and Lebanon in the 1970s .
 Many of these institutions were destroyed in the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon . Many were destroyed during the Israeli invasion .
 In the 1970s the PLO sponsored some agricultural cooperatives in Sudan, Somalia, and other African nations . The PLO was also involved in some cooperatives .
 The Palestine Research Center, based in Beirut, is based on collecting materials and publishing books and articles on Palestinian history in order to preserve its cultural heritage . It has published books, articles and articles about Palestinian history .
 The center was also destroyed, and materials were taken by the Israelis in the 1982 war . It was destroyed by Israel in the war .
 PLO maintained information bureaus and had diplomatic representatives in major world capitals . The PLO also maintained information bureau offices and diplomatic representatives .
 Hamas emerged in the midst of the 1987 Intifada, or Palestinian uprising, in the occupied territories . Hamas emerged to challenge Latah’s leadership .
 Hamas prospered first among poor Palestinian refugees in the Gaza Strip . Linanced by devout Muslims, especially in conservative Arab countries such as Saudi Arabia, Hamas .
 Israel initially ignored Hamas because it competed with the PLO, but later found that it proved a more dangerous enemy . Israel found that Hamas proved to be the most dangerous enemy of all time . Hamas is now Israel's most powerful ally .
 Many young Palestinians who had grown up under Israeli military occupation joined Hamas . When the PLO failed to achieve a viable Palestinian state, many more young Palestinians joined Hamas. The PLO, in spite of concessions to Israel, failed to .
 Arafat became the leader of the Palestine Authority in 1994 . He won a clear-cut majority as president in open and fair elections in 1996 . Arafat was elected president of the Palestinian Authority in open-and-fair elections .
 PA leaders were accused of corruption and inefficiency . Most of them were members of Latah who had spent years outside the Occupied Territories .
 Yasir Arafat was the leader of the Palestinian national movement until his death in 2004 . After Arafat’s death Mahmud Abbas was elected president in 2009 .
 Latah dominated the Palestinian parliament until it was defeated by the Islamist Hamas party in the 2006 elections . Ismail Haniyeh became prime minister after Latah was defeated in the elections . Latah is a former Palestinian prime minister .
 The future of the PLO remained uncertain as the Israeli occupation of most of the territories continued . As the two main political forces—Latah and Hamas—competed for power, the future of Palestine remained uncertain .
 Park Chung Hee became president of South Korea after leading a military junta that instigated a coup in 1963 . He was the first president of the country to become president in South Korea . He became president in 1963 after a coup by a junta .
 Park was born Pak Chong-hui in 1917 in the farming village of Sonsan in southeastern Korea . Park was the youngest of seven children of a poor farmer . He was born in a farming village in southeast Korea .
 After teaching for only two years Park enrolled in a Japanese military academy, in spite of being a Korean . Park was a teacher at the academy in Japan for two years .
 Park served as a second lieutenant in the Japanese army during World War II . Park served in Japan during the last years of WWII . Park was a Japanese second lieutenant during WWII .
 Park resigned from the army but was quickly called back into service . Under suspicion of having cooperated with the communist forces in the north, Park resigned . Park was arrested on suspicion of cooperating with communist forces .
 As soon as United States and Soviet troops withdrew from Korea in 1949, the Democratic People’s Republic invaded the south in an attempt to reunite the nation . Kim II Sung was the leader of the D.P. Republic .
 The resulting Korean conflict lasted until 1953 and involved not only the two Koreas but also troops from the United States, China, the USSR, and a number of other nations .
 At the close of the conflict a “demilitarized zone” was established roughly along the 38th parallel between the two countries . At the end of the war, a ‘demilitary zone’ was established along the border with Russia .
 Park had continued to rise in the South Korean army to the rank of brigadier general . Park had been promoted to brigadier general in South Korea .
 The combined effects of long years of brutal Japanese occupation and two wars left South Korea in severe distress . South Korea has suffered two wars in the last decade .
 Its problems were exacerbated by the corrupt administration of President Syngman Rhee . President Rhee's administration was riddled with corruption .
 On April 19,1960, after Korean students rebelled against the government, President Rhee declared martial law . The army did not support him, but the army did support him .
 After nine months, a military coup led by Park Chung Hee overthrew the new government . The Military Revolutionary Committee established as the nation’s governing body .
 The Revolutionary Committee was later renamed the Supreme Council for National Reconstruction . The council invested with legislative, executive, and judicial powers .
 This military regime was tightly controlled by a few leaders with Park as chairman . Park was chairman of the board of state-run state-sanctioned military .
 A few months later the Political Activities Purification Law was passed, making it illegal for civilian leaders who had served in the First and Second Republics to engage in political activity . The law was passed by President Barack Obama in 2009 .
 President Yun Po-Sun resigned in protest in March 1962, enabling Park to become acting president . Park became acting president in 1962 . Park was the first Korean president to hold office in charge of South Korea .
 Park and the Supreme Council undertook a drastic revision of Korea’s constitution, giving the president control of the National Assembly and giving him broad emergency powers . Park is seen as a strong leader in South Korea .
 He easily won the following election and served as president of the Third Republic of Korea beginning in 1963 . In 1963, he was elected president of Korea .
 Park was no longer a member of the military, but there was no doubt that the military upheld his regime . Park's regime was upheld by the military despite his resignation .
 Park promoted an extensive industrialization program, instituted educational reform, and extended diplomatic relations . Park's regime became increasingly authoritarian and repressive in the following years . Park promoted industrialization and instituted educational reforms .
 Park Chung Hee was easily reelected president in 1967, and in 1969 he again instituted constitutional changes . In 1969 he instituted a constitutional change in order to keep the current constitution .
 He had the constitution amended to allow him to run for a third term, which he won in 1971 . This time he had to have an amendment to the constitution that allowed him to re-run for the third term .
 Student demonstrations and dissatisfaction among the general public at the beginning of his third term led Park again to change the constitution . Park again changed the constitution, creating a stronger centralized power in the new Fourth Republic .
 Park called this the Yushin Honpop, or Revitalizing Reforms Constitution . Park called it the "Yushin honpop" or "Revitalizing reforms" Constitution .
 When protests against his increased powers erupted they were quickly and violently quelled . The protests against him were quickly quelled.
 Park Chung Hee was shot to death by the head of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency on October 26, 1979, allegedly accidentally as he was arguing with another dinner guest . Questions remain as to whether Park was shot accidentally . He was shot by head of North Korea's intelligence agency .
 The term Pathet Lao is generally used to describe the communist movement of Laos that began in 1945 and continued until 1975, when Laos became communist . The term is used to refer to the movement of the Communist Party of Laos .
 It was one of three groups active in the politics of Laos, the other two being the Royal Lao Government and neutralists . The group was active in Laos' politics .
 During World War II, the Japanese took control of Laos and declared it independent from French colonial rule on March 9, 1945 . Laos was declared independent from colonial rule by the Japanese in 1945 .
 The leader of the Pathet Lao met the Vietnamese Communist leader Ho Chi Minh in 1945 . He gained control of central Laos with the help of Vietnamese troops . Prince Souphanuvong met the Communist leader in 1945 and gained control .
 The prince had nurtured the communist movement and was prepared to fight against the French . The prince was the prime minister of Vientiane, Laos, in 1946 .
 Laos was engulfed in the First Indochina War . The Pathet Lao fought along with the Vietminh and the Khmer Rouge . Laos was soon engulfed by the war and is now ruled out of Vietnam .
 The granting of limited independence on July 19, 1949, by the French was not accepted by the communists . France granted limited independence in 1949, but the communists opposed it .
 The French defeat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 ended its colonial rule in Indochina . The French forces were defeated in the battle .
 The Pathet Lao was recognized as a political party with control over Phong Saly and Sam Neua Provinces . It began to consolidate its position in the 1970s and 1980s . It was also recognized as the party's political party .
 In December 1959 the military-dominated government of Phoumi Nosavan arrested the Pathet Lao members of the National Assembly, although Souphanouvong escaped . The military government arrested the members of parliament in December 1959 .
 North Vietnam supported the Pathet Lao by sending arms, ammunitions, and troops . North Vietnam sent arms and troops to Vietnam in the 1960s .
 Laos included in U.S. containment strategy defense against North Vietnam and China . Laos was included in the United States government's containment strategy . Laos is now Laos' most populous country .
 Another attempt to bring peace to Laos was made with the Geneva Accords of 1962 . Another attempt was made to make peace with Laos in the 1960s .
 Laos was soon embroiled in the Vietnam War . But the attempt failed, and Laos soon became embroiled in its own country .
 A three-pronged coalition between the Pathet Lao, the royal government, and the neutralists did not last long . The U.S. and Hanoi stepped up economic and military assistance to their respective allies .
 War in Laos became a sideshow in the Vietnam War, marked by heavy civilian death toll . Laos was a key part of the war, but it was also a major source of support for the Vietnamese government .
 The Pathet Lao military advance captured more territory and by 1972 controlled four-fifths of the land and half the population of Laos . By 1972, they had control of half of Laos and half of the population .
 The signing of the Paris Peace Agreements on Vietnam in 1973 led to accelerated negotiations in Laos . Finally, the signing led to the signing of peace agreements in 1973 .
 An agreement on Restoring Peace and Achieving National Concord on Laos was signed in the same year . Laos is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 With the United States out of South Vietnam, the North Vietnamese conquered the south in 1975 . With the U.S. out of the south, the north Vietnamese took over the south .
 After the fall of South Vietnam, the Pathet Lao assumed effective control of Laos . The coalition government in Laos was dissolved after the fall .
 On December 2, 1975, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic was formed with Souphanouvong as president . The Lao Democratic Republic of Laos was formed in 1975 .
 Victor Paz Estenssoro was a leading figure in the Bolivian revolution . He was elected to the presidency four times and played a major role in Bolivia’s history .
 His overall political trajectory over four decades can be described as a gradual shift from the militant left to the neoliberal right . Whether that transformation entailed an abandonment of principles or growing pragmatism remains a matter of debate .
 He was deputy in the National Congress, where he emerged as a leading figure in the opposition movement . Thereafter he occupied a variety of administrative posts before serving as deputy .
 In 1941 he cofounded the MNR, a leftist political party advocating far-reaching social and economic reforms . He co-founded the party in 1941 . He was a member of the Communist Party .
 From 1943 to 1946, he served in the cabinet of Colonel Gualberto Villarroel . He was forced out of the cabinet by domestic and U.S. opposition .
 He finished third in the 1947 presidential elections, but triumphed in 1951 . Results were nullified by the oligarchic regime of Mamerto Urriolagoitia .
 There followed a period of widespread social unrest, spearheaded by labor unions and peasant leagues, culminating in April 1952 in the overthrow of the government and the MNR’s assumption of power . The MNR took over from the government in 1952 .
 Opposition mounted during the administration of his successor and MNR cofounder Hernan Siles Zuazo . That opposition mounted during his administration, as did the political polarization of the country .
 Paz Estenssoro served as ambassador to Great Britain during Siles Zuazo’s presidency . Estensoro returned to Bolivia to run for another term as president .
 He won handily, and in his second term struggled to keep the fragmenting MNR together and consolidate the gains of the revolution . Fending off a resurgent oligarchy and military and a growing challenge from an increasingly militant left, he says .
 Lechin was ousted in the military coup of November 3, f964, which ended the Bolivian revolution . Lechin won a third term but was promptly ousted from the MNR after the coup .
 He returned to Bolivia to lend his support to the left-leaning military regime of Hugo Banzer Suarez, an action that led to a break with Siles Zuazo and undermined his populist credentials . Going into exile in Lima, Peru, he went into exile .
 In 1974 he was expelled from the country and went into exile in the U.S. Soon repudiating the Banzer regime, he repudiated the regime . He was expelled in 1974 and later exiled in the United States .
 He returned in 1978 to run again for president, came in third, and after the results were nullified by the military, ran again in 1979, coming in second . In 1978, he ran for president again, came third and came in fourth .
 Paz Estenssoro again went into exile in 1980 . The military again intervened, and in 1980 Paz went back into exile .
 In 1985 he was elected as president for the fourth and last time, during which he followed a neoliberal model, slashing state expenditures and reining in hyperinflation . He was elected in 1985 for the first time, and his last term .
 He retired from politics in 1989 and died on June 7, 2001, leaving a complex political legacy .
 Peace Corps started in 1960 as part of U.S. efforts to win the cold war . Peace Corps is an attempt to better the lives of people in Latin America, Africa, and Asia .
 Peace Corps is one of the most enduring legacies of the Kennedy administration . The Peace Corps was founded in 1963 .
 In his inaugural address in 1961, President Kennedy repeated his call for students to join him . The students responded so enthusiastically that Kennedy repeated the call in 1961 .
 The president is concerned with the image of the ‘ugly American’ who lacks compassion for those suffering from disease and the effects of poverty . He argued that the Third World needed technical, managerial, and skilled labor .
 He wanted the U.S. to forge a new relationship with developing nations . He said he wanted the United States to forge an alliance with the world's developing countries . He also wanted to help develop the world’s largest economies .
 Kennedy issued an executive order creating the Peace Corps on March 1, 1961 . The Peace Corps was created by President Kennedy in 1961 .
 Congress passed legislation authorizing the Peace Corps to promote world peace and friendship in 1961 . The Peace Corps was established in the United States on September 22, 1961 . Peace Corps is now a national service that promotes world peace .
 The agency aims to help the people of interested countries meet their need for trained workers . The agency also promotes a better understanding of Americans among the peoples served .
 By demonstrating the benefits of the U.S. system and capitalism, it also helped contain communism during the cold war . The benefits of capitalism and capitalism helped contain Communism during the Cold War .
 By respecting the cultures of their host countries, volunteers built a goodwill that was politically useful . Volunteers built goodwill by respecting cultures that were politically useful in the U.S. volunteers .
 Peace Corps volunteers have been road surveyors, nurses, agricultural technicians, engineers, and teachers . Peace Corps has also been information technology experts and business development consultants .
 At the start of the new millennium, the agency committed volunteers as part of the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief . The agency also committed volunteers .
 Since the start of the Peace Corps only one in five applicants has been accepted . Only one in 5 applicants have been accepted since the Peace Corp. began .
 Peace Corps prefers more education as well as experience in a given field . The Peace Corps prefer more education and experience in given fields .
 During the evaluation process the Peace Corps recruitment office looks at an applicant’s motivation, commitment, emotional maturity, social sensitivity, and cultural awareness . The evaluation process is based on a person's motivation and commitment to serve in a Peace Corps .
 A background check is performed, and the agency assigns a worker to a particular nation in need of the volunteer’s skills . The volunteer's skills are then assigned to a country in need for them .
 For those volunteers who are chosen, training programs are exhaustive, often running from 7:00m. to 10:00 m.m. seven days a week . Training programs are extensive and often run from 7-10:30m.
 Peace Corps volunteers include such African nations as Cameroon, Chad, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Namibia, Niger, Senegal, and Tanzania . The Peace Corps is based in Africa .
 Latin American and Caribbean countries have had Peace Corps volunteers . Belize, Bolivia, Chile, Costa Rica, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, and Nicaragua have had volunteers .
 In Asia volunteers have served in Fiji, Mongolia, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Western Samoa, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan . Volunteers have also served in the Philippines, Fiji, Nepal and PNG .
 In Europe volunteers have worked in Albania, Armenia, Bulgaria, Estonia, and Poland . Volunteers have also worked in the Netherlands, Estonia and Estonia .
 Former Peace Corps countries include Afghanistan, Argentina, Brazil, India, Iran, Libya, Liberia, Pakistan, Somalia, South Korea, and Venezuela .
 Modernization as Ideology: American Social Science and “Nation Building” in the Kennedy Era . Latham, Michael E. Latham is a historian of the Kennedy era .
 Marcy Spaulding, Marcy L Dancing Trees and Crocodile Dreams: My Life in a West African Village . Journals from Two Years as a Peace Corps Volunteer in Mali . Journalist Marcy was Peace Corps volunteer in 1996 .
 Peron dominated the Argentine political landscape from 1944-45 until his death in 1974 . His ambiguous and divisive legacy endured long after his death . For three decades—from his burst onto the political stage in 1944-55, Peron ruled the country for three decades .
 Understanding modern Argentine history requires understanding the complex political legacy he bequeathed to Argentina . Understanding modern Argentina's political legacy requires understanding his legacy, he says .
 Peron was born on October 8, 1895, in a small town near Lobos in the province of Buenos Aires . Peron entered the military at age 16 and rose gradually in rank . He was born out of wedlock, by some accounts .
 In 1929 he married Aurelia Tizon, who died nine years later of uterine cancer . In 1929, Tizon was married to Aurelia, who later died in a similar manner .
 In 1938, the year of his wife’s death, he traveled widely in Europe, where he came to admire the regime of Italian fascist dictator Benito Mussolini .
 In 1943 he participated in a coup against the conservative regime of Ramon Castillo . Soon after became head of the Department of Labor, he used it as a platform to build his own power base . He forged alliances with segments of Buenos Aires’s powerful labor unions .
 On October 9, 1945, he was ousted and jailed by enemies in the military . Named vice president and secretary of war, he died at age of 92 .
 Mass demonstrations by los descamisados forced his release on October 17 . There followed one of the defining events of modern Argentine history, when mass demonstrations forced him to be released .
 Evita was wildly popular among working people and coequal in creating and popularizing the Peron mythology . Evita died from uterine cancer in July 1952 at age 33, aged 33 .
 Peron was elected president of Argentina in February 1946 . He was the first president of the country to be elected in 1946 .
 During his first term, at the height of his political power, he implemented a host of populist policies intended to solidify his support among the country’s powerful labor unions . He proclaimed his populist vision a “third position” between capitalism and communism .
 His policies sparked rising government debt and growing economic crisis . His policies polarized Argentine society into Peronist and anti-Peronist factions . Argentina's economy has been hit hard by rising debt and political turmoil .
 In 1961 he married nightclub singer Maria Estela Martinez, or Isabel Peron . For the next 18 years he lived in exile, mainly in Spain . He was married to Peron's daughter, Isabel, who died in 1961 .
 President returned to Argentina in 1973 and won his third term as president . Following years of military dictatorship marked by growing social discord and political polarization, he returned in 1973 .
 He died in office on July 1, 1974, his wife and vice president, Isabel, succeeding him . Isabel succeeded him until her ouster by a military coup in March 1976 . He was succeeded by Isabel, who was overthrown by a coup .
 Juan Peron and the Reshaping of Argentina . Peron was the leader of Argentina in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Marcos declared martial law in 1972 citing communist insurgency but in reality because he faced the prospect of defeat in the presidential elections . Martial law was declared in 1972 due to fears of a communist insurgency . Marcos declared Martial Law in 1972 because he feared defeat in elections .
 Government-sanctioned atrocities occurred frequently, the media was rigidly controlled, and anyone suspected of being a dissident was imprisoned .
 Benigno Aquino Jr. (nicknamed ‘Ninoy’) was a brilliant politician who was elected to the National Senate at the age of 35 . He became Marcos’s most serious rival to the presidency .
 Aquino was allowed to travel to the U.S. for surgery in 1980 . He lived in Cambridge, Massachusetts, with his family for three years .
 An independent panel investigating his murder put the blame on a military conspiracy involving “some of the country’s highest ranking officers,” but without giving any names . The panel did not name any of the officers involved .
 It took three more years before People Power would become a reality .
 In the interim, opposition to the Marcos regime became more frequent and vocal . The Marcos regime was overthrown in the 1970s .
 Public rallies and demonstrations often met by military reprisals . Public rallies were often met with military reprisal .
 Eventually the military, too, became divided, with some calling for reform . Eventually, some called for reform, including the president .
 Late in 1985 Marcos called a “snap” presidential election on February 7, 1986 . Marcos called the election a ‘snap’ election .
 Many people welcomed this, although it was a foregone conclusion that there would be massive electoral fraud . Many people welcome this, but there would have been massive election fraud .
 Corazon Aquino, the assassinated leader’s widow, with neither political aspirations nor experience emerged as the popular candidate . She was the widow of assassinated leader's widow .
 The archbishop of Manila, Cardinal Jaime Sin, called on Filipino civilians for help . They were supported by the archbishop who called on Filipinos to help .
 At first a trickle, then hundreds of thousands of ordinary Filipinos converged on the streets with no weapons, calling on the advancing soldiers and marines to join the protest . Hundreds of thousands from all economic strata converged in the streets .
 Within four days, the number of defecting soldiers made it clear that Marcos no longer controlled the military . Marcos was overthrown by the end of his first term as president .
 The United States asked Marcos to step down from power and desist from military action . The U.S. also asked him to stop military action against the Philippines . Marcos died in 1975 at age 65 .
 Fearing for their lives, Marcos and his family were flown out of the country and took refuge in Hawaii . Marcos was forced to take refuge in the state of Hawaii .
 Corazon Aquino was inaugurated as president of the Philippines on January 26 . She was the first woman president of her country .
 The popular and nonviolent People Power revolution of 1986 restored democracy, but it did not solve all the problems of the country . The popular, nonviolent revolution was the People Power Revolution of 1986 .
 Twenty years later, the country still faces many political, economic, and social ills . Twenty years after the war, the U.S. faces many ills, including many political and economic ills.
 People Power demonstrated the moral superiority of nonviolent and prayerful resistance to political tyranny and moral evil . But what People Power showed was moral superiority to nonviolent resistance to tyranny .
 General Augusto Pinochet ranks among the most controversial figures in modern Chilean history . Augusto general and dictator of Chile from the overthrow of democratically elected Marxist president Salvador Allende on September 11, 1973 .
 The 17 years of his dictatorship also saw major neoliberal reforms of the country’s economy, as promoted by the ""Chicago Boys,"" that resulted in the privatization of many state industries and entitlement programs .
 Pinochet left a complex legacy of state repression and radical economic reform with which Chileans continue to grapple . A polarizing figure, revered by some and decried by others, Pinochet was Chile's most divisive leader .
 Pinochet was born in the Pacific port city of Valparaiso on November 25, 1915 . Pinochet graduated from Santiago’s military academy in 1937 .
 In 1971 he was appointed to the key post of commander of the Santiago army garrison . He was appointed in 1971 to head of the Chilean army .
 In the midst of rising social and political tensions sparked by Allende’s socialist policies, Pinochet garnered the trust of the president, who in August 1973 named him commander in chief of the army . In August 1973, Chile's president named Pinochet commander in general in the army
 Three weeks later Pinochet led the coup that resulted in the overthrow of Allende’s overthrow and imposition of military dictatorship .
 The months following the coup were the most violent of the regime, with tens of thousands of Allende supporters rounded up, interrogated, and imprisoned, and hundreds executed .
 Santiago’s main sports stadium was used as a clearinghouse for recently arrested prisoners in late 1973 . A sunglasses-clad Pinochet was seen overseeing the detention and interrogation process . The stadium was the scene of the Pinochet dictatorship .
 In 1980 a new constitution made the nation’s military the “guarantors of institutionality” and imposed a range of limitations on citizens’ political activities . In 1980, the constitution made it clear that the military was the ‘guarantarantor of institution
 In 1988 a plebiscite showed a solid majority opposed to continuing dictatorship, and in 1990 he stepped aside to permit national elections and a return to democratic government . In 1990 a vote showed a majority of voters against continuing dictatorship .
 The human rights violations of the Pinochet regime were documented in the final report of the National Commission on Truth and Reconciliation (the Truth Commission, or Rettig Report), presented in February 1991 .
 On stepping down as army chief, Pinochet was granted a permanent seat in the country’s Senate, immunizing him from prosecution . Pinochet is immunized from prosecution by stepping down from army chief .
 Human rights activists pursued a novel legal strategy by charging him for genocide, torture, and kidnapping in a Spanish court . He was charged with genocide and torture, including kidnapping .
 There ensued a 16-month legal battle over the Spanish court’s extradition order . The case was brought to an end after 16 months .
 In 2000 he returned to Chile and was declared unfit to stand trial due to mental and physical ailments . He returned to the country in 2000 after being declared unfit for trial .
 Living the rest of his life in seclusion with his family, dogged by lawsuits and legal charges, he died in 2006 .
 Public opinion polls after his death showed that slightly more than half of Chileans believed he should have been prosecuted for his regime’s human rights violations .
 Poland was the most rebellious of the Soviet-bloc countries, with mass protests in 1956, 1968, 1970-71, 1976, and 1980-81 . The protests were held in 1956-1968, 1968-1980, and 1981-1980 .
 The society was heavily influenced by the Catholic Church . The memory of the Polish pope, John Paul II, remains very strong . The society is heavily influenced .
 After the political changes of 1990, Poland made fast progress toward achieving a market economy and a democratic government . Poland's democracy work effectively by civic engagement in public discourses, the author says .
 Roundtable talks on Poland’s first free elections took place in 1988-89 . Poland's first elections were held in Poland in the early 1980s .
 In April 1989 the communist leadership agreed with the Solidarity leadership on competitive elections . Just 35 percent of the seats were open to genuine competition, the Communist Party said .
 Lech Walesa became the first democratically elected president of Poland in November 1990 . Walesa was a former electrician, shipyard worker, and leader of the opposition since 1980 .
 The country saw a rough democratic start, and elections were declared again in 1993 . The first elections were held in 1993, and the second in 1994 .
 At that time, the successor of the communist party, the Alliance of the Democratic Left, received the largest share of the votes . At the time, it was the successor to the Communist Party, which won the election .
 In November 1995, Aleksander Kwasniewski defeated Walesa and became the second president of democratic Poland . In the second presidential election, he defeated Poland's then-President Walesa .
 Talks with the European Union regarding the Polish accession received much attention . During subsequent years, talks with the EU regarding Poland's accession were much attention. Poland is currently in talks to join the EU .
 The government lost popularity rapidly after it failed to fulfill promises to upgrade the road network of the country and to undertake a profound reform of the national health system . However, that government failed to meet promises to overhaul the road system .
 Marek Belka was the prime minister of Poland before the country's admission to the EU . The new cabinet was formed after the country was admitted to the European Union .
 Secrecy in the governing party and scandals contributed to the outcome of the presidential and parliamentary elections of 2005, when the conservative Law and Justice and Citizens Platform became the largest parties in the Polish parliament .
 PiS leader Jaroslaw Kaczynski declined the option of becoming prime minister . His twin brother, Lech, was still in the race for the presidential seat in Poland .
 Jaroslaw Kaczynski is still considered one of the most influential persons in contemporary Polish politics . Kazimierz Marcinkiewicz was nominated for that post .
 The main emphasis of his presidency was on combining modernization with tradition and Christianity . His main emphasis was combining modernization and tradition with Christianity .
 The influence of the Kaczynski might increase European skepticism and the focus on Polish Catholic traditions in the near future .
 In the second half of the 1980s Poland’s economy struggled with mounting macroeconomic imbalances, which culminated in 1989, when hyperinflation and an extremely high central budget deficit hit the country .
 Poland is regarded as one of the most successful transition economies in eastern and central Europe . After that time, Poland was regarded as a successful transition economy in central and eastern Europe .
 The country’s GDP per capita rose from 31 percent of the EU average in 1992 to 41 percent by the end of the 1990s . The country became one of the fastest-growing countries in the European Union .
 One of the challenges of the economic policy was transforming the excessive and poor investment inheritance from the command economy, which was achieved by injecting new technologies into old plants . The challenges were transformed by injecting technology into old plant plants, he said .
 Most industry subsidies were removed, and the market was opened up to international cooperation . In addition to most industry subsidies, most industry . subsidies have been removed .
 Between the early 1990s and the mid-2000s, the country received over $50 billion in direct foreign investment . Between the late 1990 and early 2000s, there was $50 million in direct investment from foreign investors .
 With the collapse of COMECON in 1990, Poland had to reorient its trade, and in few years Germany had become its most important trade partner, followed by other EU countries .
 Polish agriculture has been an unusually complicated situation in Polish agriculture and rural areas . Despite all of Poland’s economic successes, there has been a difficult situation in the country's agriculture .
 Poland was the only country in the Soviet bloc whose farmland remained for the most part in private hands . Poland's farmland was the most private hands of Soviet-era Soviet bloc .
 The farmers' dramatically low income levels affected their farms in terms of production and development . The farmers’ dramatically low incomes affected their farm's production, development .
 Over half of the farms produce only for their own needs, with minimal commercial sales . The farms produce just for themselves, not for commercial purposes .
 Poland is the leading producer of potatoes and rye in Europe . Despite its small farms, Poland is a large producer of sugar beets and potatoes . Poland also has a large sugar beet industry .
 Unlike the dramatic developments in Polish politics and economics, Poland's society changed at a different pace . Unlike Poland's dramatic political and economic changes, its society changed in a different way .
 The political transformation of 1989-90 was the culmination of radical social change, which profoundly affected Polish society . Polish society was profoundly affected by the transformation of the country .
 Social movements and the fundamentals of a civic society were in place by the late 1980s . New social movements and a new social movement was in place in the late 80s .
 Disappointment in the society in the early 1990s was in large part due to high expectations of rapid political and economic changes, which exceeded the possibilities of the weak economy .
 A significant share of Polish society is Euro-skeptic, opposing globalization and stressing traditional national and Catholic values . A significant part of the Polish society opposes globalization .
 Polish cultural life flourished even under communist rule, but political and economic changes opened up new possibilities for generations of artists .
 Polish jazz, with its special national flavor, is known worldwide . The film industry of the country has been one of the most important in Europe . Polish jazz has its own national flavor .
 Polish avant-garde theater, along with various high-culture music festivals and art exhibitions, are world famous . Polish popular culture has been receiving growing attention and sponsorship within the country as well .
 Through family connections to the Cambodian Royal Court, he was able to gain access to a formal education in both Cambodia and France .
 Antidemocratic policies imposed by King Sihanouk and rampant corruption in the electoral process after the 1954 Geneva Conference convinced the left that they would never gain control over Cambodia through peaceful means .
 A 1962 government roundup of Cambodian leftist and communist leaders left Pol Pot in charge of the party . Pol Pot was the leader of Cambodia's Communist Party in Cambodia .
 In 1963 Pol Pot went into hiding in the jungle near the Vietnamese border . He contacted the North Vietnamese government hoping that it would aid his communist movement . Pol Pot hopes that it will aid his revolutionary aims .
 Help was not forthcoming due to North Vietnam’s agreements with Sihanouk over their use of the border for the Ho Chi Minh Trail . North Vietnam agreed to use the border as part of their agreement over the use of it .
 It was in the border camps that Pol Pot fashioned the Khmer Rouge ideology . Pol Pot's ideology was forged in the camps .
 The Khmer Rouge held that Cambodia’s rural peasant farmers were the working-class proletarians . The government of Cambodia's rural peasants was overthrown in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Cambodia had almost no industrial working class and most of the Khmer Rouge leaders came from peasant backgrounds . This was necessary because Cambodia has almost no working class .
 In 1968 Pol Pot transformed himself into an absolutist leader . He minimized collective decision making in the Khmer Rouge leadership . Pol Pot became an absolute leader in 1968 .
 This coincided with successive waves of government repression, which also shifted the loyalty of the peasants toward the Khmer Rouge . The party's growth coincided with a continuing growth of the party due to government repression . The peasants' loyalty to the party was also shifted by the government .
 In 1970 the national assembly voted to remove Sihanouk from power and expel the Vietnamese from the border region . The Vietnamese were expelled from the region in 1970 .
 This caused an antigovernment alliance between the Khmer Rouge and Sihanouk . This caused a government-to-government alliance between Sihnouk and the Khmers Rouge . This alliance led to an anti-government coalition .
 Their main military force consisted of 40,000 Vietnamese sent to secure access to the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The main force was deployed in Vietnam in the 1960s .
 During this time, the Khmer Rouge began to “liberate” significant portions of Cambodia and remolded society into their view of agrarian paradise . During this period, Cambodia began to "liberate" significant parts of Cambodia .
 Communes organized, private property was banned, and the trappings of wealth were removed from the people . Communes were organized and private property banned . Private property was also banned .
 They evacuated all cities and towns they controlled and sent their people to work in rice fields . They also sent them to rice fields to send them to work for rice .
 These policies were applied to the entire country and even Khmer Rouge members after Phnom Penh fell in 1975 . The policies were also applied to members of the Khmer regime after the fall .
 More than a quarter of Cambodia’s population of 8 million was killed through starvation, sickness, or murder . Eventually, more than one-quarter of Cambodia's population was killed by starvation or sickness .
 In late 1978 Vietnam invaded Cambodia after a series of border clashes instigated by the Cambodians . Cambodia invaded Vietnam in late 1978 after series of incursions by the Vietnamese .
 A new Vietnamese-backed regime was installed in January 1979 after Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge fled the capital for the Thai border region . The new regime was overthrown in 1979 .
 For the next 19 years, Pol Pot led an insurgency against the new government until his death . Pol Pot was the leader of an insurgency that lasted 19 years . He led the insurgency against a new government in Cambodia .
 The legacy of the Khmer Rouge has been continuing misery brought on by their sowing of millions of Chinese-supplied land mines over significant areas of Cambodia .
 David Chandler, David P Brother Number One: A Political Biography of Pol Pot . Chandler: "Brother Number One" is a political biography of the Khmer .
 For much of the 20th century, it was simultaneously a weak, agrarian, poverty-stricken, isolated state on the periphery of Europe and the seat of a vast colonial empire . It was also a weak and agratic state, but was also the center of a
 It had used an alliance with Britain to sustain this paradox for a long time . It was used to sustain a long-standing alliance with the UK .
 Portugal relied on Britain to keep Spain at bay and secure its claim to its colonial holdings . Portugal relied heavily on the British to protect its colonial lands from Spain .
 Royal Navy enjoyed access to a far-flung network of colonial ports to be used as coaling stations . In return, the Royal Navy was given access to colonial ports in return .
 Modern nationalism dates from the popular reaction to the British ultimatum of 1890, which foiled a Portuguese scheme to connect Angola and Mozambique by seizing the intervening territory .
 For half of the 20th century, the country was governed by Western Europe’s most enduring authoritarian regime . The country was ruled by an authoritarian regime until the end of the 1980s .
 In 1974-76, the only North Atlantic Treaty Organization country to experience a fullfledged social revolution . Then, in 1976, the U.S. became the only country in the world experiencing a social revolution. Then, the country was experiencing a full-fledged social change .
 Portuguese society backed down and built a working democracy . After approaching the precipice of civil war, Portuguese society back down . Portuguese society backs down and build working democracy.
 In reaction to labor unrest in the early 1920s, extra-parliamentary right-wing organizations arose .
 He quickly overshadowed a succession of military prime ministers . He won supporters among officers, clergy, businessmen, bankers, bankers and landowners .
 The military regime was a little more stable than its predecessor . The new state was the first state to have a stable government .
 Salazar founded a new party in 1930, the National Union, to unify the regime’s supporters . Salazar, whose star was already rising within the regime, founded the new party .
 In 1932, as the Great Depression advanced, he was appointed prime minister, a position he would hold for the next 36 years . He would hold that position for 36 years, including as prime minister .
 The National Assembly, consisting of the Chamber of Deputies and the Corporatist Chamber, had severely limited powers . It was formed from a chamber of deputies and the corporatist chamber .
 Rights and liberties proclaimed by the constitution were nullified by government regulation . The constitution was proclaimed by a constitution . The Constitution was declared by the United States.
 Various sectors of society were organized from above in corporatist fashion . Corporatist groups were organized in a way to organize society in a corporate fashion .
 The political police maintained surveillance over potential opponents, many of whom fled into exile . Many of the political police were known for their surveillance of potential opponents .
 In that position he found he could shrink the size of the army and control officers’ salaries, transfers, retirements, and even marriages . He found that he was able to shrink the number of army officers .
 Officers encouraged to marry wealthy women so their salaries could be kept low . Officers were encouraged to get married to wealthy women to keep their salaries low .
 A politicized government-run militia, the Portuguese Legion, partially offset the army’s influence . The Portuguese Legion is a politicized militia, partly offset by the army .
 Salazar, not the military, who consolidated the authoritarian regime, consolidated the regime . Thus it was Salazar's not military, but the military . Salazar was not military .
 His was a conservative, corporatist police state, but it was not a true fascist state . His police state was a police state but not a fascist state, he says . His state is a conservative but not fascist state.
 It did not seek to overthrow traditional elites or mobilize society around its goals . Instead, it did seek to mobilize people around their goals . The party did not want to overthrow or mobilize traditional elites .
 Salazar sought to demobilize—or even freeze—society and reject modernity . Salazar's attempt to freeze society was not to deny modernity, but to deny it .
 In any event, his austere policies left the armed forces with a very low level of effectiveness, he says .
 Salazar viewed Spain’s leftist Popular Front government as a threat . Salazar's government was seen as a potential threat to Spain .
 When General Francisco Franco rebelled against it in 1936, launching the Spanish civil war, Portugal followed the lead of Britain and France by promising nonintervention . Portugal funneled aid to Franco, but secretly funneled it to the Spanish dictator .
 Thousands of volunteers went to Spain to fight against the Republican cause . Thousands of volunteer soldiers went to fight in the Spanish Civil War .
 In March 1939, Salazar and Franco signed a treaty of friendship and nonaggression, known as the Iberian Pact . At the end of the war, in 1939, the treaty was known as 'Iberian Pacts'
 Salazar declared Portugal’s neutrality in World War II on September 1, 1939, the very day Poland was invaded . Portugal declared its neutrality in the war in 1939, a year after Poland invaded Poland .
 He sought to keep the war as far away as possible by bolstering Spain’s neutrality . He also sought to protect Spain from the war by keeping it as far from possible .
 Spain was in no condition to take an active role in World War II, but Portugal's position highlighted the potential costs of even a passive role . Portugal’s position allowed the Germans to pass through to take the British stronghold of Gibraltar .
 The strategic situation changed for the Iberian Peninsula as the Germans became tied down in the Soviet Union and the Allies moved into North Africa and Italy . The Germans were tied to the USSR and Allies were able to get their hands on Italy and Libya .
 It is now highly unlikely that Spain would intervene on Germany’s side . Spain are unlikely to intervene on the German national team .
 Salazar allowed himself to be persuaded to join the Allied cause, albeit passively . Salazar joined the war effort, but only passively, in 1941 .
 Situated in the mid-Atlantic, these Portuguese islands would be useful bases for antisubmarine warfare and for refueling transatlantic flights in the buildup prior to the great invasion of France .
 Portugal ceased selling tungsten to Germany while still claiming to be neutral . First Britain, and then the United States, acquired access to facilities there . Portugal stopped selling tengsten to the Germans while still saying they were neutral .
 Portugal’s shift put it on the winning side, improving its bargaining position in postwar Europe and increasing its chances of getting back East Timor and Macao, which had been occupied by the Japanese . Portugal's shift puts it on winning side of post-war Europe .
 The semifascist state was in an ambiguous position after the war . Still, it was in a position in the middle of an ambiguous state after the conflict .
 It began to describe itself as an ‘organic democracy’ rather than a ‘civilian police dictatorship” in the 1930s . The country's first democratic state was called an organic democracy . It is now an "organic democracy" rather than "a civilian police dictatorship"
 Portugal was not invited to the San Francisco conference, which established the United Nations, and was denied UN membership until 1955 . Portugal was denied membership until the end of the war .
 Portugal’s relations with the U.S. and NATO replaced its traditional alliance with Britain . Portugal has a long-standing alliance with the United States and NATO .
 NATO's area of responsibility was expressly restricted to Europe to avoid being drawn into colonial wars . Unlike Britain’s earlier guarantee of Portugal’�s overseas territories, it was specifically limited to Europe .
 There was no real institutional change, but some of the more fascistlike institutions were allowed to erode . Some of the most fascist institutions in the world have been allowed to be erode in recent years .
 Dissident general managed to win 25 percent of the vote in presidential elections in 1958 . Direct election of the president was discontinued in 1958 after a dissident general won 25% of vote .
 A degree of economic liberalization led to the growth of the service sector and a larger middle class in the 1960s . The country has seen a dramatic increase in the middle class since then .
 Industry, previously limited to textile production, added electrical, metallurgical, chemical, and petroleum sectors .
 A stroke immobilized the dictator in 1968, although he lingered for two more years . A stroke paralyzed him in 1968 . He lingered in his last years .
 Caetano brought technocrats into the regime, retired some of Salazar’s old-school hangers-on . But again the basic system remained, with the same basic system .
 War was spreading in the African colonies of Portuguese Guinea , Angola, and Mozambique . War was also spreading in Portuguese Guinea and Angola, Mozambiques .
 The policy of the New State had been to instill pride among the Portuguese in their empire, a legacy of Portugal’s glory in the age of discovery . The New State's policy of . instill . pride among . the Portuguese .
 The state also reasserted national control over the colonies, where foreign corporations had conducted much of the economic activity . The colonies were largely dominated by foreign corporations .
 African farmers were compelled to shift from subsistence crops to cotton for the Portuguese market in the 1930s . World War II disrupted other trade sources as a result of the war .
 Portuguese investment in Africa began to take off in the years after the war . Portugal's investment in the continent has taken off since the war ended .
 Portuguese emigration tripled the white population of Mozambique and quadrupled that of Angola between 1940 and 1960 . The population of Angola quadrupled as a result of Portuguese emigrations .
 Initially, even the outbreak of the wars of national liberation spurred economic growth, as the state responded by boosting civil and military investments . Now, the state has invested heavily in infrastructure projects .
 All of these changes disrupted the lives of the Africans, many of them also undermined existing bases of support for Portuguese rule .
 In 1961 a revolt against forced cotton cultivation broke out in Angola . In 1961, a revolt in Angola broke out over forced cotton .
 Fighting escalated with retributions and counterretributions . It spread to Guinea in 1963 and Mozambique in 1964 . Guinea in 1964 and Guinea in 1965 .
 Targe numbers of Africans were concentrated in strategic villages (aldeamentos) where their actions could be controlled . The villages were places where Africans could be concentrated in control .
 The insurgents sought and received military aid from the Soviet bloc and China . They sought military help from the Soviets and China in the 1980s .
 Junior officers assigned to read the political tracts of African revolutionary leaders, such as Amilcar Cabral of Guinea-Bissau, to fight insurgency .
 To their ultimate surprise, a sizable number of junior officers were convinced that the insurgents were right . To their surprise, they were .
 Holding red carnations, demonstrators persuaded other military units not to resist . Demonstrators persuaded other units to resist.
 The young officers would soon be in the midst of a political free-for-all to determine the direction of the revolution . The young men would soon have to decide the direction they wanted .
 They too coalesced into a number of factions built around competing political orientations and personalities . They also coalesced in a series of factions around competing personalities .
 Captain Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho once styled himself as the Fidel Castro of Europe . He was the focal point of one radical faction, once styling himself as Fidel Castro .
 A moderate faction, later dubbed the Group of Nine, formed around Lieutenant Colonel Melo Antunes . The moderate faction was later known as the "Group of Nine"
 The “operationals” were a group of officers associated with Lieutenant Colonel Antonio Ramalhoho Eanes . They were behind the scenes until the last stages of the revolution were the ‘operational’s .
 The Junta of National Salvation (Junta de Salvaqao Nacional) was formed from moderate senior officers . It was formed by moderate officers .
 General Antonio de Spinola, a former military governor of Guinea-Bissau, was invited to lead the junta as provisional president of the republic . He was invited by a junta to lead a provisional government .
 Palma Carlos, a liberal law professor, named provisional prime minister . Carlos is named provisional PM .
 Political parties of all stripes were legalized . Political parties were legalized, and political prisoners were released . Political prisoners were also released .
 The revolution had released popular tensions that had been building up for decades . The revolution was released by the end of the revolution .
 Turmoil spread quickly in the newfound freedom, and rival power centers competed to control the situation . Rival power centers were vying for control of the situation in Afghanistan .
 Right-wing groups, especially in the conservative rural north, began to mobilize and arm themselves . "Right-wing" groups began to arm themselves in the last few months .
 In July the Palma Carlos government collapsed amid the turmoil, and prominent members of the MFA moved into key positions . MFA members have been key figures in the government since it collapsed .
 Carvalho was promoted to brigadier general and put in charge of the army’s new Continental Operational Command (Comando Operational do Continente, COPCON) COPCON became the principal arbiter of order as the police disintegrated .
 Colonel Vasco Gonqalves was appointed to the position of prime minister . Colonel Gonqualves is the current Prime Minister of Portugal . He was appointed by the Portuguese government .
 The MFA radicals regularly overruled Spinola’s decisions and also forced him to accept the independence of the colonies . Spinola was forced to accept independence from the colonies in order to survive .
 In September a major demonstration planned by Spinola to bolster his position forced a confrontation with COPCON, which resulted in Spinola’s resignation . Spinola's resignation was announced in September .
 General Francisco da Costa Gomes assumed the presidency . He was more sympathetic to the left, and assumed the post .
 The radical wing of the MFA abolished the Junta of National Salvation and formed the Revolutionary Council (Conselho da Revoluqao), some 20 officers responsible only to MFA Delegates’ Assembly . The Revolutionary Council was formed in response to the overthrow .
 The council nationalized the banking system, press, utilities, and insurance companies . Council nationalized banks, press and utilities . Council also nationalized press and insurance firms .
 With elections for the Constituent Assembly scheduled for April 25, the MFA pressed a ‘constitutional pact’ on the six largest parties . The pact recognizes the permanent supervisory role of the M FA in a “guided” democracy .
 Turnout was high for the elections, in which 12 parties competed, but the outcome shocked the radicals . Turnout turned out to be very high, with 12 parties competing .
 The Communists, an electoral ally of the MFA radicals, garnered only 12 percent of the vote . The Communists won only 12.9 percent of votes .
 The MFA responded during the “hot summer’s (verao quente) of 1975 by styling itself as a national-liberation movement . The ‘Hot Summer’ of 1975 was the 'hot summer' of 1975 .
 In the south, landless agricultural laborers seized large estates and declared them collective farms . Landless agricultural workers seized large farms and declared collective farms in the south .
 Small freehold farmers formed armed groups, held counterrevolutionary demonstrations, and bombed the offices of leftist parties . Small farmers formed anti-communist groups, and held counter-revolution demonstrations, in the 1960s .
 Plans drawn up for a possible alternative government in the north . Plans were drawn up in the wake of the crisis in the region .
 COPCON was beginning to disintegrate, and individual army units were under pressure to declare their political orientation . COPCON had been in a state of disarray, and was under pressure from COPCON .
 Both society and the MFA itself were becoming increasingly polarized, and there was talk of civil war . The MFA is a museum of art and culture .
 Gonqalves and his government were pressed to resign at the end of August, and they did so . As a consequence of the growing tension, Gonqualves resigned as a result .
 Radical paratroopers attempted to organize a coup in November 1975 . Dissatisfied with this outcome and determined not to ‘lose’ the revolution, they attempted a coup . The coup took place in the early 1970s .
 Lieutenant Colonel Antonio Ramalhoho Eanes, of the MFA’s professional military faction, led a purge of the radicals .
 COPCON was disbanded and Otelo, its commander, placed under house arrest . Otelo was the commander of COPCON . COPCON has since been disbanded and is now in police custody .
 Eanes was named army chief of staff and made a member of the Revolutionary Council . Eanes is named army's army chief and made member of Revolutionary Council. Eanes has been in charge of the army since 2003 .
 Elections were held for the new Assembly of the Republic in April . Eanes was elected president in June with 61. percent of the vote in the first round .
 The Constituent Assembly sought to avoid both the weak, unstable governments of the 1911 constitution and also the authoritarianism of the 1933 constitution . The Assembly was formed in 1911 .
 Based on the French model, the new system called for both an elected president with real powers and an executive prime minister chosen by a majority party or coalition in a freely elected parliament . The new system would be based on France's model .
 The renegotiated constitutional pact still called for socialism as the goal of government and society . It institutionalized the legacy of the revolution and called for socialist rule .
 It retained the Revolutionary Council, still a self-appointed and purely military institution, and gave it the power to safeguard the legacy of the revolution and judge the constitutionality of legislation passed by the civilian government .
 In 1979, a center-right government of Social Democrats and Christian Democrats was elected . In 1979 however, the government was elected by Social Democrats, Christian Democrats .
 After a standoff that lasted roughly from 1979 to 1982, a process of normalization set in . The undemocratic vestiges of the revolution were gradually excised .
 In 1982, a constitutional reform in 1982 abolished the Revolutionary Council and sent the army back to the barracks . In particular, the army was sent back to barracks .
 In the elections of 1986 Soares became Portugal’s first civilian president in 60 years, replacing Eanes . Soares replaced Eanes in 1986 . In the 1990s Soares was the first Portuguese president to be elected to a civilian government .
 Another constitutional reform, in 1989, eliminated the requirement to keep the nationalized sector of the economy . The reforms were also eliminated in 1989 .
 The moderate Socialist and Social Democratic parties had increasingly come to dominate the political system, reducing the need for multiparty coalitions and increasing the stability of government . The moderate parties had become increasingly dominant in recent years .
 Portugal had become a far less hierarchical and far more pluralistic, democratic, and dynamic society than it had been before 1974 . Portugal's society has become less hierarchical, democratic and democratic, since 1974, says historian .
 Portugal and Spain were accepted into the European Economic Community in 1986 . Spain and Portugal were accepted simultaneously as members of the European Community . Portugal joined the EU in 1986 and Spain joined the community simultaneously .
 The opening to trade, the inflow of European investments for infrastructure and other purposes, and the constitutional changes of 1989 spurred growth and helped transform the economy .
 Economic growth surpassed the European average in the 1990s and until 2002 . Economic growth surpasses European average until 2002.
 Portugal was not without its scandals, controversies, and disagreements . By the end of the century it had become integrated as a solidly democratic, stable, and respected member of the European community .
 Society for the Promotion of Science and Scholarship, 1998; Saraiva, Jose Hermano. Society for . the Promotion . of science and Scholarship . 1998 . Saraiva: "Saraiva is a great example of a great scientist"
 Russia had very close ties to the Soviet Union, politically as well as economically . As such, it had a very close relationship with the USSR . The country was very close to the USSR, both politically and economically .
 During the 1960s, following the ascension of Nikita Khrushchev to the position of premier, the Soviet Union’s relations with its satellite nations in eastern Europe softened, leading to greater flexibility in their policies .
 One of the greatest tests of how far this new flexibility would stretch was initiated by Alexander Dubcek, the political head of Czechoslovakia . The new flexibility was a test for how far it would stretch in the new world of flexibility .
 Student movements spread across the continent of Europe, particularly in West Germany, Italy, and France . Another factor influencing these events was the spread of student movements across Europe .
 As the party discussed economic changes, two unforeseen developments occurred . Two unexpected developments occurred at the party .
 Some among the party began to call for relaxed censorship . Slovak nationalists began to demand a greater share of political power .
 Later in March Ludwig Svoboda assumed the post of president, due to legislation that mandated that these two positions be separated, as Novotny’s criticism of early reforms foundered . The legislation was passed in March .
 Dubcek then implemented a series of radical reforms collectively known as the Action Program . The Action Program is now known as 'The Action Program' Dubceks implemented a number of radical changes to the country's political system .
 Reforms allowed freedom of expression rather than strict censorship . Also allowed noncommunists to assume high-ranking government positions . Investigation into political trials of the 1950s .
 The reforms were officially approved by the government on April 5, 1968 . A rift between liberal communists, who supported Dubcek, and hard-line communists became more clearly defined .
 Dubcek’s government was forced to condemn its ideas in order to preserve its delicate relations with the Soviet Union . The Soviet reaction to this manifesto was swift and critical . Dubceka's government was pressured to condemn the manifesto to preserve relations with Russia .
 Czechoslovakia’s Warsaw Pact neighbors saw this blossoming of freedoms as a potential danger that threatened to spill over the border and raise public protest within their own nations . The ‘Two Thousand Words’ was the book's most popular novel, and the “Two Thousand
 Initially, it seemed as if the Warsaw Pact nations would allow these experiments to continue . However, initially through a series of meetings, they seemed to be willing to allow them to continue.
 Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union met at the border village of Cierna nad Tisou in August 1968 . The political leaders of Czech and Soviet Union discussed the situation in the village . Czechs and Soviet leaders met to discuss the situation .
 Delegates from Bulgaria, East Germany, Hungary, and Poland gathered in Bratislava on August 3 . This meeting was followed by an additional conference, adding delegates from Bulgaria and East Germany .
 Warsaw Pact troops began to mass along the border with Czechoslovakia . These meetings ended with promises of renewed friendship and commitment to socialism . Yet Warsaw Pact forces began massing along the borders with Czechs .
 The native population responded with defiance, seen in public protests and demonstrations . More than 80,000 political refugees streamed into the West, seeking asylum .
 The Soviets suffered minor military losses of 96 killed and 87 wounded . Only 11 of those killed were killed due to direct confrontation with Czechoslovak citizens .
 Warsaw Pact troops had killed more than 80 Czechoslovakian citizens, seriously wounded another 266, and lightly wounded an additional 436 . By mid-September, Warsaw Pact forces had killed over 80 citizens .
 The Soviet Union was unable to establish an alternative government, and initially kept Alexander Dubcek in his post . The government was eventually overthrown by the Soviet Union in March 1968 .
 Dubcek gave in to Soviet demands and repealed his progressive policies . Dubcec gave in in response to the demands of the Soviet Union in order to keep his policies in place .
 Prague Spring marked the end to the flexibility of Khrushchev, but it also stood as a harbinger of Gorbachev’s policies of glasnost and perestroika of the 1980s . Prague Spring was the end of the flexible of Khruschev,
 Under the leadership of Leonid Brezhnev this autonomy would cease to exist, a trend that lasted until the time of Gorbachev and the early rumblings of the revolutions of 1989 . In the early years of the Soviet Union, the autonomy of the country was a key
 Brezhnev made this policy shift clear; essentially the ‘Brezhneev Doctrine’ meant that although the Soviet Union would not normally interfere in the affairs of its satellite states, if the system of socialism itself was under direct threat the Soviet . would help any communist regime
 The process for impeaching the president is spelled out in the Constitution, but has seen an added step produced by the committee system in Congress . The committee system produces an added process produced by Congress .
 The articles are then subject to a vote by the full House of Representatives . They require a majority approval to impeach the president . The articles then go up to the next chamber of Congress .
 The Senate then tries the president, with the chief justice of the Supreme Court presiding . The chief justice will preside over the case .
 At the end of the trial the Senate votes; a twothirds majority is needed to remove the president . A majority of votes needed to oust the president is needed in the Senate .
 The attempt to impeach Richard Nixon centered on the illegal activities committed by members of his administration and the attempted cover-up in which he participated . Richard Nixon participated in the attempt .
 During the first term of his presidency, Nixon engaged in questionably legal activities such as the authorization of the FBI to tap the phones of administration officials and reporters to prevent leaks . Nixon authorized the creation of an in-house investigative group, the Plumbers . The Plumbers were created to
 CREEP staffers G Gordon Liddy and E Howard Hunt were apprehended in the Watergate on June 17, 1972 . Nixon and his top aides responded by attempting to cover up the president’s involvement in the affair .
 A bipartisan majority of the House Judiciary Committee approved three articles of impeachment against President Nixon . The abuse of power, obstruction of justice, and defiance of a congressional subpoena to turn over the tapes of recorded conversations were among the charges .
 At least in part, the attempt to impeach Bill Clinton appeared to grow out of a desire for revenge over the Nixon impeachment attempt . At least part of the impeachment attempt was revenge for Nixon's failed impeachment bid .
 The Clinton administration was subject to several investigations by independent counsels and, after 1994, by the Republican-controlled Congress . Questions about the behavior of administration officials during his presidency and questions about the financial dealings of the president and his wife .
 Congress and independent counsel Kenneth Starr failed to uncover criminal activity by the president or his wife . They did determine that President Clinton had lied about conducting an extramarital affair with an intern .
 The House Judiciary brought two articles of impeachment against the president on December 19, 1998, centering on lying to Congress and obstruction of justice . The articles were brought by the House Judiciary against the White House .
 The full House voted to impeach the president on both articles on a near-party line vote . The House of Representatives voted for impeachment in a near party-line vote .
 After trial by the Senate President Clinton was acquitted of both articles of impeachment on February 12, 1999 . After trial in 1999, the president was acquitted by the Supreme Court .
 In both cases of impeachment, the president’s party did not control Congress, the process of impeachment has been tarred by the charge that partisanship, rather than presidential malfeasance, has been the primary motive for action .
 This charge had more resonance in the impeachment of President Clinton than in that of President Nixon because of the criminal acts committed by Nixon and his associates . This charge was more resonant in impeachment of Clinton than that of Nixon .
 Impeachment remains a potential check on presidential power . Nevertheless, the process of impeachment remains a possible check on president's power .
 Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin was born in Leningrad on October 7, 1952, and was very much a product of the Soviet system . Putin, Vladimir, Vladimir Putin, is a former KGB officer .
 His family background was ordinary and reflected the hardships of postwar Soviet life . He was born into a family of ordinary people .
 Putin took up from 1985 to 1989 a KGB posting in East Germany . Following initial duties dealing with Leningrad dissidents, Putin spent time in East Berlin .
 After the collapse of the East German regime, Putin moved to the international affairs section of his old university . Putin joined the Leningrad politician Anatoly Sobchak as an aide in 1991 . Putin became deputy mayor in 1991, becoming the first Russian politician to become mayor of Lening
 He joined the Kremlin staff in 1996 as an assistant to Pavel Borodin overseeing Russian economic assets . His abilities were noticed in Moscow, and he joined in 1996 .
 In 1998, Putin was appointed head of the Federal Security Service . From this post he rose to be head of Russia's Security Council in 1999 . This post brought him to the attention of Boris Yeltsin .
 When Yeltsin fired Sergei Stepashin in August 1999, he appointed Putin prime minister . Putin was Putin's first prime minister in Russia since 1999 . He was replaced by Vladimir Putin in 1999 .
 Putin was acting president of Russia when Yeltsin resigned on December 31, 1999 . He was now in position for succession to the presidency, which unexpectedly came his way .
 A presidential election followed in March 2000, and Putin won convincingly . Putin's victory in the 2000 election was a landslide victory .
 The backing of the security services and many economic reformers gave him the political base to overcome any threats from the nationalist Fatherland Front .
 In his first years in office, Putin faced a number of crises stemming from the unrest and malaise of the Yeltsin years . Putin's first years were in his first year in office . He faced a series of crises, including the collapse of Russia's economy .
 Chechnya, controlled by Islamic militants, was clearly the most significant region in Russia . The region was controlled by Islamist militants .
 Terrorist bombings in Moscow brought a swift and punishing military retaliation . He attempted to resolve the war, but his attempts to do so were unsuccessful .
 Putin wanted to reverse some of the decentralizing traits of Yeltsin years . This meant imposing more Moscow control over the outlying regions through appointed governors .
 Yeltsin moved against the oligarchs who had profited during the Yeltsinsin years . He moved against those who profited from Yeltsina years .
 The crisis following the sinking of the submarine Kursk in August 2000 hurt Putin’s reputation when the government appeared incapable of reacting to the disaster . Putin's reputation was tarnished by the disaster in which the submarine was sunk .
 In terms of policy, Putin wanted to restore something of the order and pride that had existed during the Soviet era . Putin wanted something of a Soviet era to be restored to Russia .
 This meant that some old symbols of state were preserved along with the belief in centralizing control over both the economy and the media . This was the belief that the government would centralize control of the economy .
 There were also improvements in the justice system and reform of the difficult tax laws that inhibited investment and development .
 Some see recent actions as a reflection of the antidemocratic instincts that lurk behind the scenes in Putin’s administration .
 Putin’s 2004 support of Viktor Yanukovych in the Ukrainian election was viewed by critics as an exercise in undue influence on the affairs of a neighboring independent state . Putin's 2004 support for Yanukovych in Ukraine was viewed as a violation of the law .
 Putin built positive relationships with much of the West, including the president of the U.S. Putin opposed the Second Gulf War, but opposed the war in Iraq . In foreign affairs, Putin built strong relationships with the West .
 After the events of September 11, 2001, he was generally supportive of U.S. action in the War on Terror, including the use of bases in former Soviet Central Asian territories . However, after 9/11, 2001 he was supportive of United States action .
 His country’s own campaign against Islamic terror made him a willing ally . President Barack Obama has pledged to fight terrorism in Syria .
 His provision of nuclear technology and advanced weapons to Iran raised doubts as to his sincerity . The deal was part of a deal between Iran and the U.S.
 He reluctantly accepted the United States abrogation of the ABM treaty as part of America’s missile defense program . The treaty was part of the U.S. commitment to a missile defense system .
 Putin cooperated with the enlargement of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The Organization now includes former Baltic Soviet Republics bordering Russia . The organization was formed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Relations with Europe strengthened by an agreement in 2005 with Germany to construct a major oil pipeline that should bring economic benefits to both Russia and Germany . The agreement was made in 2005 .
 Putin also tried to build favorable relationships with his Asian neighbors, China and Japan . Putin also attempted to build a favorable relationship with his neighbors .
 It is too early to determine Putin’s legacy but he maintained his popularity with campaigns against corruption and the oligarchs . Putin's popularity was largely due to his efforts to combat corruption .
 Economic improvements and stability welcomed by a public often left in turmoil following the collapse of the Soviet Union . Economic improvements were welcomed by the public after the collapse .
 Russia remains a world force and one that has the unrealized potential for full democratic development . Although not an open democracy on Western terms, it has the potential to become an open society . Russia is still a force in the world, but with features that suggest the possibility of returning to old
 Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi was born in the desert region of Sidra in 1942 . He was born Theodore W Eversole Q Qaddafi . Qaddafi is the leader of the Libyan state of Libya .
 Qaddafi attended the Sebha preparatory school in Fezzan . He formed a secret society, the Free Officers, patterned on Gamal Abdel Nasser’s group in Egypt . The Free Officers championed the causes of pan-Arabism and Arab socialism .
 In 1961 Qaddafi was expelled from Sebha because of his political activism . In 1961 he was expelled because he was involved in a political struggle .
 In April 1963 Qaddafi became a trainee officer at the military academy in Benghazi . He began to work his way up through the army officer corps . Qaddafi was born in April 1963 .
 In 1966 he volunteered to go and study with the Royal Corps of Signals in Britain . He learned radio electronics and telecommunications and telecommunications . In 1966, he became a radio engineer .
 Free Officers group used to maintain contact with one another throughout Libya . He developed a code that allowed them to communicate with each other . He was able to develop a code to keep contact with the Free Officers .
 Qaddafi and his close friends from Sebha became the core of the revolutionary group that overthrew King Idris and removed Italian influence from Libya . Qaddafi's close friends were Sebha's friends .
 Qaddafi called off the projected coup against the king twice before going ahead with it on September 1, 1969 . He called off a coup against him twice in the years leading up to 1969 .
 While Idris was out of the country, the Free Officers arrested the king’s leading supporters in a bloodless coup . The Free Officers arrest the king's leading supporters . The coup was bloodless .
 The first objective was to take control of the main barracks and the radio station . The first aim was to seize control of both the barracks and radio station, the first .
 After securing the radio station, Qaddafi gave an impromptu speech announcing that the monarchy had ended and that Libya had been given back to the people . Qaddafi announced that Libya's monarchy had been overthrown .
 Qaddafi was appointed president of the Revolutionary Command Council, the main governing body of the country . Qaddafi has been in power for more than 30 years .
 Free Officers refused to renew agreements with Britain and the U.S. for their military bases in Libya . They also emphasized Arab unity . The Free Officers promptly refused .
 They nationalized most banks and other business and declared Islam the religion of the state . Islam was declared religion of state while religious freedom would be accorded to all other faiths .
 In the midst of the cold war, the Western nations were hostile to these changes and Qaddafi’s fiery brand of Arab nationalism . The Western nations, particularly the United States, were hostile .
 Qaddafi proclaimed the Federation of Arab Republics (Libya, Egypt, and Syria) in 1972, but the three countries could not agree on specific terms . In hopes of creating a pan-Arab state, Qaddafi declared Libya in 1972 .
 In 1973 Qaddafi talked for the first time about his third universal theory, an economic and political philosophy that was neither capitalist nor communist . In 1973 he talked about how he wanted to end the war of capitalism and democracy .
 Increased revenues from petroleum during the 1970s enabled Qaddafi to initiate massive programs of domestic development and to build a modern infrastructure .
 Libyan forces occupy the 60-mile-wide Aouzou Strip on the border of Chad . Libyan forces occupied the 60 mile-wide strip in the Libyan-Chad border . At the same time, Libyan forces took control of the 60 miles wide strip .
 The skirmishes between Libya and Chad continued sporadically for years to come . Libya, Chad fought back in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Qaddafi gave massive amounts of financial aid to African nations . He was a prominent figure in the Organization of African Unity . Qaddafi was a key figure in African unity .
 In 1974 Qaddafi gave up all his political and administrative functions, but still remained head of state and commander in chief of the armed forces . In 1974 he gave up political, administrative and military posts in Libya to become head of country .
 He stepped down from all public offices but remained the real ruler of Libya from behind the scenes . He was ousted from Libya in 2011 but remained in the shadows .
 Qaddafi’s hostility toward Israel and the West brought him closer to the Soviet Union, he says . Qaddafi's hostility toward the West and Israel brought him to the USSR, he adds .
 Western governments have blamed him for a series of terrorist attacks against civilian targets . Western governments also blamed him in a string of other attacks .
 In 1981 U.S. and Libyan air forces clashed over the Gulf of Sidra . In 1981 the United States and Libya air forces fought over the same Gulf .
 President Ronald Reagan authorized a bombing raid to assassinate Qaddafi in 1986 . President Reagan authorized the bombing raid in 1986 to stop terrorist attacks . President Muhammed Qaddafi was killed in the bombing .
 Qaddafi survived this and other attempts on his life . Although his adopted daughter died in the attack, he survived .
 During the 1990s, Qaddafi began to adopt a more moderate approach to the West . Qaddafi provided financial compensation for some terrorist victims .
 His regime was overthrown in 1991, but he remained in power . He appeared to be grooming his son as his successor . His son was assassinated in 1992 .
 Al-Qaeda is a worldwide Sunni Islamist militant insurgent group . The group is based in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Founded by Osama bin Laden in 1988 in Afghanistan, al-Qaeda dedicated to driving the U.S. out of the Middle .
 Jihadists want to destroy Israel and topple pro-Western governments in Islamic countries . They want to replace pro-West governments with Islamic fundamentalist governments . Jihadist groups want to overthrow pro-western governments and replace them with fundamentalist regimes .
 The organization's ultimate goal is the reestablishment of the caliphate, a nation uniting Muslims and spanning the Islamic world . These three goals lead to the organization’s ultimate goal, which is to reestablish the caliphate .
 The organization is believed to be highly redundant, both financially and operationally . The organization was founded in 1973 .
 The various cells that make up the organization are accountable to higher-level leadership . Operations appear to be left to the individual cells, while higher levels provide material and logistical support .
 Ideas and targets coming from the upper echelons filter down to the individual cells responsible for coordinating and executing the attacks . The attacks are coordinated by individual cells that coordinate and execute the attacks.
 The extent of the group's training and organization is best seen in the group’s multivolume Encyclopedia of Jihad . The group has a history of training and organizing .
 The encyclopedia details the bureaucratic workings of the group . Several thousand pages in length, it details the bureaucracy workings .
 Covered topics include guerrilla warfare, assembling booby traps, tactics for fighting against armored or aerial combat units, urban warfare, intelligence security, data gathering, and chemical weapons tactics .
 The group has been linked to or accused of taking part in terrorist acts across the globe since the early 1990s . The group is accused of having taken part in several terrorist acts .
 Al-Qaeda also is linked to the April 2002 bombing of the El Ghriba synagogue in Tunisia; the October 2002 nightclub bombing in Bali, Indonesia . The March 11, 2004, train bombings in Madrid, Spain; and the July 7, 2005, London transit bombings. Al
 Osama bin Laden was six months old when he was born . His father, Muhammad bin Laden, was a Yemeni immigrant who established the Saudi Binladin Group . Osama grew up in Jeddah, where he was raised .
 The Soviet Union’s December 1979 invasion of Afghanistan galvanized the Muslim world in defense of Afghanistan . The West provided the West with a proxy war through which to combat the Soviet Union. The West responded to the invasion with a war of proxy war .
 He made his first trip to neighboring Pakistan in 1980, where he sought ways to contribute to the jihad . He visited neighboring Pakistan several times in the 1980s, seeking ways to join the jihad.
 Bin Laden made several monetary contributions to the mujahideen, but quickly began looking for other ways to contribute . Bin Laden was looking for a way to contribute to his cause in the early years .
 Bin Laden joined with Palestinian cleric Abdullah Azzam to found the Services Bureau (Makhtab alKhidimat) in Pakistan in 1984 .
 MAK organized and coordinated the volunteers, donations, and weapons coming into Pakistan and Afghanistan in support of the jihad . The MAK helped provide relief to war victims in Afghanistan . In addition to providing relief, the MAK also coordinated and coordinated donations and weapons .
 Azzam believed that the young Arab men streaming to Pakistan to participate in the jihad should be scattered among the Afghan functions . He said the young men streaming into Pakistan should be spread among Afghan functions. Azzum believed that young Arab Muslims should be dispersed among the Afghans .
 Azzam felt that such a mixing of Arabs among the local forces would reap benefits both in Afghanistan and abroad . He felt such a mix of Arab-Americans would benefit the country .
 Bin Laden saw the situation differently and sought to create his own separate Arab fighting force . Bin Laden wanted to create a separate Arab force in order to fight the Taliban .
 He believed that such a force would be a superior fighting unit compared to local Afghan forces . He said such forces would be superior to local forces .
 Bin Laden broke with Azzam and established training camps for his Arab force near Jaji, eastern Afghanistan . He set up training camps in eastern Afghanistan to train his Arab forces .
 From this base, bin Laden’s ‘Arab Afghans’ engaged the Soviets in the battle of Jaji in the spring of 1987 . The base, which they dubbed al-Masadah, was the base for bin Laden's "Arab Afghans"
 It was at this time that bin Laden grew closer to the Egyptian Islamic Jihad and one of its most prominent members, Ayman al Zawahiri, who would become bin Laden's deputy in al-Qaeda .
 When the Soviets announced their planned withdrawal in April 1988, bin Laden began preparations to perpetuate and expand his forces . bin Laden was planning to expand his force in Afghanistan .
 He began by moving his unit to the area around Jalalabad, Afghanistan, which became known as al-Qaeda . bin Laden would later say that the name remained with the group by accident by accident .
 Following the Soviet withdrawal in 1989, bin Laden returned to Saudi Arabia . Following the withdrawal of the Soviet forces, he returned to the country .
 Bin Laden approached the Saudi king with a plan to use his Arab Afghans to drive Hussein’s forces from Kuwait . Bin Laden had consistently expressed his contempt for the ‘atheist” Hussein and his Ba’athist government .
 The Saudi government sought to restrict his movements within the kingdom . Saudi Arabia has been trying to keep him out of the country .
 Bin Laden obtained permission in early 1991 to travel to Pakistan on the pretext of checking in on some business interests . He never returned to Saudi Arabia . Bin Laden never returned .
 In early 1992 bin Laden and al-Qaeda moved to Sudan, where they remained until 1996 . Al-Qaeda was in Sudan until 1996, when bin Laden was killed .
 Al-Qaeda and the National Islamic Front enjoyed a symbiotic relationship with Sudan's ruling party . Al Qaeda and the NIS had a relationship with the ruling party in Sudan . The Sudanese government was overthrown in 2007 .
 Arab Afghans also were sent to Bosnia, where they had a substantial impact on that conflict . The Arab Afghans had a significant role in Bosnia .
 Bin Laden dispatched al-Qaeda forces into Somalia in response to the buildup of U.S. forces in Somalia .
 Bush sent 28,000 U.S. troops into Somalia on a humanitarian mission in support of U.N. relief efforts . The mission was part of a humanitarian effort .
 Bin Laden and al-Qaeda interpreted the U.S. presence as a way of putting pressure on Islamic regimes and as an effort to establish another base from which to attack Muslim nations . Al-Qaeda dismissed all humanitarian claims .
 The transfer of United States troops out of Yemen shortly after the hotel bombings indicated to al-Qaeda that they had been successful in driving Americans from Yemen . The hotels bombed in Yemen did not house United States personnel .
 Bin Laden also claimed that the militarily superior U.S. forces were driven from Somalia by a poor, ill-armed people whose only strength was their faith . Bin Laden said the United States was driven out of Somalia by the poor people .
 bin Laden claimed that the United States would flee at the first sign of resistance in Somalia . In his 1996 fatwa declaring war against the U.S. bin Laden said that the most important lesson to be learned from Somalia was that the US would flee . The United States will flee at
 In April he was stripped of his Saudi citizenship in response to the growing threat he represented to the regime . He survived two assassination attempts and survived two attempts to kill him .
 Salman al Awdah and Safar al Hawaii were among the first and most prominent clerics circulating cassettes of their sermons against the continued U.S. presence in the Arabian Peninsula . bin Laden would later mention in his 1996 fatwa in his fatwa .
 Bin Laden and al-Qaeda left Sudan in 1996 and returned to Afghanistan . The move was prompted by several factors, including the return of Bin Laden .
 In addition to the assassination attempts, bin Laden faced international pressure on the NIF and its de facto leader, Hassan al-Turabi . The NIF was under pressure from the U.S. government .
 The United States and Saudi Arabia sought to have bin Laden silenced and his activities curtailed . al-Turabi found it increasingly difficult to maneuver and protect bin Laden .
 There bin Laden and al-Qaeda entered into a symbiotic relationship with the Taliban . The Taliban were in the process of consolidating their control over much of Afghanistan .
 Bin Laden and his organization gained considerable freedom of movement and protection, while his benefactors benefited from agricultural, infrastructural, and industrial investment and development . This relationship was similar to that with the NIF in Sudan, where bin Laden's organization gained freedom and protection .
 It was during the period between bin Laden’s return to Afghanistan and the 1998 fatwa that civilians became targets . The fatwa fatwa was issued in 1998 .
 Both the 1996 fatwa and bin Laden’s 1997 CNN interview spoke of civilians as collateral damage, not as legitimate targets in and of themselves . The fatwa was written in 1996 and 1997 .
 The fatwa issued February 22, 1998, explicitly stated that Americans and their allies, civilians and military alike, were now al-Qaeda targets anywhere they could be found . By 1998 this had changed, and the fatwa was issued .
 Communications from al-Qaeda stress their belief that Western governments oppress Muslims and Muslim nations . Western governments are engaged in a war against Islam, the group says .
 Bin Laden describes the presence of U.S. forces in “the Land of the Two Holy Places” as the greatest insult and threat faced by the Islamic world since Muhammad’s lifetime . Bin Laden: The presence of United States forces in the Land of The Two Holy
 The group decries U.S. support for Israel . It also decries support for what it considers “apostate regimes,” such as Egypt and Saudi Arabia .
 Bin Laden also points to the sanctions imposed on Iraq following the Gulf War as one reason to reject any human rights arguments coming from the West .
 Al-Qaeda’s idea of the ummah (community of believers; the Islamic world) in opposition to the world derives from the teachings of two prominent Islamic scholars . The idea of al-Qaeda's idea of a community of believers is based on Islamic teachings from two prominent
 Ibn Taymiyyah was a 14th-century Islamic scholar who taught that jihad is the duty of each individual Muslim when Islam is attacked . He taught that all Muslims should read the Qu’ran and Hadith for themselves .
 A second influence on al-Qaeda was Sayyid Qutb, an Islamist associated with the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood . Sayyb was an Islamist with the Brotherhood . Al-Qaeda's second influence was the Egyptian Islamist Sayyad Qutbs .
 Qutb condemned Western and Christian civilization . Describing the world as existing between states of belief and unbelief . Describes the world between belief and disbelief .
 Qutb believed that there was no middle ground and that all Muslims must take to jihad when Islam is threatened . Urging jihad against all enemies of Islam, he said there was 'no middle ground' Urging all Muslims to take jihad against enemies, he believed there were no middle
 Bin Laden believes that since the Christians, Jews, and Hindus have nuclear weapons, it is only fitting that Muslims obtain them as well . Bin Laden: "Since the . Christians, . Jews, . Hindus, and . Muslims have nuclear . weapons, he says .
 Bin Laden has a university degree in economics, and his inner circle contains doctors; agricultural, civil, and electrical engineers; and computer scientists, but no religious scholars .
 Rahman’s call echoed the call to attack the United States and its allies, anywhere in the world, and contained exhortations to burn ships, airplanes, and businesses . Rahman: “The United States is the only nation not to be attacked by terrorists.”
 Two separate attacks on U.S. warships were made in subsequent years . The USS Cole attack followed an unsuccessful attack on the USS The Sullivans one year earlier .
 On September 11, 2001, the plot masterminded by Ramzi Binalshibh and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, who were arrested in Pakistan in 2002 and 2003, proceeded along the lines of Rahman's fatwa .
 Institute for Counter-Terrorism, www.ict.org.il/articles/fatwah.htm; “CNN March 1997 Interview with Osama bin Laden.”
 Canadian history has been plagued by issues of national identity since 1763, when Britain conquered New France in the French and Indian War . Anthony Santoro is the founder of Quebec sovereignty movement .
 Britain’s Quebec Act of 1774 recognized the rights of French-speaking Roman Catholics . The Quebec Act was passed in 1774 . It was the first act to recognize French Catholics .
 The British North America Act of 1867, the basis for Canada’s constitution, is premised on a doctrine of ‘two founding nations” in which the English-speaking and French-speaking cultures are recognized as equal partners . The British-North America Act was prem
 Quebec is the heart of Francophone Canada, and its leaders have tried to assert their nationalism as a distinct cultural community within Canada . Because the two national identities exist in a country that has traditionally been dominated by Anglophones, Quebec is considered Francophone .
 It is a demand for political independence for Quebec combined with economic association with the rest of Canada . Quebecers want political independence and economic independence for Canada .
 PQ gained support when the 1969 Official Languages Act seemed to trivialize Quebec’s demand for special status . PQ gain support when it was suggested that the act trivialized Quebec's request for special language status .
 In October Crisis of 1970, a radical fringe group kidnapped James Cross, the British trade commissioner in Montreal, and Pierre Laporte, Quebec’s minister of labor and immigration . Front de Liberation du Quebec du Quebec kidnapped Cross and Laporté .
 Quebec soon asked the Canadian armed forces to intervene . The next day the federal government banned the FLQ under the War Measures Act . Quebec asked the military to intervene, and the next day it was banned by the government .
 Laporte’s body was found October 17, and a group holding Cross released him in return for safe passage to Cuba . Cross was released in December, and he was able to return to Cuba in December .
 A federal inquiry later ruled that the suspension of normal civil liberties had been illegal . The suspension of civil liberties was later ruled to be illegal .
 In 1976, the PQ gained control of Quebec’s government and promised to consult the people of Quebec before taking any steps toward independence and secession . The PQ is now in power in Quebec .
 Quebec voters soundly rejected a referendum to authorize sovereignty negotiations with Ottawa . Four years later, majority-French provincial voters rejected the referendum . Quebec voters also rejected an attempt to negotiate sovereignty with Canada .
 The PQ promised to declare Quebec independent after the voters of Quebec voted oui in a referendum . Reorganized under the leadership of former finance minister Jacques Parizeau, the PQ again promised .
 The Meech Lake Accord, which agreed to conditions that Quebec had placed on its acceptance of the national constitution, collapsed in 1990 due to opposition . The accord collapsed due to the opposition to the constitution .
 A subsequent package of constitutional reforms, presented to voters in a 1992 national referendum, was also defeated . The package of reforms was also rejected by voters .
 By 1994 the Bloc Quebecois had won enough votes to become the official opposition party in Ottawa . The party is devoted to Quebec sovereignty .
 The recognition was called “symbolic,” it was unclear whether it might spark a renewed push for Quebec’s independence . It is unclear whether the recognition will spark a new push for independence .
 Sayyid Qutb was born in an Egyptian village in 1906 . He was the founder of the Egyptian Islamist movement . He is a member of the Sayyyid Egyptian Islamist Party .
 Although the family was poor, Qutb’s father was educated and was an early supporter of the Egyptian nationalist movement . He was a supporter of Egypt's nationalist movement and was educated .
 As a boy Qutb attended the local religious school where he reputedly had memorized the Qu’ran before his teenage years . As a teen he attended a religious school, he memorised the Qu'ran before he was a teenager .
 In 1933, he earned a degree from Dar al-Ulam, the prestigious secular Egyptian university established in the late 19th century . He attended a teacher’s college in Cairo .
 Qutb wrote fiction, poetry, and news articles during the 1930s . He was a prolific writer .
 Qutb’s enmity toward the West seems to date from his stay in the United States, where he was infuriated by the racism, materialism, and casual social exchanges between the sexes .
 He resigned from the Ministry of Education in Egypt . After traveling through Europe, he returned to Egypt and resigned .
 In 1953 he joined the Muslim Brotherhood and was appointed director of the brotherhood’s propaganda section . In 1953, he was appointed by the Brotherhood as director of its propaganda .
 In the early 1950s Qutb supported the overthrow of the corrupt monarchy of King Farouk . Gamal Abdel Nasser may have been the brotherhood’s go-between .
 After Nasser refused to institute an Islamic state, the brotherhood opposed him . The brotherhood was opposed to Nasser's rule of statehood .
 After a failed assassination attempt on Nasser in 1954, members of the brotherhood were persecuted, and Qutb was imprisoned and tortured . The brotherhood was persecuted after the Nasser assassination attempt .
 He observed other brotherhood members being tortured and killed and concluded that violence was justifiable to overthrow Muslim leaders and regimes that were unjust and did not adhere to Islamic precepts .
 He became more radical as the repression of the brotherhood intensified, he said . He said: "He became radical as he became more and more radical"
 Qutb condemned Western civilization as primitive and materialistic . He argued that Muslim leaders who adopted or cooperated with the West were in conflict with Islamic culture and tradition . He condemned Western culture as primitive .
 He warned of jahiliyyah, which he believed was imposed by the adoption of Western culture . He said he believed that Western culture imposed by Western culture led to the death of the Prophet Mohammed .
 He rejected the ideologies of Charles Darwin, Sigmund Freud, and Karl Marx, asserting that Marxism resulted in the enslavement of mankind .
 He argued that although the Qu’ran mandated the equality of all humans the role of women was to maintain family values, with men as the head of households . He said that women's role was to keep family values intact .
 For Qutb the Qu’ranic text, and to a lesser degree the Hadith, were the sources of all law; be believed that the Qu'ran provided a comprehensive guideline for the conduct of all aspects of human life . For example, it is believed the Qu
 Jihad, or holy war against modernization of the West and against unjust, corrupt Muslim rulers, was the duty of true believers . Authority emanated from God and the Qu’ran; therefore jihad was Jihad . Jihad was jihad against modernization and unjust rulers, the author says .
 Qutb was released from prison in 1964, but shortly thereafter was imprisoned again on charges of sedition and terrorism . He was released in 1964 but later imprisoned again in prison .
 In Milestones he had fallen just short of advocating the overthrow of Nasser’s regime . He was found guilty after a public trial in Cairo .
 Qutb was executed in 1966 and promptly became a martyr for members of the brotherhood and a myriad of breakaway Islamist organizations . He was executed by members of his brotherhood in 1966 . The brotherhood, a group of Islamist groups, has called him a martyr .
 For Qutb a theocracy was an ideal, and he envisioned the creation of a new society and government . The dictator was born in Cairo, Egypt, in 1945 .
 His books influenced a wide variety of contemporary Islamist movements in Tunisia, Egypt, Palestine, Lebanon, and Iran . His books were translated into many languages .
 Qutb’s brother taught in Saudi Arabia, where he influenced future Islamist radicals . He also influenced future Islamists .
 The Egyptian Ayman Zawahiri followed Qutb’s precepts and became a theoretical mentor to Osama bin Laden . The Egyptian followed the precepts of the Egyptian .
 Qutb’s works have remained a major force for the Muslim Brotherhood, an important factor in Egyptian politics until the present day . His works have also remained a force in Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood .
 Israeli general and prime minister Yitzhak Rabin was a key Israeli military and political leader . Janice J Terry Rabin is the daughter of Rabin . She was married to Rabin's wife .
 Born in Jerusalem in 1922, Rabin earned a degree from an agricultural college . He joined the elite Palmach forces that fought in the 1948 Arab-Israeli War .
 He became chief of staff and led the army during the stunning Israeli victory in the 1967 war . He led Israeli forces to victory in Israel's first ever war .
 Rabin was the Israeli ambassador to the United States from 1968 to 1973 . He was Israel's ambassador to U.S. from 1968 until 1973 .
 He vied with rival Shimon Peres for the position of prime minister after Golda Meir’s government fell . He defeated Peres in the leadership position after winning the election .
 He also signed the initial disengagement agreement with Egypt over the Sinai Peninsula . The deal was also signed by President Obama on Monday .
 Rabin stepped down as prime minister after reports of his wife had an illegal bank account in the U.S. Under Israeli law, Rabin's wife had illegal bank accounts in the United States .
 For much of his military career, Rabin was a hardliner with regard to the Palestinians and Arab nations . He was known for his hard-line stance on the Palestinians, Arab nations and the Palestinians .
 He advocated the use of strong force to crush the Palestinian Intifada when it erupted in the Occupied Territories (the Gaza Strip and the West Bank) in 1987 .
 Following protracted secret negotiations, he agreed to the 1993 Oslo accords and signed a much-publicized agreement with the Palestine Fiberation Organization represented by Yasir Arafat . In a ceremony hosted by then president Bill Clinton on the White House lawn .
 The agreement was opposed by both Israeli and Palestinian extremists and hard-liners . The agreement is opposed by Palestinians and Israeli extremists .
 In 1994 Rabin signed a peace treaty with King Hussein of Jordan, with whom—in contrast to Arafat, he had cordial relations . In 1994 he signed a treaty with Jordan's King Hussein .
 Rabin awarded the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize along with Peres and Arafat . Rabin was awarded the prize along with Arafat and Peres .
 Rabin was assassinated by Yigal Amir, an Israeli fanatic who opposed the settlement with the Palestinians, in 1995 . He was killed by Amir, a fanatic opposed to the settlement .
 The assassination shocked Israeli society but reflected deep divisions over the exchange of peace for land . The assassination reflects deep divisions within Israeli society over the land exchange .
 See also Arab-Israeli War and Arab-Palestinian peace negotiations . See see Arab-Arab War .
 The Rabin Memoirs, Expanded Edition with Recent Speeches, New Photographs and an Afterword . Expanded edition includes recent speeches, new photographs and an afterword . New photographs .
 He was the third child of Sheikh Luthfur Rahman and Sheikh Sahara Khatun . He was born in Karachi, Pakistan, Pakistan .
 After the partition of India in 1947, Mujibur built his career in East Pakistan as an active politician championing the cause of Bengalis . Mujibibai was a prominent Bengali politician during the early 1950s .
 Although religion was the common factor in East and West Pakistan, there were economic, social, and linguistic differences . There were also differences in Pakistan's economic and linguistic divisions .
 East Pakistan was less developed than the west, and the discriminatory policies of West Pakistan increased the marginalization of the eastern part of the country . West Pakistan's discriminatory policies were the result of the policies of the west .
 Mujibur was emerging as a prominent leader in the wake of the imposition of Urdu as the official language . Mujib is now a leading leader in Pakistan . Urdu is now an official language in the country .
 Mujibur, also called Mujib, was joint secretary of the East Pakistan Awami Muslim League (called the Awami League from 1954) when it was formed in June 1949 . He became the joint secretary of the League when it formed in 1949 .
 In 1952 the police brutally crushed the movement to make Bengali one of the official languages of Pakistan . The police crushed the Bengali movement to become an official language in Pakistan .
 Mujib spearheaded the cause of separation from the west . He was the leader of the country's separation from Pakistan .
 Mujib contested as a candidate of the United Lront, which had been formed by the Awami League for the 1954 general elections . He was elected as a member of the U.S. League, which was formed from the party .
 The following year the Awami League demanded autonomy for the eastern wing of Pakistan . The Awami Party demanded autonomy from the eastern Pakistan .
 Under the presidency of General Mohammad Ayub Khan the Bengalis were further alienated . The Bengalis are further alienated by the President of the United States .
 Mujib and the people of East Pakistan witnessed a harsh military regime exploiting and dominating the eastern wing of the country . The people of the east Pakistan witnessed the brutal military regime .
 The Ayub government was dismayed at Mujib’s popularity and imprisoned him many times . The government of Ayub Ayub had been dismayed by his popularity . He was imprisoned many times during the Ayub regime .
 Mujib spelled out a six-point program in Lebruary 1966 demanding autonomy for all provinces of Pakistan . The program was launched in February 1966 and was called for autonomy in all provinces .
 He was accused of engineering the secession of East Pakistan in 1968 . proceedings were initiated against him in the Agartala Conspiracy Case of 1968 .
 Mujib was ousted by the new president of Pakistan, Muhammad Yahya Khan . The new president was in no mood to give him power . The former prime minister was killed by a bomb blast at the airport in Islamabad .
 On March 25 Mujib declared the independence of East Pakistan, which was renamed Bangladesh . East Pakistan was then known as Bangladesh .
 With Indian military assistance Bangladesh was liberated on December 16, 1971 . With Indian help Bangladesh became Bangladesh Republic in 1971 .
 He was finally released and became the first prime minister of Bangladesh on January 12, 1972 . But because of international pressure, he was finally freed .
 Mujib faced the difficult task of governing the nation, which faced the challenges of rehabilitation and reconstruction . Mujibia faced the . challenges of reconstruction and reconstruction, which he faced .
 Most countries recognized Bangladesh, which also became a member of the U.N. Most of the world's most recognized Bangladesh .
 He promulgated a constitution in 1971 containing the principles of secularism, socialism, and democracy . The constitution was promulgated in 1971 . It was the first constitution of its kind .
 Poor governance, corruption, opposition from disgruntled elements, and natural disasters created problems . But poor governance and corruption have created problems for many of the world's problems .
 A presidential form of government was initiated with Mujib as president for life . Mujeb was elected president of the country in 2007 .
 On August 15, 1975, Mujib and 15 of his family members were assassinated by young army officers . Mujeb and 15 members of the family were killed by young soldiers .
 The military government that followed passed the infamous Indemnity Ordinance giving indemnity to the assassins . The military had to pass the bill to give the assassins an indemnity allowance .
 It was not until 1998 that the culprits were sentenced to death, when the Awami League government of Sheikh Hasina, daughter of Mujib, came to power .
 Khan, Zillur R and Khan, Khan, wrote The Third World Charismat: Sheikh Mujib and the Struggle for Freedom . Khan's biography is published by Radical Asia Publications .
 Ronald Wilson Reagan served two terms as the 33rd governor of California and 40th president of the United States . Reagan was an actor who also served as Governor of California . He was also the 40th President of the US .
 Reagan’s presidency contributed to the end of the cold war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Reagan's presidency witnessed the collapse of communism in eastern europe. Reagan's administration contributed to end of cold war .
 His administration cut taxes, reformed the tax code, offered a temporary solution to the Social Security issue, reduced inflation, continued deregulation of business, and increased military spending . His administration also cut taxes and increased the tax rate .
 Critics have commented that Reagan was unconcerned with income inequality . His dedication to military spending increased the federal deficit as well as trade deficits internationally .
 Overall, Reagan was one of the most popular U.S. presidents of the 20th century . He exited office more popular than when he began . Overall, he was a popular president of the United States .
 Reagan dominated the decade of the 1980s in the U.S. in such an extent that the two are linked inextricably together . Nicknamed the Great Communicator by the media, he dominated the media .
 Reagan was born on February 6, 1911, in Tampico, Illinois, in 1911 . Reagan was raised with strong Christian values . Reagan is known for his work in Washington, D.C.
 In 1928 Reagan entered Eureka College, where he studied economics and sociology . Reagan was a member of the Republican Party . Reagan is credited with saving the country from poverty in the 1930s .
 Following a 1937 screen test, Reagan won a Hollywood contract and began a lengthy acting career . Reagan appeared in 53 films over the next two decades, appearing in 53 .
 In 1940 he played the role of George Gipp in the film Knute Rockne, All American . In 1940, he played a role in Knute rockne's All American film Knutes Rockne .
 From this role, Reagan acquired the nickname ‘the Gipper,’ which he retained throughout his life . Reagan was known for his role in the White House .
 In 1935 Reagan was commissioned as a reserve cavalry officer in the U.S. Army . Reagan served in the Army in the early years of his presidency .
 Reagan was assigned to the First Motion Picture Unit in the United States Army Air Forces . The unit made training and propaganda films . Reagan was activated in World War II after the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Reagan’s efforts to go overseas for combat were rejected due to his astigmatism . Reagan was denied the opportunity to go on combat missions overseas .
 While in Hollywood, Reagan married actress Jane Wyman in 1940 and had a daughter, Maureen, and later adopted a son, Michael . Reagan also adopted a daughter and adopted Michael, Michael and Maureen .
 Following his divorce, Reagan married Nancy Davis, also an actress, in 1952, and had two children, Patricia Ann and Ronald Prescott . Reagan also had two other children with Davis .
 Reagan was president of the Screen Actors Guild from 1947 to 1952 and again from 1959 to 1960 . Reagan also served as president from 1952 to 1959 . Reagan was also president of SAG during the 1950s and 1960s .
 He became involved in disputes over the issue of communism in the film industry . He was involved in a dispute with film stars about the role of communism .
 Ronald Reagan was one of the most popular American presidents in recent history . Ronald Reagan and his policies dominated the 1980s . During the 1950s, Reagan was a popular figure in American politics .
 Senator Joseph McCarthy initiated a series of hearings to root out communism in the U.S. in the 1950s . McCarthy was a key figure in the anti-communist movement in the United States .
 As Reagan’s film career waned, he moved to television, hosting and performing for, General Electric Theater and starring in television movies . Reagan was known for his role in the Reagan administration as president of California .
 His employment for General Electric required extensive travel as a GE spokesman . He was a spokesman for the company .
 Reagan delivered numerous anticommunist speeches, which brought him to the attention of the Republicans . Reagan's anti-communist speeches brought him into the GOP fold .
 In 1966 Reagan was elected governor of California by a margin of 1 million votes . He was reelected in 1970 . Reagan was also reelected governor in 1966 .
 Reagan froze government hiring but approved tax increases to balance the budget . During his first term Reagan froze hiring and approved tax hikes . Reagan's first term was his first .
 Reagan supported capital punishment, but his efforts to enforce this position were hindered by the Supreme Court of California’s decision to invalidate all death sentences passed before 1972 .
 Reagan’s first attempt to secure the Republican nomination for president in 1968 was unsuccessful . Reagan's first attempt for president was unsuccessful in 1968 .
 He tried again in 1976 against incumbent Gerald Ford, but was narrowly defeated at the Republican National Convention . In 1976, he tried again against Ford, only narrowly defeating him at the convention .
 The U.S. was suffering from a period of high inflation and unemployment, unemployment, fuel shortages and international humiliation of the yearlong confinement of United States hostages in Iran .
 Reagan became popular, consequently winning in a landslide over incumbent Jimmy Carter . Reagan was elected president of the United States in 1978 .
 The Republican presidential victory accompanied a 12-seat change in the Senate, the first Republican Senate majority in over 25 years . The GOP Senate majority is the first since 1992 .
 The Iran hostage crisis ended with the release of the U.S. captives the same day . It led to allegations that a covert agreement delaying their release had been negotiated between the Iranian government and Reagan's future cabinet .
 On March 30 Reagan was nearly killed in an assassination attempt but quickly recovered . Reagan quickly recovered and returned to office after being shot in the head .
 In 1981 Reagan fired the majority of federal air traffic controllers when they embarked on an illegal strike . Reagan set limits for public employees unions and signaled the acceptability of businesses' taking stronger bargaining positions with unions .
 Reagan steered his desired domestic legislation through Congress in an effort to stimulate economic growth and reduce inflation and unemployment . Reagan steered the legislation through the House of Representatives in a bid to boost the economy .
 He followed a plan calling for cutbacks on taxes and government expenditures, refusing to deviate from this course . The strengthening of national defenses increased the national deficit, he says .
 To curb inflation, Reagan supported Paul Volcker’s plan to tighten the monetary supply by dramatically increasing interest rates . Reagan supported the plan to raise interest rates to curb inflation .
 Reagan also sponsored wide-ranging tax cuts to boost business investment . Reagan's tax cuts were part of a wider-ranging effort to boost investment .
 Reagan simultaneously limited the growth of welfare and other social programs . Reagan controlled the welfare economy in the 1980s and '80s . Reagan also limited welfare programs in the 1970s .
 Increased military spending as part of Reagan’s cold war policy caused the national deficit to soar . However, increased military spending caused the deficit to rise .
 Reagan and Bush won their second term in an unprecedented landslide against Democratic challengers Walter Mondale and Geraldine Ferraro . A renewal of U.S. self-confidence due to a recovering economy and heightened international prestige propelled them to victory .
 During his second term, Reagan overhauled the income tax code, eliminating many deductions and exempting millions of people with low incomes . Reagan's tax code was overhauled during his first term .
 Reagan’s opponents claimed his economic policies increased the gap between the rich and the poor . But the income of all economic groups rose in real terms, according to the study .
 Reagan signed legislation authorizing capital punishment for offenses involving murder in the context of illegal drug trafficking . Nancy Reagan launched a “war on drugs,” which was led by Nancy Reagan . Reagan signed a law that allowed the death penalty for drug offenses in context of trafficking .
 The Supreme Court voted to uphold Roe Wade, which legalized abortion, in 1973 . President Obama's appointees to the Supreme Court have shifted the balance in favor of conservatism .
 The gay rights movement criticized Reagan for not responding adequately to the arrival of HIV-AIDS in the mid-1980s . Reagan's response to AIDS was criticized for not adequately responding to the disease .
 Reagan administration spent almost $6 billion on HIV and AIDS research in the 1980s . However, the Reagan administration did not spend much of that money .
 By 1986, Reagan had endorsed large-scale prevention and research efforts . Reagan had also endorsed large scale prevention efforts .
 Reagan was the first U.S. president to invite an openly homosexual couple to spend an evening at the White House . In 1984, Reagan invited an openly gay couple to a White House event in 1984 .
 Reagan’s foreign policy during his presidency called for ‘peace through strength” and a close alliance with Britain . Reagan called for peace through strength and close ties with the UK .
 Reagan confronted the Soviet Union head-on, arguing that only from a position of military superiority could negotiate an end to the cold war and secure U.S. interests abroad . Reagan: "Only from a . position of . military superiority" could negotiate a deal with the Soviets to end
 Reagan reasoned that the Soviet Union could not keep up with the United States in a full-scale arms race . Reagan argued that the U.S. would not be able to compete with the Soviets .
 He increased defense spending 35 percent while seeking improved diplomatic relations with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev . Defense spending increased 35 percent during the Cold War .
 Reagan administration supported Afghan insurgents, including Osama bin Laden . Reagan administration also supported Poland's Solidarity movement and the contras in Nicaragua .
 The United States increased military funding for anticommunist dictatorships in Latin America . The U.S. was accused of assassinating several Latin American heads of state .
 A communist attempt to seize power in Grenada in 1983 prompted a United States invasion . Grenada was invaded by the United States in 1983 after a communist attempt .
 Reagan and Gorbachev negotiated a treaty to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear missiles and to continue disarmament . The treaty was reached in 1987 . It was signed by Reagan and his successor President George W. Bush .
 Reagan supported the launch of the Strategic Defense Initiative . The initiative sought to render the U.S. invulnerable to a nuclear attack . Reagan was opposed to the idea .
 Opponents of the plan labeled it Star Wars and argued that it was unrealistic and violated international treaties . Opponents argued that the plan was unrealistic, violated treaties .
 Reagan also visited the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, where he condemned the Holocaust . Reagan also condemned the death camp .
 Reagan declared war against international terrorism, taking a strong stand against the Lebanese Hizbollah terrorist organization . The Lebanese terrorist organization was holding Americans as hostages and attacking civilian targets following Israel’s invasion of Lebanon in 1982 .
 Reagan's administration also took a strong stance against Palestinian terrorists in the West Bank and Gaza . Reagan’s administration took a tough stance against terrorists in both the West and Gaza.
 United States involvement in Lebanon led to a limited U.N. mandate for an international force . U.S. involvement in the country led to the United Nations mandate for a limited United Nations force .
 The September 16, 1982, massacre of Palestinians in Beirut prompted Reagan to form a new international force . Reagan formed the force in response to the massacre in Beirut, Lebanon .
 Reagan sent United States bombers to Libya after evidence revealed government involvement in an attack on U.S. soldiers in a West Berlin nightclub . Reagan sent the bombers after evidence showed government involvement .
 Reagan’s administration maintained the controversial position that the Salvadoran LMLN and Honduran guerrilla fighters constituted terrorist organizations . Reagan's administration said the Salvadorans and Hondurans constituted terrorists organizations .
 During the Iran-Iraq War, Reagan sent naval escorts to the Persian Gulf to maintain the free flow of oil for U.S. use . Reagan sent escorts during the war to maintain free flow for United States use .
 Reagan administration came to increasingly side with Iraq under the assumption that Iraqi president Saddam Hussein was less a threat than Iranian leader Ayatollah Khomeini . Reagan administration became increasingly wary of Iraq in the 1980s .
 The U.S. covertly supplied Iran with military weapons in order to fund contra rebels in Nicaragua . While supporting Iraq, the United States supplied Iran military weapons to fund the contra rebels .
 This arrangement, known as the Iran-contra affair, became a huge scandal . It was known as 'The Iran-Contra affair' This arrangement was the first time it became known as a scandal .
 10 members of Reagan’s administration were convicted and many others were forced to resign . As a result of the scandal, many others resigned from the White House .
 Reagan returned to his estate, Rancho del Cielo, in California, eventually moving to Bel Air, Los Angeles . Reagan's estate is now located in Bel Air .
 In 1989 Reagan received an honorary British knighthood and was made Grand Cordon of the Japanese Order of the Chrysanthemum . Reagan received a posthumous honour from Britain in 1989 .
 His health worsened following a fall in January 2001 that shattered his hip and rendered him immobile . His health deteriorated after a fall that left him unable to walk .
 By late 2003 Reagan had entered the final stages of Alzheimer’s disease, and he died of pneumonia on June 5, 2004 . Reagan was diagnosed with the disease in late 2003 .
 He was buried at Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California .
 Syngman Rhee was the controversial, strongly anticommunist, and increasingly authoritarian first president of South Korea . Rhee served from April 1948 until April 1960 . Eric Martone Rhee, South Korean president .
 He gained office through a popular election in 1948, led South Korea through the Korean War, and was reelected twice . He was forced from office in the wake of the fraudulent 1960 election .
 Rhee enrolled in and eventually taught at a Western-style school run by United States Methodists . Having studied the Chinese classics and repeatedly failed the civil service examinations, Rhee studied at the school .
 In 1896 he helped found the Independence Club, a Western-leaning nationalist organization . The club was hoping to fend off the growing interventions by Japan, Russia, and China in Korean affairs .
 In 1904, Rhee traveled to the United States to petition United States president Theodore Roosevelt to help Koreans oppose expanded Japanese influence . Rhee was freed in 1904, but was forced to leave the U.S.
 Japan increased control and formally annexed Korea in 1910 . This effort failed, and Japan increased its control of Korea .
 He returned to Korea in 1910 as chief Korean secretary of the Young Men’s Christian Association in Seoul . In 1910 he returned to South Korea as head of the YMCA in Seoul, Korea .
 A year later he was forced into exile because of his organizing against Japanese rule . He was forced to flee to Japan after a year of fighting against the government .
 He would spend the next 33 years in Hawaii and Washington, D.C., where he would continue working on behalf of a modern, independent Korea . He would continue to work for a modern and independent Korean government .
 In 1920 he became the first president of the exiled Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea . In 1920, he was the first leader of the Provisional government of the republic .
 His main strategy was to build support for Korea in the international community, particularly the United States, he says . He says .
 After defeating the Japanese in World War II, the United States occupied the southern half of Korea . The U.S. occupied the south of Korea in 1945 .
 Rhee helped found the National Society for the Rapid Realization of Korean Independence . Rhee, by now back in the country, helped found a group for the independence movement .
 He was known for his desire to reunite the Korean Peninsula, his commitment to democracy, and his strong opposition to communism . Kim Jong Jong-won was a strong opponent of communism .
 In the two years after his election, Rhee intensified cold war tensions in East Asia by calling for a “march north” to destroy Kim II Sung’s communist regime . Rhee was elected to office in 1972 .
 Kim’s Communist forces invaded South Korea in June 1950 . But it was Kim's Communist forces that invaded the country in 1950 .
 After the Korean War broke out in 1950, Rhee proved a steady, but difficult ally of the United States . Rhee was a key ally of U.S. in Korea .
 In 1951 he reorganized the military in order to root out corruption and inefficiency . In 1951 the military was reorganized by President Eisenhower .
 North Korea rejected any peace deal that stopped short of reunifying Korea . But he also routinely undermined U.S. efforts by rejecting any peace deals .
 He also called on the United States to counter Chinese intervention more aggressively, including bombing China .
 By August 1953, Rhee had to accept a divided Korea . The prospect of intensified hostilities with the north and worsening relations with the U.S. forced Rhee to accept the split .
 The United States deployed troops along the demilitarization zone to protect the south from invasion from the north . The U.S. deployed troops to thwart Rhee’s aggressive tendencies .
 Rhee repeatedly worked to consolidate his hold on power . For most of the 1950s, Rhee worked to take control of the country .
 In 1952 he engineered changes in the constitution to guarantee his victory in the election . He engineered changes to the constitution in order to guarantee him victory .
 When these changes were rejected in favor of a parliamentary system, he declared martial law . When these were rejected, the changes were made into law . The country has been in power since 2003 .
 Rhee once again forced changes into the constitution to eliminate the provisions limiting presidents to two terms . As the 1956 election approached, Rhee forced changes .
 He then won the election with 55 percent of the vote, a low number considering that his rival, Sin Ik-hui, had suffered a heart attack and died 10 days earlier . He then went on to win the election .
 The expansion of the school system after independence and the modernization of the military contributed greatly to the changes that transformed Korea .
 Massive U.S. aid combined with the government’s import-substitution policies yielded strong growth . Massive United States aid combined combined with government policies yielded growth .
 He fled to the United States and died five years later in 1965 in Hawaii . He fled the U.S. and died in 1965 .
 Zimbabwe is a landlocked nation of 13 million people . It is bordered by Zambia to the north, Botswana to the west, Mozambique to the east, and South Africa to the south .
 Rhodesia remained a bastion of minority white rule because of its influential European population . The rest of Britain’s African colonies, including Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, gained independence as part of a wave of decolonization .
 Even after the country gained majority rule in 1980, white control of land continued to be a crucial issue in Zimbabwe . White control of white land was still a key issue in the country .
 Rhodesia's white population enjoyed one of the highest standards of living in the world . At midcentury, mostly because of the country’s substantial mineral wealth and fertile soil for tobacco cultivation, Rhodesia’�s white population .
 The country’s black residents, however, possessed little political power and received just 5 percent of the income . The country's black residents made up over 95 percent of its population, but made up 95 percent .
 whites made up one-twentieth of the population but held one-third of the land . Having gained control by force by force roughly a half-century earlier, whites still held a third of the country's land .
 Britain moved to grant independence to many of its colonies in Asia and Africa . Britain granted independence in Africa, Asia and Latin America .
 Rhodesia was a British-chartered corporate colony at the turn of the century and a self-governing British colony since 1923 . It took on a new political form in 1953 with the establishment of the Central African Federation . Rhodesia became a nation of African nations in 1953 .
 Southern Rhodesia dominated this confederation . It exploited the copper of Northern Rhodesia and the labor of Nyasaland .
 The arrival of independent rule in Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland in 1964 brought considerable anxiety to the white population of Southern Rhodesia . The white population believed that Britain favored majority rule .
 In November of 1965, Ian Douglas Smith, an unabashed champion of white rule, announced the Unilateral Declaration of Independence, which cut the country’s ties with Britain and established the independent nation of Rhodesia . Rhodesia became independent in November 1965 .
 In a referendum, overwhelming numbers of the white population supported Smith . Smith was elected to the presidency in 2010 .
 The cold war struggle between the U.S. and the Soviet Union for influence around the world, including in the nations of Africa, complicated these developments . The United States and Soviet Union were involved in the Cold War .
 U.S. relations with Ian Smith’s whiteruled Rhodesia at the time shows the ambivalent position of the United States . The United States had an ambivalent relationship with Rhodesia, Rhodesia .
 Rhodesia contained vast reserves of strategic minerals, especially chromium . Rhodesia had a strongly anticommunist stance . The U.S. valued Rhodesia's support of Rhodesia, which contained vast minerals .
 U.S. worried that support for Smith’s white supremacist government would cost it needed friends in decolonizing Africa . Yet, the United States worried it would cost friends in rapidly decolating Africa .
 U.S. president Lyndon B Johnson condemned Smith’s unilateral declaration of independence in 1965 . Johnson imposed economic sanctions following the decision to declare independence .
 U.S. trade there declined from $29 million in 1965 to $3. million in 1968, a real blow to the Rhodesian economy . Rhodesian trade with the United States fell to less than $3 million a year .
 Rhodesia received substantial support from some within the United States . Rhodesia was Rhodesia's first African nation to be independent from Africa .
 The Byrd Amendment of 1971 punched a hole in the sanctions against Rhodesia . The amendment was enacted with the support of the Richard Nixon administration . Rhodesia was one of the most isolated African nations in Africa .
 The U.S. could not ban the importation from a noncommunist nation any material needed for national defense if that same material would otherwise be purchased from a communist nation . According to this law, the United States could not . ban the . importation of any material from a
 U.S. forced to allow trade with Rhodesia in order to get chromium from Soviet Union . chromium, a key resource for many modern weapon systems, was also imported from the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Imports of chromium grew from $500,000 in 1965 to $13 million in 1972, to $45 million in 1975 . In 1975, chromium was imported by the United States for the first time ever .
 Organized black resistance to white rule in Rhodesia took shape in the late 1950s . Two main oppositional parties, parties that would dominate Zimbabwean politics well beyond independence, were established in the early 1960s .
 The African National Congress and the African National Youth League formed in 1957 . They were based in Bulawayo and based in Salisbury (present-day Harare) They combined to form the Southern Rhodesian National Congress under Joshua Nkomo .
 Zimbabwe African People’s Union was established . Shortly thereafter, the country's African People's Union was set up .
 ZAPU was mostly Ndebele and Chinese-leaning; ZANU was mainly Shona and Soviet-leaning . ZANu was mostly Shona/Shona-Shona . ZAPu was mainly Ndebi-N-Sha and Chinese .
 During the 1960s, as white Rhodesians like Ian Smith grew more extreme, African nationalist methods became more militant and confrontational . African nationalists became militant and militant in the early 1960s .
 Both ZANU and ZAPU began attacking white farms in 1964, but quickly realized they were outmatched by the Rhodesian military . The Rhodesian army was able to stop the attacks .
 The African National Council was organized by Bishop Abel Muzorewa . It was formed during the early 1970s . A more moderate group, the African National National Council, was formed in the 1960s .
 In 1975, after long wars, two Portuguese colonies in southern Africa, Mozambique and Angola, gained their independence . In 1975 the Portuguese colonies of southern Africa became independent from Portugal .
 Mozambique became a safe haven for many of the guerrilla groups opposing the white regime in Rhodesia . Black-ruled Mozambica became a haven for guerrilla groups against the regime .
 ZANU, under Robert Mugabe, and ZAPU under Joshua Nkomo, under Joshua Mugabe . In 1975, the two most important groups --ZANU under Mugabe and the former ZAPu under Nnkomo -- joined forces to form the Patri
 Jimmy Carter's victory in the U.S. presidential election of 1976 also played a role in shifting the context of Rhodesian politics . Jimmy Carter’s victory in Rhodesian elections of 1976 helped shift the context .
 Carter administration pushed for a settlement to the conflict . Concerned about the U.S. reputation in other parts of black Africa, the Carter administration began pushing for the settlement .
 In general, the United States supported majority rule with protection of white interests . The U.S. government was in favor of majority rule in the 1930s .
 The British called the Lancaster House Conference in an attempt to broker a lasting solution . The conference was held in Lancaster House in a bid to solve the problem .
 The resulting settlement guaranteed majority rule for Zimbabwe, a transitional period for whites, and a multiparty system . It was also guaranteed a transition period for white people .
 At the center of the settlement was a new constitution, which gave the vote to all Africans 18 years and older . It also reserved 28 seats in the parliament for whites for 10 years, guaranteed private property rights .
 ZANU-Popular Front won a clear majority, making its leader, Robert Mugabe, the prime minister . Mugabe's party won a majority of votes, making his party leader the new prime minister.
 ZAPU-Popular Front, which had recently split from ZANU-PF, joined the white members of parliament in opposition . The white party was recently banned from entering parliament .
 Rhodesia became Zimbabwe on April 18, 1980 . Taking its name from the 14thand 15th-century stone city of Great Zimbabwe, Rhodesia was named Rhodesia .
 The war for majority rule, which had cost over 25,000 lives, most of them black, was over . The war was over, and most of the people were killed . The end of the war was declared, and the death toll dropped .
 Zimbabwe in the 1980s pursued socialist-leaning policies not unlike those of many other countries in Africa . Under Robert Mugabe’s rule, Zimbabwe was known for its socialist policies . Mugabe ruled the country for decades .
 Although it claimed to want to redistribute land, it moved slowly to break up successful white farms . And, although it claimed, it did not want to . It wanted to break-up successful white . farms .
 This cost the regime politically but it enabled Zimbabwe to continue to feed itself . Zimbabwe's economy has been hit hard by a series of corruption scandals since the 1980s .
 During the early 1980s many Zimbabweans saw real improvements in the quality of their lives . Overall, during the early 80s, Zimbabweans were able to live a better life .
 Even early on, he rounded up opponents, censored the press, and gave broad authority to security forces . He gave the government broad authority in order to keep order .
 At first he was able to get away with this because of his wide support, especially in rural areas . But now he has been accused of corruption in the past . He has been charged with a series of felonies, including murder, rape and arson .
 Mugabe won the March 1996 election with 92. percent of the vote, but only a very small number of Zimbabweans bothered to vote . Mugabe was elected president of Zimbabwe in 1996 .
 The decrease in voter participation revealed the growing discontent of Zimbabweans with Mugabe . Mugabe has been the prime minister of Zimbabwe since 2003 .
 In 1997, he began seizing whiteowned land without compensation and quietly encouraging landless blacks to move onto white farms . Landless blacks are encouraged to move on to white farms without compensation .
 These farms had previously fed the nation and provided work for large numbers of people, mostly black . These farms fed the country and provided jobs for many of the country's people .
 Mugabe appropriated the remaining white land in 2002 . He ordered white farmers to offer payments to former workers . Mugabe has been accused of embezzling the land .
 Many of the blacks who moved onto the white land had few farming skills . The nation soon faced a food crisis . Many blacks had little farming skills.
 Critics claimed that Mugabe handed out the best land to his family, friends, and close supporters . Critics, however, said Mugabe gave the land to close friends and supporters .
 In 1998 Mugabe deployed the military in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to help its government fend off an armed rebellion . The situation in Zimbabwe seems precarious .
 During the 2002 elections Mugabe rigged the voting and jailed opponents, especially supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change, led by Morgan Tsvangirai . Mugabe rigging the vote in 2002 elections, jailed opponents .
 Neighboring nations supported Mugabe but other African nations, such as Kenya and Ghana, condemned his move . Neighboring countries supported his move, but others condemned it .
 Zimbabwe's people struggle with skyrocketing prices and extremely high unemployment . Famine conditions persist in Zimbabwe, and the people struggle .
 No system in place to determine a successor to the aging Mugabe portends a divisive struggle to come . Mugabe has been in power for more than a decade .
 The landmark 1973 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Roe Wade struck down state abortion laws as illegal because of their infringement on the privacy rights inherent in the United States Constitution . Tom Robertson: Roe Wade was the first state abortion law to be struck down by the Supreme Court .
 This case was the climax of a series of actions by doctors’ organizations, state legislatures, and women’s groups to legalize abortion in order to regulate surgical procedures . Doctors’ groups say the case was a culmination of efforts to legalize surgical procedures to regulate procedures .
 The case was widely seen by Christian groups and political conservatives as opening the floodgates for unfettered aborting of viable human beings . However, Christian groups say the case was seen by conservative groups and conservatives as open-minded .
 The aftermath of Roe included the formation of coherent pro-choice and pro-life organizations, a struggle with definitions of when life is created, and the magnification of the state management of abortions .
 Debates over the legality of abortion were ignited by a physicians’ movement to allow abortions during the 1940s and 1950s . Debates about abortion began in the 1950s and '60s .
 Alan and Manfred Guttmacher, a group of doctors lobbied state legislatures to allow abortions . Alan said doctors lobbied for abortion to be legalised in the U.S.
 Their activism in favor of abortion was a reaction to unsanitary and dangerous illegal abortions that were being performed throughout the U.S. They were a reaction . Their activism came in response to the dangerous and dangerous abortions performed in the United States .
 Another factor in the abortion debate was the growth of a well-organized feminist movement in the 1960s . The abortion debate has been debated for decades .
 The commercial viability of the contraceptive pill was funded by Sarah McCormick in 1960 . The focus of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations on family planning encouraged more assertive control by women .
 The creation of the National Organization for Women in 1966 and the National Abortion Rights Action League in 1969 gave avenues of political strength to women throughout the U.S.
 A significant pre-Roe ruling was Griswold Connecticut, in which the Supreme Court ruled against Connecticut state law regulating birth control . GrisWold Connecticut was a pre-ruling of a state law that regulated birth control in the state .
 Justice William Douglas used the right to privacy interpretation of the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth Amendments to justify ruling against state law . Douglas: "Ruling was based on a right-to-privacy interpretation" of the Constitution .
 Justice Byron White opined that the state laws did not ensure the welfare of the public as part of a strict interpretation of the law . Byron White said the laws were not designed to ensure the public's welfare .
 Griswold proved to be a strong legal predecessor to Roe Wade, as many of the same justifications were applied to the majority opinion . The majority opinion was the first of its kind in 1973 .
 The plaintiff in Roe Wade was Norma McCorvey, a pregnant woman who wanted to have an abortion in Dallas County, Texas, but was unable to due to Texas legislation banning the act . Norma was the plaintiff in the Roe Wade case .
 McCorvey was not pregnant by the time the Supreme Court heard and deliberated the case, which became a factor in the dissents of Byron White and William Rehnquist .
 The defending party in the case was Henry Wade, the Dallas County district attorney, joined by defense attorney John Tolle . The defense party was joined by the defense attorney for the case .
 Tolle said the fetus was alive at conception and the state's duty is to protect all people, especially those in utero . Tolle’s defense for the Texas legislation was that the state was protecting all people .
 Planned Parenthood of America and NOW, representing the more liberal interpretation of the issue, wrote an amicus brief on the plaintiff’s behalf . Planned Parenthood and NOW wrote a brief on behalf of the plaintiff .
 Groups like Americans United for Life wrote amicus briefs on behalf of the state of Texas . In contrast, groups like Americans for Life argued for the state .
 The Supreme Court decided 7-2 in favor of the plaintiff and provided a vague caveat to abortion laws . The opinion provided a prescription for how state legislatures could deal with the issue of abortion .
 Blackmun stated that abortion was not clearly a right beyond reproach . Blackmun felt that the greater harm to due process rights inherent in the Fourteenth Amendment did not justify keeping abortion illegal .
 The opinion provided states with limits as to how they could legislate abortion . The opinion also provided limits on how states could pass legislation .
 States would be allowed to regulate or limit abortions in the second trimester and third trimester . States would also be able to prohibit abortion in the third and first trimester of pregnancy .
 Several justices, while agreeing with Blackmun's general assessment, wrote concurring opinions . Several justices agreed with the general assessment of the case .
 Justice William Douglas, a proponent of privacy in Griswold, used the same reasoning for his decision in Roe, Roe . The decision was made in Roe .
 Justice Potter Stewart felt that the time was right for the freedom of choice . The decision was made to allow people to have their own choice .
 Justice Warren Burger concurred with Blackmun’s interpretation of the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . He leaned toward Douglas's interpretation in Griswold of a multifaceted constitutional basis for privacy rights .
 In the first place, he wrote, the plaintiff was not pregnant during the case and therefore her case was inappropriate . He wrote, "inappropriate" because she was pregnant at the time .
 Rehnquist felt that even if McCorvey were pregnant during the case, her right to privacy was not violated by rejection of an abortion . The Supreme Court said even if she was pregnant, she had her privacy not violated .
 Rehnquist felt that the Court ruling in favor of legal abortion was too sweeping of an act for a judicial body . He felt that it was too broad of a court ruling on abortion .
 Roe legalized abortion throughout the United States . The pro-life movement that protested this decision became a prevalent cultural force in America in the decades .
 Pro-life groups organized to lobby for maximum legal restrictions and to restrict access to clinics performing abortions . Women’s groups and prochoice groups grew around the beginning of the 1970s .
 In the immediate aftermath of Roe, the American Right to Life Committee was established as an organizing body against abortion . The committee was established in the 1970s .
 The Friends of Life established by Joseph Scheidler established branches around the country to protest abortion clinics . The group was established by Scheidlers to protest against abortion .
 The more extreme pro-life groups turned to violence to prove their point . The first abortion clinic bombing took place in 1982 .
 Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were accused of illegally giving information about U.S. atomic research to the Soviet Union . The Rosenbergs are accused of giving information to the Soviets about atomic research .
 The men were convicted of espionage on March 29, 1951, and executed on June 19, 1953 . They were convicted on espionage charges in 1951 and executed in 1953 .
 Their codefendant in the trial, Morton Sobell, was sentenced to 30 years in prison . Sobell received a 30 year sentence for his part in the case .
 The trial was highly publicized and took place during the so-called Red Scare . Many in the United States felt their way of life was threatened by the Soviet Union and by the expansion of communism .
 Many believe that the Rosenbergs did not get a fair trial and that Ethel Rosenberg in particular was not guilty of the charges . For this and other reasons, including anti-Semitism, many believe that they were not guilty . The Rosenbergs were accused of being anti-Semitic .
 Rosenberg was a civilian employee of the U.S. Army Signal Corps from 1940 to 1945 . Rosenberg served in the Signal Corps as a Signal Corps member . Rosenberg died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 Rosenbergs were married in 1939 and had two sons, Michael and Robert . The Rosenbergs had two daughters and two sons . They were married at the time of their wedding .
 Rosenberg trial can only be understood in the context of the development of atomic weaponry and the cold war . Rosenberg trial only understood in context of development of nuclear weapons and the Cold War .
 The U.S. believed it was the only country with the scientific knowledge to produce an atomic bomb . Information regarding the production of such weapons was closely guarded .
 When the USSR tested its first atomic weapon in 1949, people were shocked at how rapidly they had developed atomic weapons capability .
 The Soviets had access to some of the information the U.S. believed had been kept secret . The Soviets were able to get access to information the United States believed to have been secret .
 Klaus Fuchs confessed to having passed information to the Soviet Union in 1950 . Fuchs worked in the United States on the Manhattan Project, which developed the atomic bomb .
 David Greenglass, Ethel Rosenberg’s brother, confessed his own involvement in a spy ring . He said the spy ring included his wife, Ruth, and his brother-in-law, Julius Rosenberg . The investigation resulting from this confession led FBI agents to David .
 The "Venona Cables" were a key source of evidence in the investigation of Soviet spy operations in the U.S. in the 1940s . The “Venona’s Cables” were a crucial source of information in the Soviet spy operation in the United
 These cables carried encrypted messages to and from the Soviet Union and revealed the extent of Soviet espionage activity in the U.S. during that time .
 The Venona Cables presented clear evidence that Julius Rosenberg was guilty of espionage . David and Ruth Greenglass were implicated in the espionage plot . The Cables implicated both Julius Rosenberg and David Greenglass as well .
 He later admitted that at least some of his testimony against the Rosenbergs was false . He said he lied in order to protect his wife, who was granted immunity from prosecution .
 Many people around the world were shocked by the Rosenbergs’ execution, particularly when more important spies received lighter sentences . The Rosenbergs were executed in 1953 .
 Klaus Fuchs, who provided the Soviet Union with information essential to building an atomic weapon, was sentenced to 14 years in prison and served nine in prison . Fuchs was convicted of providing information to the Soviets with information to build an atomic bomb .
 The execution of Ethel Rosenberg in particular shocked many people, since there was little evidence against her . It was presumed that the threat of execution was meant to coerce her to testify against her husband or him to testify .
 Rosenbergs refused to confess or to name others, a decision that may have led to their deaths . Both Rosenbergs were found dead at the Rosenbergs' home . The Rosenbergs are believed to have been involved in the deaths of several people .
 Julius and Ethel Rosenberg assumed a place as characters and symbols in popular culture . Public interest in the Rosenberg trial remained strong, and the trial was highly publicized .
 Neville, John F The Press, the Rosenbergs, and the Cold War. Routledge, 1995. Neville, 1995; Neville, 1996. Neville. Neville . Neville. 1995.
 The Untold Story of Atomic Spy David Greenglass and How He Sent His Sister, Ethel Rosenberg, to the Electric Chair . Ethel was sent to the electric chair by the Atomic Spy . David and Ethel were married at the time .
 In the years after 1991 Russia experienced a revolution in the name of reform . Sarah Boslaugh Russian Federation in the years following the revolution .
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics had been a one-party dictatorship that strove to control all aspects of life . The U.S. was one of the world's most repressive regimes .
 Its collapse unleashed a host of social forces and triggered an array of experiments . People sought simultaneously to create a democratic government, a market economy, and a civil society .
 Other countries, including other remnants of the Soviet Union, were attempting similar experiments at the same time .
 No one had ever attempted this before, and there was no blueprint to follow . No one, however, had ever tried to do this before .
 Boris Yeltsin's administration would be identified with the destruction of the old structures, a struggle among alternative visions, and chaotic and sometimes contradictory efforts to build something new . During this period, the administration of Boris Yeltin would be .
 The administration of Vladimir Putin would represent a longing to reestablish order, stability, and security . Putin's administration represents a longing for order and stability, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Unlike the collapse of czarist Russia in 1917, this one was neither preceded by a world war nor followed by a civil war . The collapse of the Russian empire was also sudden, but it was not followed by civil war or world war .
 There were relatively few violent conflicts, and those tended to be clashes between rival nationalisms .
 The last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, underestimated the attraction of nationalism to his country’s various constituent peoples, writes Peter Bergen . He says he overestimated the loyalty of the communist system .
 The Soviet system had denied its own leaders the ability to gauge the true situation and had denied people in general the possibility of fully developing their own ideas . In forcing people, officials and citizens alike, to conceal their personal beliefs as well as inconvenient political and economic facts, he says .
 Gorbachev’s efforts to reform the system, in part by releasing the energies of the citizenry in the hope of using them against a sclerotic bureaucracy, resulted in the demise of the system . The system's demise came in part due to the release of citizens'
 Free multicandidate elections to a new national legislature in 1989 and elections to republic-level legislatures in 1990 unleashed a mass of rebellious and conflicting demands . In 1990, the protests against a new constitution and a new republic were led by the opposition .
 In the course of the year, most of the republics declared “sovereignty” within the Soviet Union . That is, they asserted that republic law would henceforth be above federal law .
 The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, as the Russian portion of the Soviet Union was officially known, did so on June 12, 1990 . The Russian Federation of Soviet Union officially became the Russian Federation in 1990 .
 At about the same time, the media began to free itself of government control . The media was freed from government control at the time of Watergate .
 A failed reactionary coup launched by party, military, and police officials in August 1991 was the final blow in the centrifugal process that was tearing the Soviet Union apart . The Soviet Union was torn apart by the collapse of Soviet Union .
 Yeltsin began appearing alongside Gorbachev, the Soviet president, as a coequal . Yeltsins was seen as an equal figure in the Soviet Union . He is now seen as a leader of Russia's second-largest state .
 Russia has taken over responsibility for financing central state functions . Russia has been forced to stop forwarding tax receipts to the capital from sending them to Moscow .
 On December 8, 1991, leaders of Ukraine and Belarus declared their republics a Commonwealth of Independent States . This was even though Russia had never formally withdrawn from the Soviet Union . The leaders of the two republics declared their Republics to be independent .
 Leaders of other republics, petrified at the prospect of their sudden isolation, immediately demanded membership in the CIS as well . Leaders of all republics demanded membership as soon as possible .
 On December 25, 1991, Gorbachev resigned from the presidency in frustration . On December 26, 1991 he resigned in protest at the situation in Russia .
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics legally ceased to exist . No one attempted to replace him, and no one attempted a replacement .
 In many ways it had already evaporated, although just when this occurred is difficult to determine . Just when it occurred, it's difficult to tell, but it's impossible to tell .
 After a brief attempt to maintain unified CIS armed forces, the republics took control of the military assets of their respective territories and created their own armies . The republics are now known as republic republics .
 Republics with nuclear arms stationed on their territories agreed to send them to Russia . Republics had to send nuclear arms to Russia after they were stationed in their territories .
 Each republic acquired its portion of the assets of the Committee for State Security, which continued to exist in some form . Each republic also acquired its share of assets .
 With the Soviet Union gone, the next question was what would replace it? The Soviet Union was gone, and the question of what would be replaced?
 The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic eventually renamed itself the Russian Federation .
 In the other former Soviet republics, as in Eastern Europe, the communist system could be viewed as something imposed by the Russians . The communist system in the other ex-Soviet republics could also be seen as an imposed system by Russia .
 There, nationalists, anticommunists, democrats, and economic reformers could form coalitions, at least in the beginning . There is hope for a new democracy in Russia .
 Some Russian nationalists had seen the other republics as a burden . Others had identified with the Soviet Union as a great power and saw its collapse as a tragedy . In the Russian Federation, some Russian nationalists saw it as a failure .
 Some adherents of the Soviet system and some Russian nationalists saw in the CIS a potential replacement that would ultimately amount to a rebirth of Soviet Union . Some Russian nationalists nostalgic for the old empire saw in CIS as potential replacement of Soviet system .
 The leaders of the various republics focused on their own entities, and the CIS itself failed to develop into an alternative power center . The CIS failed to become a major power center in Russia .
 The CIS functioned as a loose association that oversaw the peaceful severing of the numerous ties that linked the republics to one another . The CIS was formed from the Soviet Union to the United States .
 Russia inherited the Soviet Union’s nuclear weapons, U.N. seat, overseas embassies, and foreign debt . Russia, not the CIS, inherited Soviet Union's nuclear weapons and U.S. debt .
 Russia pressured more reluctant successor states into joining the CIS during the 1990s . This, however, did not prevent Russia from pressuring successor states to join the CIS .
 In the early days, Russians were concerned that the unraveling might not stop with the collapse of the Soviet Union . Russians were also concerned that Russia might not be able to cope with the fallout .
 Within the Russian Federation were former ‘autonomous soviet socialist republics, now simply termed ‘republics,” regions with a substantial non-Russian ethnic population . The regions were once known as “soviet republics .
 Several of these declared sovereignty over their natural resources and asserted the primacy of their laws over federation law . Several of the countries declare sovereignty over natural resources .
 In March 1992 all but Tatarstan and Chechnya signed the new Federation Treaty . Yeltsin was compelled to renegotiate center-periphery relations with several individual republics and even ethnic regions .
 Only Chechnya carried out the secessionist threat, triggering two wars with the Russian army . In the end only Chechnyans carried out a secessionism threat .
 Politically, two tendencies were prominent in the early years of Russian independence . Politically and politically, they were both prominent in Russia's early independence .
 For members of the first group, the highest-priority goals were the establishment of democratic norms and the rule of law, and integration into the Western world . The second group wanted to create a viable market economy and integration with the West .
 For the second group, the highest priorities were building a state strong enough to defend itself, both internally and externally; assuring that national industries survived; and preserving Russian uniqueness . For the first group, it was building a strong state, and protecting national industries .
 Constitutionally, the form that the Russian government was to take was also under dispute . Constitutionally . the form of the Russian . government was under dispute over whether it should be allowed to hold elections .
 The muchamended constitution of 1978 remained in force while negotiations continued over a new Russian constitution . The constitution was amended in 1978 but remained in effect until negotiations were complete .
 Yeltsin and the legislature took strongly opposed positions . Yeltsins and the Russian government took strong opposition to each other .
 With the splintering of the Soviet Union, the different republics that had formed the union sought to redefine themselves . from among its own members a smaller legislature— the Supreme Soviet—to meet between its own sessions . The Supreme Soviet was created in 1953 .
 The constitution's provision that the legislature was the supreme state body was not modified after the creation of the elected Russian presidency in 1991 . The constitution’s provision that . the legislature . was not . modified after creation of . the . elected Russian president in 1991, the constitution was not
 The period from the end of 1991 to late 1993 was marked by economic crisis and political confrontation that ended in bloodshed . The period between 1991 and 1993 marked by political and economic crisis that ended bloodshed .
 The two poles of confrontation centered on the reformist presidency and the holdover parliament . The Congress of People's Deputies fought a protracted battle over who held ultimate authority .
 For the post of prime minister, Yeltsin named Yegor Gaidar, a young academic who had taught himself market economics during the late Soviet period, but the legislature refused to confirm him . The legislature refused the nomination .
 Gaidar, nonetheless, continued to be acting prime minister for one year . He continued to hold office as acting PM for a year .
 The economy was in dire shape, quite apart from the normal inefficiencies of the centrally planned Soviet system . The Soviet economy was not in the best shape of the Soviet system, according to the historian .
 The Gorbachev government failed to establish institutions of a market economy, resulting in a staterun system that did not work properly . In the name of economic reform the Gorbama government had ceased issuing orders .
 The breakup of the Soviet state exacerbated the situation by disrupting economic ties between regions . Economic ties between Russia and the rest of the world have been strained .
 Gaidar’s response was a rapid shift, often termed “shock therapy,” to free prices, balanced budgets, and monetary restraint . The shift was often called ‘shock therapy’ and was often said to have been a success .
 This went into effect on January 1, 1992, and resulted in an enormous leap in prices in addition to the already existing shortages of supply . This led to an increase in prices and shortages of supplies .
 Normally, the shortages and rising prices should have worked as an incentive for enterprises to increase production . However, they have not worked as well as usual .
 State enterprises, however, had not been privatized, and adequate market-based incentives were not established . State enterprises were not privatized. State enterprises are not expected to be privatized in China .
 Managers commonly viewed inflation as an opportunity to increase revenues while working less . Managers view inflation as a chance to increase revenue while working more .
 When monetary restraint restricted cash flows, enterprise managers informally extended credit to each other and expended their political influence trying to get subsidies reinstated .
 The Congress of People’s Deputies was the main focus of their attention . The Congress was the biggest focus of the attention .
 It repeatedly doled out payments to bankrupt enterprises, undermining the intended impact of Gaidar’s policies . It also issued resolutions that contradicted government policies; and threatened the president with impeachment .
 Each side ignored the acts of the other, contributing to a growing general disregard for the law . The law is a growing disregard for law .
 The personification of resistance to the president was the speaker of the Congress . He and vice president Aleksandr Rutskoi moved steadily closer to the opposition .
 His replacement, Viktor Chernomyrdin, was initially more acceptable to the Congress . He was replaced by Vladimir Putin's successor, Vladimir Zelizer .
 As minister of the gas industry, he had participated in a ‘spontaneous privatization” that converted the ministry into one of Russia’s largest and most profitable companies, Gazprom .
 Chernomyrdin and his finance minister, Boris Fedorov, maintained austerity policies . They even closed some inefficient state enterprises .
 A referendum on economic reform and the division of power between the executive and legislative branches in April 1993 gave Yeltsin enough support to press ahead with his programs . Yeltsins' programs included economic reform, political reform and economic reform .
 Yeltsin and the legislature each began drawing up a new draft constitution . The draft constitution is being drawn up by Yeltsins and the state legislature .
 Yeltsin dissolved the Congress of People’s Deputies and called for a referendum on a new constitution and elections for a new legislature in December . The Russian president dissolved the congress of People's Deputies .
 Congress impeached Yeltsin and declared Rutskoi president . Meeting in emergency session, the Congress impeachment was held . Yeltsins was declared president of Russia by the Congress .
 After a standoff of several days, Rutskoi called for a popular uprising . The uprising led to some street disorders but not the outpouring of support that he had anticipated .
 Armed men seized the mayor’s office on October 3 and attempted to take the Ostankino television facility . A firefight with Interior Ministry troops lasted for several hours . Armed men seize the mayor's office and tried to take Ostankinos TV facility .
 At this point, the army drops the neutral position it had sought to maintain . The army dropped the neutral stance it had previously held on the issue .
 On October 4 tanks opened fire, and by that afternoon the rebel leaders had emerged and surrendered . Khasbulatov and Rutskoi were among the rebels who had emerged from the fighting .
 After “October events,’s no parliament would defy the president so openly again . After the ‘October events’, no parliamentarians would defy him openly again again .
 Yeltsin’s draft constitution was approved by referendum in December 1993, in the shadow of the October events . The draft constitution and elections were approved in the wake of the events in 1993 .
 The Federation Council has two members representing each of the country’s constituent regions, territories, and republics . The upper house, the Federation Council, had two members from each of those regions .
 The legislature was real, not a rubber stamp, says the president . "The constitution clearly gave the preponderance of power to the president," he says . The legislature is real, he says, but the constitution was not rubber stamped .
 The president named the prime minister and cabinet, who are responsible to him . The prime minister is responsible for the country's fate .
 The cabinet, therefore, did not have to reflect the distribution of parties in the State Duma, so there was no incentive to form coalitions to build a parliamentary majority . The cabinet was therefore not able to form a majority .
 Initially, committee chairmanships were doled out among parties and factions in proportion to the number of seats they held . Initially, committees were given out to parties or factions with a proportion of seats .
 The State Duma had the right to approve or disapprove the president’s choice for prime minister, but if it rejected three candidates it was the legislature, not the government, that was subject to dissolution . Technically, the State .
 The first post-Soviet parliamentary elections were held simultaneously with the referendum approving the constitution . The elections took place two years after the collapse of the Soviet Union . The election was held in response to a referendum approving a constitution .
 Political organizations had essentially evaporated in the interim . A number of political organizations had virtually disappeared in the past .
 The parties that did exist were often small, fractious, personalistic, and only loosely connected to the electorate . The parties were often fractious and personalistic .
 The results of the elections were far from what Yeltsin and the reformers would have hoped for . The election results were far less than the reforms hoped for, according to the Yeltsins .
 The reformists split the vote by dividing into four separate parties that constantly squabbled among themselves . The two most important parties were Russia’s Choice and the social-democratic Yabloko .
 Russian politics did not return to the chaos of the pre-October days but settled down into a relatively normal pattern . Despite the evident potential for renewed polarization, Russian politics continued to be relatively normal .
 Politicians of various stripes gradually became accustomed to open politics and even adept at it . Politicians have become accustomed to the practice of open politics .
 Despite their extremist rhetoric, ultranationalists proved relatively supportive of the government . The communists could be counted on for a backroom deal when the need arose .
 The fractious reform parties, never satisfied with compromise, often created the greatest difficulty for the reform process . Reform parties often create the greatest difficulties for the process of reform in the country .
 Gaidar’s original reform plan came to be implemented more consistently, without him . The original reform plans were implemented without the help of the former head of state .
 Yeltsin occasionally receded into the background amid rumors of drinking and the state of his health . Prime Minister Chernomyrdin became increasingly prominent, while Yeltsins receded .
 Economic policy was no longer undermined by subsidies granted to bankrupt factories by the legislature . The government no longer grants subsidies for bankrupt factories, it says .
 Also, the privatization program made progress, although this required a presidential decree . The privatization program required a president's decree .
 The economic situation began to stabilize, but it did not fully recover and grow . The economy stabilised, but the situation continued to deteriorate, and the economy did not grow .
 Yeltsin eliminated elections for the upper house and determined that each jurisdiction would be represented by its governor and its legislative speaker . Each jurisdiction would have a governor and legislative speaker representing it .
 One center-right organization intended to become the government party, was led by Prime Minister Chernomyrdin . The other was envisioned as a center-left loyal opposition, led by Ivan Rybkin .
 Chernomyrdin’s party, called Our Home Is Russia, managed to draw about 10 percent of the vote as long as he was prime minister . His party, Our Home is Russia, drew about 10 per cent of votes in the 1990s .
 The second party, which was actually listed on the ballot as “Ivan Rybkin’s bloc,” never got off the ground . The party was listed as ‘Rybkin's bloc’ and was only listed as a candidate .
 The relatively poor showing indicated the limits on Yeltsin’s ability to manipulate the electorate . Yeltsins’ showing, if nothing else, showed the limits of his power, he says .
 Forty-three parties participated in the 1995 elections . Only four of them surpassed the 5 percent threshold necessary to obtain seats under the proportional-representation system .
 The Communists, the ultranationalist Liberal Democrats, Our Home Is Russia, and the socialdemocratic Yabloko. The four that did succeed were the Communists . The Communist Party, the Liberal Democrats and Our Home is Russia .
 The Communists received the largest share this time, setting the stage for Russia’s first post-Soviet presidential election in 1996 . The election was held in two rounds in June and July 1996, with two rounds each round .
 Support was especially strong among pensioners and others who had suffered extreme hardships during the inflation and chaos of the early reform period . Support for pensioners especially strong .
 Yeltsin ran an anti-Communist campaign and eked out a plurality of 35 percent in the first round . He had been doing very poorly in opinion polls, but ran a campaign against the Communist Party .
 Communist candidate Gennadii Zyuganov finished just behind him with 32 percent . Communist candidate Zyugarov finished behind him in the polls .
 Yeltsin was reelected in the second round, 54 percent to 40 percent . He then hired a third-place candidate as his national security adviser . After hiring the third-placed candidate, he managed to consolidate the anti-Communist vote .
 All sides accept the results of the election without protests or claims of fraud . Significantly, all sides accepted the results without protests . The result was the first time the election had been held in a presidential election .
 The establishment of new start-up businesses and the privatization of state enterprises proved difficult in Russia . Start-up start-ups and state-owned businesses proved difficult for Russia .
 Gigantic state enterprises had been designed as monopolies from the beginning . Adapting them to a competitive economy would be a true challenge, he says .
 Private business was widely considered unseemly if not criminal; even small-scale street vendors were deemed an unsightly embarrassment . Private businesses were seen as an embarrassment to the public .
 Russians found private ownership of land and natural resources objectionable . Russians found it objectionable to own land .
 Russia had half as many start-up businesses as Poland, a country with a fourth as many people . Five years into the reform period, Russia had only half as number of start-ups as Poland .
 A small number of people manipulated the half-reformed economy of the late 1980s and early 1990s to accumulate vast amounts of capital . A small group of people, however, discovered a way of manipulating the . economy .
 Officials in economic ministries would declare portions of the ministry to be private companies . Officials would declare parts of the government to be a private company .
 Factory managers would establish private businesses on the side and then lease the factory’s facilities to themselves . Factory managers established private businesses in the side of the factory .
 Russian leaders had made it possible to export oil at world prices, but maintained domestic prices at less than 1 percent of the world price . Fearing the political consequences of allowing domestic oil prices to rise, Russian leaders kept prices at lower than world levels .
 When large-scale privatization of state enterprises became a government priority, these were the people who had the resources and the connections to take advantage of it . The people who took advantage of the government's decision to privatize state enterprises are those who have resources and connections to do so .
 In December 1991, small enterprises were sold off and larger ones were reorganized as joint-stock corporations . In the first phase of official privatization, starting in Dec. 1991, the government sold off small enterprises and reorganized them as joint stock corporations .
 Workers and managers of smaller enterprises could buy controlling interests for little or no money . Arrangements were made for the workers and managers to acquire controlling interests . Workers were able to buy controlling interest for little money .
 Reformers hoped the fact of ownership would give them a stake in the factory’s success and sever their dependence on the state budget . This meant that the same managers continued to control an enterprise, but reformers hoped it would be a success story .
 This would undermine the political strength of the state economic bureaucracy, a center of resistance to reform . If nothing else, this would undermine political strength .
 This program was intended to accelerate privatization and give common citizens a stake in the economy and reform process . Since the vouchers were distributed for free it did not generate revenues for the state .
 Some 100,000 enterprises had been privatized, and they employed 80 percent of the workforce . The government has privatized some of the world's largest businesses .
 Many people had simply sold their vouchers for cash or later sold their shares . Well-placed people, such as factory managers and former government functionaries, gained control of plants .
 This eroded the objective of encouraging widespread ownership, although it did not completely nullify it . It did not entirely nullify the objective, but it did make it easier to buy a car .
 The advantages that accrued to insiders generated resentment in the population, it has been said . The advantages of insiders have generated resentment among the population .
 The next phase of privatization called for the direct sale of shares in large enterprises, especially those in the energy and raw materials sectors, for cash . The next step of privatization calls for the sale of large enterprises .
 The procedure was implemented by presidential decree in July 1994 . Because of resistance to this in the State Duma, it was followed by a presidential decree .
 In 1995 the cash-strapped state offered shares in enterprises as collateral for bank loans, under rules established by the banks themselves . In 1995, the state offered the shares to be collateral for loans to the banks .
 The bank auctioned off the shares, and generally the bank proved to be the only bidder . The bank then auctioned the shares off to the public, auctioning them off .
 In this way the banks, and the oligarchs behind them, came to acquire control over large industrial empires at a fraction of their assessed value . The banks acquired control of large industrial estates at a . fraction of the assessed value of their .
 The Communists sought to make a campaign issue of the privatization scandal in the presidential election . The Communists tried to make the issue of privatization scandal a political issue in the election .
 Several oligarchs eagerly financed Yeltsin’s 1996 reelection campaign and put their media resources at his service . The oligarchs were eager to finance Yeltsins' 1996 reelection .
 Yeltsin transferred ownership of 6,000 state enterprises to the regional governments to be auctioned . The regions keeping the proceeds of the sale .
 The oligarchs became increasingly prominent, through their own media outlets and through their growing role as government advisers and officials, during Yeltsin’s second term . They were increasingly prominent through media outlets, and through government advisers .
 Six years after the beginning of economic reform, the Russian economy was still shrinking . Russia's economy was no longer in the free fall of 1992, but it was still in decline .
 The government was still unable to collect taxes, and many enterprises failed to pay their debts to each other . The government still failed to collect tax revenue .
 Barter had become the basis of much of life, with workers being paid in kind or in IOUs . Barter was the basis for much of economic life in the early 1900s .
 Yeltsin dismissed Chernomyrdin as prime minister in the spring of 1998 . He appointed a young banker, Sergei Kirienko, a former prime minister of Russia .
 A severe financial crisis struck the Russian economy in the summer of 1998 . The Russian economy was hit hard by the financial crisis that hit the country .
 Even more, it reflected the sudden decline in international oil prices . The price drop reflects a sudden drop in international prices .
 Oil exports had been the economy’s, principal revenue generator, paying for imports to cover the failure of domestic production to recover and compensate for the lack of domestic tax revenues . Oil exports were the economy's, and the government's, principal revenues generator .
 With export revenues falling, the highly indebted government found it difficult to issue new bonds . The highly indebted country is struggling to find a way to pay back its debts .
 Kirienko tried to avoid default on Russia’s foreign and domestic debt or devaluation of its currency . On August 17, 1998, Russia defaulted on its foreign, domestic debt and devalued its currency in a bid to avoid a default .
 Prices skyrocketed and most oligarch banks failed, although the oligarchs themselves survived by shuffling their assets .
 Kirienko’s term in office proved brief, and he was just the first of four prime ministers during Yeltsin's last three years as president . Four prime ministers were in office during the president's final three years in office .
 The crisis proved the turning point in the country’s economic recovery . Unexpectedly, the crisis also proved to be the key moment in the recovery .
 Unable to afford imports, Russia began to produce things for itself again . Production continued as international oil prices recovered . Russia's oil production has increased in recent years .
 In 1999, 1999, the economy grew for the first time in the post-Soviet era . In 2000 it grew 10 percent . The economy grew in 2000, and in 2001, it grew by 10 percent.
 The leaders of the new Russian Federation were worried that Russia could unravel along ethnic lines as the Soviet Union had done . In the early years, the leaders were worried about ethnic divisions .
 Russia responded strongly to the one ethnic republic that did attempt to secede, Chechnya . The response was delayed by the general chaos prevailing in Russia in the early 1990s . The Russian government responded strongly .
 The Chechens were a Muslim people of the Causcasus Mountains in the 19th century . They fought a prolonged war against the Russian occupation of their region .
 They were accused by Stalin of collaborating with the Nazis . They were all deported to Soviet Central Asia afterward . Like several other Soviet minorities they were accused of collaborating .
 When the Soviet Union collapsed, the Chechens sought secession . Nikita Khrushchev allowed their return, but when the USSR collapsed, Chechens wanted secession .
 Under Dzhokhar Dudayev, a former Soviet air force general, Chechnya declared independence in 1991 . Chechnyans declared independence from Soviet Union in 1992 . Chechenya declared its independence in 1994 .
 Yeltsin declared a state of emergency in Chechnya, issued a warrant for the arrest of Dudayev, and sent a detachment of Interior Ministry troops . The Russian president has declared an emergency in the region .
 The Chechens easily repulsed the half-hearted intervention, by ruse more than by force, and seized strategic facilities within their republic . The Chechen easily repulseed the Russian intervention by using ruse .
 Yeltsin ordered an economic blockade and then, given the chaotic state of Russia at the time, basically ignored the situation for the next three years . The blockade lasted for three years, and Yeltsins ignored it for three more years .
 The lack of any police force facilitated smuggling and other criminal operations, police say . Police say the lack of police force in the country has facilitated smuggling .
 In a search for outside resources and allies, Chechens made contacts with mafias from Russia and Islamist extremists from the Middle East . Chechens are looking for allies and allies in a bid to survive in the region .
 Corruption spread and the economic situation grew dire, and Dudayev became more dictatorial . Corruption spread, and the economy grew dire . Corruption spreads, and corruption spreads, as the economy grows .
 Russia sent three armored columns into Chechnya on December 11, 1994 . After supporting a failed attempt by a rival Chechen faction to seize power, Russia supported a failed coup .
 The Russian legislature, which had not been informed, protested vociferously . The Russian parliament was not informed, and the Russian government protested .
 The Russians made a hasty and ill-prepared assault on Grozny, the republic’s capital . They seized only after a month-long bombardment that killed an estimated 25,000 people and left the city a ruin .
 Dudayev and his fighters receded into the mountains, from where they conducted an extended guerrilla campaign . The Russian-backed government has been fighting in the past year .
 The struggle attracted Islamist volunteers from North Africa, the Middle East, and Afghanistan . The struggle was organized by Islamist groups in North Africa and the Middle Eastern .
 Yeltsin offered to negotiate with Dudayev through an intermediary in 1996 . In March 1996, with presidential elections looming in Russia, Yeltsins offered to meet the Russian president .
 Fighting flared again in June, and Chechens reoccupied parts of three cities, including Grozny . Chechens have been fighting in Chechnya since April .
 The agreement left Chechnya’s permanent status to be decided, but the republic proceeded to act as if it were independent . Chechenya's permanent status was not decided, so it acted as independent .
 Aslan Maskhadov, the chief of staff of the Chechen armed forces, was elected president of the republic in January 1997 . He is a former Soviet army colonel and a former Russian army colonel .
 Maskhadov was unable to establish order in Russia . Little rebuilding was accomplished, however, and little rebuilding was achieved .
 In the prevailing lawlessness, kidnapping for profit became a widespread practice . Kidnapping for profit is a crime in the United States .
 In an effort to outflank the Islamists in factional infighting, he imposed Islamic law and courts . In a bid to get out of the infighting with the Islamists, he imposes Islamic law . He imposed Islamic courts and Islamic law as a result .
 Chechnya became the focus of attention again in 1999 . The region has been the subject of much of the world's attention .
 Shamyl Basayev, formerly a field commander and briefly a prime minister under Maskhadov, had broken with the Chechen regime . He had been briefly a Chechen prime minister .
 In April 1998 he and a Jordanianborn Islamist founded the Congress of the Peoples of Chechnya and Dagestan . The Congress proposed to unite these two adjacent ethnic republics .
 In August 1999 they launched a raid into Dagestan and declared that the republic had seceded from Russia . The raid took place in August 1999 and declared the republic's separation from Russia was illegal .
 The following month, a series of bombs exploded in apartment buildings in Moscow and other Russian cities . The bombings were the first in Russia's capital, Moscow .
 On August 9, 1999, Yeltsin dismissed Sergei Stepashin, who had been prime minister for three months, and appointed Vladimir Putin to replace him . Putin was appointed as prime minister of Russia in August 1999 .
 Putin had catapulted through a number of Kremlin staff positions to become head of internal security in July 1998 . Putin became head of the Kremlin's internal security after becoming head of state security in 1998 .
 Opinion polls gave Putin an approval rating of 33 percent in August, 52 percent in September, and 65 percent in October . Putin's approval rating is 33 percent, according to polls in Russia .
 In October Russian armor was once again moving into Chechnya, without distinction being made between the Chechen government and renegade commanders .
 The cities were taken quickly, and a pro-Russian Chechen administration was put in place . The cities are taken quickly and the Chechen government is now in place in Russia .
 Resistance would drag on year after year in the countryside, and there would be terrorist attacks in other parts of Russia . Resistance, however, would continue to drag on, with terrorist attacks still occurring .
 This Chechen war was far more popular with the Russian public than the previous one . With the bomb blasts fresh in people's minds, people still remember the bombings . The war was more popular in Russia with the public than previous one, however .
 Yeltsin once again created a new party from scratch, Unity . Unity was dependent on the Kremlin for funding, expertise, and personnel .
 Putin gave it his public endorsement, and the party, too, became identified with the Chechen war effort . Putin gave the party's public endorsement of the war effort in Chechen .
 In third place was Fatherland-All Russia, a coalition of personalistic parties built around prominent governors . In second place was the coalition of political parties based around governors . Fatherland All Russia was the most popular party in Russia .
 For the first time, the State Duma had a dominant bloc of parties that were not ideological adversaries of the Kremlin . The Duma is now dominated by parties that are not ideological opponents to the Kremlin, say experts .
 Yeltsin, within seven months of the end of his second term in office, surveyed a political landscape that suddenly appeared quite favorable . Yeltsins' political landscape now appears quite favorable, he says .
 Putin resigned as president on December 31, 1999, and named Putin as acting president . He then promptly resigning and naming Putin as president . Putin then took over as president in 1999 .
 Yeltsin’s chosen successor would now approach with all the advantages of incumbency while other candidates were caught off guard . An early presidential election was called for March 26, 2000 .
 Putin won in the first round with 52. percent of the vote against 10 other candidates, despite having been a virtual unknown the previous August . Putin won the first election in Russia in 2008, despite being an unknown candidate .
 President Vladimir Putin pardoned Yeltsin's predecessor by issuing a blanket pardon . He promptly obliged his predecessor by pardoning him for anything he might have done .
 As president, Putin no longer devoted himself solely to the prosecution of the war . Putin's focus was on Russia's anti-Russian aggression in the 1990s .
 Putin's primary focus appeared to be order, stability, security, and consolidation of the Russian state . Economic reform continued but Putin’s primary focus seemed to be stability and stability .
 Putin’s notion of consolidating the state reflected his upbringing within the Soviet Union . Russia was very much in need of order by that time, but Putin's notion of consolidation reflects his upbringing .
 Rather than make state institutions more effective, he set out to make all institutions dependent on the president . Rather than making state institutions effective, Mr Obama wants to make them dependent on him .
 Putin remained an unknown quantity, allowing others to see in him what they wanted . Putin remained a largely unknown quantity . Putin's popularity allowed him to be seen as an outsider .
 Putin allowed officials to discredit and undermine each other’s initiatives . Putin allowed these officials free rein to discredit each other's initiatives . For all his talk of order and predictability, Putin allowed free rein .
 Duma no longer spent its time debating impeachment and censure bills . The Duma was no longer debating impeachment or censure measures .
 New requirements for the registration of a political party, including a minimum membership of 10,000, introduced some order into the chaotic party system . New requirements include membership of a minimum of ten,000 members .
 The tax code was reformed, instituting a 13 percent flat tax on both individuals and corporations, and it was actually enforced . It was instituted in 1996 .
 This reduced nominal tax rates, but, because of previous evasion, it increased revenues . The tax rates were reduced to nominal rates but also increased revenues from previous evasion . The UK has been hit by a wave of tax evasion in recent years .
 The outcome of the December 1999 election had already strengthened Putin’s position . Putin was elected to power in December 1999 . Putin's election victory in 1999 strengthened Putin's position .
 Unity and the Fatherland-All Russia bloc were merged into a pro-Putin party in 2001 . United Russia was clearly the largest in the State Duma . Unity and Fatherland and All Russia bloc merged into the new party .
 Putin replaced elected governors and regional legislative heads with appointed representatives . In the Federation Council, Putin replaced the elected governors with elected representatives . Putin replaced governors with appointed members of the Russian Council .
 Putin interposed a new layer of government, grouping Russia’s 89 constituent jurisdictions into seven supraregional federal districts . Putin placed an appointed presidential representative in charge of each of the districts .
 All federal employees in the regions, who had become increasingly dependent on the governors under Yeltsin, were now to answer to these representatives . The representatives will now answer to them .
 Another new law gave the president the right to remove elected governors accused of wrongdoing . The president then had the power to remove governors from office if they were found guilty .
 Putin declares that the threat of separatist violence required a strengthening of the state . Putin declared that the state must be strengthened to prevent separatist violence .
 In December 2004 he signed a law abolishing the election of governors, who would now be presidential appointees . The law was signed by President Bush in December 2004 .
 Minimum membership of a political party was raised from 10,000 to 50,000 . At the same time, the minimum membership of an election party was also raised . The minimum membership was raised by the government to 10,500 .
 Yabloko and the Union of Right Forces (the successor party to Russia’s Choice) no longer mustered even five percent of the vote . By 2003, Beslan had entered the Duma only through single-member districts . How these measures would have helped Beslan remained
 Putin was rewarded at the polls for his perceived efforts to impose order and the improving economic situation . Far from alienating the electorate, Putin was not alienating voters, according to Putin .
 In December 2003, his new party, United Russia, became the first ever to win an absolute majority in the State Duma . United Russia was the first party to win a majority in Russia's parliament .
 Putin was reelected in the first round, over five other candidates, with 71. percent of the vote . In the presidential elections of March 2004, Putin was . reelected . Putin won the presidential election in March 2004 with 71 percent .
 International election observers criticized the skewed electoral coverage in the media . International observers, however, criticize the skewed media coverage of the election . International media coverage has been skewed in recent years .
 Putin sought to distance himself from the oligarchs, who had become closely identified with the Yeltsin administration in the public mind . Putin and the oligarch were closely associated with Yeltsins in the 1990s .
 If the oligarchs stayed out of politics, Putin would not order the police to investigate how they had become oligarchs, he says . Putin would also not order police to look into how they became oligarchs .
 Putin’s first targets were Boris Berezovsky and Vladimir Gusinsky, who controlled large media empires that had criticized the handling of the Chechen war . Both of whom had accumulated enemies, both had accumulated many enemies .
 Putin's election victory came after he spoke of the need to form a new opposition party . Although he had actively supported Putin’s election, he spoke soon afterward of forming a new party . Putin has been in power since 2008 .
 Gusinsky had gone so far as to endorse the wrong presidential candidate in 2000 . Gusinsky endorsed the wrong candidate in the 2000 presidential election .
 Both ended up living in self-imposed exile and being stripped of many of their assets . Whatever the specific reason, both ended up in exile .
 NTV, the country’s largest independent television network, was taken over by Gazprom in 2001 . Gusinsky's NTV is now owned by the gas giant, Gazprom .
 Journalists learned especially not to criticize the Russian war effort in Chechnya . This was particularly true of journalists in the electronic media .
 The unsolved murders of several investigative reporters further reinforced caution . The unsolved murder of several reporters has reinforced caution, police say .
 The next assault on the oligarchs was directed against Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Yukos, Russia’s largest private oil conglomerate, Yukos . The assault on oligarchs began in 2003, when the oligarch was ousted from power .
 Khodorkovsky was also known for making large contributions to opposition political parties . He was known for his work in opposition politics .
 In 2003 he found himself under arrest on charges of tax evasion, and he was later sentenced to nine years in prison . In 2003, he was arrested and sentenced to 9 years in jail .
 Yukos was assessed back taxes and fees that amounted to some $27 billion . Yukos says it has been unable to find a way to pay back the money owed owed .
 When it was unable to pay, Yuganskneftegaz was taken over by Rosneft, a state-owned entity . The company's main production unit was taken into control of the Russian oil giant .
 Sibneft, an oil company that had been on the verge of merging with Yukos, instead became a part of Gazprom . Gazprom is one of the largest Russian oil companies in the world .
 The Yukos affair symbolized how random and arbitrary the use of state power had become . Although presented as a rectification of the unethical privatization schemes of the 1990s, it symbolized for many observers just how random state power has become .
 Unlike many other oligarchs, Khodorkovsky had become the model of good corporate governance in Russia . He recruited experienced foreign executives to introduce Western standards of accounting and management .
 Putin's actions ran the risk of discouraging foreign and domestic investment and of spurring new rounds of capital flight . Even if Putin’s intention was not to renationalize large sectors of the economy, as many outsiders assumed it was, his actions ran a risk .
 The hypothesis that the oligarch cases really represented the criminalization of political opposition activity received reinforcement in 2005 with the Mikhail Kasyanov affair . The hypothesis is that the cases really represent the criminalized .
 Kasyanov was not an oligarch but rather a technocrat and former finance minister with a shady reputation . He was not oligarch, but rather technocrat, technocrat with shady reputation.
 He served as prime minister throughout Putin’s first term but was dismissed in 2004 without any public explanation . Putin was dismissed without explanation in 2004 .
 The following year, Kasyanov began to issue public criticisms of the administration’s political direction . He began to criticize the government's political direction in 2010 .
 The police opened an investigation into how he acquired his country house outside Moscow . According to television reports, the house was worth $30 million .
 By the early 2000s several former East European allies and the three Baltic republics had joined NATO and the U.S. had established air bases in former Soviet republics in Central Asia . This was true despite the fact that by the early . 2000s, the United States had established
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Western governments and foundations had given financial support to a variety of independent civic groups in former Soviet republics .
 Western leaders saw the development of ‘civil society’ as a prerequisite for the further development of democracy . The development of civil society is a prerequisite to democracy, they said .
 Civil society in Russia has progressed tremendously since Soviet times, when all independent entities were proscribed by law . Civil society has progressed greatly since the Soviet era, when independent groups were banned from existence .
 Outside Russia, civic groups were central to the organization of massive demonstrations that toppled authoritarian and semi-authoritarian regimes in Georgia in 2003, Ukraine in 2004, and Kyrgyzstan .
 In each case, the successor regime was less favorably inclined toward Russia than its predecessor . The successor regime has been less favorable to Russia than their predecessor .
 In the Ukrainian case, Putin had taken an open stance in support of the side that was toppled . In the Ukraine case, in particular, he had taken a position in favor of the opposition .
 Russian officials began to speak of the civic groups as instruments of subversion directed by Western intelligence agencies . Russian officials say they are working to subvert Russia's democracy .
 A law was passed in December 2005 requiring all nongovernmental organizations to register with the state and submit regular reports on their activities and spending . In response to the law, the state passed a law that requires all organizations register with state .
 The state was empowered to review compliance and shut down any entity that violated the rules . Exactly which activities were prohibited was left vague . The rules were left vague about which activities are prohibited .
 Nashi was capable of mobilizing 60,000 people for a rally in May of that year . Founded in March 2005, Nashi mobilized 60,500 people for an April 2005 rally .
 Its leaders described the group’s purpose as preventing a coup against the Russian government . Its leaders said the group's purpose was to prevent a coup .
 The Kremlin denied any links to Nashi, but Nashi was permitted to hold its founding congress in a facility of the Russian Academy of Sciences . Nashi's leaders were granted a personal interview with Putin, who denied links to the organization .
 The rhetoric suggested that Nashi was being readied to replace an insufficiently reliable United Russia party as the country’s main political organization . Some observers say Nashi is being prepared to replace United Russia as the main political party .
 Boris Yeltsin unleashed a host of competing regional, bureaucratic, political, and economic forces in his revolution . Yeltsins' revolution unleashed a variety of competing forces, including Russia's economic, political and political forces .
 The informal interplay, backroom power struggles, deals, and personal connections often proved more important than the formal institutions of government . "He had also created in an arbitrary and self-serving manner," he said .
 Ill health, depression, and bouts of drinking kept him from engaging in the game, he says .
 Putin then set out to impose order and hierarchy by subordinating institutions and privatesector groups to the presidency . Putin then subordinated institutions and private groups to him, Putin said .
 Few people believe anymore that Russia faces the threat of economic, social, or political collapse . On the positive side, few people believe now that Russia is facing economic or social collapse . Russia's economy is booming, but Russia's political and social problems remain unsolved .
 The country under Putin is still much freer than it was as part of the Soviet Union . The country is still freer under Putin than the Soviet-era Soviet Union was .
 "It is more open, and it has more human contact and a freer flow of ideas with the outside world," she says . "It's more open and more open. It is more ... human contact," she adds .
 Civil society survives, although it faces new threats, despite new threats . Civil society still survives, but civil society still faces threats . There still are regular elections and civil society survives .
 Although it depends too heavily on favorable international oil prices, the economy continues to show signs of recovery . The economy is showing signs of improvement in recent months .
 The turmoil of the 1990s discredited the words “reform” and “democrat” in the eyes of many honest citizens . Many honest citizens still believe in the words "reform" and "democrat"
 The Soviet Union’s collapse, the loss of superpower status, the subsequent rise of poverty, and the perceived mistreatment at the hands of other powers left a reservoir of resentment and latent hostility that may be looking for an outlet .
 The brutal war in Chechnya gives little cause for satisfaction with either side, even when the Russians say it is part of the common fight against terrorism .
 Russia's more competitive manufactured exports may give some cause for concern . Even the nature of Russia’s more competitive manufacturing exports may cause some concern . Russia's manufacturing exports are more competitive than other countries .
 The stifling of the electronic media, the virtual renationalization of certain large enterprises, the abolishing of gubernatorial elections, and the concentration of power in the hands of the president all give an insight into the fragility of some of the country's most important achievements .
 The government, moreover, has shown a disturbing willingness to criminalize political opposition . The government has shown itself a disturbing tendency to criminalise political opposition, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Even if these actions are supposed to be temporary, there is still a risk that they could go too far . The actions are intended to rein in the excesses of a chaotic time and reestablish order .
 It is, of course, too soon to draw any serious conclusions about the history of the Russian Federation since 1991 since 1991 .
 Which trends finally emerge as dominant will have long-lasting consequences for the future of Russia and perhaps the rest of the world as well .
 Rwanda and Burundi were, until World War I, occupied by the Germans, being a part of German East Africa . Rwanda/Burundi was part of the German-occupied region of East Africa until the war .
 Ruanda-Urundi was administered by Belgium under League of Nations trusteeship and, from 1945, under United Nations trusteeships . Captured by the Allied armed forces, they were administered by the Belgian government .
 The entity was split in 1959 into Burundi and Rwanda, and on July 1, 1962, the two countries became independent .
 Both countries faced regular ethnic problems centering on the Tutsi-Hutu rivalry . The Hutu formed 85 percent of the population of each country and the Hutu were a much better educated minority .
 Two prime ministers, Pierre Ngendandumwe and Joseph Bamina, were assassinated before an attempted coup d’etat took place in October 1965 .
 In November 1966, the monarchy was overthrown and established a republic under President Michel Micombero . However, it gave too much power to the army, which overthrew the monarchy in November 1966 .
 The last former king, Ntare V Ndizeye, staged a coup attempt in 1972 but was killed in the attempt . The government was drawn from the Tutsi minority, and was immediately blamed on the Hutu .
 As the Tutsi government sought revenge on its opponents, some 100,000 Hutu were massacred . The Hutu government was driven by the Hutu to revenge against its opponents .
 Micombero was overthrown in a military coup in 1976 . New president Jean-Baptiste Bagaza tried to moderate the government and introduce reforms .
 However, Bagaza was overthrown in 1987 in a coup d’etat organized by Major Pierre Buyoya . Buyoya suspended the 1981 constitution and dissolved opposition parties in 1981 .
 In August 1988 some 20,000 Hutu were massacred by the government . Many Hutu refugees fled to Rwanda, many of them to escape .
 In 1973 Kayibanda was overthrown by General Juvenal Habyarimana, a former defense minister, who became president . There were massacres of some 20,000 Tutsi, and in 1973, Kayibandand was deposed .
 He formed the Mouvement Revolutionnaire National pour le Developpement (Mouvement) He formed a group of people who want to improve the economy .
 It was not until 1978 that the constitution was restored . Habyarimana was re-elected in 1983 and again in January 1989 .
 Ethnic tensions in Burundi sent large numbers of Hutu refugees across the Rwanda-Burundi border . Ethnic tension in the country was high in 1988 .
 Many Tutsis also settled in Uganda, where they became Anglophiles . The Rwandan and Burundi governments maintained connections with France, which maintained ties with France . Many of the Tutsi's descendants also settled there .
 In April 1994, the plane carrying Habyarimana was shot down with a French missile . Fighting in both countries came to a brief halt, and negotiations to end the fighting were starting to make progress .
 This was the opportunity that the extreme Rwandan Hutus were eagerly awaiting to try to take over control of Rwanda . The extreme Hutus wanted to take control of the country . The Hutus had been waiting for the opportunity to try and take control .
 It is not known for certain who shot down the plane . Hutu government of Rwanda blamed the Rwanda Patriotic Front —Tutsi rebels who were based in Uganda .
 The killing of the president gave the Hutus an excuse to unleash their Interahamwe militia on the Tutsis and moderate Hutus, killing up to 900,000 of them in horrific massacres . The killing gave the extreme Hutus the excuse for their militia to attack Tuts
 The UN Security Council did nothing to try to stop the genocide, which only ended as the RPF forces won the civil war, capturing Kigali soon afterward . The genocide only ended after the war ended, and the war only ended soon after .
 The RPF inherited a devastated country and did their best to arrest the perpetrators of the genocide . Hundreds of thousands of Flutus—extremists and their supporters—fled into the neighboring DRC .
 Since the coming of power of the government of President Paul Kagame in Rwanda, there has been a concerted effort to rebuild the country shattered by ethnic tensions, war, and genocide .
 Kagame has managed gradually to rebuild the infrastructure of the country and at the same time prosecute those guilty of horrendous atrocities . With a large number of the intelligentsia murdered or in exile overseas, Kagame is slowly rebuilding the infrastructure and prosecuting those guilty .
 Kagame government has objected to it because it has refused to sanction the death penalty even for the most heinous of crimes . Kagame has objected because of its refusal to sanction death penalty for heinous crimes .
 Some of those caught in Rwanda have been tried and executed, with others jailed . Some have been found guilty of murdering hundreds of people with machetes . Others have been jailed and executed .
 Civil society is gradually being improved in Rwanda . Conditions also improving in Burundi and Rwanda . The civil society in both countries is gradually improving .
 Prior to the recent civil war, many tourists had visited Rwanda to see the mountain gorillas . Rwanda's civil war ended in 2011 .
 After the war it was revealed that most of the gorillas survived . Some tourist groups are, once again, visiting Rwanda .
 The Sahel region is the semi-arid part of western and north-central Africa that is located between the Sahara in the north, and the humid savannah of the south . Much of it is in what was formerly French West Africa .
 It covers the region from the Atlantic Ocean, covering northern Senegal, southern Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, southern Niger, northeastern Nigeria, south-central Chad, and through to the Sudan .
 Some descriptions have it including a small part of southwestern Morocco (formerly Western Sahara), and going through to Eritrea . Some descriptions say it goes through to parts of Eritrea and some of Morocco .
 In the second part of the 20th century, with a large increase in the population of the Sahel, there has been massive soil erosion and desertification .
 Much tree and scrub cover has been removed to allow for the collection of firewood and for the creation of more farmland . Much of the land has been cleared for firewood collection and farmland .
 Subsequent rainstorms have taken away much of the topsoil, destroying the fertility of the land and turning much of it into wasteland . Subsequent rainfall has turned the land into a wasteland .
 Overgrazing has continued to make the situation worse, accentuated by bad land management . The problem has been exacerbated by the lack of land management in the area .
 This has led to the expansion of the Sahara in spite of a number of attempts to prevent this . This in turn has resulted in the creation of Sahara, which has been expanding .
 A bad drought in 1968 led to the destruction of many of the crops grown in the Sahel . With more years of drought in the early 1970s, the problems became worse . Drought in the 1970s led to a number of years of poor crops being destroyed .
 In 1972 the entire Sahel received almost no rain, and in the following year the Sahara started increasing up to 60 miles a day in the south . The Sahara increased 60 miles per day in 2012 .
 Some 100,000 people died from starvation and related diseases in 1973 . Severe drought and famine hit the Sahel again in the period 1983-85 .
 In recent years, as the situation has become far worse, it has been associated with global warming and greenhouse gases . Direct human activity is certainly to blame for the problem .
 In 1973 the United Nations Sahelian Office was created to try to address the problems facing the Sahel . The situation was so bad that in 1973 the U.N. Sahel was created .
 The International Fund for Agricultural Development was founded in 1977 to deal with this and similar environmental problems . The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification was adopted in 1990 .
 The UNCCD has managed to make progress, but the ecological crisis has exacerbated many tribal and other tensions in the region, such as in Darfur . The ecological crisis is exacerbated by the crisis in the area .
 The negotiations over the treaty revealed differing notions of what had caused World War II and of what Japan’s role in the world should be . The treaty was signed in 1945 .
 The treaty quickly became caught up in the cold war rivalries . Engineered primarily by the United States, the treaty was later developed by Russia .
 Douglas MacArthur ignited a heated debate about the proper terms of Japan’s rehabilitation when he publicly stated his preference for a relatively short U.S. occupation . He believed that Japan had been democratized and demilitarized and that a long occupation would only create resentment .
 This view was countered by those who pushed for massive reparations from Japan as well as its complete demilitarization . Those who pushed the reparations were countered by others who wanted a complete disarmament .
 A different assessment of the Versailles Treaty emerged among those who advocated a “soft’s approach to the peace treaty . The treaty was signed by the French Republic in 1918 .
 Versailles' harsh conditions contributed to the rise of Nazism, a group of Americans argued . The group argued that the harsh conditions had, by humiliating and isolating Germany, contributed to Hitler's rise .
 This group also worried that the U.S. should not overextend its military presence in Japan . The group also said that the United States should be careful not to over-exercise its presence .
 The U.S. worried about granting Soviet Russia and the newly established communist People’s Republic of China a significant role . The United States worried about giving Soviet Russia a role .
 It also wanted to guarantee that Japan would become a U.S.friendly bulwark against communism in East Asia . The U.N. had hoped to guarantee Japan would be a . U.K. wanted to . guarantee that . Japan would . become a .U.S.-
 The U.S. military wanted to retain control over Japan for an extended period to guarantee access to its military bases in the area . In particular, the United States .
 The United States eventually adopted a “piecemeal strategy” of granting Japan full sovereignty and disregarding the calls for a longer occupation . The U.S. eventually agreed with Japan and disregarded calls for an extended occupation .
 The U.S.-backed security network would include Australia and New Zealand . It met concerns of the British Commonwealth of Nations with the proposal . It would be the first time such a security network has been established .
 It satisfied concerns of the Philippines with promises of aid and security . It satisfied the concerns with promises to help and security.
 The United States also decided that neither the Chinese Communist nor the Chinese Nationalist governments would be invited to the treaty conference . The U.S. also decided not to invite neither the Communist nor Chinese Communist governments .
 The United States engineered the final result, causing delegates from the Soviet Union, Poland, and Czechoslovakia to walk out . The U.S. engineered the outcome, resulting in delegates from those countries walking out .
 The final terms of the treaty reflected a victory for the pragmatists who had worried that overly harsh conditions would push Japan away from the West . The treaty was signed in 1997 .
 The treaty established immediate sovereignty for Japan and limited reparations it owed to its World War II victim nations . It stripped Japan of all territory gained since 1895 and rejected the pardoning of war criminals . The treaty also stripped the country of all its territory gained from 1895 .
 The United States-Japan Security Treaty guaranteed a U.S. military presence . The treaty was signed two hours after the peace treaty .
 Many Japanese wanted to see the process of democratization and demilitarization continued . Many wanted the process to be continued .
 They were surprised by the number of bases the U.S. maintained in Japan as well as the ban on diplomatic relations and trade with communist China . They also were surprised that the United States maintained bases in Japan .
 In retrospect, the relatively generous terms of the treaty reformed Japan as an important member of the Western camp during the cold war . The treaty was signed by Japan in 1945 .
 Japan never again threatened the security interests of the West or of other East Asian nations . The West never again attacked Japan's security interests .
 Sandinista National Liberation Front was a neo-Marxist politico-military organization . It was founded in 1961-62 by a small group of Nicaraguan revolutionaries inspired by the example of the Cuban revolution .
 Several dozen revolutionary groups emerged in Latin America in the 1950s and 1960s . They remained relatively obscure until the late 1970s .
 It ruled Nicaragua from 1979 to 1990, when it was voted out of office . After that, it became a minority party in a series of coalition governments .
 In 2006 a reconstituted FSLN captured the presidency with the election of longtime Sandinista leader and former president Daniel Ortega . In 2006, a re-run of FSLNs captured the president with former Sandinistas .
 The group was named after Nicaraguan rebel leader Augusto C Sandino at the insistence of FSLN leader Carlos Fonesca Amador . Sandino is a potent symbol by which to more effectively generate popular support .
 FSLN founders included Tomas Borge Martinez, Noel Guerrero Santiago, Pedro Pablo Rios, Bayardo Altamirano, Silvio Mayorga, Ivan Sanchez, and Faustino Ruiz .
 Only Borge survived to witness the revolution’s triumph . After 1979 he became Interior Minister .
 In the 1960s and 1970s the movement went through several phases and was shaped by a complex sequence of events . In the 1970s and 1980s, the movement was formed by a group of activists .
 In general, the organization shifted its emphasis from the military to the political realm . From organizing rural folk to organizing students, workers, and the urban poor, the group shifted its focus .
 Among the most significant events marking the early history of the movement were the 1963 Coco River and Bocay campaign and the 1967 Pancasan offensive in the mountains near Matagalpa . The latter nearly destroyed the group and compelled a strategic rethinking .
 The December 23, 1972, Managua earthquake killed some 10,000 people and left 250,000 homeless . The earthquake exposed the corruption of the Somoza regime, enhanced the stature of the FSLN and other dissident groups .
 In December 1974, in an audacious raid on the home of wealthy businessman Chema Castillo, the group captured and ransomed several high-ranking officials . The group forced the release from prison of 14 Sandinistas leaders .
 Somoza regime arrested and killed many Sandinistas, including Carlos Fonseca in 1976 . In retaliation, from 1975 to 1976, many Sandinsistas were killed by the Somozza regime .
 In 1978-79 a series of insurrections in Managua, Leon, Estelf, and other cities, led by the Insurrectional Tendency, spelled the demise of the Somoza regime . In 1979-79, a series was led by a group led by
 After July 1979 these three factions were reunited in the nine-member National Directorate, which exercised de facto political power during the years of Sandinista rule . The National Directorate was the de facto power of the Sandinistas .
 The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is the largest Arab country on the Arabian Peninsula . Saudi Arabia has been ruled out of the Arabian peninsula .
 Saudi Arabia has played an important strategic role in the Middle East . Bordering Jordan, Iraq, Bahrain, Bahrain and Kuwait, Kuwait, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, and Yemen .
 Islam's two holiest cities, Mecca and Medina, are located in Saudi Arabia . Islam’s two holiest city, Mecca, is located in the country .
 Saudi Arabia is divided into 13 provinces, and, until the 1960s, most of the population was nomadic . Most of the country's nomadic population has been in Saudi Arabia since 2000 .
 Most Saudis are ethnically Arab, although some are of mixed ethnic origins . Saudi Arabia is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Arabs from neighboring countries work and live in Saudi Arabia but are not citizens . Many Arabs work in neighboring countries but not citizens of Saudi Arabia . Saudi Arabia is home to millions of Arab citizens .
 Of a population numbering approximately 26 million, 7 million are foreign citizens, mostly from South Asia . 7 million of the population are foreigners, most of them from South Asian countries . Of the population, 26 million are foreigners .
 There are also a significant number of Westerners living in Saudi Arabia . Saudi Arabia is home to a large number of people living in the country .
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by King Abdullah bin Abd Abd al-Aziz al-Saud . He assumed the throne upon the death of his half brother Fahd bin Abd alAziz in 2005 . King Abdullah is the current king of Saudi Arabia .
 The Qu’ran is the constitution of the land, and there is no separation of church and state, the author says . The Qu'ran is not a state of religion, but it is the state of Islam, he says .
 The king is an absolute monarch whose powers are tempered only by the sharia and other Saudi traditions . He is the king of Saudi Arabia, whose power is tempered by sharia .
 The king consults with the Majlis al-Shura, or Consultative Council; the Council of Ministers; the ulema; and other senior members of the Saudi royal family . The king consulted with Majlis . al-shura, the Council .
 Council of Ministers approves legislation, which must be compatible with sharia . Council of ministers approves legislation which must meet sharia requirements .
 While the Basic Law provides for an independent judiciary, the king serves as the highest court . The king is the king of the country .
 Saudi judicial system imposes amputations of hands and feet for serious robbery, floggings for lesser crimes such as sexual deviance and drunkenness . Beheadings for more serious crimes are punishable by beheading .
 Saudi economy is based on petroleum and gas resources, and the government controls most of the revenues . The Saudi government is in charge of the economy .
 Saudi Arabia contains nearly 25 percent of the world’s oil reserves . The country is the largest exporter of petroleum in the world . Saudi Arabia is the world's largest oil producer .
 Oil production increased during the reign of King Faisal ibn Abd al-Aziz . King became king following the abdication of his inept half brother King Saud .
 Faisal introduced education for females . With the support of his wife, Queen Iffat, he introduced girls' education .
 A devout Muslim, Faisal also worked to increase the Islamic political identity in the Arab world . A Muslim, he also worked for the government of Arab nations . He was a devout Muslim .
 After the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Saudi Arabia's strategic importance increased . Faisal built up the nation’s military capabilities after the war .
 Faisal moved to mix oil and politics during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . He withdrew Saudi oil from nations that supported Israel . Saudi oil was withdrawn from nations supporting Israel in the war .
 In 1975 Faisal was assassinated by a nephew, and his half brother, King Khaled ibn Abd al-Aziz, assumed the throne . Khaled was known for his pro-U.S. stance .
 The Saudi government supported the growth of the private sector to decrease economic dependence on oil . The government has also supported the government to increase employment opportunities . Saudi Arabia's economy is dependent on oil, but it is also dependent on private sector .
 In the 1990s, water shortages hampered efforts toward self-sufficiency . Per capita income decreased from almost $25,000 in the 1980s to about $8,000 by 2000 .
 In order to increase employment for its citizens, the government attempted to Saudize the economy by replacing foreign labor with Saudi workers . The government is attempting to replace foreign labor by replacing Saudi workers.
 Counterterror efforts dominated Saudi politics in the early 21st century . Counterterrorism efforts dominated the kingdom's politics .
 Saudi government intensified its antiterrorism campaign after 9/11 terrorist attacks . 15 Saudi hijackers perpetrated the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the U.S.
 Future of Saudi Arabia's authoritarian monarchy uncertain . Saudi government trying to combine modernization with puritanical ways of life . Future of authoritarian monarchy remains uncertain .
 In 2001, Congress renamed it the Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation and relocated it to Fort Benning, Georgia . The U.S. Congress relocated it in response to years of protests .
 Since its founding, the SOA has trained an estimated 60,000 soldiers in counterinsurgency warfare, interrogation techniques, commando and psychological warfare; sniping; military intelligence; and related courses of study . The SOA also has trained around 60,500 soldiers since its founding
 The SOA "used improper instruction materials in training Latin American officers from 1982 to 1991 condone practices such as execution of guerrillas, extortion, physical abuse, coercion, and false imprisonment," according to a 1996 report .
 Center for Justice and Accountability won a $54. million lawsuit in 2002 against two former Salvadoran generals and SOA graduates for their role in a series of human rights abuses in El Salvador .
 The organization "School of the Americas Watch" has compiled data linking SOA graduates to tortures, murders, massacres, and other human rights abuses . The organization was awarded the 2004 International Alfonso Comm Award for its promotion of peace and justice .
 SOA Watch’s list of “notorious graduates” includes Manuel Noriega, Efrain Rios Montt, Roberto D’Aubuisson and scores of others . SoA Watch has compiled a list of the most notorious graduates .
 A Joint Communique was issued in Shanghai on February 27, 1972, by the U.S. and China on the occasion of President Richard Richard Nixon .
 The Shanghai Communique would officially break the cycle of antagonism between the two countries . It would be the instrument on which their new relationship would be built, says Mr. Zhang .
 The communique allows the two sides to embrace friendly relations while deferring the contentious issue of Taiwan's status of Taiwan . The two sides also agreed to accept friendly relations .
 The first steps toward reconciliation were taken in 1969 when the U.S. relaxed certain trade and travel restrictions to China .
 In April of 1971 Chinese officials invited the United States table tennis team to Beijing . The visit was a well-publicized visit and a warm welcome by the government .
 By June of 1971 President Nixon had revoked the 21-year trade embargo with China . Nixon revoked the embargo in June of that month .
 Henry Kissinger secretly visited Beijing in order to lay the foundation for President Nixon’s trip and to take steps toward the normalization of relations between the two countries . Kissinger visited Beijing on July 9 of the same year, 1969 .
 The Shanghai Communique was the product of months of intensive negotiations . The two sides announced the document at the end of the trip .
 The communique announced that progress toward the normalization of relations between China and the United States was in the interests of all countries . The U.S. and China agreed to normalize relations .
 Both sides wished to reduce the danger of international military conflict . Neither should seek ‘hegemony’ in the Asia-Pacific region, it said .
 It also asserted that each was opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony .
 On the issue of Taiwan, both sides outlined their respective positions . Both sides outlined the respective positions.
 The Chinese stated that the government of the People’s Republic of China was the “sole legal government of China” and that Taiwan was a province of China . The Chinese state that Taiwan is a province and Taiwan is Taiwan .
 The Chinese argued that all U.S. forces and military installations must be withdrawn from Taiwan . The Chinese further argued that the United States must withdraw from Taiwan.
 The United States declared that the United States government would not challenge that position . The U.S. government said it would not be challenged by the government's position .
 The United States further affirmed its ultimate objective as the withdrawal of all United States forces and military installations from Taiwan . The U.S. reaffirmed its objective was to withdraw all U.K. forces and . military installations .
 The United States pledged to reduce its forces and military installations on Taiwan . In the meantime, the U.S. has vowed to reduce forces and installations .
 The two sides agreed to the expansion of cultural, technological, and commercial contacts to complement the normalization of diplomatic relations . The two countries agreed to expand their diplomatic relations in advance .
 Both expressed their hope that the gains achieved during Nixon’s visit would open up new prospects between the two countries and contribute to the relaxation of tensions in Asia .
 His visit reflected China’s alignment with the West against the Soviet Union . His visit resulted in a fundamental change in the global balance of power .
 The United States no longer had to prepare for war against China and could focus its resources against the Soviet Union . The U.S. was able to focus resources against Soviet Union in China .
 Better relations would have benefits for the People’s Republic of China as well as the U.S. as well .
 They allowed China an ally in a potential confrontation with the Soviet Union . They allowed the country to ally with Russia in the Cold War .
 The format of the communique allowed China to claim an equal footing with the U.S. in the world, something it had long sought . The format allows China to say it is equal with the United States, something they had sought .
 Despite this progress, United States support for Taiwan would prevent the establishment of formal U.S. diplomatic relations with China for several years . Despite this, the United States would not be able to establish formal diplomatic relations in China for years .
 On January 1, 1979, the United States would finally establish normal diplomatic relations with China . The U.S. would remove its troops from Taiwan and abrogate the U.K.-Taiwan Defense Treaty .
 The United States continued to maintain the right to sell defensive weapons to Taiwan . Despite opposition from Chinese officials, the U.S. continued to sell the weapons .
 A History of America’s Curious Relationship with China, from Nixon to Clinton . A history of America's relationship with China . A History . of China .
 Lai Bahadur Shastri was Indian prime minister at the time of the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 . He was born on October 2, 1901, at Mughalsarai, Uttar Pradesh .
 Gandhi was attracted to the freedom movement while at school . He participated in noncooperation and civil disobedience movements launched by Mohandas K Gandhi . Gandhi was inspired by Gandhi's non-cooperation movement .
 After India’s independence Shastri became the home minister of Uttar Pradesh state . He was also home minister for Uttar Pradesh .
 He was general secretary of the All India Congress Committee under Jawaharlal Nehru as president . He then joined politics on the national level, and became a close confidant of Nehru . He was a close ally of the former president of India .
 Shastri was tolerant of opposing viewpoints, but never wavered from his convictions . He was a humble man and tolerant, tolerant, he said . He said: "Shastri's life was his life, his life and his life will be his life's last."
 He resigned as railway minister after an accident near Ariyalur, Tamil Nadu, taking responsibility for the event . He resigned from the post after the accident in Tamil Nadu .
 As prime minister, he tried to solve the rising problem of food shortage in the country . He worked to ameliorate the condition of the peasantry .
 Shastri showed strong determination and iron will in his dealings with Pakistan . The former Indian President of India met with Pakistanis at the time .
 Pakistan exploited the situation by fomenting trouble on the western border of India . India had been humiliated in the Sino-Indian War of 1962, and Pakistan exploited it .
 The conflict began in the Rann of Kutch region in Gujarat in March 1965 . Pakistani infiltrators entered Kashmir in Kashmir in 1965 .
 The United Nations Security Council called for a cease-fire on September 22 . The U.N. Security Council has called for an end to the conflict .
 A meeting of the premiers of India and Pakistan was arranged by Soviet premier Alexei Kosygin in Tashkent .
 The Tashkent Agreement was signed by Shastri and Pakistani president Ayub Khan on January 10, 1966 . The agreement was signed in 1966 .
 Both armies went back to the positions they had held before the war, and the cease-fire line became the de facto border between the two countries .
 A grateful nation awarded him with the highest honor, Bharat Ratna, posthumously .
 Shastri had left an indelible mark in Indian politics because of his leadership quality, honesty, and steadfast determination . He had left behind a legacy of leadership quality and honesty .
 Prime Minister of India 9th June 1964-11 January 1966, A Life of Truth in Politics. Prime Minister . Prime Minister. of India . 9th . 1964-1966, A life of truth in Politics .
 For 12 years, from 1980 until Guzman’s capture by the Peruvian military in 1992, Shining Path waged a rural and urban guerrilla campaign against the state . Guzman was captured by the military on September 12, 1992, in Lima .
 Shining Path controlled sections in the south and central part of the highlands . Based mainly in rural areas, Shining Path had taken their struggle to the shantytowns of Lima and other cities .
 The insurgency prompted a security crackdown by three successive presidents in which the Peruvian military committed tens of thousands of documented human rights abuses . The Peruvian government has been fighting an insurgency since 2003 .
 The Shining Path provided President Fujimori with a pretext for his “self-coup” of April 1992 . Fujimor dissolved the Peruvian Congress and suspended constitutional guarantees . He then assumed dictatorial powers .
 The Shining Path movement, in conjunction with the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, created a legacy of violence and impunity that endured into the 21st century . The state repression that these guerrilla movements engendered was the effect of heightening the militarization of the country, author says .
 The ideology inspiring Shining Path’s guerrilla movement was an amalgam of various strains of leftist and Marxist theories of imperialism, capitalism, and armed struggle . Mao Zedong gave primacy to the political thought of the Chinese Communist leader . The ideology inspired Shining Path's guerrilla movement gave prim
 Shining Path’s principal weapon was its use of terror and violence against civilians it identified as its enemies . In keeping with this ideology, Shining Path used terror against civilians they identified as their enemies .
 The group also tried to outlaw alcohol, ban community celebrations, and close markets in city and countryside . Its aim was to starve Lima and ultimately seize state power . The group's brutality has alienated large sectors of the peasantry .
 Many peasant communities responded by forming rondas, or community patrols, to defend themselves against Sendero assaults .
 The group survived its leader’s 1992 capture, though its activities dropped off markedly . The group no longer posed a threat to the state .
 In the final two decades of the 20th century a total of 69,280 civilians were killed or disappeared by the Shining Path, the MRTA, paramilitary squads, and the Peruvian military . The Shining Path was responsible for more than half of the total .
 Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva was elected president of Brazil in 2002 with some 61 percent of the popular vote . Four years later, despite an unfolding corruption scandal, he was reelected for a second term . A former shoeshine boy, street vendor, metalworker, and
 His rise to power represented a shift in Latin American politics in the 1990s and 2000s toward a pragmatic and democratic left-populism . He viewed the neoliberal economic policies espoused by the United States and international financial institutions as antithetical to the interests of their citizens .
 President Lula has worked to deepen democratic institutions and improve the living standards of the majority . Along with Hugo Chavez in Venezuela, Nestor Kirchner in Argentina, Evo Morales in Bolivia, and other political leaders swept into office in postcold war era .
 Lula was born in 1945 to a poor peasant family in the state of Pernambuco in Brazil’s impoverished northeast . Lula moved with his mother and seven siblings to the coastal city of Guaruja in Sao Paulo state .
 Like many poor working-class children, he received a spotty education, instead working in the city’s informal economy to help his family make ends meet . He was born in a poor, working in an informal economy in his native India .
 When he was 11, his family moved to Sao Paulo, where he worked in a number of factories, including a copper processing facility and an automobile plant . He was 11 when he was born, he worked at a copper plant and a car factory .
 As a young man he became increasingly involved in union politics . This was during the period of military dictatorship, when state authorities violently suppressed militant labor activism . He became a union leader during the dictatorship .
 Lula's involvement in the labor movement deepened through the 1970s and 1980s . Lula’s involvement in labor movement continued through the 1980s and 1990s .
 In 1978, following an AFL-CIO-sponsored tour of the U.S. earlier in the decade, he was elected president of a local steelworker’s union .
 In 1982, in the midst of the country still in the grip of the military dictatorship, he ran for office in the Sao Paulo state assembly . In 1982 he ran in the state assembly in Sao Paulo .
 Using his congressional seat as a platform, he ran for president in 1989 . He lost the election but gained national attention for his plainspoken left-populism .
 He ran again in 1994 and 1998 and, after softening his party’s platform to ease the jitters of the investment and financial sectors, captured the presidency in 2002 .
 His administration’s policies can be described as moderately left-reformist, with an expansion of public sector spending in health care, education, social security, energy, and related arenas, coupled with careful debt and monetary management .
 Many of his erstwhile supporters have expressed disappointment at what they see as excessive compromise and dilution of his socialist vision . The response of the international financial community and of the Brazilian electorate has been mostly positive .
 Whether his administration will be able to maintain balance between needs and aspirations of transnational capital and of laboring classes remains to be seen .
 Singapore became in independent country on August 9, 1965 . Singapore became an independent country in 1965 .
 This island nation at the southern tip of western Malaysia has since become a regional powerhouse . It is now the country's most populous island nation .
 Singapore citizens enjoy a high standard of living second only to Japan’s in Asia . Singapore's 4 million citizens, by marked contrast with many other countries of Southeast Asia, enjoy high standards .
 As a Crown Colony of the British Empire, it became an impregnable fortress . It became the most important British colony in the world . It is now a British colony .
 In 1941 Japan entered World War II, simultaneously attacking Pearl Harbor, the Philippines, and Malaysia . Pearl Harbor was attacked by Japan at the time .
 By early 1942 the Japanese army was progressing rapidly down the peninsula . The Japanese Army was advancing rapidly in the area .
 Several thousand troops and civilians were killed in the fighting . The city was shelled and bombed, and several thousand troops were killed .
 The Japanese found themselves in possession of a valuable stronghold and significant quantities of Allied weapons and ammunition . The Japanese were forced to retreat from the Allied stronghold .
 Japan established an infamous prisoner of war camp at Changi, where Allied prisoners languished under inhumane conditions . The camp was established by Japan during the Second World War .
 After World War II Singapore resumed its busy trading focus . In 1959 it became a self-governing Crown Colony with Lee Kuan Yew, a British-educated barrister, as its first prime minister .
 On September 2, 1962, a referendum was held on whether to form a union with Malaya . Malaya was the only country to join Malaysia .
 On September 16, 1963, Singapore became part of the new nation of Malaysia, a selfgoverning dominion of the British Commonwealth . Singapore is now a self-governing member of the Malaysian Federation .
 Indonesia and the Philippines opposed the union, and Indonesia supported rebels in Malaysia after its formation . Indonesia and Philippines were opposed to the union .
 Singapore left the Malaysia Federation to become a sovereign country in 1965 . Singapore left Malaysia Federation in 1965 to become the country's sovereign country .
 Island section of Malaysia was expelled over the status of ethnic Malay and Chinese in the population . The island section was expelled from Malaysia in 1957 .
 On September 21, 1965, the U.N. became the 117th member of the United Nations . It is now the world's largest country .
 The government is famous for efficiency, and its people for being hardworking and forward looking . The government has a reputation for efficiency and forward-looking thinking .
 In August 1967 Singapore joined Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Thailand to form ASEAN . The Association of Southeast Asian Nations was formed by Singapore in 1967 .
 The association pursued aims of accelerating economic growth, social progress, and cultural development, and promoting peace and stability in the region .
 In 1971 Britain ended its military association with Singapore with the closure of the British Far East Command . In 1971 the British military relationship with Singapore ended .
 Lee retired in 1990 as Singapore’s reputation for efficiency and hard work grew . Lee retired from the post in 1990 . Lee was Singapore's first prime minister in the 1970s .
 Population density in 2003 was just over 6,000 people per square kilometer . Today, the nation-state is crowded . Population density is just over six,000 per square kilometers .
 Manmohan Singh was born on September 26, 1932, in the Punjab before the partition of the subcontinent . India’s 14th prime minister since independence in 1947, he was born in Punjab .
 In 1971 he joined the Indian civil service as an economic adviser in the commerce ministry . He joined the country's civil service in 1971 as a economic adviser .
 He was appointed chief economic adviser in the ministry of finance in 1972 . His talents were quickly rewarded, and he was soon promoted to the top job .
 With Rao’s support, he initiated successful economic reforms . Reforms aimed at slashing red tape, enhancing productivity, and liberalizing the economy . Rao's support has been credited with slashing India's infamous red tape .
 As a result the economy became reinvigorated, inflation was controlled, and Indian industry began to show signs of strength .
 Singh’s political career was turbulent because he was neither charismatic nor a traditional politician . Singh was not charismatic nor traditional politician, but was charismatic . Singh's political career has been turbulent .
 This is impressive due to the troubled relationship between India’s Sikhs and the Hindu majority during the 1980s . This is despite the fact that the relationship between the two groups was strained during that period .
 During his first two years in office Singh achieved a measure of success . Although governing such a diverse nation as India with a coalition is difficult, he has been a successful leader .
 The fractured relationship with Pakistan showed signs of slowly improving . However, the deeper issue of who controls Kashmir remained unresolved .
 U.S. political and trade relations with the United States improved considerably . Equally as important, political and economic ties with the U.K. improved considerably.
 The government has spearheaded a massive project aimed at eradicating rural poverty . The government also spearheaded a project to eradicate rural poverty in India .
 India’s economy continued to expand and under his government, showed signs of emerging as a global economic power . Singh's reforms and pragmatic managerial style helped India's economy continue to expand .
 The People’s Republic of China was proclaimed on October 1, 1949 . It won immediate recognition from the Soviet Union and Eastern European communist nations . The treaty was signed in 1949 .
 China needed support from the Soviet Union after winning the civil war against the Nationalists . China was not yet secure after winning a civil war with the Nationalist .
 Mao went to Moscow in December 1949, his first trip abroad, ostensibly to help celebrate Stalin’s 70th birthday . Mao visited Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviet Union . Mao's visit was his first overseas trip since his first visit in 1949 .
 A 30-year treaty of friendship, alliance, and mutual assistance was signed on February 14, 1950 . The treaty was clearly directed against the United States .
 A second agreement allowed the Soviet Union to continue its presence in Port Arthur and Dairen in China’s southern Manchuria and to operate a railway in the region .
 Treaty provided for a $300 million loan from the Soviet Union in five equal annual installments between 1950 and 1955 . The treaty provided for the loan between 1950-55 . It also provided for an equal amount of annual installments .
 A total of 6,500 Chinese students went for advanced studies to the Soviet Union instead of Western countries . Russian replaced English as the compulsory second language in Chinese schools .
 China agreed to recognize independence for Outer Mongolia, a part of China that had become a Soviet satellite in 1924 . Outer Mongolia had been part of the Soviet satellite state of China until 1924 .
 In October 1950 China intervened in the Korean War to prevent the collapse of North Korea . North Korea was an ally of both China and the Soviet Union . China intervened to prevent North Korea from collapsing .
 By the late 1950s the Moscow-Beijing Axis was collapsing for many reasons . By the mid-1950s the Soviet-China axis was collapsing due to many factors .
 The CCP had from its inception resented Moscow’s domination and interference . Although both nations were ruled by communist parties, the CCP had always resented Russia's domination .
 Mao respected Stalin’s seniority in the communist world . He firmly rejected Nikita Khrushchev's similar claim after Stalin's death . Mao offered himself as the world communist leader .
 Mao also denounced Khrushchev as revisionist for his de-Stalinization policy after 1956 . Mao also denounces Khrushchevitch for de-stalinization policies .
 Khrushchev withdrew an earlier promise to help China build a nuclear bomb in 1959 . In 1959 he recalled Soviet aid workers from China and recalled them from China .
 Mao called Khrushchev a coward for backing down before the U.S. in the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 . Mao called the Soviet leader a coward in 1962 for backing up in Cuba .
 China felt aggrieved over large territorial losses to imperial Russia in the 19th century . China wanted the Soviet Union to acknowledge that they were the result of unequal and therefore illegal treaties . The Soviet Union firmly rejected the claims .
 Relations deteriorated further when Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev sent troops to Czechoslovakia in 1968 and announced his doctrine that the Soviet Union had the right to intervene in communist countries that deviated from its interpretation of the socialist cause .
 Serious border clashes between the Soviet Union and China occurred in 1969, and war loomed . The Soviet-China border clashes were the first serious border clashes in decades .
 Tsars, Mandarins, and Commissars, A History of Chinese-Russian Relations . Tsars and Mandarsars, a History of China-Russia Relations, was first published in 1903 .
 China Crosses the Yalu: The Decision to enter the Korean War was made in 1973 . China's decision to enter South Korea was a key decision in the decision .
 From 1945 to 1989 the Soviet Union imposed significant control over the internal and external affairs of eastern European nations, that control was never complete . Jiu-Hwa Lo Upshur Solidarity movement was formed by members of the Communist Party .
 Poland is one of the most important countries in the world's Eastern bloc nations . Poland was once part of the Eastern bloc, but it was not so much as in Poland .
 The Poles demonstrated their independent streak at intervals in the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s . Poles demonstrated independent streak in intervals between 1950s and 1980s . Polish independence came in the 1960s and '70s .
 Soviet troops stationed in Poland ostensibly as defense against a Western attack were used to keep order . In many instances there were riots and bloodshed, and Soviet troops were used in order to quell riots .
 In 1953 the Polish premier informed the Soviets that while he would accept military assistance from Soviet troops already in the country, he would mobilize the entire Polish army to fight them if more were sent in .
 In 1980 a labor union that named itself Solidarity would come to being. Solidarity was formed by a union called the National Labor Union . Solidarity is the first of its kind .
 It would play a principle role in the ending of the communist regime in Poland . It would eventually play a key role in ending the communist government .
 Solidarity was founded in September 1980 in response to increasing food prices . Solidarity began in September 1981 in a bid to combat rising food prices in the 1970s .
 Solidarity was founded in September 1980 in response to increasing food prices, which had already precipitated several strikes . Solidarity began in September 1981 in a bid to combat rising food prices .
 There was already a basic organization in place around which representatives of the striking workers could meet to discuss issues . There is already an organization that allows striking workers to meet and discuss issues.
 This was the Workers Defense Committee, which had come into being as a result of strikes, riots, and the killing and injuring of workers in the 1970s . The Committee was formed in response to a series of strikes and riots in which workers were killed .
 The month before Solidarity was formed, almost 20,000 workers struck at the Lenin Shipyard in the city of Gdansk . Solidarity formed after a month of strikes at the shipyard .
 These strikers, led by Lech Walgsa, locked themselves in the shipyard . They soon communicated with other groups who were joining in strikes of their own .
 Polish workers presented a list of demands that the government granted by the government . They included the ability to organize free unions that were not sponsored or sanctioned by the Polish Government .
 With this victory, Solidarity would come into being, replace the old Workers Defense Committee, and then begin to grow throughout the country . The victory would be a victory for Solidarity, replacing the old workers Defense Committee .
 In December another group, Rural Solidarity, also came into being, called the agricultural equivalent to the industrialized organization . The organization is based on agriculture, not industrialism .
 By mid-1981, nearly all laborers were members of or represented by Solidarity . Solidarity was a labor movement in the early '80s .
 The Polish government had made concessions that allowed Solidarity to legally come into being . Poland's government began to view developments with alarm . The government made concessions to allow Solidarity legalisation .
 Leonid Brezhnev and members of the Soviet Politburo made their concerns increasingly clear to Poland’s head of state, General Wojciech Jaruzelski, who would feel pressure from the Soviet Union .
 By late 1981, faced with the demands of Solidarity, Jaruzelski was coming under increased pressure . The Polish president was forced to resign from his post .
 He received frequent calls from Brezhnev demanding that he put a stop to Solidarity’s activities, he says . He says he was forced to stop the activities .
 Soviet army moved closer to the Polish border and conducted substantial maneuvers with other Warsaw Pact troops, thus underlining the threat that if he did not act on his own, Jaruzelski could face an invasion . At the same time the Soviet army was moving closer to Poland's border and
 Jaruzelski was on trial for treason at the time of his treason trial . He was convicted of treason and died in prison .
 Jaruzelski's trial tried to resolve whether he had saved Poland from invasion by what he did to Solidarity . That trial, from which he was later acquitted, tried to determine if he had betrayed Poland's independence .
 Lech Walgsa and the other leaders of the union were imprisoned, and martial law was imposed . The union's leader was imprisoned and other leaders were imprisoned .
 The Polish army now ran everything in the country, and any union activities, strikes, or demonstrations would be met with force . The army now runs everything in Poland, says the Polish army .
 The leaders of Solidarity were quietly released, and, although the organization was illegal, it did remain active . Eventually the leaders were released and the organization remained active .
 An underground organization, based on those that had existed during World War II, emerged . Its leaders remained in contact with each other, and the underground organization emerged .
 Western journalists were able to bring to the West a picture of Solidarity, no longer legal and not functioning as it had but still alive . Solidarity is no longer a legal organization, but still a political force in Russia .
 Having imposed order, Jaruzelski was now compelled to improve the Polish economy . He was forced to improve his country's economy .
 Mikhail Gorbachev assumed responsibility for leading the Soviet Union in 1985 . Brezhnev had died in 1982, and his two immediate successors were also dead by 1985 .
 In the 1980s the Soviets were beginning to exercise looser control and endless assistance to the Eastern bloc nations . The Soviets were starting to exercise loose control of the East bloc countries .
 Jaruzelski’s attempts at reform were now opposed by Solidarity, which was reemerging as a political force . Solidarity was now opposing Jaruzelki's attempts to reform .
 Widespread strikes in Poland forced Jaruzelski to begin conversations with Walfsa and the Solidarity leadership . The Solidarity leader was forced to negotiate with Jaruzelki after widespread strikes in the country .
 Solidarity was once again legalized in April 1989, and that same year it won a crushing majority in the national elections . Solidarity won the majority of the vote in 1989 elections .
 Solidarity and Communists formed a government in August 1989 . Less than 10 years before, Walfsa had been jailed for his union activities .
 Since that time, Solidarity has declined in both membership and influence . Solidarity was founded in 1981, but has since declined in membership .
 There were personality and philosophical clashes among several of the leaders, not least of whom was Walgsa . There were personalities and philosophical differences among the leaders of the country .
 It can also be argued that once it had defeated a common enemy that posed a major threat, it could not maintain cohesion on all issues . The U.S. has not been able to maintain cohesion in the past .
 It did not have any of its candidates elected in 2001, and membership is about a tenth of what it was in the early 1980s .
 British administered Somalia until 1950, with southern Somalia put under Italian trusteeship . Ogaden returned to Ethiopia, with the remainder of Somalia, held by British, prepared for independence .
 The decision to allow the Italians to supervise any part of Somalia was controversial given their colonial record in the region . The decision sparked riots in 1950 after the Italians were allowed to oversee parts of Somalia .
 Elections were held in southern Somalia in 1956 . Elections were won by the Somali Youth League . Somalia's youth league won the elections .
 In February the Somali National League won a majority in elections in northern Somalia . In February, the party took control of the Somali parliament in Somalia's northern region .
 The platforms of both groups were to reunify Somalia and achieve independence which was granted on July 1, 1960 . Both sides were to achieve independence .
 Aden Abdullah Osman Daar was the first president of Somalia . He had served in the Italian colonial administration until 1941 .
 He had been president of the National Assembly until 1960 when he became president of Constituent Assembly . He held a position he held until independence . He was the first African African leader to hold a post at independence .
 He held the position for just over two weeks before stepping down on July 12, 1960, to become minister of defense . He stepped down from the post after just two weeks .
 Not long after independence, Somalia became embroiled in a dispute with the British . The British granted the Somali-dominated Northern Frontier District of Kenya to the Republic of Kenya .
 The main problem facing Somalia was the integration of the two halves of the country, plagued by ethnic rivalries, and worries that infrastructure development in one region was disadvantaging the other .
 Although it did not last long, it served to destabilize the country, which was becoming beset with factional troubles and the proliferation of political parties and corruption .
 In 1964 Shermarke was replaced as prime minister by Abdirizak Haji Husain, also from the Somali Youth League . On July 10, 1967, he was elected as president of Somalia, a post he held until his assassination on October 15, 1969 .
 The assassination led to a military coup six days later, which brought Major-General Mohammed Siad Barre to power . The coup led to the death of Prince Mohammed Hussein .
 He then became president of the Supreme Revolutionary Council and head of state . He then served as prime minister until January 30, 1987 . He was also head of the Revolutionary Council .
 Siad Barre was involved in introducing a program he called “scientific socialism” by which he sought to integrate Somalia . Barre introduced the program, which he called "scientific socialism," in Somalia .
 One of these policies was the creation and dissemination of a written Somali language .
 In 1975 a drought struck Somalia, this led to a famine which saw thousands of people die . Thousands of people in Somalia, and also in neighboring Ethiopia, died in the famine .
 Siad Barre was keen to create his Greater Somalia which was to include the Ogaden (from Ethiopia), Djibouti, and also northern Kenya . Two years later Somalia attacked Ethiopia .
 GSG-9, a crack German antiterrorist commando force formed after the 1972 Munich Olympics massacre, stormed the plane and released the hostages unharmed . There were no injuries in the incident .
 Surviving an attempted military coup in April 1978, Siad Barre came to lead an increasingly autocratic regime . The regime started to face trouble from internal Somali resistance groups in 1978 .
 Somalia Salvation Democratic Front used bases in Ethiopia to attack Somali soldiers, eventually overrunning parts of northern Somalia . Somalia Salvation Demolition Front attacked Somali soldiers .
 In August 1990 the Somali Salvation Democratic Front allied with two other groups, the Somali Patriotic Front and the Somali National Movement, to form a loose coalition . The coalition was formed in August 1990 .
 Siad Barre himself had been seriously injured in a car accident in May 1986, but remained in control of Mogadishu .
 He was forced to flee the country on January 26, 1991, going first to Kenya and eventually settling in Nigeria in 1992 . He settled in the country in 1992, settling in Lagos, where he was born .
 Ali Mahdi Muhammad became the president of Mogadishu . He was tasked with bringing together the various factions of the rebels .
 Northern Somali separatists appointed the leader of the SNM, Abdurahman Ahmed Ali, as president of Somaliland Republic .
 Ali Mahdi hastily left Mogadishu in November 1991 after the supporters of General Mohammad Farrah Aydid attacked . Fighting continued, and Mahdi left the Somali capital in 1991 .
 Aydid then proclaimed himself head of the new government . He fought off an attack in April 1992 by supporters of Siad Barre . He managed to fight off a bomb attack in 1992 .
 Aid agencies estimated that as many as 2,000 people were dying each day from hunger in and around Mogadishu alone . Aid agencies have estimated that up to 2,00 people are dying daily from hunger each day .
 Aydid held food supplies only for his supporters, the United Nations felt the duty to act . On August 12, 1992, the U.N. had permission to deploy troops to protect the aid workers .
 By mid-1993 the aid mission had been changed with the United States marines being deployed to achieve political objectives . The U.S. marines were deployed to Afghanistan in 1993 to aid the country .
 A large number of Somali clan leaders gathered for a conference in Somalia in 1993 . This seemed to include the overthrow of the Ay did government, which led to a U.S. helicopter attack on an alleged Ay did munitions base .
 The political climate moved against the Americans as the clan alliances reformed, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The operation was planned to last no longer than an hour, but some U.S. Marines were pinned down by thousands of Somalis . By the time they were evacuated the following morning, there were 18 United States Marines killed and more than 70 badly injured .
 General Aydid formed alliances with some of his erstwhile enemies . The United States was unable to keep up with the factional shifts .
 In November 1994 Aydid called a General Conference on Somali Reconciliation, but Ali Mahdi boycotted it, as did the Somali Salvation Alliance . In 1994 the Somali National Council of Somalia called the conference in Somalia .
 Hussein Aydid, a former U.S. Marine who had been involved in the Somali operation, became the leader of the United Somali Congress . He took his father’s title as interim president of Somalia in 1996 .
 Hussein Aydid refused to take part in the National Salvation Council when it was formed by leaders of 26 of Somalia’s factions in January 1997 . Hussein refused to participate in the council .
 The warlords agreed on a peace formula that saw the introduction of a federal system for the country . It allowed the warlords to retain their local power bases .
 Somalia, consisting of southern provinces around Mogadishu; former British areas in the north becoming Somaliland; and Puntland in the northeast . Somalia is one of the largest economies in the world .
 Frequent peace conferences were to be held to try to work out common policies on certain issues . The peace talks would be held in an effort to find common policies .
 650,000 people were facing food shortages in April 2000 . Although infighting had died down, the problems over the famine continued . In April 2000, the crisis was over for the first time in the country .
 An interim Somali National Assembly was formed in October 2001 . Salad Hassan Abdikassim was the interim president of Somalia . He was the first Somali president to hold office .
 The interim prime minister accused Ethiopia of trying to destabilize the country . Ethiopia is accused of supporting some of the clans that wanted separatism .
 Abdikassim appointed himself interim president of the Transitional National Government . Abshir Farah Hassan was elected as the interim prime minister in November 2001 .
 The September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States and the subsequent War on Terror saw the U.S. military take a keen interest in Somalia and the level of Islamic fundamentalist influence in the country .
 Since then the Somali “government” has gradually come to support the U.S. in its War on Terror . The Somali "government’s" support for the United States in the war on Terror has grown .
 The United States has rewarded pro-United States groups in the country . The U.S. has consequently rewarded proU.S groups in Afghanistan .
 On October 14, 2004, Abdullah Yusuf Ahmed became president, taking over from Salad Hassan Abdikassim . Ali Mohammed Ghadi became prime minister of the transitional federal government in November 2004 .
 Prime Minister Ghadi fled Mogadishu after a failed assassination attempt . He returned in 2006 when Ethiopian troops, aided by the United States, backed him and started a new war .
 The South East Asia Treaty Organization was formed in Manila on September 8, 1954 . It was formed by the United States, Great Britain, France, Australia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Thailand, Thailand and the Philippines .
 The United States in the cold war period wanted to prevent communism from spreading . The U.S. in the Cold War era wanted to stop communism spreading .
 Geneva Conference had been called in 1954 after defeat of the French in Indochina . Geneva Conference was called after the French defeat of Indochine in 1954 .
 The main architect was the U.S. secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, who wanted collective defense against communist aggression . Dulles was the main architect .
 After the establishment of communism in China, there was apprehension in the U.S. that South and Southeast Asia faced a threat from communists . The United States was concerned about the threat posed by communists in Asia .
 North Vietnam had become communist, and in Laos the Pathet Lao had become powerful . North Vietnam and Laos had both become communist .
 The post of secretary-general was instituted in 1957, and a Thai diplomat named Pote Sarasin was the first person to hold it .
 The members pledged under the provisions of article I to settle disputes by peaceful means . Members pledged under article I they would settle disputes with peaceful means.
 SEATO had a provision that all members should agree on intervention in case of a dispute . The decision was made after a dispute broke out between the two parties .
 This became an obstacle to intervening in the crises of Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, as there was no unanimity among members for intervention . This meant that intervention was not unanimous among members of the United States .
 Cambodia, Laos, and South Vietnam could not join a military alliance . According to the provisions of the Geneva Conference, the three countries could not form an alliance . Cambodia and Laos were not allowed to join the alliance .
 A Pacific Charter was added to the treaty at the insistence of the Philippines . The Pacific Charter calls for the upholding of the principles of self-determination and equal rights .
 "Any attempt to destroy the sovereignty and territorial integrity of member states would be checked," the EU says .
 There would also be cooperation in economic development and social welfare among signatories .
 The treaty was viewed as another attempt to bring the cold war to South and Southeast Asia . The treaty is viewed as a bid to bring Cold War to Asia's South and South .
 Only three Asian states, Pakistan, the Philippines, and Thailand, had joined it . Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, and Pakistan are the only Asian states to join it .
 India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Myanmar were in favor of a policy of nonalignment . India and Indonesia, Indonesia and Sri Lanka were among the countries who supported non-aligned .
 Pakistan thought SEATO might be helpful in its ongoing conflict with India . Pakistan thought it might be useful in its conflict with the West .
 The Philippines and Thailand had close military cooperation with the United States . Thailand and the Philippines have close military ties with the U.S.
 Manila was in favor of a multilateral pact due to the influence of the U.S. The United States was the driving force behind the pact, Manila said . Manila was opposed to a multi-nation pact .
 The joining of the Philippines invited criticism from the Afro-Asian bloc, alleging that it was serving the designs of neocolonialism in the region . The joining was criticized by Afro Asian bloc for serving the interests of the Filipinos .
 Great Britain wanted its presence felt in the region and was also concerned with the security of Hong Kong and Malaya . Great Britain was also worried about security in the area .
 France lost interest after the debacle in Indochina but it considered SEATO a barrier to the expansion of communism . France considered SeATO as a barrier .
 Australia and New Zealand committed even though an alliance with the U.S. had been signed in 1951 . The ANZUS pact was signed by the two countries .
 The inclusion of Cambodia, Laos, and South Vietnam in the sphere of action of SEATO was contrary to the spirit of the Geneva Conference of 1954 .
 SEATO was not helpful to the United States and Thailand in preventing ongoing communist victories in Indochina, including during the Vietnam War . The U.S. and Thailand were involved in the fight against communism in Vietnam .
 One of the factors was the clause that demanded unanimity before action could be taken . The clause was the requirement that demanded unanimousity before taking action . It is not the first time the clause has been agreed to be agreed .
 In March 1961, multilateral intervention was not possible due to the French opposition . In the meeting of the SEATO Council of Ministers on March 27, 1961, French opposition was not able to prevent intervention .
 Great Britain also did not support intervention, lest it jeopardize the peace effort in Geneva in 1961 pertaining to Laos . Great Britain did not intervene in 1961 .
 The United States relied on its military might in the Vietnam War . Great Britain, France, Australia, and New Zealand did not want to get involved in the conflict .
 Pakistan and France withdrew from SEATO in November 1973 and June 1974, respectively . Pakistan withdrew from the organization in June 1974 .
 The Southern Baptist Convention is the largest Protestant body in the United States . Patit Paban Mishra is a member of the Southern Baptist Conference .
 Baptists emerged after the First Great Awakening in New England and found the southern U.S. a fertile region for growth . Baptists were found in the southern United States in the 1800s .
 Baptists were committed to conservative doctrine, aggressive evangelism, and local congregational autonomy . Baptists felt the strains of slavery .
 In 1845 tensions led to the formation of the SBC, which allowed Baptists in the South to pursue missions and educational efforts on their own . The SBC was formed in 1845 after tensions between the South and the South .
 Their regional seclusion protected the denomination from the schisms of the early 20th century . The denomination was largely isolated from the region .
 Baptists eschewed the kind of denominational controls exercised by many other churches, particularly regarding doctrine . The Baptists were more conservative than most other churches .
 Free of controversies and experiencing numerical, institutional, and regional expansion . Free of theological controversies, experiencing numerical and institutional, institutional expansion .
 Baptists believed that they were called to convert the South, that the South would lead the nation, and that the U.S. would be leading the world . Baptists thought that they would convert the Southerners, and the United States would lead .
 A series of small theological rifts in SBC educational efforts portended greater controversies in the future . Denominational unity was critical to fulfilling this mission .
 Baptists in the South suffered a more shattering blow during the Civil Rights controversies of the 1940s-70s . Baptists suffered a shattering blow when they were confronted by Civil Rights debates .
 Many southerners saw these changes as a threat to their traditional way of life . The changes were made in the 1960s and '60s, and '90s .
 Conservatives grew anxious and less tolerant of change of any kind . Progressives felt remorse over decades of SBC inaction . Conservatives felt remorse for decades of inaction . SBC has a history of not allowing political change .
 By the 1970s prosperity and urbanization seemed to be taking the South into the secular currents sweeping the rest of the nation . The South was seen as part of the secularization of the South .
 A bitter battle between conservatives and moderates exploded during the 1980s . It was against that background that a bitter battle erupted during that time .
 For years, conservatives contended, denominational boards and seminaries had been controlled by liberals . They were allowing liberalism to undercut the theological foundation of the church’s evangelistic mission .
 From the moderates’ perspective this same effort appeared a departure from Baptist traditions of respect for local autonomy and the right of believers to interpret the Bible for themselves . The moderates' perspective was that the effort was a departure .
 Moderates charged conservatives were advocating the kind of coercive denominational intrusions and the mingling of religion and politics that Baptists traditionally rejected . Moderates say conservatives are advocating coercive denominations and mingling .
 Conservatives successfully framed the debate as one of accepting or rejecting the Bible, and the majority of SBC members sided with them . Conservatives framed the issue as a Bible-based issue .
 Moderates charged them with securing power through questionable parliamentary maneuvers, but, by the end of the 1980s, the conservative takeover of the SBC was all but complete . Moderates charge them with using questionable parliamentary maneuverments, but they were never charged with any wrongdoing .
 In 1989 eastern European countries of the Warsaw Pact, which had been beholden to the Soviet Union since the end of World War II, had their communist governments replaced with noncommunist governments . John Haas Soviet Union, dissolution of the USSR, was a major event in 1989 .
 For the first time in over 30 years the borders between eastern and western Europe were opened . The borders between east and west Europe have been opened for first time since 1980 .
 In March the Baltic States held elections and their national independence parties gained majorities in each of the republics . The Baltic States are now the only nations to have their own independence parties .
 Lithuania declared its independence from the Soviet Union, the first republic to do so . Lithuania became the first Lithuanian republic to declare independence from Soviet Union . Lithuania is now the largest country in the world .
 During the summer the other republics also declared their right to self-rule . During the rest of the summer, the other nations also declared themselves self-rules .
 His efforts were to be put to a vote in August 1991, but hard-line communists launched an unsuccessful coup in Moscow . Hard-line communist forces launched a failed coup in 1991, which saw the Soviet Union lose ground .
 Baltic countries started to voice their desire to be free of the Soviet Union also . Seeing these events, the Baltic countries voiced their desire for independence also .
 The Baltic countries had been absorbed by the Soviet Union as part of a treaty it had made with Nazi Germany in 1939 . The treaty was made with the USSR in 1939 and the Baltic countries were absorbed by Russia .
 Gorbachev did not care how a republic had come to be part of the Soviet Union . In his view none of the republics should be allowed to leave the Union, he said .
 Seeing events in eastern Europe only encouraged the Baltic republics . Seeing the events in east Europe only encourages the Baltic Republics .
 Attempts to buy off republics with token freedoms only encouraged them to continue to push for separation from the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union failed to find a way to buy them off with token freedom .
 Originally part of Romania, Moldavia was given to the Soviet Union as part of the NaziSoviet Pact . Moldavia is part of Moldavia, a former Romanian colony of Moldova .
 Independence movements also appeared in the Trans-Caucasian region of the Soviet Union . The region was made up of the republics of Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan .
 In Armenia and Azerbaijan, the growth in nationalistic parties also led to a dispute between them over the Nagorno-Karabakh region . The two countries have also been involved in a dispute over the region .
 In Georgia, the massacre of female protesters in the capital of Tbilisi in April 1989 only fueled the desire to be free of the Soviet Union . The massacre of women protesters in Georgia only fueled a desire for freedom .
 The congress also created the office of the president of the Soviet Union . Gorbachev was elected to the office . The congress was also created by the congress .
 In April, Gorbachev announced the Taw of Secession, laid out the process that the republics would have to follow in order to gain independence . The process was set out in the wake of a Soviet Union congress in April .
 One of the first uses of the law was to pressure Fithuania to do as the Soviet government said or face the consequences . The law was first used by Soviet government in Lithuania in the 1960s .
 Fithuanian president Vytautas Fandsbergis refused, saying that a foreign power had no right to make decisions about how his country should be run . He said that foreign powers had no rights to decide how the country should run .
 On April 18, the Soviet government started an economic blockade of Fithuania . The Soviet government began a blockade of the country on April 18 .
 The Soviets lifted the blockade on June 29 when the Fithuanian parliament suspended the independence decree . The blockade was lifted when the country's parliament suspended a decree to declare independence .
 Fatvia and Estonia followed Fithuania’s lead, and even though Gorbachev outlawed their decrees, they did not suffer the blockade as Fith Lithuania did .
 The Baltic republics were not the only ones moving toward independence . The Baltic Republics are not only moving toward independentism .
 Boris Yeltsin was elected chairman of the Russian Supreme Soviet on May 29 . Yeltsins was elected as chairman of Russia's Supreme Soviet in May .
 Yeltsin introduced a platform that pushed for Russian sovereignty in the Soviet Union . He pushed for multiparty democracy and made Russian law take precedent over Soviet law . He declared that Russia should conduct its own foreign policy .
 The actual declaration came on June 12, 1990, at which time Russia also declared its right to control the natural resources of its country . The declaration was made in 1990, when Russia declared it right to take control of natural resources .
 Through the end of 1990 Fithuania continued to try to work out a deal with the Soviet government, but the Soviets continued to stall . Through the 1990s Fith Lithuania continued to work with the Soviets .
 On January 2, 1991, Fandsbergis withdrew the suspension of the independence decree . The decree was lifted on January 3, 1991 .
 paramilitary police in Vilnius and Riga seized various buildings in response to this action . In response to the action, paramilitary police seized buildings .
 The Soviet Ministry of Defense ordered troops into all three of the Baltic States as well as Moldavia, Georgia, and the Ukraine . Then on January 7, Soviet troops entered all three Baltic States, Moldavia and Georgia .
 The Soviet military continued to occupy buildings belonging to the Fithuanian government . It attacked the capital’s television center and in the process killed 14 people and wounded over 200 .
 At about the same time, Gorbachev was telling the Soviet government that force would not be used against the people of Fithuania . Fith Lithuanians are still living in the country .
 Gorbachev claimed not to have had any advanced knowledge of what the military was going to do . These contradictory actions and talk hurt the former Soviet leader .
 A few days later, on January 20, violence broke out in Fatvia when Soviet paramilitary police stormed a government building . Two local police officers were killed in the attack .
 The Baltic republics gained support from Russia when Yeltsin signed a document recognizing the independence of the Baltic States on behalf of Russia . Russia was exerting its right to conduct its own foreign policy separate from that of the Soviet Union .
 Baltic republics had started out leading the move toward independence from the Soviet Union . Russia now began to take a more prominent role in the independence process .
 In January 1991 Gorbachev issued a decree that the Soviet army was to patrol the streets of the larger cities in the Soviet Union to help stop crime and control protests . Russia objected; Russia objected .
 Yeltsin attacked Gorbachev during a television interview . Yeltsins was attacked by various groups after the attack . The attack occurred during a TV interview by Yeltsina .
 Gorbachev’s actions might be decidedly anti-independence for the republics, but he still had the support of many of the people in the Soviet Union and Western countries . The Soviet republics still have their own independence .
 On March 17, 1991, the idea of maintaining a union of the republics was put to a vote of the people of the Soviet Union . The idea was put up for a vote by the Soviet republics in 1991 .
 Yeltsin claimed that the referendum was nothing more then an attempt by Gorbachev to generate support for his leadership . Yeltsins claimed that Gorbachachev was an attempt to create support for him . The referendum was held in Moscow in 1989 .
 Gorbachev invited Yeltsin and the presidents of eight other republics to talk about a proposal for a new Union Treaty and new Union Constitution . The conference was held in Moscow and Russia in the 1980s .
 Gorbachev and other presidents signed a declaration supporting the drafting of a new treaty and constitution . The document was signed by the Soviet Union and other world leaders in 1987 .
 May saw more changes as the republics continued to move away from the Soviet Union . May saw the most significant changes in the country's history .
 On May 5, the Russian branch of the KGB separated itself from the Soviet Union’s institution . The KGB has been in existence for more than 30 years .
 Moldavia changed its official name to the Moldavian Republic, dropping the words Soviet and Socialist . Moldavia is now known as the Moldavia Republic and the Moldova Republic .
 Georgia had its first-ever direct presidential election on May 26 . Georgia's first direct presidential vote was held in 2008 . Georgia is now a state of Georgia .
 Gorbachev and Yeltsin continued to work out the details of the new Union Treaty . The treaty was signed in Moscow in 1987 .
 The treaty would keep the Soviet Union alive, but limit the areas over which it could exercise control . It would make participation in the union voluntary and make participation voluntary .
 Before the treaty was enacted, a group of hard-line communists launched a coup to remove Gorbachev from power . The treaty was signed by the Soviet Union in 1987 .
 The committee in charge of the coup announced a state of emergency and placed Gorbachev under house arrest . It cut off his ability to communicate with the outside world . The committee also placed him on house arrest, cutting off his communication with the world .
 They tried to get him to sign a decree declaring a state of emergency, but he refused . They then tried to persuade him to declare a state-of-emergency . He refused .
 With Gorbachev’s refusal to cooperate, the coup started to come unraveled . The coup was triggered by the refusal of cooperation from the Soviet Union to cooperate .
 Plotters had planned to arrest Yeltsin also, but missed their chance . The plotters were also planning to arrest Vladimir Putin's deputy prime minister .
 Yeltsin appealed to the citizens of Moscow to ignore the unlawful coup . Instead of a coup, he went to the Russian Parliament building and appealed to citizens to ignore it . The coup was an unlawful coup, according to the former president .
 The military was unwilling to move against the civilians, and the coup ended on August 21 . The coup ended in a coup against the government .
 Because of the coup, Yeltsin became the hero of the hour, and his popularity grew rapidly . The coup was a coup that led to Yeltsins' popularity growing rapidly .
 Gorbachev's popularity plummeted and accelerated the decline of the Soviet Union . Unfortunately, his popularity plummeted, and his popularity increased dramatically .
 Yeltsin forced Gorbachev to return control of the natural resources and enterprises on Russian territory back to Russia from the Soviet Union . Yeltsina forced Yeltsins to give back control of Russia's natural resources to Russia . Russia's oil and mineral wealth was returned to Russia in
 Ukraine held a referendum to allow the people to vote in support of or against the declaration of independence from the Soviet Union . On December 1 the Ukraine voted to become independent in a referendum .
 The leaders of Russia, the Ukraine, and Belarus met to determine the future of the Soviet Union and their republics . Then the leaders of the three countries met to decide the future .
 Membership in the CIS was open to all former members of the Soviet Union and any other state interested in joining . The CIS was formed in 1991 after the collapse of Soviet Union .
 More meetings were held on December 21, and Moldavia, Azerbaijan, and Armenia joined . Moldavia and Armenia also took part in the meetings .
 During this meeting the republics agreed to abolish the position of president of the Soviet Union . The republics also agreed to abolished the position .
 Gorbachev still held the position, but on December 25, he announced his resignation . He announced that he had resigned from the position .
 At midnight on December 31, 1991, the Soviet Union ceased to exist . With Gorbachev’s resignation the remaining members of the Soviet Parliament had the Soviet flag removed from the Kremlin .
 Humankind’s exploration of space began in the 1950s, with the first satellite, the Russian Sputnik . Dallace W Unger, Jr. launched by rocket on October 4, 1957, launched by a Soviet rocket .
 The United States moved into space exploration on February 1, 1958, with Explorer I . A stream of similar robotic craft followed from both countries, carrying instruments that made important discoveries .
 Early space pioneering efforts built on the works of pre-World War II inventors such as the Russian schoolmaster Konstantin Tsiolkovsky . His writings set out the basic principles for rocket propulsion .
 In the United States, Professor Robert Goddard suggested a method for reaching the moon . In the U.S. Professor Goddard suggested that a method could be used to reach the moon.
 Soviet forces captured personnel and equipment from the V2 launching site of Peenemunde . Following the war many German rocket engineers, including Wernher von Braun, were brought to the United States .
 On April 12, 1961, the Soviets again led the way with the launch of Yuri Gagarin, a Russian cosmonaut, into space . The Soviets launched the first human to leave Earth in 1961 .
 His mission lasted 1 hour and 48 minutes; he made a single orbit of the planet . He made one orbit of Earth in 1 hour, 48 minutes .
 The United States countered with a Mercury space capsule carrying Alan B Shepard on May 5 . The U.S. launched a space shuttle carrying Alan Shepard in the 1960s .
 The early manned missions resulted in considerable study of the physical damage of g-force, radiation, and weightlessness . G-force and radiation damage of weightlessness were studied in the early missions .
 Rapid developments in hundreds of areas followed, as spacesuits, living quarters, and methodologies for delivering food were all pioneered .
 robot explorers are recovering more data to inform manned missions . Meanwhile, robot explorers were recovering data from space missions .
 The first probe to journey to the Moon was launched on September 12, 1959, by the Soviet Union . The first mission to the moon was launched by Soviet Union in September 1959 .
 The U.S. probes in the main were spurred by President John F Kennedy’s address to the United States Congress on May 25, 1961 .
 There was much debate on what the surface of the Moon actually looked like and whether it could support a landing of a heavy manned craft . There was also much debate about whether the surface looked like it could be used for a landing .
 Lunar Orbiter series of probes were designed to map the surface of the Moon . The best sites for exploration could be chosen so best sites could be found .
 By the end of the five missions, 99 percent of the moon had been photographed to a resolution of 66 meters or better . The moon was photographed to within one meter of the surface .
 The space race saw the Americans and the Russians competing as to who could reach the moon first . The dual projects were underscored by the cold war .
 The Russians never put a man onto the surface of the Moon but instead landed several robot explorers . In the end, the Russians never landed a man on the Moon .
 Both sides were progressing further down the road of manned spacecraft that could carry more than one astronaut . By the mid-1960s, the space program was progressing further .
 The rockets to launch progressively heavier spacecraft began to increase in size, with the eventual development of the Saturn series . The Saturn series still remain some of the most powerful lifting devices ever built .
 In the United States, the Mercury one-person spacecraft was followed by the two-person Gemini craft . In the U.S. the one-man spacecraft followed by two-man Gemini craft.
 The three-person Apollo vehicles were developed, a two-part craft that included a lunar lander as well as a command section . The command section would stay in orbit while the lander descended to the Moon’s surface .
 Valentina Tereshkova completed 48 orbits in the Soviet Union’s Vostok 6 on June 16, 1963 . Valentina was the first female in space in 1963 .
 The first space walk was achieved by Aleksei Leonov on March 18, 1965 . Leonov was the first Russian astronaut to walk outside a capsule .
 On April 23, 1967, the landing parachutes of the Soyuz 1 space capsule failed and cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov was killed . Komarov died in a space crash in the Soviet Union in April 1967 .
 On January 27, 1967, the new United States Apollo program experienced tragedy when a fire broke out in the command module during a launch of the first piloted flight, AS-204 .
 Mercury and Gemini mission veteran Virgil Grissom; Edward White; and Roger Chaffee, an astronaut preparing for his first spaceflight . Chaffee will be the first astronaut to fly in space .
 The subsequent investigation and report saw substantial improvements to mission safety . Mission safety was improved in the aftermath of the incident .
 The Apollo missions grew in their ability to take astronauts further from the surface of Earth . Powered by the enormous Saturn V three-stage rockets, the Apollo missions were able to take them further from Earth .
 On October 11, 1968, the first manned Apollo mission flew successfully . Around the same time Russian spacecraft carrying live animals were successfully orbiting the Moon before returning to Earth .
 Apollo 8 made the first human-manned circumnavigation of the Moon in December 1968 . Apollo 8 was the first mission to the Moon to orbit the Earth .
 Apollo 10 carried out all of the proposed operations short of an actual descent to the lunar surface . Apollo 10 descended to within nine miles of the Moon in the detached lunar module . The mission was a “full dress rehearsal” of the planned landing .
 On July 20, 1969, after a four-day trip, Apollo IV s lander separated from the main spacecraft with astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin on board . Michael Collins remained in orbit, while Neil Armstrong remained in space .
 His steps were watched by millions of people via a television signal beamed back to Earth . Millions more listened via radio and television .
 A total of seven lunar landings were made, with significant achievements made on each mission . The first lunar landing took place in 1969, and the second was in 1972 .
 Some 381. kilograms of lunar rocks were brought back to Earth . Each successive landing after Apollo 11 left behind an automated surface laboratory .
 The last three missions carried extremely sophisticated mapping cameras, and other instruments measured magnetic fields, chemical composition, and radioactivity . The missions were carried out by the Air Force .
 An oxygen tank on the spacecraft had blown up and the normal supply of electricity, light, and water to the craft was lost around 200,000 miles from Earth .
 A unique program of rigged repairs and procedure invention followed, resulting in the eventual safe return of the three astronauts to Earth . A unique and innovative program of . rigged repairs, followed by . procedure invention .
 Apollo missions continued until December 1972, with different sites visited . The wheeled lunar rover successfully deployed to carry astronauts further from the spacecraft .
 The missions increased the duration of time spent on the surface from hours to days . The missions were carried out in a bid to increase the number of days spent in space .
 Skylab was a section of a Saturn V rocket that was successfully placed in orbit and visited on several occasions by teams of astronaut/scientists who stayed in residence for ever-lengthening periods to conduct experiments .
 A Soviet-American rendezvous in space, the Apollo-Soyuz mission, took place in 1975 . The mission was the first of its kind in space .
 The development of the space shuttle began in 1970, centering around the idea of a cheaper alternative to previous craft . The shuttle is a reusable craft capable of returning in a glide to Earth’s surface .
 The program used these spacecraft from their first flight in 1981 until the present . The program has been using these spacecraft since 1981 .
 The shuttle fleet can each carry a payload of 30,000 kilograms to orbit . Shuttle fleet can also carry an astronaut's payload of more than 30,500 kilograms .
 Mission loads have consisted of satellites, experiments, and materials for the International Space Station . Mission loads for the ISS have included satellites and experiments .
 A series of space stations called Salyut were launched, using Soyuz spacecraft on ferry missions . The stations were launched on a series of missions to the Russian space station .
 Russian cosmonauts joined with the other countries contributing to the International Space Station . Following improved relations between Russia and other nations at the end of the cold war, Russia joined with other nations .
 Space flight is not without its hazards, as was discovered in the early days of space exploration with the loss of the Soyuz 1 and Apollo 1 crews . The loss of both crews is a reminder of the dangers of space travel .
 Improvements in safety through redesign and development of spacecraft and propulsion systems have greatly reduced risk of catastrophic failure . Improvements in design and development has greatly reduced the risk of catastrophe failure .
 The severe stresses placed on spacecraft and their systems, together with the risk associated with the application of cutting-edge technology, continue to make manned spaceflight inherently dangerous .
 The Challenger and Columbia space shuttles were among the spacecraft and crew of the space shuttle . The Challenger, Columbia and Columbia were both lost in space shuttle crashes .
 The Hubble Space Telescope is the largest astronomical telescope ever sent into space . It is the world's largest telescope and largest telescope telescope ever launched into space.
 Launched in 1990 by a space shuttle, the telescope's placement outside Earth’s atmosphere gives it a unique view of the universe . The telescope was launched by the space shuttle .
 NASA named the world’s first space-based optical telescope after the United States astronomer Edwin P Hubble . Hubble is the first space telescope to be launched in space .
 Hubble confirmed an ‘expanding’ universe, which provided the foundation for the big bang theory . Hubble confirmed the existence of an expanding universe, providing the foundation of the theory .
 Hubble is visited regularly by space shuttle crews for regular servicing . With a mission duration of up to 20 years, Hubble has a mission to the Hubble observatory .
 The telescope relays to Earth three to four gigabytes of information per day . Sensitive to ultraviolet through near infrared light, it relays data to the Earth .
 Powered by two 25-foot solar panels, the telescope has revealed new information on the age of the universe . It has also made findings on black holes and provided visual proof that dust disks around young stars are common .
 The James Webb Space Telescope is intended to replace Hubble . It is scheduled for launch in 2011 .
 By contrast, the Hubble can see objects 60 times fainter than those visible with Earthbased telescopes . Hubble can also see objects that are more faint than Earth-based telescopes can .
 The first components for the International Space Station were taken into orbit in 1998 . The station received its first crew on November 2, 2000, marking the first day a permanent human presence in space was achieved .
 The space station has grown and evolved into an unprecedented laboratory complex . Space station is now a laboratory complex in the world of science .
 Station offers microgravity environment that cannot be duplicated on Earth . Station furthers knowledge of science and of how the human body functions for extended periods of time .
 By the time the station had been operating for five years, 89 scientific investigations had been conducted . The station was operating in the 1970s and 1980s . It was the first time it had been operated in five years .
 A complete characterization study of the radiation environment in the station was done, with evaluation of models of radiation shielding by the station’s structure . The study was done to evaluate the radiation shielding of the station .
 With 15,000 cubic feet of habitable volume assembled by late 2005, the space station at that point had more room than a conventional three-bedroom house . The space station was assembled in late 2005 .
 Astronauts and scientists from a variety of nations have visited and worked in the space station . Astronauts have been on the station since 2009 .
 Dennis Tito was the first private space tourist to visit the ISS for a 10-day excursion in April 2001 . Tito is a California millionaire and former NASA rocket scientist . Dennis is a former NASA scientist .
 Robot explorers have also achieved an enormous amount in the conquest of space . Robot explorers are also known as 'robot explorers'
 The first interplanetary explorer, the United States’ Mariner II, was launched on August, 26, 1962, to explore Venus . The Mariner reported a high surface temperature and the absence of a magnetic field .
 In January 2004 two NASA robot explorers named Spirit and Opportunity landed on Mars . Spirit, Opportunity, landed on the red planet in 2004 . Opportunity is the first mission to land on Mars since 2004 .
 The sixwheeled craft crawled over the surface, measuring, photographing, and analyzing, and continuing to function for over a year . They traveled for several miles over the course of the year, during which they traveled several miles .
 On December 25, 2004, the NASA Cassini spacecraft, nearing Saturn, released the European Space Agency’s Huygens probe toward the surface of the ringed planet's largest moon, Titan .
 The probe’s cameras and spectrometers analyzed the chemical composition of Titan and transmitted data back to scientists on Earth . Parachuting to the Moon's surface, the probe's cameras and Spectrometers analyze the chemical compositions .
 Other probes have been sent to all of the planets in the solar system, including Pluto . The New Horizons probe launched in January 2006 .
 Pioneer space probe, launched on March 2, 1972, was the first spacecraft to travel through the asteroid belt . The Pioneer probe was launched in 1972 and launched in March 1972 . It was first to make direct observations and obtain close-up images of Jupiter .
 It made its closest encounter with Jupiter on December 3, 1973 . It passed within 81,000 miles of Jupiter . It made the closest encounter in 1973 .
 Pioneer 10 continues into interstellar space, heading for the red star Aldebaran, about 68 light years away . Pioneer 10 is headed for Aldebar, a red star that is 68 light .
 Another development of the post-Moon program has been the space community’s understandings of asteroid dangers .
 A ‘dinosaur-killer’ strike is now thought to be avoidable, due to a program of surveying and tracking all heavenly bodies . The program is thought to have been able to track and monitor the planet .
 Such ambitious ideas have been supported by the success of missions such as the Stardust spacecraft, launched in 1999 .
 This mission captured particles from a comet beyond the Earth-Moon orbit and returned them to Earth . This mission managed to capture particles from the comet beyond Earth-moon orbit .
 The discovery of other planets orbiting distant stars has been made possible . The Earth is ringed by satellites enabling advanced communications and a Global Positioning System .
 Progress has not been as fast as science fiction written from the 1930s to the 1980s depicted . Space flight has proved expensive and difficult, and manned Moon bases and Martian cities have not happened .
 Plans are under way to see a human presence on both the Moon and Mars . However, other nations besides the United States and the Soviet Union have begun space exploration .
 Two basic difficulties have to be overcome if human exploration of other stars and their solar systems is to succeed . Two basic problems must be overcome for exploration of solar systems to succeed, says NASA .
 The nuclear-powered craft crossed the Moon’s orbit around nine hours after liftoff . The mission was the first to carry out a mission to the Moon .
 Estimated mission duration to Pluto is around nine years . Even at this speed, the estimated mission duration is around 9 years . Mission to Pluto will last for around nine .
 If the mission were manned, this would mean an overall duration of 18 years traveling plus the exploration time . The mission would be the first manned mission to take off from the Earth .
 If this craft’s speed were applied to reach the nearest star system to Earth, the mission time would be hundreds of years . The craft's speed would be enough to reach a star system within a century .
 Therein lies the second major problem: the duration humans can withstand space conditions . Therein is the second problem: how long astronauts can withstand the conditions of space .
 The long-term effects of weightless space flight are still being studied . But it is doubtful that such missions could be withstood by a human crew .
 Scientists believe the craft would have to have some sort of gravitational compensation . The craft would need to have a gravitational compensation, scientists say .
 A manned, one-way, long-term mission is also an unknown, although science fiction has done a great deal to explore both of these issues . A manned manned mission is an unknown .
 Space flight may have provided some answers by extrapolating various scenarios from the work of physicists that may get around interstellar exploration problems . Indeed, space flight may provide some answers to some of the questions .
 If space is not an empty vacuum and contains distortions, then the “warps” in space may provide points where great distances can be surpassed, rather in the way a fly can travel from one end of a curved scarf to the other end by simply flying between the two points
 There may also be ways to build spacecraft that fly at much faster speeds . Light sails, antimatter rockets, and drives utilizing alternative theories of gravity and electromagnetism might allow much greater speeds .
 Although the difficulties of exploring beyond the solar system are great, they may not be insurmountable . The difficulties are great but they may be not as great as previously thought, scientists say .
 If humans want to survive beyond the certain degradation of our own star and its planetary system, space exploration must be continued . Space exploration must continue, says the author .
 Spain was still affected strongly by the results of the Spanish civil war of 1936-39 . Spain still suffered from the effects of the civil war .
 Francisco Franco’s authoritarian regime continued to censor the press and did not abide by a constitution . Francisco Franco's authoritarian regime was not to abide by the constitution .
 Franco did mitigate some fascist tendencies within his government, stressing instead the Roman Catholic Church, the monarchy, and society as the corporatist pillars of Spain . After the defeat of fascist governments in World War II, he did not prevent isolation by other international actors .
 At the same time industrialization and economic development contributed to a contrary force of secularization, secularization . However, industrialization contributed to secularization and industrialization .
 The corporatism of the state thus began to depend more and more on Franco . Franco was a key figure in Franco's reign in Spain . The state's corporatism was dependent on Franco's support for Franco .
 The Spanish ended their rule over Spanish Morocco in 1956, and over the rest of their African colonies over the next two decades . The Spanish also ruled over the other African colonies .
 In 1968 Spanish Guinea gained independence and renamed itself Equatorial Guinea . In 1968, Spanish Guinea became the country's first nation of African nations .
 Morocco's King Hassan II took advantage of Spain’s weakness and took control of Western Sahara . Spain's only remaining colony, Western Sahara, was taken over by Morocco in the Green March . Morocco is now the only remaining Spanish colony in the Sahara .
 The hierarchical nature of the state did not persist after Franco’s death in 1975 . Indeed, the hierarchical state of the Spanish state was not maintained after his death . Franco died in 1975 at the age of 75 .
 After the elections, the Spanish constitution was drafted in 1978 by a committee made up of the deputies of most of the main political groups . After the election, the constitution was drawn up in 1978 .
 Suarez’s power weakened, however, and he resigned as president and party leader on January 29, 1981 . Suarez's power weakened after he was forced to step down from power .
 Finding a successor was difficult in what became a very tense political and economic climate due to economic struggle, difficulty creating a new territorial organization of Spain, Euskadi Ta Askatasuna terrorist attacks, and the army’s lukewarm support of democratic institutions .
 In this political atmosphere, democratic governance in Spain was tested by a 1981 coup that was called 23F and El Tejerazo . The coup took place in Spain's capital, Madrid, in 1981 .
 The coup ended largely because the king called upon the army to abide by the orders of the democratically elected civilian authorities . No one was harmed and the coup ended in a coup .
 Domestic reforms under Gonzalez’s administration included the legalization of abortion, education reforms, and increased personal freedoms . Gonzalez's administration also included the decriminalization of abortion .
 Spain made many advances in integrating back into the international economic and political community . Also during this era, Spain made numerous advances in integration into the world's economic community .
 The U.S. joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Economic Community in 1986 .
 Technological and industrial investment in the country increased, despite its persistently high unemployment rate .
 Spain suffered from regional separatism and regional groups seeking autonomy from Spain . Spain was able to make progress in international integration, but still suffered from separatism .
 Spain's economy benefited from high domestic demand and export-led growth . Spain’s economy has been hit by high export demand and high export growth .
 It joined the Economic and Monetary Union and adopted the euro in 1999 . It continued down the path of European integration, joining the EAEU and Eurozone .
 Lieutenant Colonel Pedro Antonio Blanco Garcia was assassinated in 2001 . In 2001 he was assassinated by the Colombian army . He was killed by a bomb blast .
 An enormous street demonstration of over 1 million Spaniards protesting the assassination occurred the next day . Over 1 million people protested the assassination of the dictator .
 After some ETA members were killed in a car bomb that August, the ETA retaliated with a series of bloodiest attacks since 1992 . The attacks included the assassination of Supreme Court justice Jose Francisco Querol Lombardero, his driver, bodyguard, and a bystander
 Aznar supported the U.S. “War on Terror” in the Iraq War, possibly resulting in the March 11, 2004, train bombings in Madrid . Aznar also supported the United States ‘War on terror’ in Iraq War .
 Although the government blamed ETA, al-Qaeda operatives carried out the attacks . The government blames ETA for the attacks, which were carried out by al Qaeda operatives .
 Aznar, however, had decided not to run, despite not being barred from running for a third term . Aznar is not allowed to run for third term, despite being allowed to do so in 2012 .
 Under his administration, Spain approved a same-sex marriage law with the support of a majority of the population . The law was approved under his administration . Under his government, Spain's president approved the law .
 In contrast to Aznar, Zapatero’s relations with the U.S. were strained . Aznar was the prime minister of Spain during the 1990s .
 He maintained good relations with the United Nations and the European Union . However, he maintained close ties with the U.N. and EU .
 The island nation of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka gained independence from British rule on February 4, 1948 . Sri Lanka is one of the largest economies in the world .
 The country followed a nonaligned foreign policy and participated in various world bodies such as the United Nations, the World Bank, and the Asian Development Bank .
 Sri Lanka became the first country in South Asia to liberalize its economy . Sri Lanka was the first South Asian country to liberalise its economy in the 1990s .
 The government passed the 1956 Sinhala Only Act, which made Sinhalala the official language . The act was passed by the government in 1956 .
 Tamils, living in the north and east, constituted about 18 percent of the population . The Tamils are living in northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka .
 They feared dominance by the Sinhala majority, who were 74 percent of the population . The majority of the Sri Lankan population was ethnic Sinhalese .
 A separatist movement was launched, resulting in confrontation between the two communities . The two communities have been at loggerheads for years .
 Tamil Elam was broached by several Tamil militant groups in recent years . The concept of Elam has been mooted by Tamil militants in the past .
 Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam emerging as the leading militant group . Liberation Tigers under the leadership of Velupillai Prabhakaran .
 A large-scale riot broke out in 1977, and in the 1980s civil war broke out . The country's civil war began in the late 1980s .
 Indian premier Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by Tamil militants in the state of Tamil Nadu, India . Rajiv was assassinated in Tamil Nadu in 1991 .
 The president of Sri Lanka, Ranasinghe Premadasa, also was assassinated in Colombo, Sri Lanka .
 There was a formal cease-fire in February 2002 under the auspices of the government of Norway . After two decades of bloodshed, there was a truce in 2002 .
 Peace talks were held in February and April 2006 in Geneva, but did not produce any concrete results . Peace talks in Geneva were held between 2006 and 2007 .
 In July and August 2006 there was heavy fighting in the Muslim-dominated Muttur region . Heavy fighting took place in the region during the summer and summer of 2006 .
 Stanley Tambiah, Stanley J Sri Lanka: Ethnic Fratricide and the Dismantling of Democracy. Brookings Institution Press, 1999; . Brookings Institution: Sri Lanka is a nation of people who have suffered from ethnic violence .
 The Great Lakes Seaway is a 2,342mile-long series of canals, locks, and seaways constructed jointly by Canada and the U.S. Seaways were built to allow oceangoing vessels access to the Great Lakes .
 It streamlined shipping and created additional hydroelectric facilities along its route . The route of the route was created in order to create a route of hydroelectricity .
 The total cost was $470 million, which Canada provided $336. million and the United States $133. million . Canada provided more than $336 million for the project .
 The United States St. Lawrence Seaway Management Corporation manages 13 locks . The U.S. Seaway management company manages the locks, managing 13 locks in the United States .
 To ensure proper depth it was necessary to flood some areas, some areas were flooded . Residents of river towns were displaced by the flood .
 The Great Lakes connect the upper Great Lakes with Lake Superior . S.E. Marie, Michigan, are slightly larger and connect the Great Lakes . Lake Superior is the largest lake in the world .
 Westbound traffic primarily carries cargoes of steel, coal, iron ore, and iron ore . 40 percent of eastbound cargo is grain .
 Inter-lake trade accounts for four times the tonnage handled for international markets . Inter-labor trade is four times as much as international trade .
 In recent years, proposals by the U.S. and Canadian governments to deepen the seaway have met with resistance .
 The Lawrence project is operating at only half the capacity envisioned when the project began in the 1950s . The Panama Canal is achieving full capacity and more .
 Opponents of expansion fear damage to water quality in the world's greatest freshwater system . They point to damage already caused by invasive animal and plant species introduced by shipping .
 In the United States, the initial impetus for student activism came from the Civil Rights movement . In the U.S. student activism began in the 1960s and '60s .
 Ella Baker founded the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee in 1960 . Baker organized the Southern Christian Leadership Conference for Martin Luther King, Jr. The committee was the first major student protest organization .
 She believed that existing civil rights organizations were out of touch with African-American students who were willing to push the movement further . She said existing organizations were not in touch with students willing to take on the issue further .
 Students for a Democratic Society emerged from the Student League for Industrial Democracy . The League was created in the 1930s to try to build a political left in Great Depression America .
 SDS became the central institution of what would soon be called the New Left . SDS was the center of SDS, the organization that would soon become known as New Left.
 59 SDS members and sympathizers assembled at an ALL-CIO camp in Port Huron, Michigan, to develop a political manifesto . In June 1962, 59 members of SDS, including some SNCC members, assembled at the camp .
 It suggested that U.S. universities should become the locus for a new movement concerned with empowering individuals and communities . The movement was inspired by the idea of empowering individuals, communities .
 SNCC was the first of these organizations to achieve national prominence . SNCC became the first organization to gain national prominence in the 1960s and '90s .
 Its members had initiated sit-ins at segregated lunch counters . They took part in the Lreedom Rides of 1961, testing federal court orders desegregating interstate bus terminals . Members of the 1960s civil disobedience movement were active .
 They conducted voter registration programs in several southern cities and demonstrated against segregation . They also demonstrated against racial segregation .
 SNCC and CORE staged “Lreedom Summer’s” during which white college students were invited to teach African-American children and assist with voter registration efforts in Mississippi in 1964 . SNCC, CORE (the Congress of Racial Equality) staged ‘L
 During that summer, three student activists were murdered by white racists . Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman and African-American James Chaney were murdered .
 White resistance to Civil Rights Act of 1964 and 1965 Voting Rights Act led SDS and SNCC to see themselves as allies of revolutionaries in Vietnam . Students demonstrate against the war in Vietnam during the March on the Pentagon in 1967 .
 SNCC chairman Stokely Carmichael coined the slogan “Black Power” to express African-American pride . Carmichael had the effect of driving white activists out of the organization . SNCC was founded in 1966 .
 SDS and other white-dominated activist groups had, by this time, become outraged at the escalation of the war in Vietnam . SDS was protesting the war's escalation .
 In April a march on Washington organized by SDS drew 20,000 protesters . In April, SDS organizers organized a March on Washington, D.C. protest .
 Later, they publicly raised the importance of feminism in civil rights and antiwar groups . They later raised the issue of feminism to civil rights groups .
 Some men saw women’s issues as a trivial distraction from their own concerns about the draft . Some men in the movement saw women's issues as trivial distractions .
 Between 1964 and 1969 many of the nation’s college campuses became stages for student activism, whether connected to the war or not . The war was a major source of student activism in the 1960s .
 Students stormed boards of regents meetings and occupied buildings and offices . Students stormed regents' offices and took over buildings and buildings .
 In May 1968 youth uprisings in Paris nearly brought down the government of Charles de Gaulle . Youth upriests in Paris almost brought down government of the late French president .
 A general strike led by elite Sorbonne university students decried France’s education system and its role in the Vietnam War .
 Czechoslovakia’s ‘Prague Spring’ tried to implement “socialism with a human face” in the teeth of Soviet domination . That same year, Czechoslovakians tried to . implement ‘socialism’ with a . human face .
 In August Warsaw Pact troops crushed the movement, while in the U.S. riots erupted between Chicago police and student activists during the Democratic National Convention .
 Violence escalated in 1970 when National Guard units shot and killed students protesting the Vietnam War at Kent State and Jackson State Universities . The shootings touched off protests at many other campuses .
 SDS splintered at its 1969 convention into a number of groups, the Weathermen . The Weathermen took its name from a Bob Dylan song .
 Renamed the Weather Underground, this group is best remembered for a Greenwich Village explosion in which three members blew themselves up while assembling explosives . The Weather Underground is best known for its involvement in an explosion in Greenwich Village .
 Broad-based student activism declined after the draft was discontinued in 1973 . Student activism declined in the wake of the draft being discontinued .
 Suburbanization describes a process by which U.S. city dwellers moved from central cities to residential areas characterized by single-family homes with lawn space . David Miller Parker describes the process of suburbanization in the United States .
 It is generally associated with the period directly following World War II, but suburbanization is a much older process . Suburbanization is an older process than it is associated with WWII .
 Although it originally applied to a pastoral existence, connected to but outside the central city, it is now associated with the basic ideals of family life .
 The form of the United States city has been changing since the development of the steam engine . The U.S. city form has changed since steam engines were developed .
 As the railroad replaced the stagecoach as a means of transportation, it became possible to live farther from the center of the city while still working in the central business district .
 The streetcar accelerated this outward movement, and automobiles accelerated it even more . It created ‘bedroom communities’ with access to commuter trains, buses and ferries, and parking lots . The streetcar also accelerated the outward movement .
 By 1940 only 20 percent of U.S. citizens lived in the suburbs, which were regarded as communities for the upper class . The suburbs were seen as a community for the wealthy .
 The diversion of resources for the war effort created a national housing shortage for returning servicemen . A shortage of housing in cities with significant concentrations of war-related industries led to the building of suburban communities to house workers during WWII .
 Ninety-seven percent of all new singlefamily dwellings built between 1946 and 1956 were surrounded by their own plots . Ninety per cent of new homes were built in the 1950s .
 The period saw the cottage industry of single-family home construction transformed into a major manufacturing process . The cottage industry was transformed into an industry of manufacturing .
 Levittown is named after the family who built it . The most famous example of this is Levitttown, which was named after its name . Levittstown is the name of a town built by the family of the family .
 Developers of Lakewood, in Los Angeles County, California, purchased 3,500 acres in 1949 and had built and sold 17,500 houses by 1953 . Lakewood was the second largest development in the United States .
 The new suburbs were characterized by low density, architectural monotony, and economic and racial homogeneity . The suburbs are characterized as low density and economic homophony .
 Businesses opened branch stores in the suburbs, creating shopping malls to reach consumers who had moved there . Soon businesses, especially retailers, opened branches in suburbs .
 The suburbs continue to grow as the urban/suburban relationship in the nation’s metropolitan areas evolves . The suburbs are growing as the relationship between urban and suburban areas grows .
 Sudan has been the theater for several major intercommunal conflicts since the 1950s . David Miller Parker: Sudanese civil wars have been the center of several major conflicts since 1950s.
 During the British administration of the Sudan under the Condominium Agreement, North and South Sudan had been administered separately . North Sudan was administered separately by the British under the British .
 The north, with historic ties to Egypt, was predominantly Muslim and Arabic speaking . The north is predominantly Muslim, Arabic-speaking .
 The population in the south was primarily black and a mixture of Christians and animists, speaking a variety of African languages . The population of the southern part of the country was predominantly black .
 The British restricted Sudanese living north of the 10th parallel from traveling farther south . Sudanese people living below the 8th parallel were also restricted from traveling north .
 The first Sudanese civil war broke out shortly before Sudanese independence in 1956 and lasted until 1972 . The first civil war was fought in Sudan between 1956 and 1972 .
 The Addis Ababa Agreement was signed in 1972, ending hostilities and giving the southern Sudan considerable self-rule and autonomy . The southern Sudanese are now the only nation in the country .
 President Jaafar Muhammad Numeiri broke the peace agreement in 1983 by trying to create a federated Sudan . The peace held until President Numeir broke the deal in 1983 . The agreement was signed in 1953 .
 President Numeiri moved to implement Islamic sharia law over all of the Sudan, including the Christian population . President is trying to implement sharia rule over Sudan's Christians .
 Newly discovered oil reserves in southern territory also provided a motive for more northern interference in the region . Newly discovered gas reserves in the southern territory provided the motive for northern interference .
 Sudan People's Liberation Movement and Sudan People’s Liberation Army launched an all-out war against northern domination, further weakening Numeiri . Colonel John Garang led the war against the northern domination . The war further weakened Numeir .
 The Numeiri regime was overthrown in a militaryled coup in 1985, but civil war continued as Islamist forces gained power in Khartoum . The civil war in Sudan continued in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Negotiations for a cease-fire ended in 1986 when SPLA forces shot down a civilian aircraft . The two sides had been negotiating to end a ceasefire .
 The National Islamic Lront then joined the northern forces to ensure that Islamic law was retained . Islamic law has been retained in Iraq .
 One of the primary demands of those in the south had been the repeal of Islamic law . This endangered hopes for future peace talks because one of the main demands was the repeal .
 In 1989 further negotiations collapsed over the issue of Islamic law . Southern forces retained control over most of the southern countryside .
 In 1991 the Ethiopian government was deposed, depriving the south of its main ally and arms supplier . The south of Ethiopia has been a key ally in the region since the fall of 1991 .
 Inter-rival fighting among groups in the south further weakened the resistance against the north . Inter-rival fighting also weakened the south's resistance .
 As almost all of the fighting had occurred in southern provinces, the region had experienced massive population dislocation, food shortages, and destruction .
 Throughout the 1990s, the south was torn apart by inter-tribal warfare as well as numerous offensives from the north . The south has been torn apart from tribal warfare throughout the years .
 The two sides signed the Naivasha Treaty on January 9, 2005 . With international pressure, the 2003 peace talks made progress .
 The treaty guaranteed autonomy for southern Sudan for six years . After that, a referendum was to be held regarding complete independence .
 Both north and south armies allowed to remain in place . Monies from oil reserves were to be divided equally between the north and the south .
 Peace treaty imperiled after John Garang, the new co-vice president, was killed in a helicopter crash . The peace treaty was imperiled by Garang's death in the crash .
 Many believed the regime in Khartoum had been responsible for Garang’s death . Riots broke out in the south, where many believed Garang had been killed .
 Salva Kiir Mayardit became the new SPLA leader and Sudanese vice president . However, a tentative peace held, and Salva was the new Sudanese president .
 The United Nations established the UN Mission to Sudan under UN Security Council Resolution 1590 in March 2005 . The mission was to protect and promote human rights in southern Sudan .
 An uprising in the western Darfur region put the mission and Sudanese unity in danger .
 Darfur region, predominantly Muslim, rebelled in 2003, accusing the government of neglect . It used this as a basis for secessionist claims . Darfur is predominantly Muslim .
 The central government launched a brutal campaign of scorched earth against Darfur . It aligned itself with Arab militias known as the Janjaweed . Darfur has been a source of conflict for decades .
 Many in Darfur fled into neighboring Chad, thereby creating an international crisis . Many of Darfur's residents fled to neighboring Chad . Many Darfur refugees are now living in neighbouring Chad .
 By 2006 the government in Khartoum claimed victory and signed the Darfur Peace Agreement . This failed to halt hostilities, and the conflict continues . By 2006, the government claimed victory, but this failed to stop hostilities .
 Sudanese civil wars have decimated large sectors of the Sudanese economy . Civil war has decimated many sectors of Sudan's economy, including the oil industry .
 The fluctuating price of cotton, Sudan's primary cash crop, has further weakened Sudan’s economic prospects . Sudan's economy has been hit hard by fluctuating prices of cotton crop .
 The discovery of small oil reserves raised hopes, but with the ongoing violence, it is difficult to gauge the positive effects of this resource . The discovery has raised hopes but with ongoing violence it is impossible to gauge its positive effects .
 Sudan is likely to remain a volatile and unstable region for the foreseeable future . The Sudan will remain volatile, unstable and unstable for the next few years .
 General Haji Mohammad Suharto was born June 8, 1921, in Kemusuk Argamulja, central Java . He was the second president of Indonesia after Sukarno . He is married to Katie Belliel Belliel, who was born in 1921 .
 His military career began with the Japanese occupation from 1942 to 1945 . He served in the Japanese military during the occupation of Japan .
 Suharto fought against the Dutch and later joined the Indonesian National Army . After Sukarno’s declaration of independence in 1945, he fought in the Indonesian Army .
 As Sukarno’s political authority weakened, Suharto began to strengthen his position . Suharti strengthened his position in Indonesia as his political authority was weakened .
 By an executive order in 1966, Sukarno was forced to grant emergency powers to Suharto . By the end of the war, Suharta was in control of the Indonesian state of Indonesia .
 Suharto Orde Baru was established, emphasizing economic development and social harmony . Orde baru emphasized economic development, social harmony and social development . The Indonesian capital is located in Jakarta, Indonesia .
 Relations with Western countries improved and confrontation with Malaysia ended . Relations with China deteriorated, but relations with the West improved .
 The military extended its hold over economic management, which led to large-scale corruption . The military became powerful and extended its . hold over . economic management . It led to . large scale corruption .
 By March 1967 he was the acting president and he was elected president on March 21, 1968 . He was elected President of the United States in 1968 .
 He continued to hold the office until 1998, being reelected unopposed five times . He was reelected to five times without being defeated .
 Suharto’s regime suppressed secessionist movements and added Western New Guinea in 1969 . The former Dutch colony under U.N. temporary executive authority after a stage-managed election in 1969 was added .
 Organisasi Papua Merdeka is a guerrilla campaign against the government of Indonesia . However, he had to deal with its guerrilla campaign in Papua . He had to also deal with his role in the fight against Indonesia's government .
 Suharto also faced problems from the province of Aceh after the formation of the Gerakan Aceh Merdeka . The province demanded independence from Indonesia in 1976 .
 He suppressed the rebellion by force by force and martial law, but discontent remained . He suppressed it by force .
 Suharto ordered an invasion and incorporated it into Indonesia in 1976 . The invasion was the first invasion of Indonesia in the 1970s and 1980s . Indonesia incorporated the invasion into the country in 1976.
 A guerrilla war against Indonesian occupation continued amid reports of brutality by the army . Reports of brutality reported by the Indonesian army .
 In 1998 talks between Portugal, Indonesia, and the United Nations resulted in a plebiscite for the East Timorese people . In 1998, Portugal and Indonesia agreed to hold a referendum on the issue in East Timoresu .
 Indonesian army and pro-Indonesian militia unleashed a reign of terror in the region that killed more than 1,300 people and sent 300,000 people fleeing into West Timor . More than a million people were killed in the Indonesian army's crackdown .
 Suharto faced challenges on the economic front also, as his profligate spending and corruption forced the economy to falter . Suharta faced challenges in the 1970s and '80s, including corruption and corruption .
 Beginning in the 1990s, opposition to his authoritarian regime gained intensity .
 The financial crisis of Asia in 1997 resulted in the plummeting value of the Indonesia currency . The Indonesia currency lost 80 percent of its value in 1998 .
 In 2003 the Human Rights Commission of Indonesia began to examine atrocities committed under his regime . In 2003 he was accused of committing atrocities .
 By then Suharto was in poor health, often hospitalized, and therefore spared prosecution . By then he had already been spared prosecution for crimes .
 Suharto died in Jakarta on January 27, 2008, from multiple organ failure . He was Indonesian president of Indonesia .
 Ahmed Sukarno left an indelible imprint on the history and politics of Indonesia . A charismatic leader, he left a lasting legacy on Indonesia's politics .
 Sukarno was instrumental in establishing the Perserikatan Nasional Nasional Indonesia on July 4, 1927 . He graduated from Bandung Technische Hoogeschool in 1926 and joined the nationalist movement .
 He was imprisoned and exiled, returning to Jakarta after the Japanese occupation in 1942 . He returned to Indonesia after the occupation of the city .
 The Netherlands signed the Hague Agreement of December 27, 1949, ending its colonial rule . Unable to suppress the independence movement, the Netherlands signed a treaty ending colonial rule in 1949 .
 Sukarno and Muhammad Hatta became president and prime minister of Indonesia . Hatta was president and later prime minister, respectively . He was assassinated .
 The new constitution provided for a parliamentary form of government in Indonesia . Sukarno was a mere figurehead, with his rivals dominating the political scene . He was a figurehead in the new constitution .
 There was political instability and the collapse of five successive cabinets in six years . Five successive cabinets collapsed in that period of instability .
 There were revolts against the central authority in West Java, Kalimantan, south Sulawesi, and Sumatra . The revolts took place in the early 1900s .
 Sukarno criticized the ineffective government and began to assert his authority gradually from 1955 . He instituted a “guided democracy” in 1957 that replaced democratic with authoritarian rule . The country's first democracy was overthrown in 1957 .
 On July 5, 1959, Sukarno reinstituted the 1945 constitution, assuming executive authority, ruling by decree . The Indonesian prime minister ruled by decree in 1959 . The country's constitution was restored to the post-19th century .
 In July 1963 Sukarno was made president for life by a compliant assembly . Sukarnos was elected president of Indonesia in July 1963 .
 From the early 1960s Sukarno directed his attention to grandiose plans of projecting Indonesia into the international arena and himself as leader of the nonaligned bloc . The Indonesian leader directed his plans to be a nonaligned leader .
 He hosted the 29-nation Afro-Asian conference at Bandung in 1955 . His image building was built on his hosting of the conference in Bandung .
 In 1963 he annexed the western half of Papua New Guinea, or Dutch New Guinea . He annexed the west half of the island nation, which is now known as Dutch Guinea .
 Sukarno broke off relations with the newly formed Malaysia in 1963 . He attempted to destabilize it by guerrilla attacks . The Indonesian government attempted to overthrow Malaysia .
 Indonesia withdrew from the U.N. after the admission of Malaysia to the United Nations . Indonesia withdraws from the UN after Malaysia's admission to the organization . Malaysia was the first Asian nation to admit to the UN .
 Sukarno consulted communist nations with Moscow responding with foreign aid . Sukarnos then consulted communist countries with help from communist nations . Moscow responded by sending foreign aid to the country .
 Inflation, corruption, deficit spending, and victimization of the Chinese business community led to economic ruin . Domestically, inflation, corruption and deficit spending led to the collapse of the economy .
 Inflation reached a staggering proportion, and the economy was on the brink of collapse . Inflation was a massive problem in the 1980s and '90s, when it was the worst .
 General Haji Mohammad Suharto took leadership in crushing the coup on September 30 . General Suarto took control of the coup and took over the country's military .
 Sukarno was fatally weakened by Suharto, who became the president in March 1967 . As a result, the political authority of Sukarnos was fatally undermined by Suarto . Suhartos was the first Indonesian president to become president in 1967 . Sukarnas was assassinated
 Sukarno, stripped of presidential powers, was banned from any political activity . He remained under house arrest in Jakarta until his death on June 21, 1970 . Sukarnos was stripped of all political powers and banned from political activity and remained under a house arrest .
 There was a revival of the popularity of Sukarno in 1980s, because many people had become disenchanted with the dictatorial military regime of Suharto .
 Megawati Sukarnoputri was the symbol of the pro-democracy movement that opposed Suharto . Her eldest daughter was elected president of Indonesia from 2001 to 2004 .
 About 2 million people from mainland China fled to Taiwan . About 6 million people had earlier migrated to the island, mainly from Fujian province across the Taiwan Strait . The island is home to about 2 million Chinese migrants .
 Chiang Kai-shek was elected president of China under the constitution in 1947 . He resumed his presidency in 1950 after stepping down in 1949 .
 With the failure of the George Marshall mission to mediate the Chinese civil war, the U.S. became a bystander in the Chinese conflict . The invasion of Communist North Korea (later aided by “volunteers” from the PRC) of pro-Western South
 The United States Seventh Fleet then began to patrol the Taiwan Strait to prevent a PRC invasion of Taiwan . In 1952 the U.S. and the ROC signed a Mutual Defense Treaty, which provided protection for Taiwan .
 By 1954 Chiang’s government had completed a successful equitable land reform that transferred ownership to cultivators . The land reform was completed in 1954 .
 Resource-poor Taiwan relied on social and educational reforms to produce a literate citizenry . The country's literacy rate has been at the heart of a literacy crisis in recent years .
 U.S. economic aid helped to reform all aspects of the economy so that an even greater rate of growth became possible when it ended in 1964 .
 Industrial development began with labor-intensive light industries that capitalized on a literate workforce . Industrial development started with labor intensive light industries . Literate industries began in the 1930s and '90s .
 Infrastructure building allowed the economy to shift to heavy, and later high technology, industries . Infrastructure building helped the economy shift towards heavy and technology industries .
 In 1978 the National Assembly elected Chiang Ching-kuo president . He was reelected in 1984 and died in 1989 .
 Chiang Ching-kuo accelerated the rapid economic development of Taiwan . Taiwan is called an economic miracle by the rest of the world .
 He began political reforms that ended martial law, granted freedom of the press, and allowed opposition political parties . He began reforms that end martial law .
 The Chiang ‘dynasty’ ended with Chiang Ching-kuo’s death (he had disavowed succession by his family members), and he was followed by his vice president Lee Teng-hui .
 Lee continued democratization and won two more terms, the second by a universal suffrage vote under an amended constitution . Lee was elected to office in 1946 . Lee continued his democratization .
 Taiwan added to its accomplishments the “political miracle” of a peaceful transformation from one-party rule to multiparty democracy without violence . Taiwan thus added to the accomplishments of the "political miracle" Taiwan .
 With a population of 23 million, it continued to be one of the most advanced and prosperous nations in Asia . The country is one of Asia's most prosperous nations .
 Taiwan's political future remained unclear because of the PRC’s stated goal of national unification, by force if necessary . The PRC's stated goal is to unify Taiwan by force by force .
 Clough, Ralph N. Clough: Reaching across the Taiwan Strait, People-to-People Diplomacy. Reaching Across the Taiwan strait, People to People Diplomacy, is a key part of the U.S. strategy .
 Osama bin Laden was born on March 10, 1957, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia . He was born into a construction dynasty estimated worth $5 billion by the mid-1990s . His family owned a construction empire worth an estimated $5billion .
 When the Soviets invaded Afghanistan in 1979, they began a war in which 1 million people were killed and 5 million were sent into exile . 1 million died and more than 5 million went into exile from Afghanistan .
 During the war, Osama bin Laden lobbied his family and friends to support the mujahideen . He made several trips to Pakistan, where he continued his fundraising work .
 U.S. supported the cause of the mujahideen against the Soviets . During this time the United States also supported the fight against the Soviet-backed regime .
 Reagan administration authorized the CIA to establish training camps for the mujahideen in Afghanistan and Pakistan . King Fahd of Saudi Arabia was asked to match United States contributions .
 King Fahd instructed the minister of intelligence, Turki al-Faisal, to raise money from private sources . Faisal entrusted bin Laden with the task of raising money, knowing of bin Laden's efforts .
 bin Laden helped encourage Arab volunteers to fight in Afghanistan against the Soviets . Besides raising money for the effort, bin Laden also encouraged Arab volunteers in Afghanistan .
 He kept a database of his volunteers; the word database translates to Arabic as al-Qaeda . He kept his volunteers . The word "al-Qaeda" translates to "terrorist" in Arabic .
 When the Soviets left Afghanistan in 1989, the U.S. withdrew its support for the mujahideen . The country was plunged into chaos and civil war .
 When Iraq invaded Kuwait, the U.S. sent thousands of troops into Saudi Arabia . The United States built up as a major military power by the United States against Iran . Saudi Arabia is now a major ally of the Islamic state .
 bin Laden objected to the presence of United States troops on land sacred to Muslims . The U.S.-Saudi alliance was criticized by bin Laden, who objected .
 Fahd convinced King Fahd that he had business to take care of in Pakistan as a means of escaping the country . Eventually found refuge in Sudan with Hasan al-Turabi, the leader of the country’s Islamic Front .
 While in Sudan, bin Laden opposed the presence of U.S. troops in Somalia . Al-Qaeda affiliates in Yemen bombed two hotels housing American troops in transit to Somalia .
 Following an attack by al-Qaeda on the World Trade Center in 1993, the Saudi government froze bin Laden’s assets in the country . The Saudi government stripped bin Laden of his citizenship .
 In 1994, the Taliban (translated as “students”), a small group of graduates from madrassas led by Mullah Muhammad Umar, took control of the city of Kandahar, Afghanistan .
 The Taliban seized leaders of warring factions, and called for the city to disarm . The Taliban were able to seize leaders of factions, calling for disarmament . The city has been declared a state of martial law .
 Fatigued by two years of anarchy, the city willingly agreed to the restoration of order . The city willingly agrees to the return of order after years of unrest .
 The Taliban announced that it was their duty to set up an Islamic society in Afghanistan, and gained popular support . The Taliban has gained support for the Taliban in recent years .
 By 1996 they had taken Kabul and established a government willing to provide sanctuary to Osama bin Laden and to accept his support of their regime . By 1996, the Taliban had established a regime willing to give sanctuary to bin Laden .
 In 2000, bin Laden was linked to the attack on the American guided missile destroyer USS Cole in Aden Harbor, Yemen . On September ii, 2001, al-Qaeda was held responsible by the U.S. for the attacks on the twin towers and Pentagon .
 The Taliban regime fell as a result of the U.S. attacks on Afghanistan on October 10, 2001 . The United States was unable to capture Osama bin Laden or destroy the Taliban . The Taliban was defeated by the United States in 2001 .
 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Brookings Institution Press, 2005; Rashid, Ahmed. Rashid. Ahmed . Rashid . Ahmed Rashid: "I'm not afraid to say yes"
 The rebel group gains much of its internal support from the Tamil agricultural workers and dislocated Tamil youths . Tamil farmers and young Tamil youths support the rebel group .
 Tamil Tiger operations have targeted both military and political objectives since the early 1970s . Tamil Tiger attacks have targeted military, political objectives in the past .
 The United States, the European union, Canada, and India all consider the Tamil Tigers a terrorist organization . The Tamil Tigers are considered a terrorist group by the U.S. and India .
 Under the leadership of its founder, Velupillai Prabhakaran, the LTTE argues that they are freedom fighters . The LTTE says they are fighting for freedom .
 Until the 1970s the Tamils insisted upon autonomy but did not resort to violent methods . The Tamils did not use violent methods until the 1960s . Until the 70s, the Tamilis insisted on autonomy .
 After a long period of attempts to negotiate, Tamils adopted the belief that the Sinhalese-dominated Sri Lankan government was unwilling to negotiate . Tamils have been in dispute with Sri Lanka's government for decades .
 A number of militant organizations were created—including the New Tamil Tigers and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam . Tamil Eeelam is a Tamil state of Tamil Nadu .
 In 1979 the LTTE began a campaign of attacking military targets, including a July 1983 killing of 16 army soldiers that led to the killing of thousands of Tamil civilians . The LTTE has been blamed for the deaths of thousands more Tamil civilians in the past .
 By 1984 the LTTE had begun higher intensity attacks and created a naval unit called the Sea Tigers . The Sea Tigers were the first naval unit to be formed by the LTte .
 In 1987 a special elite unit of LTTE members known as the Black Tigers was formed . The Black Tigers were formed by members of the LTTE .
 The LTTE inexplicably dropped its call for a separate Tamil state in 2001 . By 2001 the LTTE had reduced its demands to regional autonomy . The Tamil separatist group was reduced to a regional autonomy state .
 Norway negotiated a cease-fire, which as of mid-2006 was tenuous at best . The cease-fires were tenuous as of late 2006 .
 In the summer of 2006 calls for a ‘Final War’ for Tamil Eelam independence emerged . Calls for a final war emerged in the summer 2006 .
 The LTTE, in addition to its military activities, provides a host of government services . The country's government is based in Sri Lanka, Sri Lanka and Afghanistan .
 LTTE’s de facto government funds schools, hospitals, police stations, courts, and other municipal services . The LTTE funds schools and hospitals, hospitals and police stations .
 The LTTE also has a political wing, the Tamil National Alliance, but formal attempts have not been made by the LTTE to create political parties . The group has not made formal attempts to create parties .
 External support for the Tamil Tigers has come from a number of Indian regimes . External support has also come from Indian regimes, including those of the Tamil Tamil Tigers .
 LTTE associate’s assassination of Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi led to support for the LTTE . That support ended with the assassination of India's prime minister in 1991 .
 The international arms of the Tamil Tigers, located in London and Paris, have facilitated a number of purchases of weaponry . Tamil Tigers have purchased weapons in the past .
 Funding for activities originates in expatriate Tamil communities in the West . Funding comes from expatriates who live in Tamil communities .
 Fund-raising activities include extortion and illegal trade as well as legitimate business fronts and charities . Other fund-raisers include extortion, illegal trade and extortion .
 Many terror analysts note that part of the Tamil network includes cargo ships . Many analysts say cargo ships are key to the network .
 This has prompted concerns over the use of the fleet in terror operations . The fleet has been used in terror attacks in the past .
 This is because of a rigorous training regime that includes political indoctrination emphasizing the importance of not being captured . This is due to an emphasis on not capturing people, not capturing them .
 Tamil recruits wear a capsule of cyanide around their necks and are encouraged to commit suicide rather than face capture . Tamil recruits typically wear a cyanide capsule around their neck .
 LTTE were one of the first modern terrorist groups to encourage suicide bombings . In addition, the LTTE encouraged suicide bombings in the early years of the terrorist group .
 Much has been written concerning the LTTE practice of recruiting children to fight in the rebellion .
 The rebel organization has participated in both a conventional war and attacks targeting civilians . The rebels have participated in attacks on civilians in the past .
 Tamil Tigers attempted to remove all non-Tamil residents from the Tamil state of Jaffna in 1990 . The Tamil Tigers tried to remove the state of Tamil Nadu from Jaffana in 1990.
 India, Sri Lanka and the Tamil Crisis 1976-1994. Sri Lanka . The Tamil Crisis . 1976- 1994. Sri Lankan crisis . Sri Lanka was the heart of the Tamil crisis .
 The Tashkent Agreement of 1966 brought a temporary end to the 1965 war between India and Pakistan . It was important in regulating negotiations over the disputed territory of Kashmir . The agreement also regulated negotiations over Kashmir .
 The United Nations had organized a ceasefire in 1965 when it became clear that the fighting had the possibility of endangering large population centers . The U.N. had organized the ceasefire in response to the fighting .
 After 17 days of fighting, neither side wished to resume hostilities owing to the vulnerability of their people, the lack of ammunition and supplies . The lack of war goals that could be held could not be held, according to the British government .
 Arms suppliers in the United States and the United Kingdom as well as in China were unwilling to provide more weapons . Arms suppliers are unwilling to give more weapons to the Taliban .
 All parties were amenable to finding a means of diplomatically resolving the confrontation . Consequently, all parties agreed to find a way to resolve the situation .
 Soviet prime minister Alexei Nikolaevich Kosygin invited both sides to a conference at Tashkent in the southern Soviet Uzbek Republic . The Soviet-Uzbek Republic is in the south of the Soviet Union .
 The subsequent agreement was signed by the president of Pakistan, Mohammad Ayub Khan, and the Indian prime minister, Lal Bahadur Shastri, on January 10, 1966 .
 The main provisions included the withdrawal of all troops to their prewar positions, the restoration of diplomatic relations and the promise not to intervene in the internal affairs of the other side .
 The permanent end to war and the renunciation of terrorist activities in Kashmir were not included in the final treaty . Both India and Pakistan suffered from some measure of internal disorder .
 In the case of Pakistan, unrest forced the resignation of Ayub Khan, the head of a military government, in 1969 . Unrest in the country's capital, Islamabad, led to unrest in the early 1960s . In 1969, the government was overthrown by a coup d'
 Shastri was succeeded by Indira Gandhi, whose administration was troubled by right-wing opposition . Meanwhile, the prime minister's government was mired in a series of scandals .
 The two countries were at war again in 1971 as part of the secession of East Bengal from Pakistan and the creation of Bangladesh . Pakistan and Bangladesh fought again in the 1970s and 1971 .
 The Tlatelolco massacre is one of the most important and controversial episodes in Mexican history . Police and army units violently suppressed a demonstration in the heart of Mexico City on October 2, 1968 .
 The government’s version of events differed starkly from those of eyewitnesses and the version that gained currency among much of the populace . The government's version was that of events .
 The government’s mobilization of an antiriot paramilitary squad, the granaderos, in response to street fights between two Mexico City schools in July 1968 . More immediate antecedents include the government's mobilization of a paramilitary squad in 1968 .
 Tensions mounted throughout August as students held huge demonstrations at the UNAM and the National Polytechnic Institute . Tensions rose throughout August and August .
 The events prompted the formation of a National Student Strike Committee . The committee issued a list of demands that included disbandment of the granaderos and release of political prisoners .
 An estimated 500,000 people, mostly students and workers, participated in antigovernment demonstrations in Mexico City’s central square on August 27, to that date . It was the country's single largest mass protest .
 Law enforcement agencies responded with tanks and armored cars, killing at least one student . The incident occurred at a University of Mississippi College in Mississippi .
 In mid-September, President Gustavo Diaz Ordaz ordered 10,000 troops to occupy the UNAM campus . President DiazOrdaz ordered the troops to take over the campus .
 The exact sequence of events on the evening of October 2 in the Plaza de las Tres Culturas (Plaza of the Three Cultures) in the District of Tlatelolco remains disputed . 5,000 to 10,000 protesters had gathered, according to reports .
 The next day the government claimed that terrorists had opened fire on the police from a nearby building and that police had responded to the unprovoked attack . The government claimed the attack had been an act of terrorism .
 Eyewitnesses recalled with near unanimity that police and army units had instigated the violence . Police and soldiers dropped flares from helicopters before spraying machine-gun and small-arms fire indiscriminately into the crowd .
 Ecker, Ronald L “The Tlatelolco Massacre in Mexico” www.hobrad.com/massacre.htm (cited February 2007) Poniatowska, Elena. Poniatowski, Elena . Poniatowkska .
 Pierre Teilhard de Chardin was one of the most eloquent 20th-century voices for religion in an increasingly secular world . He was a scientist, mystic, writer and mystic .
 Jesuit priest tried to synthesize evolutionary science with the incarnation of Christ . As a distinguished paleontologist and a Jesuit priest, he was a scientist and priest .
 His ideas were new, speculative, and bold enough to figure into deliberations as diverse as the founding of the United Nations and the formulation of several Vatican Council documents . His ideas figured into deliberations such as founding of U.N. and Vatican Council papers .
 He was born in France into a devout Catholic family of 11 children in 1881 . He was the only son of a French aristocratic family .
 His father was an intellectual and a farmer, and his mother was a great-grandniece of Voltaire . His father and mother were both intellectuals and farmers .
 Teilhard’s father provided his son with a keen interest in science, and his mother an inclination toward mysticism . TeilHard's father provided him with an interest in the sciences .
 He received a top-notch Jesuit education and entered their novitiate program by 1899 . He entered the Jes Jesuits' novitate program in 1899 .
 By 1911 he was ordained a priest after doing assignments in England and Egypt . He was ordained in 1911 .
 World War I interrupted further studies in geology, and he saw action on the front lines .
 His close calls with death prompted him to consider a more speculative approach to science . He says he has had close encounters with death that inspired him to become a scientist .
 After the war he brilliantly defended his doctorate at the Sorbonne in 1922 . He defended his PhD in 1922 in a brilliant defence of his thesis .
 He was the chair of the geology department at the Institut Catholique . Soon thereafter he accepted the position of geology chair .
 The resulting controversy cost him his license at the Institut and forced him abroad to do his research and study . From this platform he began to publicize ideas about the synthesis of science and religion .
 For almost the rest of his career he lived abroad, almost as in a self-imposed exile . He lived abroad as well as his career as a member of the world's top tennis team .
 He helped discover the skull of Peking Man in China . Most of his time in China was spent working with the Chinese Geological Survey .
 He wrote important books, The Divine Milieu and The Human Phenomenon, during these years . He wrote his important books during this period .
 For one brief time after World War II he returned to France, but the Jesuits refused to allow him to take an academic position . The Jesuits were afraid he would receive critical scrutiny .
 Lonely and suffering, he died on Easter Sunday, 1955, and is buried in a Jesuit cemetery there .
 From a scientific point of view, it is difficult to establish the methodology and provability of Teilhard’s ideas, says Dr. Teil Hard . Hard's ideas are not provable .
 He has clearly advanced the fields of geology, stratigraphy, and paleontology, with a supreme competence in the areas of China and the Far East .
 His interest was in “anthropogenesis,” a new study focusing on the evolutionary position of humanity . However, his dominant interest and the source of his infamy was in "anthropogenesis"
 He proposed that evolution had entered a new phase with the emergence of humanity, whereby complexity and consciousness converged and spiritualized evolution . Evolution has entered a different phase with humanity, he said .
 The final development of humanity he termed the “Omega Point,” he said . He connected this perfection with Christ, and connected it with perfection with perfection .
 In 1962 the Catholic Church issued a warning against the uncritical acceptance of Teilhard’s theories . The Catholic Church did not question his scientific contributions or his integrity of faith .
 The best way of categorizing his unsystematized though eloquent speculation is as process theology, or perhaps even as a form of Christian pantheism . The best one way to categorize process theology is to consider process theology .
 Mother Teresa was born on August 26, 1910, in Skopje, Albania . Mother Teresa of Calcutta was born in 1910 .
 The youngest of the children of Nikola and Dran Bojaxhiu, she was baptized Gonxha Agnes . She was the youngest of three children born in the family . She is the daughter of Nikola, Dran Dran, and was baptised in 2000 .
 Gonxha joined the Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary (Sisters of Loretto) in Ireland at 18 . At 18, desiring to become a missionary, she joined the institute of the sisters .
 In December she departed for India, arriving in Calcutta on January 6, 1929 . She arrived in January 1929 .
 After making her first profession of vows in May 1931, Sister Teresa was assigned to the Loretto Entally community in Calcutta .
 Mother Teresa said she experienced a divine love for souls, a force within her that motivated her for the rest of her life . On September 10, 1946, during the train ride from Calcutta to Darjeeling for her annual retreat, Mother Teresa says she experienced the divine love .
 She felt called to establish a religious community dedicated to the service of the poorest of the poor . The Missionaries of Charity sisters are dedicated to helping the poorest .
 Nearly two years passed in discernment before Mother Teresa received permission to begin . Mother Teresa had to wait two years to receive permission to start her work .
 On August 17, 1948, she dressed for the first time in a white, blue-bordered sari . She left Loretto to enter the world of the poor . The sari is one of the world's most famous women .
 On October 7, 1950, the new congregation of the Missionaries of Charity was officially established in Calcutta, India . The new congregation was established by the missionaries of the missionaries .
 By the early 1960s Mother Teresa began to send her sisters to other parts of India . Mother Teresa's sisters were sent to India in the 1960s .
 Foundation was set up in Rome and Tanzania and spread to every continent . It was soon followed by foundations in Rome, Tanzania and Rome and eventually, on every continent.
 During the years of rapid growth the world began to focus its attention on Mother Teresa . Mother Teresa was the focus of the world's attention during her time as a child .
 Her humble stature and effective work attracted the attention of many intellectuals and celebrities, many of whom were touched by her spirit . She was touched by many, including celebrities and intellectuals .
 Mother Teresa’s life bore witness to the joy of loving, the dignity of every human person, the value of little things done faithfully, and the surpassing worth of faith in God .
 Her interior life was marked by a painful experience of feeling separated from God . But only after her death was it revealed that she had an interior life marked by painful feelings .
 At times she grappled with profound doubts and fears about her work and her faith . She grapples with profound fears about the work and the faith .
 Despite increasingly severe health problems, she continued to govern her society of sisters . She continued to respond to the needs of the poor and the church .
 In March 1997 she handed on her duties as superior to a newly elected successor . She handed on duties in March 1997 .
 She was given a state funeral by the government of India . Her body was buried in the headquarters of her order .
 Pope John Paul II permitted official discussions about Mother Teresa's canonization as a saint to begin . Less than two years later, in view of Mother Teresa’s widespread reputation of holiness and miracles reported as connected to her intercession .
 On October 19, 2003, he beatified Mother Teresa before a crowd of at least 300,000 . He beatified her in a Catholic ceremony in front of a crowd .
 Terrorism is attacks on civilians and noncombatants for political purposes . Terrorism has an ancient history . Brian Kolodiejchuk: Terrorism has a long history .
 The Assassins, a Shi’i sect of Islam, killed Muslims who disagreed with their practices in the 11th century . Hindu Thugees in India killed innocents as part of ritualistic practices from the 7th to the 19th century.
 From the 18th to the late 20th century, most terrorists were motivated by nationalist or political causes . Most terrorists are motivated by nationalists and political causes, including terrorism .
 Contemporary terrorism is systematic, political, conveys a message, and generates fear . Contemporary terrorism has been systematic and political, it has been said .
 Terrorism may be committed by a state or by individual groups, although some dispute the use of the term for governmental actions . Terrorism is committed by individuals or by groups .
 In English the term terrorism derives from the French revolutionary reign of terror under Maximilien Robespierre, when thousands were sent to their deaths, often at the guillotine, in 1793-94 . Thousands of people were killed at the hands of the French revolutionaries .
 Nonstate groups often adopted terrorist tactics to achieve political goals . After World War II nonstate groups used terrorist tactics for political purposes .
 Terrorism was usually the tactic of the weak and disaffected who lacked access to or possession of high technology and sophisticated weapons of war . Terrorism is usually the tactics of the . weak and . disaffected .
 In the modern era, the media and instant communications provided terrorists with ready platforms to publicize their programs and grievances . Terrorists have a ready platform for publicizing their programs, the author says .
 Publicity on a global scale permitted terrorists to have a psychological impact far beyond single deeds, thereby greatly magnifying their effects . Publicity has been allowed to have an impact on the psychological impact beyond deeds, says the author .
 Third World liberation movements sometimes adopted terrorist tactics by attacking civilians as well as colonial armed forces to achieve national independence .
 Third World leaders often argued that these tactics were no less ‘terrifying’ or horrific than the bombing of villages, the use of napalm, or the imprisonment of thousands in concentration camps .
 The Pentagon in Washington, D.C., was damaged by a terrorist attack on September 11, 2001, concurrently with attacks on the World Trade Center using hijacked airliners filled with passengers . However, governments tended to the Pentagon after the attacks .
 Leftist groups responsible for numerous terrorist attacks in Europe . During the 1960s-70s leftist groups were responsible for many terrorist attacks . Leftist terrorist groups were behind numerous attacks on Europe .
 The Baader Meinhof Gang bombed U.S. military installations and police stations . It attempted to assassinate Alexander Haig, the supreme Allied commander of NATO, as well .
 The Meinhof Gang’s attacks ended in the 1990s . After most of their leaders had been imprisoned or had died, most of them had been killed or imprisoned .
 The communist Italian Red Brigades also kidnapped and killed leading establishment figures . The Italian government was overthrown by the Red Brigade .
 Provisional Irish Republican Army planted bombs in shopping malls and killed Lord Louis Mountbatten and Margaret Thatcher . The IRA narrowly missed killing British prime minister Margaret Thatcher in 1981 .
 The nationalist Basque party attacked Spanish leaders and placed bombs at targets with heavy civilian use . Similarly, the nationalist Basques party attacked Spain's political leaders .
 In the Middle East small Palestinian Marxist-Leninist groups skyjacked civilian airliners in dramatic and well-publicized attacks . The attacks brought world attention to the Palestinian national cause . In the past, the attacks were carried out by small Palestinian groups .
 The Palestine Liberation Organization also launched terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians as well as the military . The PLO launched attacks on Israeli civilians and the military in the past .
 At the 1972 Munich Olympic Games, Palestinians attacked and killed Israeli athletes . Palestinians attacked Israeli athletes at the 1972 Olympic Games .
 Israel retaliated by killing Palestinian leaders in Beirut and Europe . Israel responded by killing Palestinians in Beirut, killing them in Europe .
 In Asia the nationalist Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka attacked civilians, and the Japanese Red Army launched attacks in Europe and elsewhere . In Asia, the nationalists and leftist groups attacked civilians in Asia .
 In 1995 the group Aum Shinrikyo released the poison gas sarin in the Tokyo subway . In 1995 sarin was released by the group in a Tokyo subway subway .
 Terrorism escalated throughout much of South America and Latin America in the 1970s-80s . Terrorism escalated in much of the region in the 70s and 80s .
 Argentina military junta and right-wing death squads terrorized and killed opponents during the 1970s . Argentina's government was overthrown by the junta during the military's dictatorship .
 In Chile General Augusto Pinochet’s regime tortured and ‘disappeared’ opponents . Pinochet's regime was known for its brutality, including torture .
 The Pinochet regime was also implicated in the car bombing assassinations of a Chilean diplomat and Pinochet opponent, Orlando Letelier, and a U.S. colleague in Washington, D.C., in 1976 .
 During the same period, the Shining Path terrorized villagers and political leaders in Peru, while narco-terrorism by criminal drug cartels killed judges, police, and others in Colombia . The Shining Path also terrorized Peruvian villagers .
 Leftwing guerrilla forces and right-wing death squads killed thousands of civilians as well as religious and nongovernmental volunteers from the international community in El Salvador .
 The government in Guatemala used terrorism to repress its Amerindian population . The government used terrorism in Guatemala to try and repress Amerindians .
 From the 1960s onward a wide variety of political groups opposing the Vietnam War and the conservative establishment or struggling for civil rights in the United States adopted terrorist tactics .
 Weathermen and other groups kidnapped high-profile individuals, bombed military and research installations, and sometimes killed law enforcement officers . The Weathermen are known for kidnappings, bombings, kidnappings and bombings .
 There was a revival of religiously motivated terrorism beginning in the later part of the 20th century . There has been a revival in religiously motivated terrorist terrorism .
 Clashes among Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs in India proliferated in the past .
 Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was killed by her Sikh bodyguard, and the Mumbai stock exchange was bombed . Indira's Sikh bodyguards shot her in the head, killing her and bombing Mumbai .
 The 1979 Islamic Revolution in Iran provided the impetus and support for numerous Islamist groups in the Middle East . Hizbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in the occupied Palestinian territories of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank .
 Both of these groups used suicide bombers in an attempt to achieve their goals . Both of the groups have been involved in suicide bombings .
 Many disillusioned Muslim young people around the world joined Islamist organizations that used encouraged jibadis to use terrorism to oust corrupt regimes . When their governments failed to provide the means for legitimate political dissent or jobs, many joined Islamist groups .
 Many Islamic groups were hostile to the West, particularly the U.S., particularly the United States . The United States is a major ally of the Islamic world .
 Much of their anger was fueled by the spread of Western culture, which threatened or undermined old traditions and practices . Much of them were angry at Western culture which they say is threatening or undermining traditions .
 Many young jihadis gained military training and experience fighting with the Taliban and other Islamic mujahideen groups against the Soviet occupation in Afghanistan in the 1980s . The Taliban and the Taliban were among those fighting in Afghanistan against Soviet occupation .
 After the Soviet defeat in Afghanistan, the Taliban managed to wrest power from its rivals and established an extreme theocracy . The Taliban is now the Taliban government of Afghanistan, which is based in Afghanistan .
 Mullah Omar provided a safe haven for one of the most extreme Islamic groups, al-Qaeda, which was led by a disaffected Saudi Arabian, Osama bin Laden . Mullah had been a key figure in the Islamic State of Islam .
 In 1998 bin Laden issued a fatwa (religious proclamation) urging jihad against the United States . The fatwa was issued by bin Laden in 1998 . He has been in the Middle East since then .
 These were the most devastating terror attacks that the U.S. had ever experienced on its home territory . The United States was devastated by the 9/11 attacks in Afghanistan .
 The U.S. and coalition forces successfully overthrew the pro-al-Qaeda Taliban regime in Afghanistan . However they failed to destroy either the Taliban or alQaeda .
 Osama bin Laden managed to escape and continued to orchestrate terror attacks against U.S. forces and supporters . He was captured in 1998 but was killed by the United States in 1998 .
 These included suicide bomb attacks on trains in Madrid, Spain, and the transit system in London, England, in the past .
 Gerges, Fawaz A The Far Enemy: Why Jihad Went Global. Ballantine, 1996; Gerges: Jihad went global . Gerges' book, "The Far Enemy," was published by Gerges in 1996 .
 She rejected the ‘consensus’ politics that had characterized Britain since World War II . In favor of polarizing “conviction” politics, she rejected “consensus politics” in favor of ‘conviction .
 Thatcher fought for Britain within and sometimes against the European Union . Strongly nationalistic, Thatcher fought against the EU in the 1980s and 1990s .
 She was lucky to have the opportunity to fight a short, successful, and very popular war with distant Argentina . Argentina's brutal military dictatorship had seized the Falkland Islands .
 Proposal for the nationalization of major industries disappeared from the debate over public policy . Except for those from a few stubborn socialists, proposals for nationalization were ignored .
 It was a rebellion among her nominal supporters that ended her political career . Her political career was cut short after she was defeated by a rebellion .
 Intelligence and hard work, not family connections, explain Thatcher’s rise to power . Intelligence and work not family ties, says Thatcher . Thatcher's rise was the result of hard work and intelligence, not connections .
 Thatcher was born Margaret Hilda Roberts on October 13, 1925, in Grantham, a small town in eastern England . She was born in 1925 . Thatcher was the first woman to be elected to Downing Street .
 Her father served for many years on the city council and at one point held the title of mayor . Active in civic affairs, her father served as mayor of the city .
 Already politically minded, she was elected president of Oxford’s student Conservative organization in 1946, the year after Labour had crushed her party in the general election that followed the defeat of Nazi Germany .
 In addition, she stood for Parliament, always for seats that were hopeless for her party . In addition to being a member of Parliament, she also stood for seats in hopelessly defeated seats .
 During her political campaigns she met Dennis Thatcher, a wealthy businessman, whom she married in 1951 . She met him during her campaigns and he was a successful businessman .
 Thatcher was in her mid-30s when she was elected to the House of Commons in 1959 . She was in the safe Conservative seat of Finchley in north London . Thatcher was the first woman to win a seat in the Commons since 1964 .
 She was appointed to a junior position in the Harold Macmillan government . Two years later she was appointed as parliamentary secretary at the ministry of pensions and national service . She was also appointed as a parliamentary secretary for the government in 1964 .
 Heath’s failure to stand up to the trade unions cost him the support of many Conservatives . Heath was defeated in two 1974 general elections in 1974 and 1975 .
 His principal colleagues were reluctant to challenge him . Despite his weakness, he was not challenged .
 Thatcher won the general election four years later, and Thatcher became prime minister . Four years later she became the prime minister, Thatcher became the UK's first female prime minister.
 She acknowledged that many of her ideas came from an older Conservative politician, Sir Keith Joseph . She said many of the ideas she was inspired came from a Tory politician .
 She cut government spending, with higher education suffering particularly hard . Higher education was particularly hard hit .
 She increased interest rates and sales taxes and eventually income taxes too . She increased income taxes and interest rates in the 1990s .
 It took years for this bitter medicine to cure runaway inflation, but it did . The bitter medicine was a bitter medicine, and it took years to cure inflation .
 Some members of Thatcher’s own party thought that the human cost of her policies was unacceptable . Thatcher's own party members thought that her policies were unacceptable .
 Thatcher wanted to encourage individualism and discourage reliance on the state . Convinced that the welfare state had ruined Britain, Thatcher wanted individualism .
 She made it easy for tenants in council houses to buy their homes . Consequently, she made it easier for tenants to buy a home .
 Thatcher regarded nationalized industries as a deadweight handicapping the British economy . Thatcher was committed to competition and capitalism, Thatcher regarded the nationalized industry as a handicaping economy .
 In the early 1980s she sold off parts of the state’s array of industries, such as the railroad hotels, but it was not until the mid-1980s that privatization became dramatic .
 Thatcher sold the telephone system, the gas industry, the principal automobile and truck manufacturers, the steel industry, and water companies . Thatcher sold many of the country's major industries, including the telephone, gas and truck makers .
 Thatcher worried that the power of Britain’s militant trade unions crippled the economy . Thatcher was worried that it would cripple the economy in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In 1984 Parliament enacted legislation that required a majority vote by secret ballot for a legal strike . The law was enacted by Parliament in 1984 and required a secret ballot vote for a strike .
 In the same year, the leader of the coal miners challenged the management of one of the last nationalized industries . The leader of coal miners challenges the management .
 As a result of competition from oil and natural gas, the coal mining industry soon shrank to almost nothing . Coal mining is now almost extinct in the United States .
 Thatcher did not care how many people she alienated or how many she alienated . Thatcher was known for her decisiveness and rarely conciliatory .
 Victory over Argentina in the Falklands War was perhaps her only success that nearly everybody applauded . The Falklands was perhaps the only success she had in the war .
 She refused any compromise when members of the Irish Republican Army, imprisoned in Ulster, started a hunger strike to be recognized as political prisoners . She refused to compromise on the issue .
 Labour controlled many local councils, including that of greater London . Labour controlled most of London's councils, with the exception of London .
 Thatcher considered their spending profligate, so she had Parliament abolish them . Thatcher considered them to be 'profoundly' and 'prostitute' councils .
 She was suspicious of the trend toward economic and political centralization within the EU . Protective of British sovereignty, she was suspicious .
 In contrast to her ambivalence toward Europe, she was a staunch ally of the U.S. She was an outspoken critic of the EU .
 Thatcher did not share Reagan’s concern for moral issues in politics . Thatcher and Reagan were much alike in their economic and foreign policies .
 Thatcher’s relationship with the U.S. was, in part, the result of political realism . Thatcher was a strong ally of the United States during her time in the UK . Thatcher's relationship with America was a result of realism .
 Her realism also showed in her conciliatory relationship with Mikhail Gorbachev, the last ruler of the Soviet Union . Her realism showed in the realism of her relationship with the former Soviet leader .
 She recognized the importance of the reforms that he advocated in changing the nature of communism in his powerful country .
 In her biggest mistake, she proposed a reform of local government finance widely denounced as an unfair poll tax .
 Nearly all households would pay more than they had in the past . Except for the well-off, nearly all households will pay more in the next round .
 Perhaps because she was preparing for war against Iraq in alliance with the United States, that she paid insufficient attention to the political situation at home . Thatcher paid too much attention .
 She erred by making provocatively anti-EU remarks that caused her foreign secretary to resign . She also erred in making provocative comments that caused the foreign secretary's resignation .
 One of her old enemies, a former defense secretary, challenged Thatcher for the party leadership in late 1990s . Thatcher's old enemies challenged her for the leadership of the Conservative Party in 1990 .
 When she failed to win on the first ballot, she withdrew and threw her support to one of her loyalists, John Major . She withdrew from the Labour Party after failing to win a seat on the Commons .
 She interfered too much, undermining the new prime minister’s authority, she said . Calling herself a “good back-seat driver,” she interfered too little, she called herself “a good back seat driver .
 In retirement Thatcher took a nonhereditary peerage that made her a member of the House of Lords . Thatcher is now a British Prime Minister and a British citizen .
 She outraged public opinion by visiting former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet while he was under house arrest in Britain . Pinochet died in August 1998 at the age of 80 .
 Most believed that he was guilty of torturing and murdering opponents in his home country . Most people believed he tortured and murdered opponents .
 By the first years of the 21st century, Thatcher’s physical and mental health began to fail . By the end of the 20th century, the health of the former PM began to deteriorate .
 Her husband died in 2003, and her children sometimes proved to be an embarrassment . Her children were sometimes an embarrassment, but she was never embarrassed .
 Her son, Mark, became involved in an abortive coup against an African government . Her son Mark, also involved in a coup, was involved in the coup .
 Her daughter, Carol, appeared on a widely viewed and undignified ‘reality’ television program . Carol's daughter appeared on the program, which was widely viewed .
 Thatcher suffered from a form of dementia that destroyed her short-term memory, Thatcher said . Thatcher was diagnosed with dementia in the 1970s and 'wasn't able to cope with it'
 In the cold war construct the First World was dominated by the United States . Western Europe, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan .
 These nations were wealthy, highly industrialized and urban, urban, largely secular, democratic, and had capitalist economies . They were largely secular and democratic, with many of the world's largest cities .
 The Second World consisted of the Soviet bloc, dominated by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union dominated the world during the Second World .
 These nations were industrialized but not as wealthy as the First World; they were secular, authoritarian, and had socialist economics . They were secular and authoritarian, with socialist economics and secularism .
 Third World nations, consisting of two-thirds of the world’s population, were poor, rural, and agrarian, with traditional societies . The Third World was poor and rural, rural .
 Most of the nations of the Third World were south of the equator . The term Global South came to be used as a collective label for these nations . After the breakup of the Soviet bloc and the collapse of Soviet Union, the terms no longer applied .
 Third World countries caught in a cycle of poverty, with low incomes and low production . Third World nations caught in cycles of poverty with low production and low incomes .
 After independence many became dictatorships and attempted to improve their economies . They attempted to adopt socialist systems on the Soviet state capitalist model .
 Economists often referred to the poor developing nations as low-GDP countries, meaning they produced little in the way of goods and services . The poor developing countries are often known as low GDP countries .
 Countries in the Global South adopted a wide variety of methods to break out of the cycle of poverty . Countries adopt a variety of ways to escape poverty in the global South .
 In China Mao Zedong led a socialist revolution and mobilized the masses, but only with privatization after his death did the Chinese economy begin to take off . In China, privatization was privatized after the death of the Chinese leader .
 At the beginning of the 20th century, India suffered major famines but by the end of the century it was exporting foodstuffs . By the end the century, the country was exporting its own foodstuff .
 In Southeast Asia educated workers became the backbone of industrialization and the development of high-tech firms . Educated workers are now a key part of the region's industrialization process .
 Other nations built huge development projects, such as the Aswan Dam in Egypt and the Three Gorges Dam in China . Other nations also built huge projects, including the Three-Gorges dam in China and Egypt .
 Following Western advice in the 1950s and 1960s, many Third World nations concentrated on industrialization, to the detriment of the agricultural sector . The agricultural sector is now a major source of income in the world .
 Climate change, droughts, civil wars, political corruption, and instability contributed to large famines and mass starvation in many African nations . Many African nations have been hit hard by drought, civil war and political instability .
 Middle East oil-producing nations joined a cartel, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries . Oil-producing countries joined the cartel to gain increased revenues from their major resource . The cartel is based in the Middle East .
 Kuwait was able to provide a complete welfare system from cradle to grave for its small population . Kuwait's welfare system was built up from the start of the country's history .
 Other countries, such as the ‘little dragons’ in Southeast Asia, attracted foreign businesses and industries . Other countries such as Thailand attracted foreign business and industries.
 Many nations in South America and Africa borrowed vast amounts of money from private and public Western banks, such as the World Bank, to bring much-needed capital into their countries .
 Nongovernmental organizations also provided assistance in welfare, food, education, and healthcare .
 Brazil used foreign loans to create new industries and provide jobs . But it became ensnared in a web of indebtedness that was impossible to repay . Brazil's economy has been hit hard by foreign loans .
 By the 1990s rich nations promised but often failed to deliver increased foreign aid and to forgive or restructure the debts of these nations, especially the poorest in Africa . The poor in Africa are often left in debt, especially by the poor .
 Other nations had some modest successes in adopting appropriate technology to establish small, inexpensive grassroots projects .
 In Kenya the population doubled every 18 years and in Egypt every 26 years, compared to every 92 in the U.S. In Egypt the population doubles every 26 . In the United States, the population has doubled every 92 years .
 By 2000 the world’s population had exceeded 6 billion, from 1 billion in 1800 to 6 billion . By 2000, the population of the world had exceeded 1 billion . In 1800 the population in the world was 1 billion, and by 2000 it had reached 6 billion people .
 In poor countries high infant mortality contributed to the desire to have many children in hopes that at least some would survive to adulthood and be able to care for their parents, especially their mothers, in their old age .
 To limit its population China adopted a draconian one-child policy . China strictly enforced it through its totalitarian system . The policy was meant to limit population growth .
 India adopted numerous approaches in attempts to limit population growth . Urban elites were often accepted by urban elites, but peasants continued to value large families .
 In societies where women had low status, having children, especially boys, brought status . Having children brought status and the hope of some security, especially in societies where low status .
 The educational status of many countries improved, and literacy rates improved . In many countries boys enjoyed higher rates of education than girls, although in many countries .
 While programs to empower women were often successful, they were also resisted by traditional and religious leaders . The programs were often unsuccessful .
 Globalization and privatization in the late 20th century actually caused some nations to become poorer as prices for agricultural goods and raw materials dropped . Globalization caused some countries to be poorer .
 In some Global South nations, a few people became millionaires, but most remained desperately poor . In India, many became millionaires but most remain desperately poor, says CNN.com.com .
 In Zimbabwe, life expectancy fell from 56 to 331, compared to over 80 in the United States and Japan . In the 1990s, incomes in 54 nations actually declined, and in Zimbabwe life expectancy was 56 . Life expectancy in Zimbabwe fell to 331 in 1990s .
 Disease, especially AIDS, contributed to further economic and social problems, particularly in many southern African countries, especially in southern Africa . Disease and AIDS contributed to poverty in many African countries .
 At the 2000 Millennium Summit, world leaders agreed to institute programs aimed at cutting in half the number of people living on under $1 a day . World leaders also agreed to cut in half of people suffering from hunger by 2015 by halving it by 2015 .
 Five years later the commitments of the donor nations, especially the United States, had fallen short of the promises made . It remained uncertain whether the goals would be met .
 Another large protest was held there in April 1976 by supporters of the former premier Zhou Enlai, who had recently died .
 Hu Yaobang had been made a scapegoat for government failures in 1987 . Some of the students felt that he was made a victim of government failures . Some felt he had made the government scapegoat in 1987.
 By April 18, some 10,000 students were in Tiananmen Square taking part in protests . The protests were in front of the Zhongnanhai, the seat of the government .
 On May 4 some 100,000 students and workers marched through Beijing . They demanded a formal dialogue between the student leaders and the government . The government rejected the demands, which the government rejected .
 The protest reached its first peak on May 13, just before the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev came to visit Beijing . The protest was held in protest against the government of Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 Some of the protestors urged for the reforms that Gorbachev had introduced in the Soviet Union and saw him as a possible ally, but he refused to become involved in the protests . Some protestors urged the reforms to be implemented, but the protests were largely unsuccessful .
 On May 30 a statue that became known as the ‘Goddess of Democracy’ was erected in the square . However, the demonstrations continued, and a statue was erected on May 30 .
 Protests and strikes started taking place in factories and in other parts of China . It was not long after that protests and strikes began in factories across China .
 On May 27 some 300,000 people gathered in Hong Kong to protest in support of the students in Beijing . The students are students from China and Hong Kong universities .
 Premier Li Peng urged for a hardline stance, supported by President Yang Shangkun . Zhao Ziyang still urging for a moderate approach . Premier Li Pian urged for hardline approach .
 Yang Shangkun’s presidency was a largely ceremonial role, but it did, however, mean that he was the commander in chief of the armed forces . Although his presidency was largely ceremonial, it was also a largely military post .
 Martial law had been declared on May 20, and soldiers rushed to Beijing late in the evening of June 3 . Martial law was declared in May 20 and troops were deployed to Beijing .
 Tanks entered the square, and the accompanying soldiers cleared the square of demonstrators by the early morning . The square was cleared by the morning of Monday morning .
 On June 5, a lone protestor stood in front of tanks advancing on the square, and the tank stopped and tried to drive around him . The photo was taken by Jeff Widener, a famous photo of a lone protester .
 The lone demonstrator, never identified, was pulled into the crowd . He was pulled from the crowd by police .
 Nobody knows how many were killed in Tiananmen Square on those two days in June and in the subsequent crackdown around the country .
 Craig J Calhoun, Craig J Neither Gods Nor Emperors: Students and the Struggle for Democracy in China . Calhoun: Students are students and the struggle for democracy in China. Neither Gods nor Emperors are Emperors .
 Tibet’s political ties with China began in the seventh century . Tibet has a long history of political ties to China .
 It was annexed into the Yuan dynasty by Kublai Khan and came under tight Mongol control in the 13th century . It was under tight control under the Mongol rule of the Yuan Dynasty .
 China conferred titles on local Tibetan leaders but exercised only loose supervision over them . Under the subsequent Ming dynasty, China exercised only loosely supervision of Tibetan leaders .
 Qing dynasty exerted considerable control over Tibet during its prime . Qing dynasty stationed imperial commissioners and garrisons in its major centers .
 Qing rulers honored Tibet's spiritual leaders the Dalai and Panchen Lamas . Qing rulers also honored Tibet’s spiritual leaders, the Dalai .
 Tibet became a pawn in international politics in the late 19th century; with the Qing dynasty in decline both Great Britain and Russia became interested in controlling Tibet and interfered in its internal politics . Neither China nor Tibetans could resist .
 Weak Chinese central governments in the republican period were too beset by other problems to deal effectively with Tibet, which enjoyed autonomy . Weak central governments were not able to deal with Tibet .
 An important goal of the People’s Republic of China was to assert control over Tibet . Tibet was an important part of the Chinese government .
 The Panchen Lama, the second leader of Tibet who was headquartered in Tashilhumpo, accepted Chinese sovereignty . He was the second Tibetan leader to accept China's sovereignty .
 Dalai Lama’s government in Lhasa vainly tried to obtain international assistance in resisting China in 1950 . The Dalai Lama tried to get international assistance to resist China in the 1950s .
 Tibetans were allowed to maintain their traditional religious and political . and economic . systems under Chinese control .
 The Chinese Communists looked at the traditional Tibetan Buddhist society, the theocratic government, and the landed estate system with extreme distaste . The Communists began a program to dismantle both .
 By 1957 armed resistance had begun in eastern Tibet that culminated in an uprising in Lhasa against the Chinese government in 1959 . In 1959, the uprising against China's government in Tibet was the first Tibetan uprising in Tibet .
 Dalai Lama and his advisers fled Lhasa in disguise in March 1959 and headed for the Indian border . Realizing that the revolt was suicidal and fearing that he would be captured by the Chinese, the Dalai Lama fled in disguise . The Dalai Lama is believed to be the only Tibetan leader
 After putting down the revolt, China implemented a program that brought Tibet more in line with the rest of the country . China implemented the program after putting down a revolt .
 Chinese-Indian relations, warm after the establishment of the People’s Republic, had become antagonistic by 1959, partly over Tibet .
 In April the Dalai Lama and his party crossed into India and were granted political asylum . The Dalai Lama was granted asylum in April by India .
 Indian government also gave political asylum to 13,000 Tibetan refugees . Dalai Lama established a government in exile in Dharmasala, a Himalayan town near the Chinese border . The Dalai Lama is now living in exile .
 The acts further soured Chinese-Indian relations and exacerbated a border dispute that culminated in a border war in 1962 . These acts soured China-India relations and soured relations .
 Minority Nationalities and National Integration in the People’s Republic of China in China . Ethnic minorities and nationalities are being integrated in the country .
 Josip Broz was born on May 7, 1892, and died on May 4, 1980 . Jiu-Hwa Lo Upshur Tito was born in 1892 . He was the Marshal Yugoslav leader of Yugoslavia .
 His life was caught up in some of the most momentous events of the 20th century . His life caught up with the most significant events of that century .
 He fought in World War I, took part in the Russian Revolution, became a leader of guerrilla resistance to the German occupation of Yugoslavia . After World War II until his death he was the leader of the country . He was also a member of the Communist Party in Yugoslavia .
 During this period, he defied Joseph Stalin over the communist consolidation of power in Yugoslavia . He defied Stalin's attempts to consolidate power in the country .
 Tito Tito was born in the village of Kumroves, some 50 kilometers northwest of Zagreb in what was then Austria-Hungary . Tito is one of the world's most famous Croatian presidents .
 His native village is located in the valley of the river Sutla, which served as a boundary between Croatia and Slovenia . The Sutla was the borderline between Croatia, Slovenia and Slovenia, which is now Croatia .
 Tito's father was a Croatian peasant, and his mother was Slovenian from a village across the river . Tito’s father was Croatian peasant and Slovenian peasant, .
 In 1907, at the age of 15, he left home and went to the town of Sisak (Croatia), where he became an apprentice to a locksmith . In 1907 he left his home to become an apprentice and worked as an apprentice in the town .
 Tito completed his apprenticeship in 1910 and began a series of mechanic jobs, which took him to factories across central Europe . Tito was born Tito in 1913 and died in 1945 .
 In the autumn of 1913 Tito was called up for his military service with the 25th Croatian Territorial Infantry Regiment based in Zagreb . Tito served in the army in the early years of his career .
 Tito, already a sergeant, was sent to fight on the Serbian front in July 1914 . Tito was a sergeant when Austria-Hungary attacked Serbia in July .
 In January 1915 his regiment was transferred to Galicia in anticipation of a Russian offensive . He was the last member of his regiment to die in France .
 Tito Tito was put in charge of a reconnoitering section operating behind enemy lines . Tito served in the Second World War as a member of the Communist Party .
 Tito began sympathizing with the ideas of Bolshevism in the 1930s . Tito was a member of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia . He later became a leader of Yugoslavia's anti-war movement .
 In June 1917 he escaped from the POW camp and made his way to Petrograd in search of work . But the suppression of Bolshevik demonstrations forced him to flee to Finland . He escaped in June 1917 .
 While attempting to cross the border he was captured and sent back to the POW camp . But he escaped on the way and arrived in Bolshevik-controlled Omsk in Siberia in autumn 1917 .
 When the Bolsheviks retook Omsk in 1919, he started making his way back to Croatia . When the war broke out, he was forced to return to his homeland .
 His activities brought him to the attention of the police, and in August 1928 he was arrested . He was arrested for his activities in 1928 .
 In February 1935 he was sent to Moscow for training with the Balkan Department of the Comintern . He was trained in the Balkans and was sent back to Moscow .
 He stayed there until September 1936, when he was sent back to consolidate the Yugoslav party and recruit volunteers to fight in the Spanish civil war . He stayed in Yugoslavia until the end of the war and was sent to Spain to recruit volunteers .
 Tito was officially confirmed as a secretary at a party congress in October 1940 . Moscow offered him provisional approval in the beginning of 1939, and Tito became a party secretary in 1940 .
 Axis powers invaded, occupied, and partitioned Yugoslavia in 1941 . Civil war in Yugoslavia triggered by the invasion triggered a civil war in the country . Axis forces invaded Yugoslavia in April 1941 .
 Tito’s partisans turned against rival guerrilla organizations, including the internationally recognized ‘Chetniks” of Draza Mihailovic . In the process Tito's partisans also turned against rivals, in particular the “Chetnks’ of
 Tito and his partisans emerged victorious from the war, and, despite his promises to form a government of national unity, he immediately began consolidating his authority and establishing communist rule over the territory of Yugoslavia . Tito was the leader of Yugoslavia's communist government .
 Tito was entertaining ideas of leading a Balkan federation involving Albania, Bulgaria, and potentially Greece . Tito also considered a possible Balkan Federation involving Albania and Bulgaria . The federation would involve Albania and possibly Greece .
 The prospect of a regional federation under Tito’s leadership seemed likely during 1947 and brought Tito into a direct confrontation with Stalin . Tito became the first president of Yugoslavia to be elected in 1947 .
 This gave him both international prominence and domestic appeal, which helped him consolidate his position in Yugoslavia . This helped him to consolidate the position he held in Yugoslavia, which he held until his death .
 Tito promoted the principles of brotherhood and workers’ self-management (a form of market-oriented socialism) in parallel with his ongoing suppression of internal dissent . Tito was the leader of Yugoslavia during the Second World War II .
 His death in 1980 was a shock for the country, and the seeming stability of Yugoslavia began to crack under the strains of national factionalism . Yugoslavia's stability of the country cracked under strain of factionalists .
 Many commentators trace the origins of the 1990s Yugoslav dissolution to Tito’s authoritarian rule . Tito's authoritarian rule was one of the key factors in Yugoslavia's dissolution of Yugoslavia .
 Emilian Kavalski Togo is a small, narrow republic in western Africa . Togo was founded in 1903 .
 The capital and largest city of Lome is located on the western side of the 56kilometer coastline on the Gulf of Guinea . Lome has a 56kilometre coastline of its 56km coastline .
 There are 37 ethnic groups among its nearly 6 million people, who practice traditional religions, Christianity, and Islam . The majority of the population is white, white and black .
 French is the official language in the country . African languages Ewe and Kabiye are also taught . French is an official language .
 Togo has one of Africa’s highest rates of population growth and deforestation rates of deforestation . Togo also has the highest rate of deforestation rate in Africa .
 Over twothirds of the population are engaged in agriculture and lives in areas with limited safe drinking water . The majority of the people live in areas that have limited safe water .
 HIV or AIDS results in about 10,000 deaths per year in the United States . In addition to other serious health problems, HIV and AIDS results from about 10-000 deaths a year .
 Germany made the territory the protectorate of Togoland in 1884 . During the next decade it determined the permanent boundaries through agreements with France and Britain .
 The port city of Lome was built by the Germans for shipment of goods from the interior . It was built in 1940 for shipment from the inside of the city .
 After World War I, France received Togoland in exchange for interior land granted to the British . France received interior land from the British in return for the interior land .
 After World War II, the U.N. gave Britain and France joint control of the territory . The United Nations gave the British and French control of it after the war .
 In 1956 British Togo became part of the Gold Coast, which later became Ghana, while French Togo moved for independence . In 1956 Togo was part of Ghana, which became Ghana . Togo is now the most populous country in Africa .
 Premier Olympio was assassinated in a military coup that installed Nicolas Grunitzky as president . Three years later, President Olympio died in the military coup .
 When the army staged a second coup in 1967, the new government dismissed the legislature and threw out the constitution . The new government, headed by Etienne Eyadema, dismissed the parliament and threw the constitution.
 Eyadema was almost unanimously reelected president in the 1990s . In the elections that followed the election, he was reelected to power .
 Eyadema announced the Third Togolese Republic on the 13th anniversary of his takeover of the government . He took over the government from the government in 2003 .
 In 1986 France sent troops to help quell another attempted coup in Togo . Unrest continued to plague Togo, and in 1986 France deployed troops to quell an attempted coup .
 Eyadema agreed in 1991 to work with a transitional government until general elections could be held . Eyadem agreed to work in 1991 with the transitional government in place of elections .
 Among the provisions of the constitution were the establishment of multiparty elections and term limits for officials . The constitution was also established by the constitution in 1993 .
 Eyadema was still able to emerge as the victor for another term in 1993 . In 1993 he was able to win a second term .
 Elections resulted in a new legislature, which demanded concessions . The elections resulted in an election for the first time .
 In 1994 he appointed Edem Kodjo prime minister of a new coalition government . He was appointed in 1994 as prime minister . In 1994, he was appointed as president of a coalition government.
 Eyadema was reelected in 1998 and in 2003, after the legislature removed term limits from the constitution . Eyadem was re-elected in both 1998 and 2003 .
 When President Eyadema died in February 2005, he was succeeded by his son Faure Gnassingbe . He was the first president of the country .
 The succession, supported by the military but not by the constitution, was challenged by popular protest and a threat of sanctions from regional leaders . The succession challenge was supported by popular protests and threats of sanctions . The country's president is expected to be sworn in as a permanent president .
 General Omar Efrafn Torrijos Herrera was the de facto ruler of Panama from his coup d’etat of 1968 until his death in an airplane crash on July 31, 1981 . He was succeeded by General Manuel Noriega after his death .
 Torrijos was a staunch U.S. ally who negotiated a series of treaties in 1977 with the United States for the return of the Panama Canal to Panama in 2000 . He was also known for suppressing dissent and committing many human rights abuses during his years as the country’
 Never elected to office, Torrijos dominated Panama’s political life for 13 years . His rule represented a significant departure from the country’�s previous regimes, dominated by landowning and commercial elite .
 Torrijos was born on February 13, 1929, in Santiago, southwest of Panama City . Denounced by many as a false populist whose dictatorship ruthlessly crushed dissent, paid lip service to anti-imperialism .
 In 1952 he joined the U.S.-created National Guard, was promoted to captain in 1956 . In 1956, he attended the School of the Americas, where he attended school in Latin America .
 In 1968 he and Major Boris Martinez overthrew the democratically elected president Arnulfo Arias . As a lieutenant colonel, he was lieutenant colonel in the coup .
 He excluded traditional powerholders from office, dissolving the national legislature and outlawing other political parties . Leaving existing property relations largely intact, he excluded the country’s traditional power holders from office . He also dissolves the national parliament and outlaws other parties .
 The high point of his rule came in the 1977 treaties with the United States, though his expenditure of political capital in securing the treaties’ passage compelled him to approve amendments to the constitution .
 The circumstances of his death remain the topic of considerable controversy, with some implicating his successor, Noriega, in the plane crash that killed him in 1981 . Some blame his successor for the crash .
 Ahmed Sekou Toure was a prominent West African politician and anticolonial agitator . He ruled the Republic of Guinea as a singleparty state until his death in 1984 .
 He improved his nationalist credentials by claiming the well-known anti-French resistance figure Samory Toure as his grandfather . He also claimed to be his grandfather by claiming to be the anti-France resistance figure .
 Toure’s rise to power did not come through social prominence and family connections but as the result of his success as a labor union organizer . Toure's rise was not through local social prominence or family connections, but as well as family connections .
 His views were bitterly anticolonial, and complete independence from France was his desired goal . He was bitterly anti-France and wanted complete independence .
 Through this affiliation he linked with other emerging African politicians, such as Felix HouphouetBoigny, later president of the Ivory Coast .
 In 1952 Toure assumed the party leadership, and in 1956 he was elected to the French National Assembly . Toure was a member of the National Assembly of France .
 Toure was committed throughout the 1950s to the drive for a total break from France . He argued against any half measures such as partial independence under an associated Francophone union . Toure fought for independence from France during the French Revolution .
 Toure took the total independence option on October 2, 1958, when he became Guinea’s president . Toure became Guinea's president in 1958 . He took the option of total independence from Guinea in October 1958 .
 France responded abruptly and harshly by ending all political and economic cooperation . France responded by ending the cooperation with Russia in the wake of the crisis .
 Relations between France and Guinea hardened, and eventually in 1965 all links were broken . Relations between the Republic of Guinea hardened in 1965 .
 The strong stand taken by Guinea proved costly, although it fitted the anticolonial mood . Guinea's strong stand against the West African empire proved costly .
 Given his early Marxist orientation and admiration for Lenin, it was not surprising that he found a ready friend in the Soviet Union and its satellites .
 His country's extensive bauxite reserves gave him a tool to maintain his position and attract international interest . His country’s extensive baukite reserves were used to attract interest .
 He was also keenly supported by Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, who in 1957 led his country to independence from Great Britain .
 Toure partially mended his political disagreements with France in 1978 . In that year President Valery Giscard d’Estaing made a conciliatory gesture and visited Guinea .
 Toure had for a time friendly relations with the U.S. especially during the John F Kennedy administration . Toure was assassinated in 1968 .
 By the late 1960s he feared Soviet intervention, but also feared that U.S. involvement might undermine his regime . He was equally worried that the United States involvement might undermined his regime.
 Guinea in 1970 unsuccessfully invaded Guinea by Portuguese Guinea . Portuguese Guinea tried to take control of Guinea in the 1970s . Guinea was ruled out of the country by Portugal and Portugal in 1970 .
 Toure is accused of imposing a harsh one-man, one-party political system . Some have argued that Toure abandoned democratic principles . Toure has been accused of abandoning democratic principles and imposing a one party system .
 Elections were held during this period, there was not a serious voice of opposition . Although elections were held in this period there was no serious opposition .
 Toure abandoned some of his Marxist-Socialist roots in the late 1970s in an attempt to improve the country’s economic fortunes in the 1970s . Toure is the current president of the French Republic .
 To maintain his power, Sekou Toure did not reject all communist practices . Toure refused to reject communist practices to maintain his authority .
 He particularly made use of the labor camp as a tool for the state’s domination of its people, he says .
 His camps became watchwords for African oppression, brutality, and human rights abuses . His camps were watchwords of African oppression and brutality .
 He created the typical personality cult found in so many communist-inspired regimes . He created a personality cult that is typical for so many regimes .
 He loaded his regime’s offices with members of his extended family . He also exploited tribal rivalries to his benefit, according to his regime .
 Relations with the International Monetary Fund floundered toward the end of his rule . Guinea’s foreign debt increasingly mounted, and repayments fell into arrears .
 Toure’s dismal performance did not dampen his ambitions for a wider political stage . Toure's ambitions for the presidency have not been dampened by his performance .
 In the years immediately preceding his death, he saw himself as a statesman . In the . years immediately before his death he saw . himself as the statesman, he said .
 Toure’s health declined in the early 1980s, and he died of complications following heart surgery in Cleveland, Ohio, on March 26, 1984 . Toure's health deteriorated in the 1980s .
 Upon his death the military seized power under the leadership of Colonel Lansana Conte . A new constitution was written after the death of Conte and the military took over .
 There are claims that Toure was warmly regarded by his people . However, the imprisonment and murder of his opponents makes this assumption hard to assess . Toure's supporters were killed and tortured in prison .
 His lasting legacy seems to be one of failure, and Guinea and its people seem to be the principal victims . Guinea's people are the main victims of his failure .
 Guinea is a prime example of a failed state, according to international estimates . Political instability and impoverishment remain the country’s fate .
 Gender, Ethnicity and Class in the Nationalist Movement in Guinea, 1939-1958 . Nationalist movement in Guinea was Nationalist Party .
 His 1965 election to the Canadian House of Commons marked the beginning of his ascendancy in Canadian politics . He was elected to the Commons in 1965 .
 Lester B Pearson appointed him parliamentary secretary in 1966 and then minister of justice and attorney general . Lester B. Pearson was appointed him as prime minister in 1966 . He was also appointed as attorney general in 1973 .
 Trudeau won the passage of social welfare reform measures regarding gun control, abortion, and homosexuality . Trudeau also won the vote on gun control and abortion .
 Trudeau struggled against economic and domestic problems throughout the 1970s . Trudeau struggled to overcome economic, domestic problems during that era .
 His administration witnessed the defeat of a referendum in May 1980 on the separation of Quebec . His administration saw the defeat in a referendum on Quebec's separation .
 Trudeau’s legacy as prime minister includes his successfully patriating the Canadian Constitution from the British Parliament . The act gave Canada the power to amend the document without the need to seek the approval of the British Crown . The Canadian Constitution was patriated by the Canadian Parliament .
 He included a Charter of Rights and Lreedoms, which guaranteed certain civil liberties, in the constitution that year . He had included a charter of rights and freedoms in the Constitution .
 He passed laws that made Canada an officially bilingual nation . He also used his office to support multiculturalism .
 Canadian journalists named Trudeau the top Canadian newsmaker of the 20th century in 1999 . Trudeau was named Canada's top newsmaker in 1999 in a series of interviews .
 In 1971, at age 51, he married 22-year-old Vancouver socialite Margaret Sinclair . In 1971 he married Margaret Sinclair, 22, at the age of 51 .
 Their union produced three children and was the subject of enormous press coverage . Their union ended in divorce in 1984 .
 Trudeau’s works include Federalism and the French Canadians , Approaches to Politics, and Conversations with Canadians .
 Pierre Trudeau, the 15th Canadian prime minister, died on September 28, 2000 . Pierre Trudeau was Canada's 15th prime minister .
 Hassan 'abd Allah al-Turabi was born into a respected and educated family in the central Sudan in 1932 . Christopher M Cook Turabi is an Islamist politician .
 Al-Turabi is related by marriage to Sadiq al-Mahdi, the great-grandson of the 19th-century Sudanese prime minister . His father was a judge, and he is related to the former prime minister of Sudanese Sudan .
 He is related by marriage to Osama bin Laden . He is also related to the Saudi Arabian Islamist Islamist .
 In the 1950s he joined the Sudanese Muslim Brotherhood . He later joined the Islamic Charter Lront, an offshoot of the brotherhood . In the 1960s he was a member of the Brotherhood .
 The party’s goal was the creation of an Islamic state as delineated in the Islamic Charter for an Islamic State . The party's goal was to create an Islamic Islamic state, according to the charter .
 The constitution, as revised by Turabi in the 1960s, provided for the full equality of women and non-Muslims . Turabi also advocated the creation of a presidential rather than a parliamentary state .
 ICE encouraged missionary efforts to spread Islam throughout the south . ICE also encouraged missionary work in the area .
 Turabi opposed the military dictatorship of Ibrahim Abboud , who was overthrown in 1964 . Turabi was born in Cairo, Egypt .
 When Sadiq al-Mahdi became prime minister, Turabi’s influence increased . Turabi's influence increased when Mahdi became PM, but his political fortunes waned by 1968 .
 In 1969 Jaafar Numeiri, with the support of Sudanese communist allies, successfully overthrew the parliamentary government in a military coup d’etat .
 Turabi was permitted to return in 1977 and was subsequently appointed attorney general . Turabi returned to the U.S. in 1977 .
 With Turabi’s support in 1983 Numeiri instituted sharia law in Sudan, thereby exacerbating relations with the large Christian population in the southern Sudanese provinces . Turabi's support for the law was the support of Numeir .
 This contributed to an escalation in the ongoing civil war between the predominantly Muslim government in the north and the southern Christian and animist south . This directly contributed to the escalation of the conflict .
 During this period the brotherhood’s influence in key institutions, especially schools and the military, markedly increased . The brotherhood's influence in schools and military also increased .
 In 1985 Numeiri was overthrown in a bloodless coup led by General Abdel Rahman Mohammed Hassan Siwar al-Dahab .
 In 1991 Turabi established the Popular Arab and Islamic People’s Congress, an umbrella organization of Islamist groups . He worked to bring Sunni and Shi’i Muslims closer together . Turabi was born in Cairo .
 In the same year Turabi toured Europe, Canada, and the U.S. Turabi spoke on behalf of the creation of liberal, nonviolent Islamic states . Turabi tours Europe and the United States, speaking for the sake of liberals, nonviolent states .
 During the 1990s he offered protection to the radical Osama bin Laden after bin Laden left Saudi Arabia for Sudan . He also offered protection for bin Laden .
 Turabi was elected to Parliament in 1996 and became speaker of Parliament under the military dictatorship of Colonel Umar Hasan al-Bashir, who had seized power in 1989 . Turabi has been elected to parliament in 1996 .
 After that time, Turabi adopted a far lower public profile . Although he was thought to exercise considerable political influence in the government, his exact role or impact remained unclear .
 Turabi has never published a comprehensive study of his ideology, but his career has demonstrated considerable political flexibility . Turabi's career has shown considerable flexibility .
 Islamist forces in Sudan have played key roles in the Sudanese civil service, professions, and military . Under his leadership Islamist forces have played . key roles .
 He also supported the export of Islamic movements to neighboring African nations in the north and east, particularly in Egypt . The former president also supported exporting Islamic movements .
 Present-day Turkey lies in southeastern Europe and southwestern Asia . Turkey shares borders with Greece, Bulgaria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Iran, Iraq, and Syria . Turkey is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Bosporus Strait is one of the busiest shipping lanes, in the world . It contains the Bosporu Strait, which connects, the Black and Marmara seas, and is a major shipping lane .
 Turkey’s population is almost 70 million, of which a majority are Turkish . A significant minority of Kurds, as well as Armenians, Greeks, Jews, Jews and Circassians, Circassian, Assyrians and Arabs .
 Turkey is a republican parliamentary democracy with a civil law system . Civil law system is derived from several European legal systems such as the Swiss Code . Turkish civil law is based on several European law systems, including the Swiss code .
 The private sector is expanding, but the state still controls most basic industries and the banking, transport, and communication sectors . The state controls most of the banking and transport sectors .
 The main export industries are textile and clothing production, with automotive and electronic export production close behind . Textile, clothing and electronics production are the main exports to China .
 The main agricultural products include tobacco, cotton, grain, grain and olives, sugar beets, pulses, citrus products, and livestock .
 In the 1990s Turkey’s economy suffered severe fluctuations, which culminated in financial disaster in February 2001 . Turkey's economy suffered financial fluctuations, culminating in financial crisis in 2001 .
 The International Monetary Fund provides heavy backing, but the economy faces high debt and deficits . The IMF is the world's largest and most important source of funding .
 Inonii managed to stay out of World War II until 1945, when Turkey declared war on Germany as a symbolic gesture in order to qualify as a founder of the newly forming United Nations . Turkey declared its war against Germany in 1945 as a gesture to qualify to be a founding member of
 Under the Truman Doctrine, Turkey qualified for massive financial aid . Turkey, due to its close proximity to the Soviet Union, qualified for financial aid. Turkey was given financial aid under the Truman doctrine .
 Despite these achievements, the economy was weak, and the RPP and Inonii grew increasingly unpopular . The RPP became increasingly unpopular in the 1990s .
 Celal Bayar became president, and Adnan Menderes became prime minister . Celal was president, Adnan was prime minister.
 The economic boom of the early 1950s strengthened Menderes and the DP’s position, he says . The DP's position was strengthened in the 1950s during the economic boom .
 Conflict was exacerbated when a Greek citizen placed a bomb at the Turkish consulate in Thessalonica . The bomb was placed in a bomb attack at the consulate in the city of Thessaloniki, Greece .
 The island of Cyprus, under British control and with an 80 percent Greek majority, also became a point of conflict . Cyprus was under British rule and under 80 percent of its Greek majority .
 Riots in 1955 targeted Greek homes, shops, and businesses and wrought havoc throughout Istanbul . The riots were the result of Greek homes and businesses being targeted by Greeks .
 Greek nationalists of the EOKA movement on Cyprus also began a struggle against the British forces . During this period, Greek nationalists began to struggle against British forces in the island .
 Turkey opposed British suggestions that the Greeks might be allowed to annex Cyprus . Turkey strongly opposed British suggestion that the Greek might have been allowed to annexed Cyprus .
 The Turkish military was a strong and powerful mechanism within Turkey, writes CNN's John Defterios . Because of training, aid, and financial support gained as a result of joining NATO, the Turkish military is a strong force within Turkey .
 A new constitution was drawn up that justified military intervention if the ruling government acted unconstitutionally . The constitution was then drawn up to justify military intervention .
 In January 1961 political activity was allowed once again, and 11 parties registered for the elections to be held at the end of 1961 . The elections were held in 1961 .
 Menderes and two of his cabinet members were tried by a military tribunal and executed in September 1961 . Mendeses was executed by military tribunal in September .
 In 1965, the JP, led by Suleyman Demirel, won a major victory in elections . In 1965 the JP led the country's first major election victory in the country .
 The JP espoused Islamist and traditional beliefs that ran directly counter to communist and leftist thought . The JP was the leader of the Communist Party in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The left grew increasingly popular among the student population and industrial proletariat . The left became increasingly popular in the 1960s and '90s .
 The right emerged as a strong force in the 1960s, setting the stage for the crisis of the 1970s . The right also emerged in the 60s and the 70s, and the 1980s .
 Because they failed to capture the majority vote, they were forced into coalition governments . They were forced to form coalition governments because of their lack of majority vote .
 This continued throughout the 1970s as rightist and leftist violence escalated . Rightist and leftist violence escalated throughout the decade .
 Islamic groups in Turkey were suspected of receiving aid from Iran . After the Iranian revolution in 1979, Islamic groups were believed to have received aid from the country .
 The religious demonstrations in Konya in September 1980 provided an excuse for direct military intervention . The military intervention was prompted by religious demonstrations .
 The military suspended all political parties and groups and instituted martial law and curfews . The military also instituted a curfew and imposed martial law .
 The National Security Council arrested 122,000 people during 1980-81 in order to stop the violence . The arrests were part of a plan to stop violence in the Soviet Union . The arrest was part of the plan to prevent violence in Russia .
 Kenan Evren was then elected president, and the military began to restructure the political system . The military began the restructure of political system in 2008 .
 The old parties then reincarnated and changed their names in order to enter the 1984 elections . The parties were reincarnated in 1984 to take part in the elections .
 Turgut Ozal’s presidency, although fraught with corruption and scandal, was also marked by impressive modernization . Ozal's presidency was marked with impressive modernization, despite scandal and corruption .
 After the 1980 coup the Kurdish language was forbidden, as was the term Kurdish as a separate identity . After the coup the word Kurdish was forbidden in Turkey .
 Ocalan’s followers carried out their missions with an almost religious zeal . Ocalans’ supporters carried out missions with a religious zeal, says Spanish media .
 Turkey is a Muslim nation (mostly Sunni, but significant Shi’i, Alevi, and Sufi communities are present) Only 0. percent of the population are Christian or Jewish . PKK brought the PKK beyond the sphere of Turkey .
 Villages thought to be harboring PKK terrorists were destroyed, and thousands were arrested, detained, and tortured . Villages were destroyed and thousands of people were arrested and detained .
 Turkey feared the creation of a Kurdish state in northern Iraq that would be used as a base for Kurdish attacks on Turkey . After the U.S. defeat of Iraq in 1991, the United States defeated Iraq in Iraq . Turkey feared that the state could be used to launch attacks against Turkey
 President Ozal officially recognized the existence of Kurds in Turkey and implemented a bill that would allow the Kurdish language to be used in everyday conversations but not in business, government, or any other official agency . The Kurdish language is not allowed in business or government .
 PKK stepped up their campaigns against the Turkish government, committing more atrocities, which further enraged the Turkish public . Despite this, the PKK continued to commit more atrocities against the government . The Turkish public has been enraged by the PKK's atrocities .
 He was sentenced to death and imprisoned on an island in the Marmara Sea, where he remained for years . He was convicted of murder and sentenced to be executed .
 Necmettin Erbakan was the leader of Refah, which was supported by the young, professional middle class and students . Refah is supported by many of the young professional middle-class and students.
 He personally championed reforms to change the working hours during Ramadan and loosen control of the Directorate of Religious Affairs .
 The Erbakan/filler coalition also made significant overtures to Libya and Iran, and condemned Israel . The coalition condemned Israel and condemned Libya, but also condemned Libya .
 With the advent of new freedoms under Erbakan, many other Islamic leaders eagerly expressed their long-silent opinions . Many other leaders have long been silent on the issue of Islam .
 Refah wanted to abolish the Swiss legal code instituted by Atatiirk . Secularists feared a return to sharia, or Islamic law, or sharia .
 In 1998 the Constitutional Court formally disbanded Refah and forced its members out of Parliament . Erbakan and (filler) both left government, and both left . Refah was forced to leave the government .
 Biilent Ecevit emerged as the new president in large part because of his handling of Ocalan and the Kurdish conflict . Eceevit has been in charge of the Kurdistan National Council of Representatives .
 In 1999 a huge earthquake struck Izmit, near Istanbul, killing between 15,000 and 40,000 people . In 1999, between 15 and 40 million people were killed in Izmit .
 The public was enraged by the lack of support from both the government and the military . The government was extremely slow to respond, and the public was angry .
 In 2002 elections the JDP, led by Recep Tayyip Erdogan, won a majority in the Grand National Assembly . In the 2002 elections, Erdogan's party led the Turkish government . The JDP is led by Erdogan .
 Although the JDP espoused a moderate Islamic line, it was careful to respect the secular state . The JDP was careful not to interfere with the secularism of the country .
 Erdogan also instituted reforms to help pull Turkey out of its financial troubles . Erdogan's reforms are meant to help ease Turkey's financial woes .
 Erdogan and the JDP also scored a major victory with the October 2005 decision by the European Union to start Turkey’s EU membership bid . Erdogan and JDP scored major victories with the decision to start the EU bid .
 Turkey: A Modern History of Turkey . Zurcher, Erik J. Zurcher: Turkey is a Modern History. Turkey is an important part of the nation's history .
 Uganda was part of the charter of the British East Africa Company in 1888 . The area known today as Uganda was ruled as a protectorate in 1894 . It was ruled by the protectorate of Uganda from 1894 onwards .
 The boundaries of what now form Uganda took shape in 1914 . As more territory was added to the British claims, the boundaries took shape .
 Apollo Milton Obote was prime minster of Uganda from 1962 to 1966 . He was state president from 1966 to 1971 and again from 1980 to 1985 . Obote also served as prime minister of Uganda between 1962 and 1985 .
 He is best known for leading Uganda to independence on October 9, 1962, in a relatively peaceful revolution . He began his adult life as a schoolteacher before becoming a president .
 Obote served on the Ugandan legislative council beginning in 1957 . In 1960 he founded the Uganda People's Congress . Obote was a member of Uganda's legislative council .
 Obote created a political coalition with his rival, Sir Edward Mutesa, king of Buganda . The coalition was in preparation for the peaceful handover of colonial power to indigenous black African rule . Obote's political coalition helped prepare the handover .
 Obote used the position of his rival political leader to gain political favor in the region of Buganda . Obote's position was used to gain favor in Buganda's Buganda region . He used his position to gain support for his rival politician .
 In a practical political move, Mutesa was installed as president with Obote as prime minister . Obote was in charge of the government in the 1960s .
 His nominally socialist rule after independence made him unpopular with Western states, particularly Britain . He was unpopular with many Western countries, including Britain .
 Mutesa's presidency and Obote’s prime ministership were difficult times during independence period . Uganda was peaceful and economically stable during the period of independence .
 At the time of independence, Uganda was the only peaceful nation in the region . It was a safe haven for refugees from Zaire, Sudan, and Rwanda .
 This period also made it clear that Obote was not going to share power with coalition president Mutesa . Obote also made a clear that he would not be sharing power with the coalition president .
 The trigger for confrontation was Obote’s indictment in a gold-smuggling plot with Idi Amin, then deputy of the Ugandan Armed Forces . Obote and Amin were both indicted in the plot with Amin, who was deputy of Uganda's armed forces .
 Obote suspended the Ugandan constitution under the power of his prime ministership, abolishing the role of the leaders of Uganda’s five tribal kingdoms, removing power from President Mutesa . Obote also gave himself unlimited emergency powers .
 The corrupt Ugandan judiciary cleared Obote of all charges of gold smuggling . Obote had been accused of smuggling gold from Uganda .
 The incident incited Obote and his supporters to stage a coup against Mutesa in 1966 . Obote's supporters staged a coup in 1966, but the coup was not successful .
 Obote’s first act as president was to have his attorney general rewrite the Ugandan constitution, transfer all powers to his presidency, and nationalize all foreign assets . Obote's first act was to rewrite the constitution .
 In 1971 Obote was disposed of by his army chief, Idi Amin, who had assisted him in overthrowing Mutesa . Amin was the leader of the army chief who had helped him overthrow Mutea . Obote died in 1971 at the hands of Amin .
 After nine years in exile, Obote gathered Ugandan exiles in Tanzania and ousted Amin in 1979 . He gathered ex-Ugandan ex-imporporporters in Tanzania to oust Amin .
 Although Obote won the 1980 elections, his second rule was marked by civil war, further distancing him from Western approval . Obote's second rule of the 1980s was followed by a civil war .
 Opposition parties staged a guerrilla rebellion under Yoweri Museveni’s National Resistance Army . Believing the 1980 elections to be rigged, the opposition parties staged an opposition rebellion .
 Obote was deposed in July 1985, again by his own army commander, Bazilio Okello, and General Tito Okella in a military coup .
 Obote remained in southern Africa until his death on October 10, 2005, of kidney failure at a hospital in Johannesburg, South Africa .
 Idi Amin is perhaps best known for ousting his predecessor, Apollo Milton Obote, and for instituting a totalitarian regime . Amin's regime would devastate Uganda both politically and economically . Amin was known for overthrowing his predecessor and ousting the Obote .
 Amin’s rise to power began in January 1971, when President Obote headed off to the Commonwealth Heads of Government meetings in Singapore . Amin was the first African African leader to be elected to power in the country since 1964 .
 Obote left his staff with the order to have Amin and his supporters arrested upon his departure . Suspecting trouble, Obote ordered his staff to arrest Amin and supporters .
 Amin's forces loyal to Amin stormed strategic military targets in Kampala and the airport in Entebbe in 1971 . Amin's Ugandan forces stormed the airport and Kampala's Kampala airport in the morning of January 25, 1971 . The Ugandan government was overthrown by Amin's
 The first shells fired at Entebbe Airport killed two Roman Catholic priests, setting off a wave of violence throughout the country . The first shots fired at the airport killed two priests and set off a series of violence .
 Amin and his troops carried out mass executions of pro-Obote troops and supporters . Despite initial disorganization, Amin's troops managed to carry out executions . Amin's forces carried out the executions in the wake of the uprising .
 Amin repudiated Obote's soft socialist foreign policy, resulting in Uganda’s recognition by Israel, Britain, and the U.S. After assuming power, Amin took control of Uganda . Amin was the first African African leader to take power in Uganda since 1964 .
 Many African nations and organizations, including the Organization of African Unity, refused to recognize Amin and his military government . Amin's military government was overthrown by Amin's government in 1977 .
 Amin embraced the label ‘totalitarian” and renamed the government house the Command House . Amin later instituted an advisory defense council composed of military commanders . Amin was the first president of the Arab Spring in Tunisia to take office .
 He extended military rule to his cabinet members, who, if not drawn from the military, were advised that they would be subjected to military discipline . In an attempt to place Uganda under his military dictatorship, he extended military rules to cabinet members .
 Army commanders, with Amin’s blessing, acted like warlords, representing the coercive arm of the government . Army commanders acted as warlords with the help of Amin's regime .
 Foreign policy was revised again in 1972 so that the country could obtain financial assistance and technical support from Libya . Libya provided financial assistance to the country .
 Amin expelled all remaining remaining Israeli advisers and became anti-Israeli in accordance with Libyan policy . Amin expelled the remaining advisers and then became an anti-Israel campaigner . Amin's actions were followed by the expulsion of all remaining advisers .
 Amin went in search of foreign help in the form of monetary aid from Saudi Arabia . Amin went to Saudi Arabia to seek financial help from the government . Amin says Saudi Arabia is helping the country's economy .
 Amin rediscovered Uganda’s previously neglected Islamic heritage . Amin was the first president of Uganda to discover Uganda's Islamic heritage in the country . Amin's efforts to revive Uganda's previously neglected Muslim heritage were successful .
 Amin expelled the Asian minority in Uganda and seized their property . Amin went on to expel them in an attempt to recoup profits from lost Western foreign aid . Amin expelled them in a bid to recover profits from the loss of Western aid .
 Ugandan economy was fueled by export crops . However, this appropriation proved disastrous for the already failing economy . The appropriation has proved disastrous .
 The money from the sale of export crops was being recycled back into the purchase of imports for the army . Yet the money is still being used to buy food for the soldiers .
 As a result, rural farmers turned to smuggling from neighboring countries . Rural farmers have been forced to rely on smuggled goods from neighboring nations .
 He appointed British citizen Bob Astles to take all necessary steps to end the problem . He appointed his mercenary adviser, British citizen Astles, to take necessary steps .
 Amin’s rule also faced a counterattack from former Ugandan leader Obote . Amin faced a backlash from Obote, a former leader of Uganda . Amin's rule was overthrown by the Ugandan government in 1964 .
 Amin expelled the Asian minority in 1972 . Obote did attempt an attack into southern parts of Uganda . Amin expelled Amin's Asian minority .
 The attack was launched by a small contingent of only 27 army trucks . His ambition was to capture the strategic military post of Masaka near the border .
 Obote’s troops decided to settle in and wait for a general uprising against Amin, which did not occur . Obote's troops settled in and waited for the uprising to occur .
 Obote also attempted a seizure of Entebbe Airport by allegedly hijacking an East African Airways flight out of Tanzania . Obote attempted to hijack a flight from Tanzania .
 The attempt failed to accomplish much when the pilot blew out the tires on the passenger plane, and the flight remained in Tanzania .
 Amin is internationally known for the hostage crisis at Entebbe Airport in June 1976 . Amin offered Palestinian hijackers of an Air France jet from Tel Aviv a protected base from which they could press their demands in exchange for the release of Israeli hostages . Amin is known for his role in the
 The dramatic rescue of the hostages by Israeli commandos was a severe blow to Amin Amin . Amin was forced to give up his position as a leader of the West . Amin's wife was killed by the Israeli forces during the rescue .
 Amin's rule is also marked by a number of disappearances of priests and ministers in the 1970s . Amin’s rule was marked by several disappearances, including those of priests .
 The matter reached a climax with the formal protest against army terrorism and death squad activity in 1977 . Church of Uganda ministers, led by Archbishop Janani Luwum, led the protest against the army .
 Luwum was assassinated in response to Amin’s violent domestic policies, it appears . Amin was assassinated after his assassination . Amin's violent domestic policy policies were the result of his assassination.
 Luwum’s body was recovered from a clumsily contrived ‘auto accident,” subsequent investigations revealed that he had been shot by Amin himself .
 Amin went on to claim that Julius Nyerere's acceptance of Obote after the coup had been at the root of his troubles . Amin also claimed that the Tanzanian president had accepted Obote's accept of the coup .
 Amin invaded Tanzanian territory and formally annexed a section across the Kagera River boundary on November 1, 1978 . Amin invaded Tanzania in 1978 and annexed a portion of its territory across the border .
 Libya’s Muammar Qaddafi sent 3,000 troops to aid fellow Muslim Amin, but the Libyans soon found themselves on the front line . Amin died in the civil war that began in 1968 .
 Amin fled by air, first to Libya and later into permanent exile in Jiddah, Saudi Arabia, where he died on August 16, 2003, after being in a coma for over a month . Amin died in 2003 after suffering from a coma .
 The current president of Uganda is Yoweri Museveni, who was elected in February 2006 . Uganda is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 Since 1991, Ukraine has been an independent state since 1991 . The sovereignty of Ukraine is now recognized by all the countries of the world .
 Ukraine has common borders with seven countries (Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, Moldova, Russia, and Byelorussia) The Black and Azov Seas are on its southern border .
 A Pan-Ukrainian population census in 2001 found the total number of inhabitants at 48,416,000 . The population census was conducted in 2001 . In 2001, the total population of the country was 48.4 million .
 The majority are city inhabitants, and 32 percent live in the countryside . The majority of those living in the country are city dwellers .
 Among them are Ukrainians, Russians, Belorussians, Moldavians, Crimean Tatars, and Bulgarians . Bulgarians are among the most prominent ethnic groups in the world .
 Most of the population of Ukraine belongs to the Orthodox Christian Church . Ukraine is one of the most populous countries in the world . Most of Ukraine's population is Orthodox Christian .
 Independence was a key issue in Ukraine in the 20th century . Striving for national and state independence was a major issue in the country .
 Ukrainians living all over the world are Ukrainians living around the world . This aspiration, partly realized during the hard days of 1917-20, remained potent political motivation .
 The democracy brought by Mikhail Gorbachev’s perestroika inspired ethnic minorities in the Soviet Union to activate national liberation movements . Ethnic minorities in Russia were mobilized by ethnic minorities to fight for freedom .
 Revision of Ukrainian nation historical past, promoted by representatives of the Ukrainian Helsinki Group of human rights activists . Rise in national identity supported and developed by artists, poets, writers, and scientists . People’s movement known as ‘meeting democracy’ had created the necessary background for
 On July 16,1990, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted a declaration of state sovereignty of Ukraine . Ukraine was first among the republics of the former Soviet Union to declare sovereignty in 1990 .
 First elections were held for president of independent Ukraine (Leonid Kravchuk won and was president from 1991 to 1994). AllUkrainian referendum for endorsement of independence of Ukraine was held in 1991 .
 Since that time a series of measures aimed at the organization of bodies and institutions necessary for an independent Ukraine have been undertaken . Since then, the measures have been taken in Ukraine .
 Some acts were compromises with the Russian Federation; because of the deep economic integration of both countries, it was hard to become separated at once . Some of the compromises with Russia were compromises .
 On December 7-8, 1991, the presidents of Russia, Ukraine, and Belorussia signed a document denouncing the union treaty of 1922 . The treaty was the treaty that organized the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics .
 A treaty establishing a Commonwealth of Independent States was signed instead of a treaty . The treaty was signed in 1950s .
 The presidential and parliamentary elections of 1994 opened a new phase in the political development of Ukraine . The elections were held in Ukraine's capital Kiev in 1994 .
 The keystone of the political history of Ukraine at that time was the adoption of a new constitution . The new constitution was a long and hard process that repeatedly caused political and parliamentary criss. The constitution was adopted by Ukraine's parliamentarians .
 It was the beginning of parliamentary and presidential opposition, which led to growing tension during Kuchma’s presidency in relation to the composition of parliament factions and their representation . Growing tension during the presidency led to a growing tension between the two parties .
 The presidential elections of 2004 and the following Orange Revolution opened a new era in the political history of Ukraine . Ukraine is characterized by general democratization and liberalization of the political process . The Orange Revolution was the country's first Orange Revolution .
 Ukrainians dissatisfied with officially announced results of runoff election demonstrated in Kiev's Maidan of Independence . People from various cities, towns, and villages in Ukraine marched for democracy, for their political rights .
 The Orange Revolution ended in a victory for democracy in Ukraine . Representatives of different political parties and movements united their efforts in this process .
 A coalition government, with the participation of all ‘orange’ parties and movements, was formed, with Julia Timoshenko as the first woman prime minister in the history of Ukraine .
 In local administrations, thousands of former functionaries of different levels have been replaced by “orange” democrats . Thousands of people have been taken over by ‘orange’ democrats.
 New priorities in foreign policy, a tendency toward integration with the European Union and cooperation with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, have been elaborated .
 As early as the beginning of September 2005, Julia Timoshenko’s government was dismissed, it became clear that there were serious discrepancies among Orange Revolution leaders and representatives of different parties .
 The ideals of democracy and freedom still remain the essence of the Viktor Yuschenko presidency . Yuschenko was shown by the first free parliamentary election in March 2006 . The ideals still remain an essence of his presidency .
 Ukraine faced problems during the transitional period of economic development from planned socialism to free-market forms . Shortly after its independence, Ukraine faced economic problems .
 The destruction of traditional Soviet resources, marketing, and energetic and macroeconomic networks, along with the extreme difficulty of creating new ones in the European community, negatively influenced the general state . The urgent need for modernization of basic equipment and production techniques, negatively impacted the prospects of further development of the
 A shadow economy sprang up and grew rapidly with substantial support from the highest administration of Ukraine, which appeared to be corrupt . A so-called shadow economy grew rapidly in Ukraine . The shadow economy was supported by the highest government in the country, which was corrupt .
 Inflation, accompanied by a decrease in purchasing power, indicated that the standard of living of Ukrainians decreased to a crucial level . The state administration has a need for the state administration to finance a series of social programs .
 Pension reform, changes in support for families with low income, support for veterans of World War II, and many other social actions were undertaken . Pension reform and other social changes were undertaken in the 1930s .
 Broad-scale raising of salaries, stipends and pensions began in 2004 under the government headed by Viktor Yanukovich on the eve of presidential elections .
 The new president of Ukraine, Viktor Yuschenko, has instituted a series of social programs aimed at improving the standard of living . The programs include a range of programs to improve the standard living .
 New currency, privatization in agriculture and industry, promotion of national producers and national product exportation, searches for new investments and new sources of power supply abroad . Reforms gradually contributed to a general slow growth of the Ukrainian economy after 2000 .
 The creation of a new macroeconomic network, tending toward integration with the European Union and the World Trade Organization, is the principal strategic goal of President Yuschenko . Ukraine's economic growth is a key priority for the country's future .
 The organization of an independent state of Ukraine led to a new trend in the development of the ideology and culture of the country . Ukraine's independence led to the formation of the ideas of national unity and ethnic and national self-identification .
 Ukrainian language is one of the sharpest debates in the context of cultural development . Ukraine is currently without an official language of its own .
 It was demonstrated in the presidential election of 2004 and the parliamentary election of 2006 that a strong Russian-speaking opposition still exists in Ukraine .
 The activation of religious life in independent Ukraine after the dismantling of a totalitarian ideology brought a series of conflicts, first of all among representatives of different branches of Orthodox Christianity . Ukraine's religious life was activated after dismantling of the totalitarian ideology . Ukraine is one of the most important countries in the world
 As stated by the constitution of Ukraine, the nonobligatory character of any religion creates the background necessary for religious pluralism and freedom of people’s consciousness, the constitution states .
 Russia, Ukraine, and the Breakup of the Soviet Union. Optima, 2005; Szporluk, R Russia and Ukraine . Optima. 2005. .
 The United Arab Emirates is an oil-rich Arab country . It is located on the southeast side of the Arabian Peninsula .
 Abu Dhabi, Ajman, Dubai, A1 Fujayrah, Ras al-Khaymah, Shariqah, and Um A1 Qaywayn. Abu Dhabi .
 Formerly known as the Trucial States, the UAE was created when six of the emirates merged in 1971; Ras al-Khaymah joined in 1972 .
 Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan A1 Nahyan served as president from the country’s founding until his death in 2004 . He was the first president of the country from the founding until 2004 .
 The Supreme Council comprises the individual rulers of the seven emirates . The president and vice president are elected by the council every five years .
 The position of the presidency is an unofficial hereditary post for the A1 Nahyan family . The position is unofficial hereditary .
 The council also elects the Council of Ministers and the Federal National Council reviews legislation . The council is also elected by an appointed National Council .
 The federal court system includes all the emirates except Dubai and Ras Al-Khaymah . Dubai is the most populous emirate in the UAE .
 All of the emirates have a mix of secular law and sharia with civil, criminal, and high courts . The emirate of Dubai and Abu Dhabi have the highest courts in the world .
 The UAE is a member of the United Nations and the Arab League . The UAE has diplomatic relationships with more than 60 countries .
 The UAE plays a vital role in the affairs of the region because of its massive foreign development and moderate foreign policy positions . The UAE is a key player in the Arab world's development and development .
 Unlike its neighbors, the UAE, under the leadership of Sheikh Zayed, promotes religious tolerance . The UAE promotes tolerance for religious tolerance and tolerance .
 UAE is one of the largest producers of oil, after Saudi Arabia and Iran, in the Middle East . The UAE is a major oil producer .
 Since its formation, the UAE has transformed from an impoverished desert country to a modern, wealthy country . The UAE has been transformed into a modern nation .
 Zayed invested the country’s oil revenues in hospitals, schools, and universities . All citizens gave all citizens free and universal access to these public services .
 He distributed free land and held majlis (traditional Arab consultation councils) that were open to the public . He distributed land, distributed land in Arab lands and held public consultation councils .
 Zayed was a contemporary liberal who advocated for women’s rights . He advocated for the education and participation of women in the work force . Zayed died in 1994 at the age of 50 .
 The country boasts numerous universities and colleges and hundreds of schools . The country is home to more than 1,000 colleges and universities .
 The United Arab Emirates: A Venture in Unity. Middle East Institute, 1975; Peck, Malcolm C. Peck, 1971; . Peck, 1975. Peck: UAE: A venture in unity. United Arab Arab Emirates .
 The United Arab Republic, a union of Egypt and Syria, lasted from 1958 to 1961 . It was formed from 1958- 1961 .
 Nasser was reluctant to join such a union . The lack of a contiguous border, with Israel between them, and political and economic differences between the two countries, was the reason .
 The Ba’athists mistakenly thought they would control the direction of the union from behind the scenes . Nasser convinced Nasser to become the leader of the . union .
 A February 1958 plebiscite on the union received nearly unanimous support from the citizens of both Egypt and Syria . The union was implemented in late February 1958 .
 The real power rested with Egypt, which was by far the larger, more populous, and more powerful of the two nations . Nasser served as president, and the Syrian leader Shri al-Quwatli became vice president .
 Nasser made a tumultuous tour of Syria, where he received overwhelming popular support . Shortly after the establishment of the UAR, Nasser visited Syria and received overwhelming support .
 Egyptian political and economic policies, including land reform, were instituted . In addition to land reform in Egypt, land reform was instituted in Egypt .
 Many Ba’athists and the military grew increasingly disenchanted with Nasser . Health services and conditions for the working and urban middle classes improved the Syrian upper class .
 Nasser’s close associate General Abd al-Hakim Amer was appointed to oversee the government in Syria, but by 1960 the former interior minister, Abd Al-Hamid Sarraj, became the strongman within the administration .
 The UAR also faced considerable opposition from conservative Arab regimes and Western nations . Western nations, especially the United States, have criticized the UAR .
 Hashemite monarchs in Jordan and Iraq announced a union between their two nations, but it was never really implemented . To counter Nasser’s growing strength, the Hashemites in Jordan, Iraq and Iraq planned a union .
 Saudi Arabia was also opposed to the union and feared the political shift toward the left . Saudi Arabia also feared the move toward the right .
 The United States viewed the union through the prism of the cold war . The U.S. was determined to prevent possible Soviet expansion into the region . The union was formed during the Cold War .
 The civil war in Lebanon and the revolution in Iraq accentuated the rivalries between the two Arab regimes dominated by Nasser and the conservative monarchies in what has been called the Arab cold war . Nasser's regime dominated by the Arab monarchies led to the death of Nasser .
 The West blamed Nasser for both the Lebanese civil war and the Iraqi revolution . Nasser was the prime figure in both of the Lebanese and Iraqi civil wars .
 Although Nasser supported both, he was not primarily responsible for either . He was not solely responsible for the deaths of Nasser's children .
 The nationalization of banks and many large businesses in the summer of 1961 created a form of state socialism that was unpopular in Syria . Syria's government nationalized banks and businesses in summer 1961 .
 In reaction, army officers led a coup in September 1961 to withdraw from the union . Nasser reluctantly agreed to the breakup of the union, ending the union in 1961 .
 Nasser blamed Syrian feudal elites and conservative Arab regimes, particularly Saudi Arabia, for the collapse of the union . Nasser said the union was formed by feudal elites .
 For the remainder of the 1960s he turned increasingly to the left and to support from the Soviet Union . For the rest of the 60s, he turned to the right and became increasingly popular .
 Hafez al-Assad, a committed Ba’athist, seized power and established a regime that remained in power into the 21st century . Following the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Hafez established the Syrian regime .
 The United Nations, already six decades old, has traversed a long, strife-formed cold war . Janice J Terry: The U.N. has traverses a long and strife-filled cold war.
 Not a superstate above the states, it collectively approaches issues of war, peace, development, and justice . It has sufficient transforming potentials to create a new, better world order, says David Cameron .
 Since the end of the cold war, it has acquired new dynamism, but at the same time it has to be restructured to cope with an emerging complex world of nation-states, various movements, and unforeseen challenges like terrorism like terrorism .
 The United Nations was established at the San Francisco Conference in 1945 on the principle of collective security . The UN was founded in the aftermath of World War II .
 The peacekeeping force monitored the cease-fire between Hizbollah and Israel . been established after World War I but failed to organize world order on principles of universality. been established .
 The U.N. took care to avoid the mistakes of its predecessor, and five major powers were given special power and responsibility through the mechanism of “veto” power in the Security Council .
 Security was broadened to include socioeconomic justice, human rights, and development . Unlike in the league, security was not narrowly conceived in the United Nations but broadened . The U.N. Security Council was also broadened into a broader discussion of socioeconomic justice .
 The United Nations was based on the principles of collective security . Like the league, the United Nations is based on collective security, the league says .
 The new principle on which the league and the United Nations were based does not consider security as an individual affair of states or regions but as a collective affair of all states . aggression against one state is considered aggression against all others, the U.N. says .
 All states are obliged to take collective action against the aggressor . All states must now act together to protect themselves from the situation .
 The UN Charter provided for six major organs, four of which evolved out of the League of Nations . Four of the UN's six organs evolved from the original six . The U.N. Council of Nations is the largest body of the organization .
 The General Assembly was based on the democratic principle of “one country, one vote,” irrespective of size and power . It was essentially a deliberative organ. It was effectively an organ of deliberation .
 The countries of the Third World used the body for organizing themselves and took up issues of colonialism and racialism . The countries used it to organize themselves and take up issues such as colonialism and racism .
 The Charter provided for some supervisory functions of the General Assembly . The Charter was created in 1973 .
 The United States, the Soviet Union, France, Britain, Great Britain, and China were the five permanent members of the U.S. with veto power . The Soviet Union had special responsibility to maintain world peace and security .
 The veto became a mechanism of obstruction, and the Soviet Union frequently used it . While the United States did not use it in earlier years, the frequency of veto increased after 1970 .
 The Security Council was based on the assumption that the major powers would agree on issues of war and peace . The onset of the cold war around 1945 made the U.N. a helpless spectator .
 The Charter provided for a mechanism of maintaining peace . The council may call upon members states to apply sanctions against the aggressor .
 The enforcement of peace was possible in the Korean War . A united command was formed under the U.S. under the United States .
 It placed an embargo on the export of strategic materials to China and North Korea . The embargo was imposed in response to the threat posed by North Korea and China .
 It was only after the closing stages of the cold war that the Security Council became effective again . Consultations and coordination among major powers in the council have been frequent in recent years .
 For about five decades of the cold war, the United Nations never appeared to play the role envisaged at San Francisco in the realm of peace and security . It was bypassed in major flash points across the globe, such as the Panama Canal crisis, Hungary, the Berlin BLOCKADE
 The United Nations was a passive bystander as major powers professed to settle scores outside the United Nations . The U.N. was not a bystander in this case, but it was a major bystander .
 The United Nations was hamstrung due to the use of veto . The General Assembly sought a way out through the Uniting for Peace Resolution to consider measures in a breach of peace .
 After the end of the cold war, the United Nations became more active again . In the process it acquired new functions, in line with but not envisaged in the Charter . The United Nations is now the world's most powerful organization .
 Peacekeeping has been used to act as a buffer between contending parties or monitoring ceasefire agreements . During the turn of the 21st century peacekeeping has expanded to other areas .
 Peacekeeping also means the provision of humanitarian relief, removal of mines, repatriation of refugees, and reconstruction of national infrastructure in devasted areas, such as Afghanistan . Peacekeeping is also providing humanitarian relief and removing mines .
 South Africa, Rwanda, Iraq-Kuwait, Mozambique, Somalia, Somalia and Haiti, Haiti, and Liberia are among the countries listed . South Africa is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Sometimes the United Nations has drawn flak; the UN troops have also been targeted, as in Somalia and Bosnia . UN troops also have been targeted in Somalia, Bosnia and Somalia .
 U.N. finds cooperation among major powers to repulse aggression . Unlike during the cold war years, the United Nations finds cooperation with major powers . U.S. has a history of cooperation with the world's most powerful powers .
 Moscow supported U.S. efforts to impose sanctions against Iraq . In the First Gulf War, Moscow supported United States . Russia was involved in the conflict with Iraq, which had annexed Kuwait .
 Other major powers contributed troops, particularly France and Britain, to the fight .
 Besides war and peace, the United Nations has been instrumental in various humanitarian efforts . The U.N. has been involved in numerous humanitarian efforts in the past .
 A large amount of credit must go to the U.N. for ending apartheid in South Africa, improving life expectancy in Africa, helping children suffering from malnutrition, and fighting diseases .
 It has not been as successful in the removal of global poverty, but it has launched efforts in that direction . The U.N. has not succeeded in removing global poverty .
 Now the United Nations finds itself playing a new role against international terrorism . Now the U.N. is playing a key role in the fight against terrorism in the world .
 The United States acted unilaterally in 1998 when al-Qaeda attacked U.S. embassies in East Africa . It has not been as successful, and the United States has not acted unilaterally since .
 Following September 11, 2001, the United States took drastic steps, and the United Nations was more involved . Terrorism became a key issue of international and United Nations concern .
 Human rights has become a major arena of international attention . In a world where millions of children die days after they are born, the issue of human rights is now a major issue .
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1948 . It has been enshrined in constitutions of states .
 U.N. has been a force in expanding the frontiers of democracy worldwide, believes that democracy fosters world peace . Now the United Nations has also been a . force .
 There is also demand to restructure the Security Council and to add new permanent members . There are also demands to add permanent members with veto power .
 Brazil, Germany, India, Japan, and some African countries are key candidates for permanent places on the Security Council . Brazil and Germany are among the countries demanding permanent places .
 Reforms are necessary to make the U.N. more in tune with the changes of the 20th century and the beginning of the 21st century . Reforms will be necessary, but they are needed to make it more in line with the changing times of the past .
 Pradhan U Nu was the prime minister of Burma (now the Union of Myanmar) from 1948 to 1958 and from 1960 to 1962 . He was an important leader in the struggle for independence from Britain .
 U Nu was born in a period during which the British colonization of Burma was coming under increasing pressure from nationalist Burmese and opposition in Britain . He was born during a period when the British colonisation of Burma faced increasing pressure .
 In 1934 he returned to the university to study law and became involved in nationalist politics . In 1934, he became involved with nationalist politics and returned to university . He was a member of the National Socialist Party .
 He became leader of the student union and was expelled from the university, along with Aung San . He was subsequently expelled from university along with a fellow student leader .
 The subsequent student strike was one of the earliest confrontations between the Burmese and the British, which intensified in the following years . The student strike in Burma was the first of its kind in Burma .
 U Nu joined the WeBurmans Association, which had been formed in the wake of the 1932 anti-Indian riots and was a center for nationalism . U Nu was a member of the group which was formed after the riots .
 It was influenced by a combination of Marxism, democratic socialism, and Irish nationalism . It was inspired by a mixture of Marxism and democratic socialism .
 The leaders, including U Nu, took the forename Thakin, or master, to demonstrate that they were not subservient to the British . The forename is Thakin - master - to show that they didn't want to be submissive to British .
 When World War II broke out in Asia, British authorities arrested U Nu and others, and they were imprisoned until Burma was invaded and occupied by the Japanese .
 The Japanese established a puppet government under Ba Maw, and U Nu served in his cabinet for a period . U Nu was a member of a cabinet under the Japanese government .
 In the years between the end of the war and independence, U Nu assumed the . leading position in the nationalist movement following Aung San’s assassination in 1947 .
 He headed the AntiFascist People's Freedom League and became the first prime minister of independent Burma in 1948 . He was the first Prime Minister of Burma in independent Burma .
 He remained in office for a decade, with only a brief hiatus in 1956-57 . Winning two subsequent elections, he won two more elections .
 His time as prime minister was marked by numerous communist insurgencies and independence struggles by ethnic minority peoples . The former prime minister's time in charge of the country was marked with a decline in value of rice exports .
 He resigned in 1958, and the government was taken over by General Ne Win as a result of widespread social disorder . He resigned from the government in 1958 and was replaced by Ne Win . The government was overthrown in 1958 .
 U Nu returned to power in a brief return to democracy from 1960 to 1962, but the subsequent military coup returned the country to the repressive regime that remained in power into the 21st century .
 He made several attempts to return to power in the 1970s . He attempted to do so in 1969 when he attempted to organize resistance to the military government . He has since tried several times since .
 He was forced into exile in India, but returned to Rangoon to become a Buddhist monk in 1980 . He was then forced to become an exile in the country .
 He had throughout his life been a devoted Buddhist . He had introduced several laws to support the religion .
 In 1988 it briefly appeared that democracy would return to Burma, but U Nu’s attempt to seize power was crushed and he was put under house arrest . In 1988, U Nu tried to take power but was arrested by the military .
 Japan agreed to a United States proposal to create the Self-Defense Force at a modest size of 180,000 troops in 1954 . Because of the communist threat in the cold war, Yoshida Shigeru of Japan agreed .
 By allowing the Japanese government to train a modestly sized defense force, the constitution of 1947 was kept intact . The constitution was kept in place by allowing the defense force to be trained .
 The original treaty was replaced in 1960 by the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security . The treaty marked a significant change from the one-sided alliance to a more balanced relationship based on shared responsibility .
 For the Japanese, the treaty provided a commitment from the United States to defend Japan against an armed attack . It also required the U.S. to consult the Japanese government on the use of military bases on its soil .
 Consultation was required to ensure that any major changes to U.S. operations or force deployments would be approved by both governments . Consultation is required for any major change to United States operations .
 The treaty ensured a greater commitment to a stable alliance to support U.S. interests in Northeast Asia . The treaty was signed by the Eisenhower administration in 1953 . It was the first time the treaty was made public .
 Japan began to pay some of the cost of U.S. military installations in Japan in 1962 . In 1962, Japan agreed to pay for some costs of the military installations .
 The United States returned Okinawa and the Ryukyu Islands to Japanese control . The U.S. returned Okinawa to Japan in 1994 .
 Beginning in the mid-1970s, U.S. forces were gradually reduced in Japan .
 In the late 1970s a new series of agreements were implemented to transfer the responsibility for protecting specific sea lanes to Japan . In the 1970s, agreements were carried out to transfer responsibility for protection of sea lanes .
 Japan broke the former 1 percent spending cap for defense and began purchasing Americanmade aircraft . Along with its expanded commitments, Japan broke its 1 percent defense spending cap .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union brought renewed focus to the U.S.-Japan defense alliance . It lessened the need for a major United States military presence in northeast Asia .
 In 1991, the Japanese government was forced to decline requests to send troops to participate in the First Gulf War, bowing to parliamentary opposition . However, in 1991, Japan declined to send military personnel to the Gulf War .
 The next year, the Japanese government passed a new law authorizing Japan to participate in U.N. peacekeeping operations, with contingents of Japanese troops . The law was passed the next year .
 The expansion of Japan’s international commitments were reaffirmed in 1996 with the Clinton-Hashimoto Security Declaration . U.S. committed to maintain 100,000 troops in the Western Pacific region that included Japan .
 In 1999 the Japanese Diet passed the Law Concerning Measures to Ensure the Peace and Security of Japan in Situations in Areas Surrounding Japan .
 It authorized the use of force in ‘rear areas’ surrounding Japan, partly in response to Communist North Korea’s development of nuclear weapons . The U.S. says it is responding to the threat posed by the North Korea .
 After 2001 Japan’s Self-Defense Forces and Maritime Defense Forces participated in U.S.-led military actions in Iraq and Afghanistan . Japan's Self-Defence Forces and . Maritime Defense forces participated in .
 Washington encouraged and supported Japanese efforts to contribute to the war on terror . Washington encouraged efforts to help contribute to Japan's efforts to fight terrorism .
 Defense Production, Alliance Politics, and the Postwar Search for Autonomy . Defense Production and Alliance Politics is the subject of a new book .
 Richard Nixon's visit to China in 1972 marked a turning point in U.S.-China relations . The visit of Richard Nixon to China marked a 'turning point' in the relationship .
 Their confrontation in the Korean War began two decades of confrontation at a number of strategic points . The United States was embroiled in a ground war supporting South Vietnam and while China provided backing to its then-ally North Vietnam .
 The turn in U.S.-China ties from confrontation to rapproachment was a result of a host of factors, but mainly because of the dangers posed by the Soviet Union . Both nations were concerned about the danger posed by Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 China too was moving from ideological puritanism toward greater pragmatism, spurred on by the Sino-Soviet border dispute . China also moving from Maoist ideological puritansism to greater pragmaticism .
 The Soviet Union’s intervention in Czechoslovakia in August 1968 led to its pronouncement of the Brezhnev Doctrine . As the leading country of the Marxist bloc, the USSR had the right to determine the correct interpretation of Marxism and to intervene in socialist countries .
 China under Mao Zedong had developed its own version of Marxism, feared that it could become a Soviet target for its deviations . The Chinese government feared it could be a target for Soviet targets .
 China’s quest to end its diplomatic isolation with a rapprochement with the U.S. Hence came China's quest to . end its . diplomatic isolation . Hence came the quest to ended its diplomatic . isolation .
 U.S. needed China’s leverage to facilitate a United States withdrawal from Vietnam, it says . China needed China to facilitate the withdrawal of Vietnam from Vietnam . It therefore needed China's leverage to . facilitate a withdrawal .
 The opening came when United States and Chinese table tennis teams met in an international table tennis tournament . The U.S. team was invited to China to play .
 Nixon took steps to expedite visas for visitors from China to the U.S. President Nixon relaxed currency controls, eased currency controls and lifted restrictions on United States oil companies to provide fuel to ships and aircraft .
 Since Washington and Beijing had no diplomatic ties, Pakistan acted as an intermediary . Pakistan acted in place of Washington-Beijing-Washington relations .
 Henry Kissinger secretly visited China via Pakistan via Pakistan in July 1971 . Kissinger was trying to seek normalization of relations with China . Kissinger's visit was to seek exchange of views of common interest . Kissinger visited China in 1971 via Pakistan .
 The announcement heralds an atmosphere of warmth and cordiality in U.S.-China relations, which had been frozen for two decades . The announcement of the announcement heralded a warm atmosphere of U.K. relations .
 The United States had also departed from its hard-line stand that blocked the People’s Republic of China from seating its legitimate representation in the United Nations . Meanwhile the U.S. had also removed from its stand that . blocked the P.R.China from seating .
 In August 1971 the United States dropped its opposition, paving the way for the seating of China in the United Nations . The U.S. dropped its support for China in August 1971 .
 While a quick resolution of outstanding issues were not possible, it signaled the end of “a sterile and barren interlude” in ties . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for years .
 Nixon arrived in Beijing on February 21, 1972, accompanied by Secretary of State William P Rogers and Henry Kissinger . Nixon arrived with Kissinger and Rogers in 1972 .
 The visit generated global interest as a watershed in redefining the balance of power of the world . The world's most powerful nations visited the U.S. in 1998 . The U.N. State of the World Summit was the first of its kind .
 Nixon emphasized ‘common interests’ in a new era . Nixon emphasized common interests in new era. Nixon emphasized "common interests" in a New era .
 The two countries signed the Shanghai Communique, wherein China stated its stand on Cambodia, Korea, and Vietnam . The two nations signed the communique .
 The U.S. envisaged ‘the ultimate withdrawal’ of all forces from Indochina . Both countries declared opposition to hegemony in the Asia-Pacific area .
 U.S.-China ties had moved from deep hostility to detente, facilitating major changes in the global balance of power . The Taiwan issue evaded a solution, but U.K. and China have since moved from hostile to friendly relations .
 William J. Barnds, William J China and America: The Search for a New Relationship . China and the U.S. are at odds with each other in the relationship .
 The U.S.-Republic of Korea Mutual Defense Treaty was signed October 1, 1953, and became effective in 1954 . The treaty was signed in 1953 . It was signed by the United States and the Republic of Korea .
 Rhee flatly rejected any agreement that would allow the Chinese People’s Volunteer Army (Chinese Communists) to remain in Korea following a ceasefire . Such an agreement would be tantamount to ROK's signing its own death warrant, Rhee said .
 Rhee sought a mutual defense treaty with the United States as a precondition for any armistice . Eisenhower’s assurances that the U.S. would pursue peaceful means of reunification, but Rhee wanted a treaty .
 ROK leader Rhee agreed to the release of 25,000 prisoners of war prisoners on June 25, 1953 . Rhee’s unilateral release of the prisoners was the result of U.S. pressure on the North Korean regime .
 Eisenhower sent Assistant Secretary of State Walter Robinson to offer Rhee a mutual security pact . Robinson promised economic incentives in return for Rhee’s agreement .
 The Robinson mission was successful, and when Rhee did not stand in the way of the armistice, the two countries set about crafting the bilateral treaty . The treaty was signed on July 27, 1953, and the two nations signed a treaty .
 On August 8, 1953, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles initiated negotiations that culminated in a treaty of six articles . The treaty was based on the model of existing treaties between the U.S. and the Philippines, and Australia and New Zealand .
 A note of understanding was added to the treaty clarifying the United States position that the mutual defense agreement extended only to attacks from external forces . During the ratification debates in the U.S. Senate, a note was added .
 It received ratification on January 26,1954, and the president accepted the Senate’s recommendations on February 5, 1954, subject to the agreement on the limitation of commitment . The Senate's approval of the bill was ratified on January 25, 1954 .
 ROK agreed to the change, and the treaty came into effect when ratification documents were exchanged in Washington, D.C., on November 17,1954 .
 The treaty was approved by U.S. president Dwight Eisenhower and Taiwan’s president Chiang Kai-shek . It was fully ratified by their respective legislatures . The treaty is signed by the United States and Taiwan .
 The United States had washed its hands of China’s civil war in 1948 . The U.S. had become concerned about communist expansion when Communist North Korea attacked pro-Western South Korea in 1950 .
 The United States then sent the Seventh Fleet to patrol the waters in Taiwan Strait . The U.S. then sent it to the region .
 The terms of the treaty committed the U.S. government to deploy land, sea, and air forces in and around Taiwan as required for its defense . The terms committed the United States .
 The treaty also stipulated that the ROC and the U.S. would aid each other to increase their capacity to resist an armed attack or communist subversive activities directed against either country’s territorial integrity .
 Both sides agreed to maintain peace and security in the region and refrain from the use of force in any manner inconsistent with their obligations to the United Nations . Both sides also agreed to refrain from using force in violation of U.N. obligations .
 The U.S. became concerned that the nationalist government of Taiwan might deploy force against the mainland . Following the 1954 crisis with the PRC, the United States became concerned about Taiwan's intervention .
 This could possibly involve American troops despite the treaty’s defensive nature .
 An incident occurred in 1958 when the PRC shot down two Nationalist F-84s on patrol in China .
 The PRC also renewed attacks on the offshore islands in midsummer 1958 . The attacks tested the commitment of the United States to the treaty .
 The United States deployed an aircraft carrier battle group to the region that included combat aircraft and transports . In response, the U.S. deployed a combat aircraft, transports and combat aircraft .
 Nationalist forces were escorted safely by their ships to supply their offshore islands . The islands were protected by the ships .
 China declared that Taiwan was a part of China and that differences should be resolved peacefully . The visit culminated in the Shanghai Communique in which China declared Taiwan was part of it .
 In 1978 President Jimmy Carter established formal diplomatic relations with the PRC, effective in 1979 . In 1979, President Carter severed diplomatic ties with the ROC, ending the U.S.-ROC Mutual Defense Treaty .
 The Taiwan Relations Act and the Defense of the Republic of China were passed in 2002 . Snyder, Edwin K. Snyder, Edward K.
 Vajpayee was twice prime minister of India, in 1996 and 1998, from 1998 to 2004 . He was also prime minister from 1996 to 2004, when he was prime minister .
 He is considered the leader of Hindu nationalism and served as a member of parliament for almost 50 years . He has served in parliament for nearly 50 years and is considered a Hindu nationalist leader .
 During his six years as prime minister, Vajpayee worked to modernize the Indian economy . He also worked to settle long-standing disputes with Pakistan . He was prime minister for six years .
 His government has been accused of fostering racism against Muslims and political extremism . His government is accused of encouraging extremism against Muslims .
 Alongside his political activity Vajpayee also earned a reputation as a poet, publishing collections of poetry .
 He earned a master’s degree in political science from Victoria College and DAV College . He earned his master's degree from the Victoria College .
 Initially close to communism he soon shifted to the right, finding inspiration in the campaigns of Syama Prasad Mookerjee for inclusion of the Muslim majority state of Kashmir in the Indian Union .
 The BJS increasingly won strong support in the northern regions of the country . But it repeatedly failed to remove the Congress from power .
 During the Indian Emergency of 1975-77, Vajpayee was a vocal critic of the government and the suspensions of civil rights . During the Emergency, Indira Gandhi proclaimed by then-prime minister Indira Gandhara, he said .
 In his two years in government, Vajpayee worked to improve diplomatic relations with Pakistan and China . He visited both countries and established trade relations with them . In spite of his Hindu nationalism, he was Hindu nationalist .
 With strong parliamentary support, Vajpayee embarked on a large program of economic reforms . Reforms were aimed at limiting state involvement in the industrial sector to contain waste and public debt .
 He also stimulated foreign investments and research in information technology, making India one of the major powers in the field .
 During Vajpayee’s government, India experienced one of its fastest periods of economic growth . During the 1990s, India had one of India's fastest economic growth rates .
 Critics argue that poorer sectors of Indian society were left out of this prosperity . Yet critics argue that the poor sectors of India society have been left out .
 President Clinton’s official visit to India signaled the beginning of a new diplomatic entente between the U.S. and India after the tensions of the cold war . Bill Clinton made historic progress in the establishment of normal relations with Pakistan .
 The economic and diplomatic successes of his government, however, were not enough to assure Vajpayee’s reelection . The economic . and diplomatic . success of his . government was not enough . to assure him reelection .
 The Second Vatican Council was one of the most significant events in the history of the Roman Catholic Church . Luca Prono was a member of the Council of the Holy Council .
 Vatican II attempted to redirect the Catholic Church . Vatican II was an ecumenical council of bishops, bishops, priests and nuns .
 Its effect was considerable, both in its intended and unintended results . Its effect on the world was considerable .
 He signaled the need for renewal so that the church could more effectively impact the world, he said .
 The Vatican City is a landlocked sovereign city-state whose territory consists of a walled enclave within the city of Rome . Council continued for three more sessions, concluding on December 8, 1965 . Council members continued to meet again in Rome .
 The Church issued 16 documents, the most authoritative being the Constitutions on the Liturgy, the Church, Revelation, and the Church in the Modern World . It issued 16 .
 It directed a major revision of the liturgy, the services of the Catholic Church that had practically not changed for four centuries . The changes were directed by the Church's liturgical services .
 It promoted the use of the Bible and emphasized its authority . It mandated a restoration of the college of bishops in the governing of the church . It took a positive approach to other religions and modern society .
 The council opened the door to change, and a period of rapid, confusing, and often unintended change then began . Change then began, with the council opening the door for change .
 Shortly after the council, the liturgy began to be celebrated in the vernacular . The Eucharist was celebrated with the priest facing the people, and women stopped wearing head-coverings .
 Pope Paul VI refused to change the ruling against artificial contraception in 1967 . For others, there was shock that the changes would not include the elimination of many unpopular teachings and practices .
 Many Catholics took a secularizing approach, many a conservative resisting approach . Many clergy and laity left, and soon there was a common conviction the Catholic Church was in crisis . The Catholic Church is in crisis, and many have left .
 Pope John Paul II participated in the council as archbishop of Krakow . He began a process of stabilization after becoming pope in 1978 .
 The Extraordinary Synod of Bishops in 1985 reaffirmed the value of Vatican II . He urged Catholics to avoid the deviations of extreme rejection and of promotion of secularization .
 Vatican II has been accepted as the charter of the modern church and may turn out to be the source of renewal that was hoped for . As a result of his papacy, Vatican II is accepted as a charter of modern church .
 Velasco Ibarra's campaign techniques included radio, public address systems, and mass-produced leaflets . Ibarras are famous for their use of radio and leaflets . The Spanish president was elected to lead the Spanish Senate in 2006 .
 In subsequent years, he forged a national state far more activist and populist in orientation . In later years, the state was more activist in orientation. He forged a state far less activist than his predecessor .
 Pitching appeal principally to the urban working and middle classes, he alienated many of the country’s traditional landowning and military elite . Leaving traditional relations of power and privilege largely intact, he left traditional relations with power largely intact . Pitching his appeal mainly to the working and
 In keeping with broader 20th-century trends in Latin America, he also promoted the expansion of internal infrastructure and public works . He implemented universal suffrage; and used nationalist discourse to bolster his own popularity and unify his compatriots .
 The populist legacy he bequeathed continues to shape Ecuador’s political landscape . Ecuador's populist legacy continues to be shaped by his legacy .
 In 1932 he was named president of the House of Deputies and in 1933 won the country’s presidential election . In 1933 he won the election to become president .
 He was overthrown by the military and went into exile in Colombia and Argentina . He served only a year in office before being overthrown .
 From exile he built a formidable following, returning in 1944 to wide acclaim . In 1944 he mobilized strikes and protests and forced the resignation of the sitting president .
 As provisional president he supervised a constitutional convention and triumphed in the 1944 presidential election that followed . He was provisional president of the United States and later became president .
 His populist policies alienated many of his elite supporters, prompting his overthrow by the military in 1947 . He was overthrown by the army in 1947, and his populist policies were met with resistance .
 He returned for the 1952 presidential campaign and won in a landslide . He went into exile and went back into exile in 1952 .
 He was reelected in 1960, only to be overthrown by the military a year later . The same sequence unfolded in his election of 1968 and overthrow in 1972 .
 The United States, the Soviet Union, and other countries recognized only a 12-mile limit . The U.S., Soviet Union and others had to limit their cars to 12 miles .
 The Velasco Ibarra regime impounded U.S. tuna boats that had not paid the requisite average $10,000 special fee . The result was the so-called tuna war of the late 1960s and early 1970s .
 His populist policies, causing a growing economic crisis and fiscally unsustainable, prompted his final overthrow in 1972 . He was overthrown in 1972 after his populist policies caused a growing crisis .
 He died on March 30, 1979, leaving a complex legacy of heightened political mobilization, resurgent nationalism, and unmet political and economic aspirations .
 North Vietnam came into existence on September 2, 1945 . North Vietnam became commonly known after the 1954 Geneva Accords . The Democratic Republic of Vietnam was known as North Vietnam .
 The French, however, were disinclined to accept this, and moved to reimpose their colonial rule over the entire region . The French were forced to take over the region in order to maintain colonial rule in the region .
 They quickly established control in the south, although they could not effectively control the countryside . They established control of the southern part of the country, but were unable to effectively control it .
 The French and the Vietminh hoped to avoid a full-scale war . Both sides entered into intermittent negotiations .
 In March 1946 the French provisionally recognized the DRV in exchange for Ho’s agreement to include the north in a proposed French Union . The French agreed to the agreement in return for the inclusion of the north .
 Final agreement remained elusive, however, and the relationship between the two sides continued to deteriorate . The U.S. government and U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton have been involved in negotiations .
 Ho and his supporters escaped into the mountains in the north and began a war of nationwide resistance . Ho's supporters escaped to the mountains and began to fight a government crackdown . Ho and supporters escaped in the mountains .
 The war against the French unfolded against the backdrop of the emerging cold war .
 On the battlefield, the Vietminh relied on the military genius of General Vo Nguyen Giap . General Giap's military genius led the Vietnamese to victory in Vietnam .
 They seized land belonging to French landowners and alleged traitors and redistributed it to peasants, winning popular support . They also seized land from French landowners .
 French were decisively defeated at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in May 1954 . The French were defeated by the French in the battle .
 Ho was pressured by the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China to accept a compromise . At the Geneva Conference that followed, Ho accepted a compromise with the Soviets and China .
 The result was the partitioning of Vietnam, with the promise of nationwide elections in 1956 . Vietnam was partitioned into a nation with a promise to hold nationwide elections .
 Ho had to accept a truncated Democratic Republic of Vietnam north of the 17th parallel . Ho had envisioned an independent government over all of Vietnam . He had envisioned the establishment of an independent .
 North Vietnam became the first communist state in Southeast Asia, with Ho Chi Minh as president and Hanoi as its capital . The DRV was formed in 1953 .
 The power nucleus of the VWP was the Politburo, which was responsible for day-to-day decision making . VWP is a state-run state of Soviet Union .
 The primary task that confronted Ho and his colleagues was the need to consolidate their rule . Ho's primary task was to consolidate the rule of the state .
 DRV leadership has indicated its intention to proceed cautiously and take gradual steps toward establishing a socialist economy . DRV leaders have issued a directive that indicated their intention to progress cautiously toward establishing socialism .
 In order to reassure the population, the government announced that the country would operate with a mixed economy . The country will operate with the country's mixed economy, indicating acceptance of private wealth .
 At the same time, the government also stated its intention to respect the freedom of religion .
 After the partition some 800,000 refugees made the trek south . These pronouncements failed to reassure many in the north, and after the partition, many fled the country .
 Many leaders in the VWP and others in local party and government structures continued to nurture suspicion of Catholics . Harsh treatment of Catholics bred resentment in some areas of the country .
 The economy, which had been devastated by years of war, posed a challenge to the government . The economy was devastated by the war, but the government was able to rebuild it .
 DRV government moved to nationalize certain sectors of the economy such as utilities, banking, and some large enterprises . DRV went nationalize some of the country's largest firms .
 In 1961 the government launched the first Five-Year Plan to develop heavy industry . The plan was launched by the government in 1961 . The government launched a five-year plan in the same year .
 By the middle of the decade war with the United States diverted resources from industrial development and stalled these efforts . War with the U.S. diverted resources into industrial development .
 The agricultural sector required immediate attention since food was in chronically short supply . Food was in need of immediate attention, the government said .
 This, as well as the need to win over the rural population, seemed to demand land reform . The need for land reform seemed to be the reason for the land reform, the government said .
 In 1955 the government launched a program to confiscate land from wealthy landlords for redistribution . The land was confiscated by the government in order to redistribute land .
 On the positive side it increased the rates of landownership, increased rice production, reduced the influence of wealthy landlords, and won the support of numerous poor peasants .
 On the negative side, overzealous cadres and poor peasants often denounced those who owned only medium-sized holdings . Local tribunals executed many who owned medium-size holdings .
 In 1956 the hostility eventually erupted in a peasant uprising in the province of Nghe An . In 1956, the hostility erupted in an uprising against the government .
 Ho Chi Minh publicly admitted that errors had been made and slowed the pace of land reform . Ho Chi-Minh: "Land reform has been hit by a series of errors and has been slowed down"
 Within two years, the government initiated a large-scale collectivization effort . Most of the rural population was brought into some form of statecontrolled cooperative farming . The government initiated the effort within two years .
 The VWP also created party-run organizations that recruited different segments of Vietnamese society, including veterans, workers, farmers, youths, and women . The party also created parties that recruited veterans and workers .
 By mobilizing the population into various communist-led organizations, the VWP realized its domination of Vietnamese society . The VWP's domination of Vietnam society was achieved by mobilizing people into communist organizations .
 Authors of protest literature came under increasing public attack from 1958 to 1958 . Authors were attacked with increasing public criticism from 1958 onwards .
 Culprits were sent to work in agricultural cooperatives or work camps to be re-educated . The victims were then sent to re-educate themselves .
 The South Vietnamese government’s decision to boycott the elections planned for 1956 compelled the North Vietnamese leadership to decide the priority it would give to reunification . North Vietnamese leaders decided to give priority priority to the reunification process .
 By and large the DRV leadership decided to adhere to the decision to build socialism in the north while searching for some means to reunify the country . The DRV leader decided to stay with the decision and said he was looking to reunite the north .
 Debates in the VWP Central Committee in the mid-1950s suggested that reunification to be realizable only after a military struggle . The leadership anticipated reunification only after military struggle, according to reports .
 In 1959 the VWP began to approve efforts to increase pressure on Ngo Dinh Diem’s regime in the south . The VWP shifted to a more activist approach in 1959 . In 1959 it began to be more activist .
 By this point, a broad-based resistance movement against Diem had gained strength . By this time, the resistance movement had grown strong .
 In late 1960, largely at the behest of southern cadres, the National Liberation Front was created as an umbrella organization . It rallied a broad range of anti-Diem resistance . The group was created in late 1960 .
 The road to the reunification of Vietnam led the DRV to war against the United States . The U.S. commitment to a noncommunist South Vietnam had grown steadily .
 Between 1965 and 1973 U.S. combat troops fought in Vietnam War . Between 1965 to 1973 United States fought in the Vietnam War.
 Evidence suggests that Hanoi had begun infiltrating troops into the south in late 1964 . Some evidence suggests that the Vietnamese government was beginning to infiltrate troops .
 Supplies and men flowed south along the Ho Chi Minh Trail through Laos and Cambodia . Supplies of men flowed from Laos to Cambodia and Laos .
 In January 1973, after several rounds of peace talks, the Paris Peace Accords ended U.S. involvement in the Arab-American conflict .
 The cease-fire between north and south broke down, and the war resumed . North and south of Syria has been fighting since 2003 .
 On April 30, 1975, victorious North Vietnamese forces captured Saigon and achieved Ho’s dream of a unified Vietnam . Ho's dream of unified Vietnam was realized in Saigon . Ho died in April 1975 .
 In his honor Saigon was renamed Ho Chi Minh City in 1976, in a country now renamed the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . Saigon is now known as Ho Chi-Minh .
 It was created after the defeat of previous colonial masters, the French . It ceased to exist with the seizure of its capital, Saigon, by communist forces .
 When the French arrived in the 19th century, they made the southern part of the country, which they named Cochin-China, a full colony . The French made the area a colony of its own .
 Saigon was more thoroughly internationalized than the rest of the country . Saigon's people were more familiar with the capitalist system and French culture .
 The French created the state of Vietnam in 1949, which centered on the CochinChina colony and had the emperor as head of state . The French state was based on the former colony of Cochin China, which was a French colony .
 The defeat of the French and the Geneva Conference of 1954 established the state as occupying the territory south of the 17th parallel . The Geneva Conference was held in 1954 .
 In the following year the Republic of Vietnam was announced after Emperor Bao Dai was deposed . The Republic was formed after the deposed of the Emperor .
 The first president of the republic was Ngo Dinh Diem, who had been involved in the ousting of the emperor . Diem adopted an authoritarian approach to ruling the country .
 When Diem was deposed and killed, a brief interlude under Nguyen Cao Ky was succeeded by military rule . Military rule began in 1965, when the country was ruled by the military .
 Nguyen Van Thieu was elected president of Vietnam in 1967 . He was reelected unopposed four years later . In 1967 he was elected and re-elected in 2006 .
 North Vietnamese capture of Saigon in 1975 seems to have been inevitable . Despite massive outlay of lives and materiel to resist the North Vietnamese, after the withdrawal of U.S. troops in 1973 as a result of the Paris Accord, the capture was inevitable . North Vietnam captured Sa
 The Republic of Vietnam had developed a sophisticated bicameral parliamentary system . Its existence was tainted more or less by corruption and by the authoritarian rule of its presidents and rulers .
 A number of people have characterized the state as little more than a puppet United States state . The state would not have lasted so long without largescale United States military support, he says .
 Nguyen Van Thieu was often trenchant in his criticisms of U.S. leaders . He was intransigent in pursuing policies of his own devising, he says .
 The Vietnam War was extremely costly and destructive and had a profound effect on both the soldiers who fought it and the civilians who lived through it . It was extremely destructive and destructive .
 The Tonkin Gulf Resolution was signed by Lyndon B Johnson in 1964 . It gave him the power to wage war in Vietnam . The resolution was signed in 1964 and signed by President Johnson .
 Throughout the 1940s and into the 1950s, the Vietminh under Ho Chi Minh were fighting the French colonial presence in Vietnam . During the 1940 and 1950s they were fighting against French colonial forces in Vietnam.
 By 1954 the United States was paying 80 percent of the cost of France’s war against the Vietminh . The U.S. was paying the majority of the costs of the war against Vietnam .
 In July 1954 the French and the Vietminh signed an armistice in Geneva, which divided Vietnam at the 17th parallel . The French-Vietminh war ended in July 1954 .
 Ho Chi Minh controlled the north, and Vietnam-wide elections were to be held in 1956 . Ho Chi-Minh ruled the north of Vietnam, and the country was to be ruled by him . Vietnam's first elections were in 1956, when the country became a democracy .
 The United States did not sign the agreement, and plans were put in place to stop Ho Chi Minh’s plans to conquer all of Vietnam . The U.S. never signed the agreement .
 President Dwight Eisenhower was afraid that if Vietnam fell to communism, the rest of Southeast Asia would follow . Eisenhower feared that if the country fell to communistism, the whole of the region would fall to communism . Eisenhower was worried that Vietnam would lead to communism in Vietnam .
 The U.S. pushed aside the French puppet leader and replaced him with Ngo Dinh Diem, a Vietnamese nationalist . Not wanting Vietnam to be under the control of a communist leader, the United States pushed aside .
 The United States increased aid to South Vietnam, and the first U.S. advisers arrived there in early 1955 . The first United States advisers arrived at the scene of the war .
 In 1957 the Vietminh in South Vietnam began to revolt against the Diem regime . Ho Chi Minh was frustrated that Vietnam was not yet independent and unified . In 1957, he began a revolt against Diem .
 In May 1959 communist North Vietnam came to the aid of the Vietnamese revolutionaries in the south . North Vietnam was the first country to join the anti-Vietnam rebels .
 In 1960 anti-Diem communists and Buddhists created the National Liberation Front, with the Vietcong as its military wing, and began operations against Diem’s forces . In 1960, anti-Dem communists, Buddhists and communists and communists created the .
 The United States pledged in the 1954 South East Asia Treaty Organization pact to defend South Vietnam against external aggression . President John F Kennedy lived up to that obligation .
 To Kennedy and other politicians, Vietnam was another cold war battlefield . Kennedy: Vietnam was a cold war battleground . To Kennedy: "To Kennedy, it was a war of war"
 Signs of weakness would lead the Soviet Union to believe that the U.S. was weak and vulnerable . The Soviet Union would want to see signs of weakness in the United States .
 South Vietnam also became a testing facility for counterinsurgency units . As such, South Vietnam became a test facility for anti-war forces . South Vietnam was also known as a testing ground for counter insurgency units .
 The United States Green Berets advised the South Vietnamese army, and civilians provided medical and technical aid and economic and political reforms . The U.S. was in an effort to “win the hearts and minds” of the Vietnamese .
 There was a general consensus in Kennedy’s administration about the consequences of losing Vietnam to communism . There were others who feared the worst. Kennedy's administration feared the loss of Vietnam .
 Undersecretary of State George Ball told Kennedy that within five years there would be 300,000 U.S. soldiers in Vietnam . Ball: Within five years of Vietnam, the United States would be in the midst of a major war in Vietnam. Ball: "Within five years,
 Even with advisers calling for escalation, Kennedy proceeded cautiously . Even with his advisers called for escalation he proceeded cautiously.
 As the number of casualties increased, the prospects of withdrawing became increasingly difficult . The situation has become increasingly difficult for the Afghan forces .
 In the face of so many problems, Kennedy gave the order to overthrow Diem . Kennedy gave order to oust Diem, says CNN's John Sutter . Diem: "It was a mistake to underestimate the depth of the problem"
 On November 1, South Vietnamese military officials with the assistance of the U.S. embassy in Saigon, arrested Diem and his brother .
 A number of inexperienced military officers took command in South Vietnam with little support . They were unable to govern effectively . The South Vietnamese government was unable to take control effectively .
 The country sank deeper into trouble and the role of the U.S. increased . The United States played a key role in the fight against the Taliban .
 Lyndon B Johnson was deeply troubled over Vietnam and had been for some time . After President Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963, the issue of Vietnam fell to President Johnson .
 During the months leading up to the November 1964 election, Johnson tried all he could to keep the issue of Vietnam in the background, fearing it would hurt his election chances .
 Some advisers were trying to give Johnson suggestions for getting out of Vietnam and still saving face . Meanwhile, Joint Chiefs of Staff were advising him that preventing the loss of South Vietnam was of overriding importance to the United States .
 Johnson reported to Johnson that conditions had worsened in Vietnam since Khanh took over power in January 1964 . Johnson reported that conditions in the country had worsened .
 Many officials in Vietnam favor increased pressure on North Vietnam, including air strikes . Many officials favored increased pressure from North Vietnam . Air strikes are expected to be part of the plan .
 McNamara, aware of Johnson’s wish to be ambiguous to the public regarding his stance, offered to take a lot of the heat . McNamara: "I’m happy to take the heat. McNamara is happy to be the guy who takes the heat."
 Johnson understood that in order to achieve the ambitious conditions set out in McNamara’s policy statement, an escalation of military power in the country would have to be undertaken .
 The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was passed in Congress on August 7, 1964 . It was passed by Congress in 1964 . The resolution was passed on the basis of the Gulf War .
 It provided the legal authority for Johnson to escalate the Vietnam War . The legal authority was used to justify escalation of the war .
 On August 2 North Vietnamese gunboats attacked the USS Maddox in the Gulf of Tonkin . North Vietnam gunboats had attacked the Maddox .
 On August 4 Maddox and another vessel, the USS Turner Joy, reported being under attack . The Maddox was attacked on August 4, 2012 .
 Many doubts exist about whether or not the second attack actually took place . The Johnson administration used it as a pretext for retaliation against the U.S.
 Johnson ordered the first U.S. air strikes against North Vietnam . Johnson: "It's a war of revenge for what happened"
 Vietnam was the largest issue he dealt with in Vietnam . Vietnam was one of the largest issues of his Great Society agenda .
 Johnson had countless discussions about Vietnam with Richard Russell . Still relying on trusted advisers like Russell, even though he would not take his advice, Johnson would not .
 Johnson's rationalization was what he considered a treaty commitment inherited from Eisenhower and Kennedy . Johnson’s rationalization is that he considered treaty commitment .
 Russell stuck to his conviction that Vietnam was not the place to invest U.S. blood and treasure . No matter what Johnson said to him, Russell stuck with his conviction . Russell: Vietnam was the place not to invest United States money .
 Johnson told Everett Dirksen, Senate minority leader, that communist propaganda, his advice from Eisenhower, and the domino theory informed his policies with regard to Vietnam . Johnson said the communist propaganda and advice from the president from Eisenhower informed his policy .
 After July 1965, the war escalated into a major international conflict . The conflict began in July 1965 and ended in July 1968 .
 The North Vietnamese army numbered in the thousands, and they supported an estimated 80,000 . The National Liberation Front force was estimated to be at large at the time .
 From 6,000 U.S. troops in Vietnam in July 1965, the number increased to over 536,000 by 1968 . An additional 800,000 South Vietnamese troops were also in Vietnam .
 The social activism and antiwar movements of the late 1960s spurred many protests against the Vietnam War . Both sides played to their own strengths. The Vietnam War was the focus of many protests .
 The United States had great wealth, modern weapons, and a highly trained military force under the command of General William Westmoreland . The U.S. had a very strong military force and a very wealthy military force .
 Using bombing raids and search-and-destroy missions, it sought to force the opponent to surrender . It was the first time the U.S. government had been able to use such tactics .
 The National Liberation Front and the North Vietnamese army, under the exceptional direction of Vo Nguyen Giap, used a different strategy altogether . The N.N.F. and the N.V. army used a completely different strategy .
 Giap wanted to wear down the U.S. and its allies by harassment missions . Giap said he wanted to "wear down" the United States and allies by harassing missions .
 Between 1965 and 1967 the United States did untold amounts of damage to Vietnam . The U.S. did much of the damage to the country during that time .
 Bombing increased from 63,000 tons in 1965 to over 226,000 ton in 1967 . Bombing in 1967 increased by over 200 tons .
 The war dragged on, and opposition to the conflict in the United States intensified . The war in the U.S. intensified .
 In late 1967 the North Vietnamese launched operations in remote areas to draw U.S. forces away from cities . North Vietnam launched operations to draw United States forces from cities in late 1967 . The North Vietnamese government launched operations on remote areas .
 On January 31, 1968, the National Liberation Front launched massive attacks on unsecured urban areas . The attacks were carried out by the N.L. Front .
 They led strikes on 36 provincial capitals, 5 major cities in the south, and 64 district capitals . Strike also targeted 36 provinces and 64 districts capitals . The strike is the first in a series of strikes in the country's history .
 They attacked the United States embassy in Saigon and captured Hue for a period . They also attacked the U.S. embassy in Vietnam, captured Hue and attacked Hue .
 Although the Tet Offensive failed overall, it had a profound psychological effect on the people of the U.S. The Tet Offensive had a psychological impact on the nation .
 Lyndon Johnson announced in 1968 that he would not seek reelection in 1968 . Vietnam and widespread unrest across the country led to Johnson's decision .
 After the Tet Offensive, ensuing peace talks failed to produce any agreement . The Tet Offensive took place in Vietnam in 1968 . The conflict was the first to take place in the country since 1968 .
 The problem of Vietnam fell to the fourth U.S. president involved in the Vietnam conflict, Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon was the president of the United States during the Vietnam War .
 In 1969 he expanded the war into neighboring Cambodia, a move that he kept from the press . The move further increased the gap in the people’s trust in the government when he went public about it in 1970 .
 Nixon’s involvement in Vietnam was marked by increased domestic opposition . Nixon's involvement in the Vietnam war marked by domestic opposition to his involvement .
 After the Cambodian affair, Congress repealed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution . Congress repealed it after the incident .
 Polls showed that more than 70 percent of Americans felt that the U.S. had erred when it sent troops into Vietnam . Polls also showed that 70 percent felt the United States should not have sent troops there .
 U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam did not address the fundamental issues over which the war had been fought . It allowed for the extraction of United States military forces from Vietnam and the return of prisoners of war .
 North Vietnam was allowed to leave 150,000 troops in the south . The future of South Vietnam was not clearly spelled out .
 U.S. Congress drastically cut military and economic aid to South Vietnam . Fighting broke out between the north and the south, and the United States cut military aid .
 When Richard Nixon resigned because of the Watergate scandal, the Vietnam War issue was passed to its fifth president, Gerald Ford . Gerald Ford became president of the U.S. when Richard Nixon stepped down .
 Congress rejected his request for $722 million in aid for South Vietnam . Congress agreed to only $300 million in emergency aid to extract the remaining U.S. personnel from the south .
 The climax of this came on May 1, 1975, with a harrowing rooftop helicopter evacuation . The climax was the evacuation of a rooftop helicopter helicopter .
 South Vietnamese military casualties exceeded 350,000, and estimates of North Vietnamese losses range between 500,000 and 1 million . South Vietnamese losses are estimated to be between 1 million and 500 million .
 Civilian deaths cannot be accurately counted but ran into the millions of deaths . Civilians died in the conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 More than 58,000 U.S. troops were killed, and over 300,000 were injured in the Vietnam War . More than 400,000 Americans died in the war, including 58,500 Americans .
 Many of Johnson’s Great Society reforms were cut back because of the increased military expenditures . Johnson's Great Society was cut back due to increased military spending . Many of the reforms were part of the Great Society .
 Veterans returning home experienced long-lasting effects, which ranged from flashbacks to posttraumatic stress disorder to the effects of exposure to chemicals . The effects of returning home to the U.S. include flashbacks, post traumatic stress disorder and exposure to chemical exposure .
 Once the United States evacuated Saigon, the North overran the city, and Vietnam was united under communist rule . Once the U.S. evacuated, Saigon was under communist control .
 Herring, George C. Herring: America’s Longest War: The U.S. and Vietnam, 1950-1975, is the longest war of its kind . Herring's Vietnam War was the longest and longest conflict in American history .
 Vo Nguyen Giap is second only to Ho Chi Minh in the history of communist Vietnam . Giap was a military leader in Vietnam's communist state . He was the second most influential leader in the country .
 Giap was also the chief military strategist against the U.S. led Vietnam War . Giap also was the chief commander of the Vietnam War against the United States led Vietnam .
 Giap was born in central Annam, just north of the 17th parallel, on August 25, 1911, to Nguyen Thi Kien and Vo Quang Nghiem . Giap is one of the world's most famous war leaders .
 Giap’s father was a rice farmer who tilled his own land and rented another small portion of his land . Giap's father was also a practitioner of traditional Asian medicine .
 In 1923 he received a certificate for finishing elementary studies, which was not very common . In 1923, he was able to earn a certificate from his elementary studies .
 The following year he took the entrance examination to qualify for additional education at Hue but failed . He took the exam but failed to pass the entrance exam to Hue but did not qualify .
 Giap then became a history teacher, a profession he retained throughout the 1930s . Giap was a teacher at the time of his early youth .
 He was a devoted scholar of military tactics and studied Napoleon and the ancient Chinese military tactician Sunzi extensively .
 Giap, along with Ho Chi Minh, fled to China, where he studied guerrilla warfare . The French outlawed communism in 1939, so Giap fled to the country to study guerrilla warfare in China .
 From 1939 until around 1947 Giap was busy developing and directing the military plan that defeated the French and eventually caused the U.S. to abandon its efforts in Vietnam . Giap developed and directed the plan that led to the defeat of the French in the war .
 It was a multifaceted plan that included gathering popular support for his efforts and mobilizing the people to join the communist cause . It was also a plan to gather popular support and mobilize the people .
 Giap’s military strategies caused millions of people to lose their lives, including millions of Vietnamese, both North and South, and over 58,000 Americans . Giap's military strategies led to millions of Vietnam, both South and North, losing millions of lives .
 Many American soldiers were impressed with the diligence of the Vietnamese, the skill of the North Vietnamese army, and their discipline . The North Vietnam army was one of the most disciplined in the world .
 Giap served as deputy prime minister and minister of defense in 1975 . Giap was the first Vietnamese prime minister of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . He served as defense minister in 1975, when North Vietnam conquered the south .
 In 1992, he was awarded the Golden Star Award, Vietnam’s highest decorative honor . He was awarded Vietnam's highest decoration award in 1992 .
 Balthazar Johannes Vorster was South African prime minister from 1966 to 1978 . Vorster served as prime minister of South Africa between 1966 and 1978 .
 He is perhaps best known for having legislated into power some of apartheid’s most discriminatory and racial policies . He legislated some of the most discriminatory policies in apartheid .
 John Vorster was born on December 13, 1915, in Uitenhage, Eastern Cape . He was the 13th child of a wealthy sheep farmer .
 He opposed South Africa’s involvement in support of the Allies by becoming a member of the pro-Nazi Ossewa-Brandwag . With the onset of World War II, he ardently opposed South African involvement in the Allies .
 He maintained that the dictatorial regime in Germany at the time was a better model for South African governance than the parliamentary system already in place . However, this did little to deter his radical ideology .
 After one session in parliament, he was appointed deputy minister of education in 1958 . He rigidly enforced apartheid’s Bantu education policies .
 During this time, the government sent South African Defense Force soldiers to support Ian Smith’s white regime in Rhodesia, with the popular support of most of white South Africa . Most of the South African government supported the white regime .
 Vorster succeeded Prime Minister Verwoerd unopposed after he was assassinated in 1966 . Vorster was the first Dutch prime minister to take office in a cabinet post .
 His brief and uneventful time as a cabinet minister under Verwoerd meant that he knew little about the workings of departments other than his own . The Dutchman's brief time in the cabinet was brief .
 He knew little about the African population and the inner workings of the huge departments that governed their lives, he said . He said he knew little of the African people and the workings of their lives .
 Vorster combined the Justice portfolio with that of Police and Prisons . Vorster has strengthened the power of the department and the South African Police Service .
 Vorster’s tenure as prime minister was marked mainly by an increase in racial discrimination and violence in all of South Africa . However, Vorster's tenure as PM was marked by increase in detention without trial .
 He began by unofficially supporting Rhodesia, which at the time was struggling to gain independence from British rule under prime minister Ian Smith . Rhodesia is now the only African nation to have independence .
 He did not wish to alienate potential political allies such as the U.S. by extending diplomatic recognition to Rhodesia . Although publicly he espoused the white public opinion in South Africa, he did not .
 He exerted his pressure as a hegemon in the region by persuading Smith to negotiate with Mozambique during the regional civil war that was ongoing in southern Africa .
 Vorster began cutting off vital supplies to Smith and even refused calls from the Rhodesian prime minister . Vorster refused calls made by Smith and refused to answer calls from Smith .
 International pressure continued to squeeze South Africa for the remainder of apartheid . South Africa continued to suffer from apartheid until the end of the apartheid era .
 Vorster invaded Angola in the 1970s in order to protect South-West Africa against rebel attempts by Angola to invade the country for diamonds . Vorster, in an attempt to regain South African public approval, invaded Angola .
 Vorster announced in Cape Town his famous Detente with Africa policy in 1974 . In Cape Town, Vorster made a famous detente policy with Africa .
 Despite regional efforts in Angola at the time, Vorster promised cooperation with the leaders of neighboring black nations .
 The negotiations over Rhodesia and attempts to make peace with black Africa were predicated on the hopes that such maneuvers would postpone Vorster’s day of reckoning in South Africa .
 His hope was that emerging Zimbabwean and Mozambican states would feel indebted to South Africa for its role in liberating these countries . South Africa's role in freeing Zimbabweans was crucial to the liberation of these countries, he said .
 He harshly suppressed the Soweto uprising in 1976, which would draw more international pressure in the form of economic and social sanctions . He would have faced international pressure if he did not .
 He granted independence to the Transkei in 1976 and Bophuthatswana in 1977 in accordance with apartheid’s separate development policies . Economic development within them would stagnate, but economic development within the two countries remained stagnant .
 He maintained that Africans could exercise political rights only in their homelands regardless of where they actually lived . He maintained the view that Africans should exercise political right in their home country only .
 Steve Biko, the Black Consciousness leader, died in horrifying circumstances while in police custody . Biko died on September 12, 1977, while in custody .
 This step helped him to an overwhelming victory in the general election of November 1977 . This step was the first step to take the country to the polls in 1977 .
 Vorster took the first, unconscious steps toward a more equal South Africa . Vorster did take the first steps toward an equal South African state .
 Each national group had to play sport separately, but they might play against each other in multinational events . Each national team must play sports separately .
 Higher-class hotels and restaurants might acquire multinational status and thereby admit people of all races . Similarly higher-class hospitals and restaurants could also become multinational .
 An elaborate system of permits for mixed gatherings, events, and venues was initiated . The permit system was set up to permit mixed gatherings and events .
 Vorster saw many apartheid policies as unnecessary and began the slow process of weeding them out . Vorster began weeding out of apartheid policies in order to remove them .
 Vorster was implicated in what became known as Muldergate (so named after Dr. Dr. Michael Vorster) in the 1970s .
 Vorster was certainly a victim of the scandal, but in a sense the scandal arose from circumstances that he himself had perpetrated . Vorster's scandal arose in circumstances that Vorster had perpetrated, he says .
 The official investigation concluded that Vorster, in conjunction with the head of the South African Police Services, General H J. van den Bergh, had conspired to manipulate the U.S.-based Washington Star . The Citizen was also found to have been involved in the plot .
 In 1973 Vorster agreed to shift about 64 million rands from defense budget for a series of propaganda campaigns . Vorster had agreed to Mulder’s plan to shift the funds from the defense budget .
 After the scandal, Vorster retired from the position of prime minister in 1978 . Vorster was prime minister of the Netherlands from 1978 to 1978 .
 Sheikh Hasina Wajed is the president and head of the Bangladesh Awami League . She is the country's prime minister . She has been in power for more than 20 years .
 She is the daughter of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the popular Bangladeshi leader who played a leading role in the founding of Bangladesh . She is also a leading figure in Bangladesh's history .
 Sheikh Hasina Wajed was one of only two members of the Mujib family to survive a bloody August 15, 1975, military coup . She was only one of the only two surviving members of her family surviving the coup .
 Sheikh Hasina Wajed was born on September 28, 1947, in the city of Tungipara in the Gopalganj district of Bangladesh . She was born in 1947 .
 During her school days, she became active in politics . She became the chief of the Student Union at the Government Intermediate College for Women in 1966 .
 She and other members of her family were imprisoned several times by Pakistan’s military government leading up to the Bangladesh liberation struggle in 1971 . She and others were imprisoned .
 After the assassination of Mujibur Rahman in 1975, Wajed was forced by the military government of General Ziaur Rahman to live in exile until 1981 . He was forced to live under the rule of the military in exile in 1981 .
 Wajed became the prime minister of Bangladesh on June 23 . With an absolute majority secured by her Awami League in the 1996 election, she became the PM in 1996 .
 She took measures to alleviate rural poverty, enhance per capita income, create job opportunities, and increase agricultural production . She took many measures to ease rural poverty .
 She also introduced new welfare schemes, innovative housing programs in rural areas that reversed the trend of migration from rural to urban areas .
 She was the leader of the opposition in the Bangladeshi parliament from 1986 to 1987, 1991 to 1993, and 2001 forward . She was also the opposition leader in the Bangladesh parliament from 1987 to 1993 .
 Awami League boycotted parliament until June 2004, accusing Khaleda Zia's government of corruption and nepotism . Under her stewardship, the party accused Zia of corruption .
 Wajed is a fierce, enigmatic leader who believes in political parties based in the needs of the masses . He believes in mobilizing the party cadre to win elections .
 Wajed is likely to play a prominent role in Bangladeshi politics for the foreseeable future . He comes from a political family and with a father who was a highly revered personality in Bangladesh politics .
 In 1955 the member nations signed the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance . The treaty was signed in 1955 .
 The Warsaw Pact’s objectives from its inception to its demise in 1991 changed . Throughout that time, the organization served as the means by which the Soviet Union bound its Eastern European clients together militarily .
 The Warsaw Pact agreement replaced a series of bilateral treaties of defense and friendship between the Soviet Union and these nations . Warsaw Pact countries signed a treaty of friendship and defense between them .
 Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Romania joined with the Soviet Union . Albania was one of six countries to join with the USSR in 1968 .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization had been in existence since 1949 . NATO announced in May 1955 that it would include West Germany as a member . This prompted the formation of the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was formed in 1955 .
 Only 10 years after the end of World War II, the Soviet Union faced a resurgent Germany . The Soviet Union was engaged in a cold war with the West and faced a resurgence in Germany .
 It was not only an external threat that moved the Soviets to change their agreements with these nations, but there was the matter of internal stability as well as the threat of internal instability .
 Following World War II, there had been significant armed resistance to the Soviets . The Soviets had entered these nations while advancing against retreating German armies .
 Polish anti-Soviet partisans opposed the Soviets until well into the late 1940s . Anti-Russian partisans fought against the Soviets in Poland until the end of the 1940s.
 Demonstrations against the Soviets caused real concern about the stability of the communist elites running these countries . Demonstrators against the Soviet Union caused concern about stability of these countries, says historian John Sutter .
 By bringing in Soviet troops to occupy these countries as part of Warsaw Pact activities, the Soviet Union allowed itself to more easily defend any attacks that might come from the West . The Soviet Union was able to keep these friendly regimes stable .
 The treaty clearly stated that national sovereignty would be respected and that all of the signatories were independent . The treaty was signed by the U.N. to ensure that sovereignty was respected .
 The treaty was to last for 20 years, with an automatic 10-year extension . It was due to last 20 years with automatic extension of 10 years .
 Each member nation could unilaterally leave the organization; the reality proved to be very different . Each member member of the organization could leave the country .
 Hungarian government of Imre Nagy declared that it would no longer be allied with the Soviet Union but would become neutral . In 1956 the Hungarian government decided to become a neutral with the USSR .
 The Soviet Union acted quickly to defeat this rebellion . Regardless of any promises, the Soviet Union was quick to defeat it .
 In the early days of the Warsaw Pact, the nature of the alliance was somewhat vague . In the 1960s and '90s, it was unclear what sort of alliance was behind the alliance .
 Each of the member nations, while influenced by the Soviet Union, still had a certain amount of independence in its tactical doctrine . The Soviet Union did not coordinate its training with other members of the military .
 Soviet-manufactured weapons and equipment were purchased by the member nations in 1961 . From 1961 on, combined exercises were conducted, and combined exercises conducted .
 High-ranking Soviet officers were assigned to defense ministries of Warsaw Pact members to ensure uniformity of training and to keep the national militaries subservient to and a part of the Soviet Union .
 Although the Warsaw Pact gained cohesion in terms of command and control, there were movements that served to weaken it . The Warsaw Pact was weakened by movements that weakened it in the 1960s .
 In 1962 there was another defection from the Warsaw Pact, this time a successful one . In 1962, there was a successful defection to the Soviet Union from the communist bloc .
 Albania strengthened its ties to China and distanced itself from the Soviet Union . Albania's relationship with China is a key part of its relations with China . Albania has a history of anti-Soviet relations with Russia .
 Albania did not border on any other Warsaw Pact member, the Soviet Union had no choice but to accept this action . Albania was not part of the Warsaw Pact, but it was part of a Warsaw Pact pact .
 Albania’s formal defection in 1968 merely ratified what already existed . Albania's official defection from Albania in 1968 was merely ratified by the country's constitution . Albania joined the U.S. in 1968, but it was never formally recognized .
 Another unhappy member of the alliance was Romania . Romania was also unhappy with the NATO alliance .
 This country managed to conduct a very successful balancing act in staying within the alliance, exercising a surprising degree of independence, and not paying a very high price for its actions .
 Romania’s independent streak began as early as 1958, when it stated that Soviet troops were not welcome on its territory . Romania would not participate in the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 . Romania's independence streak began in 1958 .
 Romania's position was that the pact existed only for self-defense and not to maintain communist elites in the separate nations . Romania’s position said the pact was only for defense and not for the sake of maintaining communist elites .
 Romania was loyal in other ways and because it was not close to the potential front with Germany . This independent streak went unpunished because of its loyalty to Romania .
 The Soviets were concerned that any reform or liberalization might weaken their control over this state . After the attempted defection by Hungary 10 years before, Albania’s departure, and Romania”s distancing itself, the Soviets were worried about any reform .
 Freedom of the press and freedom of expression forced the Soviets to act . The continued freedom of press and expression forced them to act. The Soviets were forced to take action .
 Combined Warsaw Pact exercises had been taking place that summer, and the Warsaw Pact nations had been able to stage their invasion and subsequently move quickly into the country .
 The Czechoslovak government was changed, and there was no more discussion of changing Czechoslovakia’s role in the Warsaw Pact . The Czechs were replaced by the Soviet Union in the 1970s and '80s .
 The Warsaw Pact’s invasion of Czechoslovakia influenced another nation . Thirteen years later, the Warsaw Pact invaded another nation. The invasion took place in 1968 .
 Poland's labor union Solidarity has been in the spotlight for decades . Solidarity is the country's largest labor union in the history of the country .
 By the end of 1981, after almost two years of liberalization, the Communist government of Poland imposed martial law . The end of the 1980s was the beginning of a two-decade period of Polish democracy .
 Union leaders were imprisoned, the union was declared illegal, and Polish soldiers took over many of the government’s functions . Union leaders imprisoned, soldiers took control of many of government's functions, and the union leader was imprisoned .
 The rationale for this move was that the imposition of martial law by Polish authorities would eliminate the possibility of a repetition of the events of 1968 . Polish authorities imposed martial law in order to prevent a repeat of the 1968 events .
 As the 1980s wore on, there were significant changes in Soviet leadership . The Soviet Union was ruled by the West in the early 1980s .
 Leonid Brezhnev, who had ordered the invasion of Czechoslovakia and threatened the same for Poland, died in 1982 . He had also threatened to do the same thing for Poland .
 He was succeeded by Yuri Andropov, who had restored order to Hungary after its unsuccessful rebellion in 1956 .
 Andropov died in 1984 and was succeeded by Konstantin Chernenko . Konstantina Chernenko was succeeded in 1986 by Andropova .
 With the accession of Mikhail Gorbachev to power in 1985, relationships between the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact slowly changed . Relationships between the two countries slowly changed in the 1980s and '90s .
 Warsaw Pact members agreed to another 20-year term to be followed by a 10-year extension . Warsaw Pact came up for renewal 30 years before . Pact was extended to 20-years, followed by 10-years extension .
 It became recognized that there would be no more interventions such as the ones that had taken place in Czechoslovakia and had been threatened in Poland . It became known that there were no more .
 The Warsaw Pact still, however, existed as a force with over 6,300,000 soldiers . 20 percent of those soldiers were non-Soviet, the Warsaw Pact .
 The resolution of the Euromissile crisis and changing politics within the Soviet Union were leading to other changes . The resolution was leading to changes in the country's political and economic policies .
 At the end of 1988 Gorbachev announced that there would be troop withdrawals from East Germany, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Poland . The withdrawal of troops was announced in 1988 .
 The power elites did not look forward to this, as their position within their own countries had been strengthened against dissidents and other opposition by the presence of the Soviet army . But the power elites were not looking forward, as they had strengthened their position against dissidents .
 Hungary removed its barbed wire barriers along its border with Austria in 1989 . Solidarity scored well in a partially free election in Hungary .
 Before the year was out, the regimes had changed in Bulgaria, Romania, East Germany, and Czechoslovakia .
 The Warsaw Pact ended in 1991 . Although there were some attempts to keep the Warsaw Pact alive as a political organization, the organization was disbanded .
 In 2004 former members Bulgaria, Romania, and Slovakia joined, as did three former republics of the Soviet Union . Lithuania, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia and Estonia joined .
 There was a great deal of distrust between the Soviet Union and the member states and among the members of the USSR . The Soviet Union was ruled out of existence by the West .
 Several countries had not enjoyed good relations before World War II and still harbored ill feelings toward each other . Several of these countries had had good relations with each other before WWII .
 Although the Soviet Union, could compel these nations to buy Soviet equipment and essentially to become part of the Soviet army, they could not force complete obedience in all matters . Also, although, although . could . compel these . nations to . buy Soviet equipment and essentially to .
 Despite Soviet demands that pact members buy substantial amounts of military equipment, many of the nations refused to do so . Many of the countries refused to buy military equipment .
 Arms purchases would bring in cash desired by the Soviet Union . It wanted these nations to field equipment compatible with Soviet issue . Arms purchases brought in cash .
 The Soviets did not want other pact members to have armies, air forces, or navies that could present obstacles to the Soviet Union . On the other hand, the Soviets didn't want members of the pact to have army, air force, or navy .
 NATO and the Warsaw Pact never had a conflict between NATO and Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact sent advisers and provided military aid to Soviet clients . NATO never faced a conflict with the Warsaw pact .
 To predict that pact forces would have fought unreservedly to protect the Soviet Union and socialism is an unrealistic assumption . The Soviet Union is not a socialist state, but a pact would have been formed to protect it, says historian .
 See also Hungarian revolt ; Prague Spring; Soviet Union, dissolution of the Soviet Union . See Hungarian revolt .
 Watergate is an impressive hotel, apartment, and office complex that overlooks the Potomac River . The complex is located near an old canal lock .
 The name evolved to become an all-embracing label for political corruption, intrigue, and the misuse of presidential authority . The name has evolved to be a reference to political corruption and intrigue .
 Watergate, in the lexicon of U.S. politics, is simply synonymous with scandal . Watergate in the United States politics has been linked to scandal. Watergate was the first scandal to emerge in the country's history .
 Richard Nixon resigned from the presidency on August 9, 1974 . The scandal emerged as an interconnected series of events and deeds that would destroy the Nixon presidency . Nixon's resignation was the result of the scandal .
 Watergate produced a national crisis in leadership and a lasting sense of national betrayal . In the wake of Watergate, the U.S. faces a crisis of leadership and national betrayal, says President Nixon .
 A security guard discovered a suspicious tape holding a stairwell door open . This prompted him to contact Washington police . D.C. police are investigating the tape .
 Bernard Barker, Virgilio Gonzalez, Eugenio Martinez, James W McCord, Jr., and Frank Sturgis were arrested . The police discovered and arrested on the scene .
 The men were in the process of breaking into the Democratic National Committee Headquarters . The men are believed to be planning to break into the DNC Headquarters .
 McCord, a former CIA operative, was the chief of security at the Committee to Re-elect the President . In his possession was the telephone number of E Howard Hunt, a possible incriminating link to the White House . Hunt was also in possession of the number of Hunt's phone
 The burglary could have passed into obscurity in 1972 presidential election year if not for media attention . After a White House dismissal of the affair, the White House dismissed the burglary .
 Journalists used FBI sources to probe the events in New York City . FBI sources were involved in the investigation .
 The outcome was that the burglary began to appear as one part of a complex dirty-tricks campaign by Nixon cronies . The burglary was one of Nixon's dirty tricks . The outcome of the burglary was that it was part of the Watergate scandal .
 This group was active in undermining administration opponents through a variety of nefarious schemes such as breaking into the offices of Daniel Ellsberg, a former Pentagon and State Department employee .
 As the future would reveal, these actions would have unfortunate consequences for the president . The president would have to deal with the consequences of his actions .
 Watergate burglary itself had approval of former attorney general John Mitchell and support of leading White House personnel such as Charles Colson and John Ehrlichman .
 Few believed any of these men would have acted without the personal approval of the president . Few believed that any of them would have taken action without the president's personal approval .
 Watergate burglars, along with Liddy and Hunt, went on trial in January 1973 . Liddy, Hunt and Liddy were convicted of Watergate crimes in January .
 The defendants initially refused to talk, and the judge, John Sirica, ordered long sentences unless there was greater cooperation . Judge Sirica: Long sentences are due to be imposed unless there is more cooperation .
 McCord admitted that the campaign was behind the burglary and arranged payments to guarantee silence . This brought about McCord’s admission that he had arranged payments for silence . McCord said the campaign had arranged to silence the burglars .
 With the McCord admission, the political stakes were considerably raised, leading to a Senate investigation chaired by Senator Sam Ervin . Senator Ervin chaired the investigation into McCord .
 Watergate was now on the national agenda, and White House staff faced subpoenas to testify . The White House was now facing subpoenas for Watergate . The Watergate scandal was the subject of a major White House investigation .
 Nixon’s close advisers H R Haldeman and Ehrlichman resigned, resigned, and White House counsel John Dean was fired . Nixon's close advisers resigned, but his close adviser H R . Haldman and E. Haldemman resigned .
 The Senate investigation was televised from May 17 until August 7, 1973 . Many former White House officials testified, including John Dean .
 A White House official admitted the existence of a White House taping system, which seemed to offer a way of finding the truth . The situation became even more complex after the White House admitted to the existence . Alexander Butterfield said the system could help find out what happened .
 Nixon thought that this particular intrusion represented an attack on executive privilege . Nixon thought it was a violation of executive privilege. Nixon thought this was an attempt to breach executive privilege, but it was not .
 He ordered the attorney general to dismiss Cox if he didn’t cancel the subpoena . Cox was ordered to be dismissed by the Attorney General . Cox is accused of lying under a subpoena from the White House .
 This led to what has come to be known as the “Saturday Night Massacre’s” Richardson and his deputy, William Ruckelshaus, resigning . Richardson resigned after the incident .
 Nixon appointed a new special prosecutor, Leon Jaworski, and as a desperate compromise gesture released the tapes in an edited form . The tapes were released as a compromise gesture by Nixon .
 The tapes seemed to cause less but more distress for Nixon, particularly after it was revealed that there had been an 18-minute erasure as well as many additional erasures . The tapes were released in May .
 Nixon’s position throughout 1974 had also been progressively undercut through an ever-increasing series of guilty pleas by White House associates . Nixon's position was also progressively undercut by a series of White House aides .
 In January campaign aide Herbert Porter admitted lying to the FBI; in February Nixon’s lawyer, Herbert Kalmbach, pleaded guilty to illegal electioneering . In March, the so-called Watergate Seven were all indicted for conspiring to interfere with the Watergate investigation .
 Watergate grand jury indictments followed in April . Ed Reinecke, a lieutenant governor of California and Nixon campaigner, was charged with three counts of perjury . Nixon was a Nixon campaigner .
 Dwight Chapin, Nixon’s appointments secretary, admitted perjury and lying to the Senate and a grand jury in April . Also in April Dwight Chapins admitted perjury .
 The House of Representatives began preparations for impeachment following a July 27, 1974, vote of 27 to 11 by the House Judiciary Committee on obstruction of justice charges . The vote was passed by a unanimous vote in 1974 . The impeachment process began in August 1974 .
 Nixon and Haldeman discussed possibilities for blocking FBI investigations in 1972 tape . Tape proved to be the final blow that toppled Nixon from power .
 Richard M Nixon announced to the nation on August 8, 1974, that he would resign as of noon on August 9, 1974 . Nixon became the first U.S. president to resign from office without support in the House or Senate .
 Ford pardoned Nixon on September 8, pardoned him and thus saved him from criminal prosecution . Nixon was pardoned by Ford, ending his prosecution of Watergate crimes .
 Watergate poisoned the political waters of the nation and left a jaundiced, cynical view of politicians and their promises . Watergate poisoned political waters and left the nation with a cynical view .
 When stripped of their offices and the emblems of power, the politicos appeared disgraceful, dishonest purveyors of power for power’s sake . The politicos appear to have no regard for the well-being of the democracy .
 This would create a lasting legacy of paranoid suspicions and give rise to conspiracy theories . This would give up to a climate receptive to conspiracy theorists, says David Frum .
 Watergate led to reforms in campaign financing as well as the passage of the Freedom of Information Act in 1986 . Watergate also led to the passage the Freedom Of Information Act, which was passed in 1986.
 The media became a much stronger voice, particularly as the nation moved toward news coverage on a 24-7 basis . The media has a strong voice, especially in the nation's 24-hour news coverage .
 This led to the quandary of instant analysis, often incorrect, which can shape policy and possibly undermine the best democratic interests of the nation . Instant analysis is often incorrect and can shape government policy, often wrong .
 The cult of personality and celebrity has now perhaps replaced the cult of power . It is perhaps replaced by the cults of power, says David Cameron .
 Watergate: The Scandal that Shocked America. Pocket, 2005; Olson, Keith W. Olson, 2005, . Olson, 2004, . Watergate: Watergate: President Richard Nixon’s White House scandal .
 Chinese politician Wen Jiabao was born in Tianjin, China, and attended Nankai High School . He was born Theodore W Eversole, Theodore W. Eversole and Theodore Eversole .
 He worked closely with Zhao Ziyang in the late 1980s and was demoted after Zhao’s fall from grace following the Tiananmen Square massacre . He worked with Zhao in the 1980s but later demoted .
 Wen's career recovered quickly and he was able to continue to work under Jiang Zemin . He was an alternate member of the Politburo in 1992 .
 In 1998 premier Zhu Rongji entrusted him with oversight of agriculture, finance, and environment policies .
 He is noted for his encyclopedic knowledge, practical approach, and consensual management style . He is also noted for the encyclopaedic knowledge .
 He has built up a network of influential friends during his political career . He has proven himself to be a political survivor .
 Wen has shifted the focus of China’s economic policies from growth and development at all costs to consideration of social goals such as public health and education, more egalitarian development, and awareness of the costs of development .
 Wen Wen has not been afraid to deal publicly with controversial matters involving public health and safety . Wen has been criticized for his actions in the past for his comments on the health of China .
 In 2003 he ended public silence over the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome outbreak . The outbreak began in Guangdong Province in November 2002 . It was the first time he had spoken publicly about the outbreak .
 He was the first Chinese official to address the AIDS problem in China . He was also the first official to acknowledge the problem .
 Wen indicated the seriousness of his concern by making numerous unannounced visits to rural areas . Wen avoided elaborate preparations by local officials to cover up problems that exist .
 Spain ruled the western Saharan region known as Rio de Oro as part of its colonial empire . Western Saharan War was the start of the Second World War .
 The region was sparsely populated by mostly Sunni Muslim nomadic peoples of mixed Berber and Arab ancestry who were Arabic speaking . The region has been largely populated by nomadic people who were Arab speaking .
 The region contained some of the world’s richest phosphate mines but was otherwise desperately poor . The region was once rich in phosphate but desperately poor in phosphate mines .
 In the early 1970s the Polisario Front (Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia al Hamra and Rio de Oro) initiated an armed nationalist struggle for independence from Spain .
 After the death of Francisco Franco, the new Spanish government granted the territory independence in 1975 . The territory was granted independence by the Spanish government in 1975.
 Morocco and Mauritania both immediately claimed the Sahrawi territory . Although the U.N. declared that they should have selfdetermination, both claimed the territory . Mauritania and Morocco also claim the territory, which is disputed by both countries .
 King Hassan II of Morocco launched the ‘Green March’ of over 300,000 unarmed Moroccans to march into the territory and incorporate it into Morocco . The march was led by King Hassan III of Morocco .
 Algeria supported the Polisario because of its rivalry with Morocco as well as its desire for access to a port on the Atlantic Ocean . Algeria supplied it with arms and assistance . Algeria also supplied arms, assistance to the Polsario .
 SADR became a full-fledged member of the African Union in 2009 . Recognized by some 70 nations, the country is now a full member of some 70 countries .
 The war between the Polisario, Morocco, and Mauritania lasted from 1975 to 1984 . The war was fought between Morocco and the Mauritania .
 The Polisario was able to defeat Mauritania, which withdrew its claims in 1979, but it was largely defeated by Morocco . Morocco obtained arms from the United States, which obtained arms .
 Moroccan troops moved into northern sector of the territory and occupied the huge phosphate mines at Bu Craa . Moroccan troops move into the northern sector and occupy the northern part of the province .
 The war and Moroccan occupation resulted in the displacement of over 200,000 Sahrawi, who continue to live in refugee camps in surrounding regions to the present day .
 By the early 1980s Morocco controlled the majority of the territory, and SADR administered the remainder as liberated territory . Morocco controlled most of Morocco's territory, with the rest of the rest as liberated .
 The wall effectively enclosed the Moroccanheld sections of Western Sahara . The wall was effectively enclosed by Morocco .
 The United Nations called for a referendum, for the people to vote for independence or for union with Morocco . The U.N. called for the referendum, which could be held in Morocco .
 The Polisario supported the referendum, but Morocco moved in settlers, who probably now outnumber the indigenous Sahrawis, to the territory it held . Morocco has since moved in to its territory, which is now home to more than 100,000 settlers .
 Morocco argued that the settlers, presumably all in favor of union, should be allowed to vote in the proposed referendum . Morocco argued the settlers should be able to vote for the referendum .
 Morocco denies Morocco's claim that it has won the World Cup . SADR and its supporters strongly rejected Morocco’s claim . Morocco has been accused of using the vote to deny the vote .
 Both the United Nations and the United States attempted to mediate but failed to break the impasse . Both the U.N. and U.S. attempted to negotiate a resolution .
 Morocco would refuse any referendum until it could guarantee a victory in the election . Morocco is expected to hold a referendum in the coming weeks . Morocco has not ruled out a referendum .
 In 1983 King Hassan II negotiated an agreement with Algeria, which then halted its support for the Polisario . Many Sahrawis remained refugees in Algeria and other neighboring countries . In 1983, Algeria stopped supporting the Polsario .
 After Hassan’s death in 1999 his son King Muhammad VI announced his desire for a resolution to the problem . But he also opposed holding a referendum on independence . After Hassan died in 1999, his son Muhammad VI said he wanted a resolution .
 In 2005 riots by supporters of the referendum in Moroccan-held territory broke out . Moroccan forces quickly quelled the riots and repressed SADR supporters .
 One of the longest liberation struggles in the contemporary era continued to be unresolved . Hence one of the long-standing liberation struggles continued to remain unresolved .
 From the 1950s the World Bank broadened its mandate to encompass economic development and poverty issues in Third World countries . Its International Finance Corporation, its International Development Association, and its International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes are the IBRD . The World Bank Group, which together with
 Its governing structure consists of a board of governors, with a representative from each member state . A board of executive directors and a president are also in charge of the organization .
 In the decades following its foundation, the World Bank underwent a number of broad shifts, from funding reconstruction to large development projects in Third World countries to its current focus on alleviating poverty and sustainable development .
 Scholarly interpretations of the World Bank’s role in world affairs vary widely . The World Bank's role in the world affairs varies widely .
 Neoclassical and neoliberal economists and social scientists tend to interpret the World Bank in positive terms . The World Bank is a force for progressive social change in the world .
 Many leftleaning social scientists tend to view it as serving the interests of multinational corporations and facilitating the foreign policy goals of the world’s advanced industrial countries, particularly the United States . In contrast, some social scientists see it as facilitating foreign policy .
 The bank acknowledges many of its past mistakes, particularly its support for massive “white elephant’s projects in Africa and Latin America . The bank has been criticized for supporting corrupt politicians and business owners in Africa .
 The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund were founded at Bretton Woods in 1944 . Despite divergent interpretations, all observers agree that the World Bank is one of the most important financial entities of the postwar era .
 William Easterly, William R The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics . Easterly’s book is published by William R. Easterly at the University of New York .
 The term 9/11 was added to the U.S. vocabulary, symbolizing armed aggression holding humankind for ransom . The term was added in the United States vocabulary .
 American Airlines Flight 11, . United Airlines Flight 175, . American . Airlines Flight 77, and . United . airlines Flight 93 were hijacked by al-Qaeda .
 The aircraft crashed into the north tower of the World Trade Center, the south tower of WTC, the Pentagon headquarters, and a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania . The aircraft, respectively, were crashed .
 About 3,000 people died, and property worth billions of dollars was lost . Property worth billions were lost in the earthquake .
 Bin Laden is the son of Saudi Arabian construction tycoon Mohammed Awad bin Laden . He was the mastermind behind the September 11 attacks . Bin Laden was born in Saudi Arabia .
 Bin Laden had a deep hatred of the U.S. policy in the Middle East . Bin Laden called for the liberation of the region from the United States .
 The United States had previously been the target of terrorist attacks such as the World Trade Center bombing . The USS Cole attack was a bomb attack on the USS Cole .
 The successful execution of the attack inside United States territory by 19 Islamic militants was a demonstration of the failure of U.S. intelligence . The attack was a successful execution by 19 militants .
 The terrorists dispatched by al-Qaeda passed through security checkpoints of airports easily and performed their mission . Al-Qaeda dispatched by the terrorist group passed through airport security checkpoints easily .
 It was one of the greatest failures of U.S. intelligence since Pearl Harbor . The failure of intelligence in the Philippines was a major intelligence failure .
 Targets, as well as the type of aircraft, were being modified until the final decision was made . Targets and type of planes are being modified before the decision is made .
 Operation Bojinka was conceived by Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and Ramzi Yousef as early as 1995 in Manila . The plan had begun with Operation BoJinka, which was conceived in 1995 .
 Khalid presented al-Qaeda with the argument that commercial planes could be used to hit targets . Khalid was in Afghanistan during his time in the country . Khalid: "Instead of using aircraft loaded with explosives, commercial planes can hit targets"
 Nine planes were to be crashed into different targets such as the WTC, the Pentagon, the White House, and the Capitol . 9 planes were planned to crash into the WTC and the Pentagon .
 It would be landed in the United States after all the male passengers were killed . The plane would land in the U.S. after all of its male passengers had died .
 The WTC, the Pentagon, and the United States Capitol were to be the targets of the 9/11 attacks . The Pentagon, the U.S. Capitol and the World Trade Center were among the targets .
 A new terrorist cell was established in Hamburg, Germany, and militants were chosen by bin Laden . The cell was set up in Hamburg and was chosen by the terrorist leader .
 At a January 2000 meeting held in Kuala Lumpur, militants discussed the USS Cole bombing and the September 11 attacks .
 Some members had already been to the United States, renting apartments and undergoing training as students at flight schools . Some of the members have already been renting apartments .
 By June 2000 alMihdhar, al-Hazmi, Mohammed Atta, and Marwan al-Shehhi were already in the U.S. by June 2000 . Al-Mazmi and Atta were among those who were already living in the United
 The terrorists often changed their places of residence, spent money on airline tickets, and got driver’s licenses by obtaining mailboxes . Terrorists often changed locations of residence and bought airline tickets by changing places .
 In the final preparations, four teams were chosen and airline tickets were purchased . The final preparations are now being made for the World Cup .
 AA Flight 11 crashed into the north tower of the WTC and had on board the hijackers Walid A1 Shehri, Wail Alsheri, Mohammad Atta, Aabdul Alomari, and Satam Sugami .
 The Pentagon was hit by AA Flight 77, this third plane carrying Khalid al-Mihdhar, Majed Moqued, Nawaf A1 Hazmi, and Salem A 1 Hazmi . The Pentagon hit by the crash was the third AA flight to the Pentagon .
 UA Flight 93 crashed into the ground in Shanksville, Pennsylvania . Ahmed A1 Haznawi, Ahmed Alnami, Ziad Jarrah, and Saeed Alghamdi had overpowered the fourth plane, which crashed .
 Flight 11 crashed into the north tower of the World Trade Center at 8:46:40m. local time and at 9:03:11m. Local time . Flight 11 was the last plane to crash into the building's north tower at the time of the crash .
 Millions watched the live collapse of the north and south towers . Millions of people watched the collapse live on the internet .
 Messages of sympathy poured in to the administration and the people of the United States . Messages of support poured in for the president and his family .
 The United Nations, in Resolution 1368, expressed its support to the United States in defending its homeland . The U.N. expressed support for the U.S. in defense of its homeland. The United States is the only nation to defend its homeland from terrorism.
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization declared that the attack on the U.S. was an attack against all NATO members . NATO members declared the attack against the United States as an attack on NATO .
 The towers had previously been the target of a terrorist attack in 1993 . The U.S. towers had been the targets of the 1993 attack . The towers were previously targeted by terrorists .
 President George W Bush addressed the nation on the evening of September 11, saying that the U.S. was not going to be cowed by the acts of mass murder . President Bush said that the United States was not cowed .
 The United States declared al-Qaeda the prime suspect, and bin Laden became a wanted man . The U.S. declared bin Laden the main suspect in the September 11 attacks .
 Sales of the U.S. flag soared . Patriotism reached a new height, sales of the United States flag soared.
 Donations to charitable organizations topped half a billion dollars within two weeks after 9/11 . Donations topped half billion dollars in two weeks .
 Counterterrorism laws were introduced by the Bush administration infringing on the personal liberty of citizens . Counterterror laws introduced by Bush administration infringed on personal liberty .
 A Council for Homeland Security was established for internal counterterrorism efforts . The council is based on internal security efforts . It was established to help combat terrorism .
 The USA Patriot Act empowered federal authorities to prosecute terrorism suspects and detain them without charges . The act was passed by Congress in 2005 .
 Information Awareness Office created in 2002 . Measures for collecting information pertaining to Internet activity, credit card purchase histories and airline ticket purchases .
 Joint Inquiry into Intelligence Community Activities Before and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001, released its final report in December 2002 . The Joint Inquiry released a final report into intelligence community activities before and after 9/11 .
 The National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States made its report public on July 22, 2004 . The bipartisan commission was created by Congressional legislation .
 The attacks also had significant economic repercussions, pushing the U.S. deeper into a recession . The attacks have also had economic repercussions .
 United States stocks lost $1.1 trillion in value in a week after the attack . United States stock market was reopened six days after the attacks .
 The WTC fire was extinguished after burning for three months . Recovery operations took months to complete, and the WTC fire took months .
 The September attack led to the “War on Terror, “ with the U.S. increasing it military operations, putting pressure on terrorist groups, threatening governments sheltering militants, and waging war in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 Operation Enduring Freedom began on October 7, 2001, against the Taliban regime in Afghanistan . Operation ended in October 2001, and lasted for two months .
 Initial support for the War on Terror waged by the U.S. began to drop significantly after the invasion of Iraq in 2003 . Support for the war on Terror has dropped significantly since that invasion began .
 Clarke, Richard A. Against All Enemies: Inside America’s War on Terror . Clarke: "Against All Enemies" is inside the war on terror. Clarke: “The war on Terror is not a war on terrorism. It is a war of terror. It’
 Yahya Khan was the president of Pakistan and chief of army staff from 1969 to 1971 . He succeeded Mohammad Ayub Khan, who resigned as president of the country . He was the chief of the army staff of Pakistan from 1969 until 1971 .
 Yahya Khan declared martial law to quell riots caused by discontent in the aftermath of the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 . Khan declared the martial law as soon as he rose to power . Khan was the prime minister of the late 1960s .
 Yahya Khan dissolved the National Assembly and terminated the constitution . Khan also dissolved the national assembly . Khan's government also terminated the country's constitution .
 His two years as president were marked by strong tensions in East Pakistan, leading to the Bangladesh Liberation War and the eventual secession of Bangladesh in 1971 . He was president of East Pakistan during his presidency .
 Yahya was born in Chakwal on February 4, 1917, into a family of Persian origins, descended from the military elite . Yahya is the first woman to be assassinated in Pakistan's history . She is the daughter of the former Pakistani President Hamid Khan .
 Yahya joined the British army during World War II . He served in Iraq, Italy, and North Africa . Yahya served in North Africa, Iraq, and Italy .
 After the partition of India, he became the youngest brigadier general in the Pakistani army, commander in chief of the army in 1966 . Ayub Khan turned to his faithful aide Yahya Khan to maintain order in the country .
 To make this suspension of political and civil liberties more palatable, he also started a large-scale renovation of the country’s civil service personnel . The country's civil service staff is being renovated .
 He also announced restrictions on economic monopolies and a more equal distribution of wealth . The president also announced an end to the economic monopoly .
 Yahya’s reforms and his government were swept away by the conflict that erupted in 1971 between East and West Pakistan . Yahya's reforms and government swept away in the conflict between the two sides .
 Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, leader of the Awami League, launched a campaign for the creation of a federation in which East Pakistan would enjoy great autonomy . The federation would be based in East Pakistan .
 Neither Bhutto nor Mujibur would support the other as prime minister . Yahya decided to solve the political impasse by sending the army to East Pakistan to crush the Awami League .
 The acts of brutality committed by the West Pakistani army caused millions to flee to India for Indian intervention . Millions of Pakistanis fled to India, forcing the West Pakistan army to surrender .
 East Pakistan declared its independence in 1972, establishing the state of Bangladesh in 1972 . East Pakistan is now known as Bangladesh .
 Yahya Khan’s only option was to hand power to Zulfikar Bhutto, who put him under arrest . Khan was forced to hand over power to the Prime Minister of Pakistan, who was put under arrest by Bhutte .
 Yeltsin struggled against vestiges of the former regime and the chaos following its collapse to introduce a stable, democratic system . The former regime's collapse led to the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 He studied construction at the Ural Polytechnic Institute, graduating in 1955 .
 He first became a party administrator in 1969 and continued to develop contacts within the Soviet system . He became an administrator in the Soviet Union in 1969 .
 Yeltsin rose to the top of the CPSU during the 1980s through connections with Mikhail Gorbachev, the de facto leader of the country, and other reformers . The former Soviet Union leader is now Russia's second most powerful politician .
 Yeltsin portrayed himself as a reformer and people’s champion despite his lavish lifestyle . Yeltsins portrayed himself . as reformer despite lavish lifestyle despite lavish lifestyles .
 Yeltsin repeatedly shuffled and fired staff members and underwent criticism by hard-line Communists . However, Yeltsins' staff members were fired and heavily criticized by the Communists .
 In 1987 Gorbachev removed Yeltsin from his highranking party positions . Yeltsins was removed from his party positions in 1987 . In 1987 he was removed by the Soviet Union .
 Yeltsin became a harsh critic of Gorbachev and advocated a slow pace of reform . His later policies were a hallmark of his later policies .
 This was an effort to counter Gorbachev’s favoring of a decentralization of power to create hurried reform . This was a push to create a hurried reform to create more rapid reform, the author says .
 He vented in the Congress of People’s Deputies, a parliamentary body established by Gorbachev . The body was established in 1987 .
 Yeltsin’s detractors attempted to undermine his integrity, accusing him of being heavily intoxicated in public . Yeltsins’ detractors accused him of drinking heavily in public, but he was not intoxicated .
 Growing dissatisfaction with the Soviet system made men who opposed it, such as Yeltsin, popular . Growing dissatisfaction in Soviet system led men who oppose it to be popular .
 Yeltsin ascended to the Congress of People’s Deputies as delegate from the Moscow district in 1989 . He gained a seat on the Supreme Soviet Supreme Soviet . Yeltsins was a delegate from Moscow district and gained seat on Supreme Soviet.
 In 1990 the Congress of People’s Deputies of the RSFSR adopted a declaration of sovereignty . In June 1990 the congress of People's Deputies adopted the declaration .
 Yeltsin won 57 percent of the vote in the 1991 democratic presidential elections . During the 1991 presidential elections, Yeltsins won 57 per cent of the votes .
 In August 1991 hard-line Communists launched a coup against Gorbachev, who was held in the Crimea . The coup took place in August 1991, when the former Soviet Union leader was still in Crimea .
 Yeltsin returned to his presidential office in Moscow, which was surrounded by troops, to deal with the coup . The coup took place in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 From a tank turret, Yeltsin made a rousing speech that rallied the troops to defect in the face of mass popular demonstrations . Yeltsins made the speech from a tank tank turret .
 Yeltsin emerged a national hero after the coup . The leaders of the coup were dispersed . Yeltsins was a hero for his country .
 Throughout 1991 the Russian government continued to take over the Soviet Union government . Throughout 1991, the government took control of the country's government .
 In December, Yeltsin met with the presidents of Ukraine and Belarus to discuss the Soviet Union’s dissolution and its replacement with a voluntary Commonwealth of Independent States . The Soviet Union's dissolution was discussed in December .
 On December 24, the Russian federation took the Soviet Union’s place in the United Nations . The Russian federation is now Russia's second largest in the world .
 The next day, Gorbachev declared that the Soviet Union would cease to exist . The Soviet Union was declared to be an end of Soviet Union .
 The Supreme Soviet contained many opposed to Yeltsin’s policies, and local elites collaborated with criminal organizations . Local elites collaborated to criminal organizations, according to the Russian president . Yeltsins' policies were unpopular with many of his policies .
 Yeltsin bypassed Supreme Soviet and deliberated policy with his own inner circle . Yeltsins bypassed the Supreme Soviet . He deliberated with his inner circle.
 Yeltsin attempted to implement economic reforms by decree in 1992 . He declined to hold new elections and refused to hold any new elections . The reforms were implemented by decree .
 Yeltsin removed state control over the prices of most goods in January . The move was aimed at reintroducing a capitalist system and stabilizing currency . Yeltsins removed state controls over most goods last year .
 The administrative elite of the Soviet era retained control of factories, shops, offices, and farms . It was the administrative elite who kept control of many of the country's factories .
 Yeltsin granted a concession continuing governmental subsidies and guarantees that the denationalization of companies would not hinder directors’ and workers’ immediate interests . Yeltsins granted the concession .
 Yeltsin appointed candidates to some key positions to appease his detractors . Yeltsins appointed candidates for key positions in order to appease critics .
 In the face of skyrocketing inflation Yeltsin fired his premier and replaced him with Viktor Chernomyrdin, who introduced limits on profit rates for several goods . Yeltsins fired his prime minister in 2008 after inflation became a problem .
 Popular disenchantment with Yeltsin increased, and the country descended into crisis . Popular disenchenchantment increased after Yeltsins' government failed to implement reforms .
 Many farmers went unpaid for deliveries to state purchasing agents, and industrial production declined . Industrial production declined as a result .
 Yeltsin reasserted central authority, enacting a no-tolerance policy toward separatist movements to maintain the Russian state’s integrity during the implementation of reforms . The Russian president reasserts central authority to maintain state's integrity .
 Yeltsin maneuvered around cabinet members appointed to appease the opposition . Yeltsins' cabinet members had been appointed by the opposition to appease them .
 He inherited a constitution enabling the Congress of People's Deputies to intervene in any organ’s jurisdiction . He inherits a constitution that allows the Congress to intervene .
 Former Communist elites in positions of power were concerned with securing their dominance and engaged in a power struggle with Yeltsin . The former Communist elites were worried about securing the dominance of the former Communist Party .
 Yeltsin held a national referendum concerning popular trust in his socioeconomic policies . In response to the referendum, Yeltsins held a series of national referendums .
 The results encouraged Yeltsin, who dissolved the Russian parliament in September, to dissolve the parliament .
 Yeltsin initiated a new constitution increasing presidential authority in December . In December new elections were held under limited censorship, and new constitution increased presidential authority .
 Yeltsin reappointed his favored cabinet and quickly implemented reforms . Yeltsins reappointed favored cabinet members and implemented reforms quickly .
 Russia’s inability to establish a stable multiparty system gave Yeltsin freedom to maneuver . Russia's inability to set up a stable multi-party system allowed Yeltsins to maneuver, he says .
 In late 1993 remaining price controls were lifted, and privatization continued . privatization continued in the 1990s .
 Yeltsin realized that economic reform was happening too fast, and conditions were improving unevenly throughout the country . By 1994, Yeltsins realized that reform was taking place too fast .
 Yeltsin pursued nationalist policies after success in 1993 elections . Yeltsins was the leader of Russia's first state-run government .
 Following the Communists’ success in 1995, Yeltsin adopted Communist policies . Following the Communist Party’s success in the 1990s, the Russian president became a popular leader .
 Yeltsin ordered Russian troops into the breakaway republic of Ichkeria in December 1994 . Ichkia was a breakaway Russian republic from the Soviet Union in the 1990s .
 His military campaigns were unsuccessful and unpopular, damaging his political reputation and image as protector of Russia’s integrity . Putin's military campaigns have been unpopular and unpopular . His political reputation has been damaged by his military campaigns .
 In 1996 he narrowly won the presidency in the face of a Communist resurgence resulting from disillusionment with democracy . In 1996, he narrowly beat a Communist Party resurgence .
 Yeltsin became increasingly unstable, and his alcohol consumption mounted . Yeltsins' alcohol consumption also mounted, and he drank heavily .
 Yeltsin did little to curb the corrupt practices carried out by his administration . However, Yeltsins' administration was accused of corrupt practices .
 That same year Yeltsin announced Russia’s default on its debts; financial markets panicked . Financial markets panicked; and Russia's currency collapsed . Yeltsins announced Russia's default on debts that same year .
 Yeltsin resigned as president in favor of Prime Minister Vladimir Putin . His approval rating plummeting, Yeltsins resigns as president . Putin replaced him as prime minister of Russia in 2008 .
 The Arab Republic of Yemen is located on the southern part of the Arabian Peninsula . It shares borders with Saudi Arabia and Oman . Yemen is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Three-quarters of its population in 2004 lived in rural areas, and its topography ranges from coastal plains to highlands to desert .
 The British occupation and colonization of southern Yemen continued until the late 1950s . The United Kingdom promised to grant independence to the six states under its control in the south .
 The British declared in 1967 that they would hand over power to any group that could set up a government . Two southern Yemeni groups, the Front for the Liberation of Occupied South Yemen and the National Liberation Front fought .
 In November 1967 the last British troops were withdrawn, and the NLF formed a government with Aden as its capital . The NLF government was formed in Aden .
 Other communist countries, including the Soviet Union, China, and Cuba, provided the impoverished nation with economic aid and assistance . The Soviet Union and China also provided economic aid .
 In 1962 the ruling religious leader in northern Yemen, Imam Ahmad, was overthrown by military officers with the support of Egypt . In 1962, the ruler of northern Yemen overthrown in Yemen .
 Fighting ensued between the royalists, supported by Saudi Arabia, and the republicans . The republicans were supported by Egypt and supported by the royalist .
 Following their defeat in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the Egyptians were forced to withdraw their troops from Israel . The Egyptian government was forced to pull out of Israel in order to protect the country .
 The republicans forged a peace with the remaining royalist tribes and obtained backing from the Saudis . The republics forged peace with remaining royalists tribes .
 The fighting ended in 1970, and a government was formed of both royalists and republicans . The Yemen Arab Republic was known as North Yemen or Yemen, with Sanaa as the capital .
 The imam’s son was exiled to Britain by the republicans . Republicans eventually took over the government, exiling the imam's son to Britain .
 The dispute was mediated by the Arab League and resulted in the surprising Cairo Treaty . The Cairo Treaty anticipated the unification of the two sides within 12 months .
 The merger was delayed, and the two sides moved further right and left . The merger has been delayed . The two sides have been in touch again .
 The late 1970s was a period of assassination of leaders, upheaval, and armed clashes between the two sides . The two sides were involved in armed clashes and assassination of key leaders .
 The two Yemens would fight, they would sign an agreement to unify the country . The proposed merger would fail, and the deal would fail .
 In the mid-1980s oil was discovered in the Rub Al-Khali, the desert that straddled the two Yemens . In addition to the Rub, the Rub was discovered by the 1980s, oil was found in the desert .
 In May 1988 the two Yemens agreed on a neutral zone so that each could use the oil in cooperation with the other . The zone was agreed in May 1988 to allow the two countries to use oil together .
 The resolution of this issue and the boost to their economies helped pave the way for a concrete 14month plan for unification . The resolution and boost to the economies helped paved the way .
 In 1990 the border was demilitarized, and currencies were made valid in both Yemens . In 1990, the border between the two countries was made valid .
 On May 22, 1990, the two Yemens were united as the Republic of Yemen . The political capital in Sanaa and the economic capital in Aden are located in Aden . Yemen is now the world's largest country .
 A referendum ratified the unification, and generally fair and open elections were held in April 1993 . A referendum was held to ratify the unification .
 Unification of Yemen is seen by some Yemenis as too favorable to the north . Unification was seen as too unfavorable to the northern Yemen .
 Yemen declared its support for an Arab solution to the 1990-91 Gulf crisis . Yemen demanded the Iraqis leave Kuwait and the U.S. troops withdraw from the region . Yemen declared support for the Arab solution .
 Saudi Arabia expelled tens of thousands of Yemeni workers in retaliation for Yemen . Saudi Arabia has expelled thousands of Yemenis from Saudi Arabia .
 After the 1994 war, Yemeni unity was reinforced, and all national parties now support national unity . Yemeni unity has been reinforced after the war .
 President Ali Abdullah Saleh was elected to a seven-year term in 1997 . In 1997 a second fair and calm parliamentary election was held in Yemen .
 The regime is threatened by mounting pressure from Islamist groups and local leaders . However, the regime is under pressure from the opposition .
 Yoshida Shigeru was both a diplomat and a politician . He served as prime minister of Japan from 1946 to 1947 and from 1948 to 1954 . He was also a diplomat .
 Yoshida led Japan through much of the U.S. occupation of Japan . Yoshida was the prime minister of Japan during the Japanese occupation of the United States .
 His policies led Japan to rapid economic recovery . He was willing to give up independence in foreign affairs in exchange for military protection from the U.S.
 Yoshida outlined much of the policy for Japan during the cold war era . As a result of his policy, Yoshida was able to shape the country's foreign policy .
 His belief that the U.S. would provide the necessary security appealed to the United States as well as many of Japan’s conservatives .
 Like many of the Japanese military and diplomatic leaders of the early 20th century, he joined the Japanese diplomatic corps . He joined the diplomatic corps in Japan .
 He spent a brief time in prison after World War II for his participation in the Japanese government . He spent the time in Japanese prison for his involvement in the war .
 Allied occupation forces held him in high regard for his pro-U.S. and pro-British stances . Allied forces also held him for his familiarity with Western cultures .
 On May 24, 1947, Tetsu Katayama replaced Yoshida as prime minister, but he regained the position on October 15, 1948 . He would continue to serve in the position until 1954, when he was prime minister again .
 Yoshida’s policies for Japan concentrated on the economic growth required to rebuild the war-torn infrastructure . Yoshida's policies focused on economic growth needed to rebuild Japan's war-damaged infrastructure .
 His policies were quite popular, and he was reelected for three consecutive terms . He served three terms in three terms: 1949, 1952, and 1953 .
 Yoshida's most complicated role was bridging the gap from World War II to Japan under occupation to the modern and contemporary economic power . Yoshida’s most complicated task was to bridge the gap between occupation and modern economic power in Japan .
 Yoshida brought stability to Japan but also, in the direction he planned for Japan, offered an opportunity for regional peace and economic prosperity . Yoshida died at the age of 80 in March .
 The wars that attended the breakup of Yugoslavia during the 1990s tend to be explained by indicating some historical predisposition of Balkan nationalities toward violence against one another .
 The legacy of the past did play a role in the conflict, but it did not determine the bloodshed . Although the past played a role, it was not a factor in the bloodshed, the conflict was over 90 years ago .
 Units were deployed as an enabling force for KFOR, the NATO-led peacekeeping mission in the Balkan region of Yugoslavia of Yugoslavia . Units deployed in the region were deployed in support of KFOR . Units are deployed in Bosnia and Montenegro .
 There is a complex array of economic, cultural, and systemic factors, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is an array of factors that contribute to the problem"
 Many factors can be traced to the federal design imposed on the state by Marshal Tito (Josip Broz), which began to unravel soon after his death . Many of these factors are traced to Tito's federal design .
 The April 1981 Albanian riots in Kosovo marked a turning point in the history of the Yugoslav state . The riots marked an escalation in interethnic tensions during the 1980s during the Yugoslavia .
 The ethnically based structure of the federation ensured that the political elites of individual republics relied on the support of their respective republics . The federation was based on an ethnically-based structure .
 Political programs, therefore, were increasingly influenced by nationalist agendas . Political programs were often influenced by nationalistic agendas .
 These developments would not have sufficed to take Yugoslavia down the path of intercommunal violence had it not been for the agency of individual republican leaders . SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC .
 Most commentators agree that it was the rise to power in Serbia of Slobodan Milosevic that led to war . The rise of Serbia's power in the 1990s was the trigger for war .
 Serb nationalist nationalist sentiments allowed him to become president of Serbia in 1989 . His manipulation of Serb nationalists allowed him the presidency .
 Under Milosevic’s leadership the Serbian parliament amended the constitution of the republic in March 1989 . The Serbian parliament added the constitution to the country's constitution .
 In December 1990 Milosevic ordered the National Bank of Yugoslavia to allocate unauthorized credits to Serbian-owned enterprises . The move triggered hyperinflation and stiffened the resolve of other republics to secede from Yugoslavia .
 Milosevic’s chauvinistic rhetoric and policies pushed the country into war . The country was invaded by the Serbian army in the 1990s . The conflict was the result of the conflict in Yugoslavia .
 The crisis came in spring 1991 when Serbia announced that it was going to block the rotation of the federal presidency . The crisis was triggered by Serbia's refusal to rotate the presidency of the country's president .
 Slovenia and Croatia declared independence on June 25, 1991, starting a series of wars . In May 1991 the Serb representative refused to step down, forcing the two countries to declare independence . Croatia and Slovenia declared independence in June 1991 .
 The shortest of those conflicts was the so-called 10day war in Slovenia . Slovenia was the country's 10 days of war, ending in a 10-day war .
 Yugoslav People's Army crossed into Slovenia from Croatia from Croatia in 1991 . JNA units around Ljubljana moved in to occupy the airport . The airport was occupied by units of the Yugoslav People’s Army .
 Authorities in Belgrade did not anticipate the resolve of the fledgling Slovenian army and Slovenian citizens . Yet what the authorities in . Serbia did not . anticipate the . resolve of Slovenian soldiers and Slovenians .
 Slovenian detachments engaged in attacks and ambushes of JNA convoys, besieged JNA barracks, and blocked roads . By deploying effectively, Slovenians engaged effectively, they engaged effectively in attacks .
 On July 5, 1991, the two sides agreed to a cease-fire, and on July 7, 1991 the heads of Yugoslavia’s republics signed the Brioni Agreement . The agreement allowed for Slovenia's independence . Slovenia became part of Slovenia in 1991 .
 The Brioni Agreement, however, did not address the situation in Croatia . The agreement was signed by Croatia's president and prime minister .
 In February 1991 there were skirmishes between Croatian police and Serb militias . In 1991, Croatian police clashed with Serb militia forces in Croatia .
 In April 1991 the self-proclaimed Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina declared its secession from Croatia . The region declared its independence from Croatia in 1991 . Krajinija declared its separation from Croatia .
 JNA forces retreating from Slovenia lent their support to Serb militias, and in July 1991 a full-fledged war began in Croatia . In July 1991, Croatia was invaded by the JNA, which was allied with the Serb in Slovenia .
 The city of Vukovar in particular became a symbol of the barbarity of the war . The city was symbolized by its barbarity, and was a symbol for the Russians .
 Completely surrounded by Serb forces in August, it was under siege for nearly 90 days, by the end of which the entire town was leveled . The town was completely destroyed by the Serb, with the town leveled .
 In October 1991, JNA forces began bombing the old city of Dubrovnik on the Dalmatian coast . The city was bombed by the JNA in October 1991 . The bombing began in the early 1990s .
 This marked a turning point in the wars of Yugoslav dissolution as it urged international actors to get involved in stopping the violence . This marked the end of the Yugoslav wars of Yugoslavia's dissolution .
 In May 1995 the Croatian army took the offensive again, starting the second phase of the war, and retook most of the Serb-controlled areas in western Slavonia and in the region of Krajina . Croatian army retook the area in May 1995 .
 This triggered an exodus of almost all Serbs who lived in the country . The Serbs were forced to leave the country in the early 1990s .
 In many respects the fighting in Croatia marked the next stage in the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the attempt to carve ethnically homogeneous states . In many ways, the conflict in Croatia was the next step in Yugoslavia's attempt to break up Yugoslavia . In Croatia, Croatia was one of Yugoslavia's
 On December 19, 1991, the Serbian-controlled western Slavonia and the region of Krajina declared themselves the Republic of Serbian Krajina . The government in Belgrade declared the establishment of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, consisting of Serbia, Montenegro, and Serbian Kra
 Milosevic’s strategy was to carve out a ‘Greater Serbia’ under the guise of a smaller Yugoslavia . This formation attested to his strategy of carving out a Greater Serbia . The formation of the Serbija was part of a larger Yugoslavia, a smaller
 This approach was tragically confirmed during the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina . The approach was confirmed by the Bosnian war in 1992 .
 Republic of Yugoslavia was one of the most ethnically heterogeneous in former Yugoslavia . The republic was once one of Yugoslavia's most heterogeneous regions . It is now one of Croatia's most populous cities .
 In 1990 the JNA had already begun transferring weapons to Serb militias in Bosnia-Herzegovina . In 1990 it had already been transferring weapons .
 In August 1991 Milosevic met with the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic to discuss a strategy for annexing portions of the republic to Serbia . The meeting took place in August 1991 .
 Croatian president was also plotting to annex Croat-dominated areas of Bosnia-Herzegovina . At the same time, the Croatian president Franjo Tudjman was also planning to annex the Croatian-dominated parts of Bosnia .
 Milosevic and Tudjman met secretly in September 1991 to discuss the division of Bosnia-Herzegovina . Despite the ongoing fighting between Serbia and Croatia, the two leaders met secretly .
 Initial stages saw Serbian forces confronting Bosniaks and Herzegovinian Croats . Serbians and Bosniakians were fighting each other in the Bosnian conflict .
 The United Nations designated as “safe areas” the cities of Sarajevo, Bihac, Gorazde, Srebrenica, Tuzla, and Zepa . The U.N. declared Bosnia-Herzegovina a no-
 The international community presented a peace plan in January 1993 that proposed the division of the country between the Serbs, Croats, and the Bosniaks . The plan was proposed by the international community .
 Fighting continued until March 1994, when Bosniaks and Croats formed a BosniakCroat Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
 During November 1995 all sides met in Dayton and negotiated a peace agreement, which ended the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
 Milosevic had revoked the autonomy of Kosovo in his first act as president of Serbia in 1989 . In 1989, he had revoked Kosovo's autonomy .
 Kosovo Albanians and Serbs in the province have been at odds with each other for years . This exacerbated the tensions between the two sides . Kosovo Albanian-Serbians have been fighting for independence from Kosovo since 2001 .
 Kosovars organized a peaceful resistance, some of them formed the Kosovo Liberation Army in 1996 . Some of the Kosovarans formed the Liberation Army, which was formed by Kosovo Liberation Party .
 KLA began to carry out sporadic attacks on Serbian police in the province . The KLA has been fighting Serbian forces in Serbia since 2003 .
 Both the United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization tried to mediate in the conflict . In 1998 the tensions started to escalate, and both the U.N. and the N.A. tried to calm the situation down .
 It was the January 1999 massacre of Albanians in the village of Racak by Serb forces that urged the international community to put more pressure on the two sides . The massacre of the Albanians was the first to be carried out in January 1999 .
 NATO bombed Yugoslavia on March 24,1999 . Kosovo was the first country to be bombed by NATO bombing campaign . NATO bombed Kosovo in response to Kosovo's failure and continued violence .
 NATO’s campaign, which lasted for 78 days, was its first-ever peace-enforcing mission without a UN mandate . NATO's campaign lasted 78 days and was NATO's first peace-enforcement mission .
 Only republics to remain in Yugoslavia were Serbia and Montenegro . After the war in Kosovo, the only republics that remained in Yugoslavia remained in the former Yugoslavia . Serbia, Montenegro and Serbia and Serbia are the two remaining republics in Yugoslavia .
 The European Union brokered an agreement for the creation of the Union of Serbia and Montenegro in 2003 . The latter became increasingly vocal about its desire for independence, and in February 2003 the EU brokered the agreement .
 Montenegro and Serbia declared their independence as two separate nations in June 2006 . Montenegro is one of the two countries that declared independence in 2006 . Serbia and Montenegro are now two separate countries .
 The Zapatista National Liberation Army proclaimed themselves in rebellion against the Mexican government on New Year's Day, 1994 .
 The uprising was timed to coincide with the implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement between Mexico, the U.S. and Canada .
 The Mexican government responded by sending some 25,000 soldiers into Chiapas . They were armed with automatic weapons, tanks, and helicopters .
 On January 12, the government declared a cease-fire, saying it would respond with force only if attacked . The government says it will respond only if it is attacked by the rebels .
 Talks between the EZLN and government negotiators began on February 20 . The talks are expected to take place in March .
 The Zapatista spokesperson, who called himself Sub-Commander Marcos, soon became an international celebrity . He soon became a national celebrity .
 The Zapatista movement continued into the 21st century, posing a thorny challenge to the Mexican state and local powerholders . Its principal weapons not guns but words, grassroots organizing, and the Internet, and its principal weapons are the Internet .
 In 2007 the rebellion still simmered in dozens of Zapatista “autonomous municipalities” in the heart of the Chiapas Lacondon rain forest, central highlands, and northern zones .
 Mexico’s Maya zones have seen a long series of protest movements against local, regional, national, and imperial authorities that stretch back to the initial Spanish invasion in 1522 . The Tzeltal Revolt of 1712, Jacinto Canek Revol of 1761,
 Maya Indians, some two-thirds living in rural areas, are divided into numerous ethno-linguistic groups . Maya Indians include Tzeltales, Tzotziles, Choles, Zoques, and Tojolabales . In 1994 its 3. million
 At least half of the indigenous people did not have access to potable water and were illiterate . Two-thirds of indigenous people do not have sewage systems and 90 percent had little or no income . 90 percent of those who live in the indigenous community had no income or access to water
 In 1992 President Carlos Salinas and the PRI-dominated houses of Congrttess approved farreaching changes to Article 27 of the 1917 Constitution . The changes effectively privatized the ejidos that had been a cornerstone of Mexico’s postrevolutionary agrarian reform
 Emiliano Zapata was a village leader from the state of Morelos and a leading figure in the Mexican Revolution . Zapata's honesty, rectitude, and uncompromising demands for “land and liberty” made him a heroic figure among the poor and Indian population .
 The Zapatista spokesperson, Sub-Commander Marcos, remains an enigmatic figure . Sub-commander Marcos is a member of the Zapatistas . He remains enigmatic figure in his post .
 He is called the group’s “sttfi-commander” because the EZLN is based on grassroots participatory democracy . He is therefore considered not the group's leader but a subordinate to the people in whose name he speaks .
 Peace talks between representatives of the EZLN and the national government began at San Andres Larrainzar in April 1995 . Peace talks began in 1995 at the end of the conflict .
 On Lebruary 17, 1996, parties agreed to the terms of the Accords on Indigenous Rights and Culture, known as the San Andres Accords . Parties agreed to a series of treaties on Indigenous rights and culture .
 In essence, the accords would have permitted an autonomous parallel state and political structure within Mexico . It would have included an independent judicial system based on indigenous practices . The accords were intended to allow an independent judiciary system .
 Mexican army and security forces in Chiapas intensified as government waged low-intensity war against EZLN forces . Mexican government has been waging war against the EZN forces throughout the region .
 Local paramilitaries, growing out of the ‘white guards’ organized by the region’s cattle and landowning oligarchy, also stepped up their attacks against EZLN activists and supporters .
 New anti-EZLN paramilitaries formed, including the Indigenous Revolutionary Anti-Zapatista Movement and the Red Mask . The Red Mask was formed in the 1980s .
 Attacks, assaults, and human rights abuses against EZLN supporters mounted . Attacks and assaults on supporters of the NPL continued in the 1980s .
 On December 22, 1997, the Red Mask massacred 45 people at Acteal, including 21 women and 15 children . The Red Mask killed 21 women, 15 children and 21 people .
 In August 1996 the EZLN sponsored an International Conference for Humanity Against Neoliberalism (called by Marcos the “Intergalactic Encuentro”) attended by intellectuals, activists, and celebrities from around the world .
 In 1997 President Ernesto Zedillo proposed a watered-down version of the San Andres Accords that eliminated provisions recognizing indigenous rights . In January 1997, Zedillo's proposal was rejected by the president .
 The EZLN rejected the revisions, and henceforth the accords remained a dead letter . The accords were agreed to be signed in 1998 .
 The EZLN’s propaganda offensive continued in marches, demonstrations, solidarity agreements with various sectors of civil society, and a flurry of communiques and declarations from Sub-Commander Marcos . Sub-commander Marcos has declared his support for the movement .
 In March 2001 Zapatista commanders headed a caravan to Mexico City, where they rallied with supporters to demand legislation implementing the original San Andres accords . Zapatistas have been in Mexico since 2001 .
 The government passed a law denounced by indigenous rights groups . Instead of a law, the government passed the law denouncing indigenous groups .
 Zapatistas responded with a four-year period of “strategic silence,” which they broke in June 2005 . The Zapatista responded with their “Sixth Declaration of the Lacandon Jungle,’ inaugurating a series of grassroots meetings and a national
 He was a founding member of the Chinese Communist Youth Corps in France . He was in charge of political indoctrination . He founded the youth corps in France in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Zhou was able to escape Chiang’s dragnet when the latter purged communists from the KMT visited the Soviet Union in 1927, and finally surfaced in Ruijin .
 In Ruijin the Zhou-Mao Zedong collaboration began, and lasted until Zhou’s death in 1976 . Zhou and Mao Zedong were the first to work together in China together .
 Zhou participated in the formation of the Second United Front with the KMT, which came about as a result of Japan’s all-out war against China in 1937 . Zhou was a member of the Fong March and was a major figure in the creation of the Chinese Communist Party
 Zhou represented the CCP in post-World War II talks with the KMT, mediated by U.S. special ambassador George Marshall . Zhou represented China in the post-WWII talks between the Communist Party and the Soviet Union .
 Zhou employed the “now talk; now fight” strategy, which contributed to the United States washing its hands of China and the CCP victory over the KMT in 1949 . Zhou’s ‘now talk’ strategy contributed to U.S. washing hands .
 Zhou became China's premier and foreign minister in 1949 . Zhou was China's first foreign minister . He was also known for his role in the Chinese revolution .
 He personally handled China’s important international negotiations even after he ceded the foreign minister post to Chen Yi in 1958 . He handled important international talks even after ceding the post .
 He represented China at the Geneva Conference, which ended the First Indochina War in 1954, and at the Bandung Conference of 29 AfroAsian states in 1955 . China was accepted as the leader of the "anti-imperialist" bloc of nations .
 He mediated between the Soviet Union, Hungary, and Poland in 1957 . He failed to find a peaceful solution with India in the Sino-Indian boundary dispute . He also mediated between Hungary, Poland and Poland .
 He was the lone leader of moderation during the violence and chaos of the Cultural Revolution after 1966 . Played a key role in bringing about the rapprochement between China and the U.S. that culminated in President Richard Nixon’s visit to China in 1972 .
 Zhou promoted pragmatist Deng Xiaoping to be his vice premier in his last years . Deng was Zhou's last prime minister . Zhou was known for promoting pragmatism in China .
 Zhou alone escaped being purged in a long career as Mao's senior associate . Zhou was one of Mao’s senior associates . Zhou's career spanned more than 40 years .
 Khaleda Zia became the prime minister of Bangladesh for the third time in October 2001 for a five-year term . Zia is the third prime minister to become Bangladesh's prime minister .
 She was born on August 15, 1945, in Jalpaiguri (now in Bengal, India) She was the third of her parents’ five children . She is one of five siblings .
 Zia Zia had her early school education at Dinajpur Government Girl School and post-secondary education at Surendranath College . Zia is a member of the National Youth Council of India .
 She was married to Ziaur Rahman, then a captain in the Pakistan army, in August 1960 .
 Ziaur Rahman later broke away from the Pakistan army to join the pro-independence forces of Bangladesh on March 25, 1971 . He later joined pro-independent forces of the Bangladesh government .
 During her first tenure she brought about major educational changes by mandating free and compulsory education for girls . She also brought about free education for all girls .
 She introduced incentives such as stipends for young female students . She also revitalized the economy by taking poverty alleviation measures .
 Zia became prime minister for the second consecutive term when the BNP scored a landslide victory in the February 1996 general election . Zia was the prime minister of the country during his second term .
 She also made efforts to safeguard the traditional and cultural identity of underdeveloped hill and tribal people of Bangladesh by providing them with employment opportunities, education, and other facilities .
 She was elected prime minister for the third time in October 2001, when she led a four-party alliance to win a two-thirds majority in the parliamentary poll . She was deposed in 2007, but was elected again in October 2007 . She is the third prime minister to be dep
 In foreign affairs, she promoted regional cooperation with Bangladesh’s South Asian neighbors, including India . She promoted cooperation with her country's neighbors, India .
 On the environment, she took measures for planned usage of water resources, prevention of erosion of riverbanks, and maintaining ecological balance through conservation of forests .
 In local government and people’s empowerment she decentralized the power at the village, union, district, and subdistrict levels through a four-tier, autonomous, and democratic local self-governance . She decentralizes the power of the local government at the villages, unions,
 Mohammed Badrul Alam Zia-ul-Haq was president of Pakistan from 1977 to 1988 . He overthrew the government of Zulfikar Bhutto, overthrew his predecessor, Zulfar Bhuttto . He died in a plane crash in 1988 .
 As the president of Pakistan, in 1978, Zia established a totalitarian and dictatorial regime based on the enforcement of martial law, the suppression of political opponents, and the dissolution of all political parties . Zia ruled Pakistan in the 1970s .
 When he decided to partially restore democracy, he made key amendments to the constitution ensuring the president had the right to overrule parliamentary decisions in the national interest . The president has the power to override parliamentary decisions .
 As president he tried to maintain close links to Islam and revive the country’s declining economy . His foreign policy was marked by the support of the mujahideens in the Soviet-Afghan War .
 Zia was born in Jalandhar on August 12, 1924 . He was the son of a teacher in the British army . Zia is one of the country's most prominent politicians .
 He first attended the Government High School in Simla, then went on to earn his B.A. at St. Louis University . He also earned a B.E. at the University of Queensland .
 At the time of the Indian partition he, like most Muslims, chose to continue his career in the Pakistani army . He chose to remain in the army during the partition .
 In the early 1960s Zia trained in the U.S. and was later sent to Jordan to help the formation of the country’s army . In the 1960s, Zia was sent to the United States to train in the United Nations .
 In April 1976 Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto surprisingly appointed Zia chief of army staff instead of more senior generals . Zia was the first general to be made chief of the army staff .
 Bhutto probably underestimated Zia’s political abilities, ambitions, and his following in the army . Zia probably underestimated his political abilities and ambitions, says Zia's political ambitions .
 Zia took advantage of the situation, leading a military coup against Bhutto and decreeing martial law to reestablish order . Yet when the opposition coalition of the Pakistan National Alliance charged Bhuttto with rigging the electoral results, Zia led the coup . Zia ruled out Bh
 Zia consolidated his grip on the government and created the Disqualification Tribunal, which forced many politicians and members of Parliament to retire from public life . Zia was the prime minister of the late 1980s .
 Former prime minister Bhutto was hanged in 1979 after a long and controversial trial . Bhut to was hanged after a lengthy trial in 1979 .
 When Zia finally decided to call elections in the mid-1980s, he first secured his right to continue to be president with a referendum that closely linked his presidency with the Islamization of Pakistan . The referendum was closely linked to his presidency .
 He overwhelmingly won the referendum and appointed Muhammad Khan Junejo as the prime minister . The referendum was held in the early hours of Sunday morning . He overwhelmingly backed his election as prime minister in a referendum .
 Tensions between the president and the prime minister soon surfaced, and he removed Junejo from office in 1988 . Junejo was removed from office after a series of scandals .
 Bhutto’s daughter, Benazir Bhuttto, had started to gather the forces of opposition . The president soon found himself in a difficult position due to the return of Bhut to Pakistan .
 Zia died in a plane crash near Bhawalpur on August 17, 1988 . Zia had not been able to decide how to solve his intricate political situation before he died in the crash .
 Alexander, Alexander, Vladimir E Minkov, Vadim A Simoneko, and George S Stanford. DeVolpi, Alexander. Stanford . Stanford .
 Djurfeldt, Goran, Hans Holmen, Magnus Jirstroml, and Rolf Larsson, eds. eds . The book is published in Sweden, Norway and Sweden .
 Reform, Transition, and Revolution in the Fall of the Soviet Communist Regime . The Soviet Union is now in ruins in Russia .
 Authoritarian Regimes in Latin America: Dictators, Despots, and Tyrants . Henry Holt, 2001 . Paul Lewis, Paul H. Lewis, 2001.
 See Strategic Arms Reduction Talks and Treaties Star Wars, xli, 35, 101, 101 .
 In Not Free countries, the political process is tightly controlled and basic freedoms are denied . Not Free nations are tightly controlled by the state of the state .