 A frightening period in which nuclear holocaust seemed imminent began to come to an end . The frightening period was a frightening period of which nuclear . holocaust . seemed imminent . The end of the frightening period began to be an end. A frightening . period of . which seemed . imminent began
 The world held its breath waiting to see whether the two superpowers would come to blows . President Kennedy’s October 22 address warned the Soviets to cease their reckless program to put nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 On October 24, millions waited to see if Soviet ships bound for Cuba carrying additional missiles would try to break the U.S. naval blockade around the island . The ships were headed for Cuba with additional missiles .
 Soviet ships bound for Cuba would “not carry any kind of armaments” if the U.S. vowed never to invade Cuba . The Soviet ships would not carry any armaments if the United States vowed to never invade Cuba, the Soviet Union said .
 President Obama offered to remove the missiles from Cuba if the U.S. removed its nuclear missiles from Turkey . He followed this with another letter offering to remove them from Cuba the next day . He offered the United States to remove its nuclear missile from Turkey in exchange for removing the missiles .
 Kennedy and his officials debated the proper U.S. response to these offers . Kennedy and officials debated how best to respond to the offers .
 Russian diplomats were informed that the missiles in Turkey would be removed after the Soviet missiles in Cuba were taken away . Nevertheless, behind the scenes, Russia diplomats were told that Russia would not remove the missiles .
 If the Cuban missiles were not removed in two days, the United States would resort to military action . The U.S. would have to remove the missiles in order to prevent military action against Cuba .
 1994 U.S. prison population exceeds one million for the first time in American history . The United States Justice Department announces that the United States prison population has topped one million . HISTORY reviews and updates its content regularly .
 The figure—1,012,851 men and women were in state and federal prisons—did not even include local prisons . An estimated 500,000 prisoners were in local prisons, which were in 1656 .
 The Boston Red Sox win the World Series for the first time since 1918 . The Red Sox finally defeated the "Curse of the Bambino" that had plagued them for 86 years . While London boasts the world’s oldest underground train network and Boston has the world's oldest
 Joseph Glidden applied for a patent on his barbed wire design on October 27, 1873 . In 1880, Roosevelt married Roosevelt in 1880 .
 Sylvia Plath is born on October 27, 1932, in Boston . Hit shows like West Side Story, The Sound of Music, Funny Girl, among several others, spun off .
 Her father, a German immigrant, was a professor of biology and a leading expert on bumblebees . Her father was a leading bumblebee expert .
 An autocrat at home, he insisted his wife give up teaching to raise their two children . He insisted on her to stay at home to raise the children .
 Chick-fil-A founder takes last Ford Taurus off the assembly line in Georgia . Gotti, the grandson of Italian immigrants, was raised in a poor family .