 In February of 1945, the Yalta Conference was held to plan what would happen after Germany's defeat . The conference was held in February of that month to plan the aftermath of the defeat of Germany .
 Stalin, Roosevelt, Churchill managed to agree on some important matters . Despite their differences, the Big Three Stalin and Roosevelt agreed on some of the most important things .
 Stalin agreed to enter the war against Japan once Germany had surrendered . Germany, Berlin and Berlin would split into four zones; they would hunt down and punish war criminals . Eastern Europe should be seen as a 'Soviet sphere of influence'
 Churchill persuaded Roosevelt to accept Stalin's terms, provided that the USSR did not interfere in Greece . The Potsdam Conference was held in July 1945 .
 Truman had become president after Roosevelt died 12th April . Stalin's army now occupied most of Eastern Europe . Truman had been president after Truman died .
 He was much more anti-communist than his predecessor . On 16th July 1945, the Allies had tested an atomic bomb .
 Stalin wanted to cripple Germany but Truman didn't want to repeat the mistake of the Treaty of Versailles . They disagreed over Soviet Policy in Eastern Europe . It was clear that the wartime alliance was running thin .
 Yalta Conference agreed Eastern Europe would be seen as Soviet Union's 'sphere of influence' Stalin's troops had liberated country after country in Eastern Europe, but instead of withdrawing his troops, he had left them there .
 By July 1945, Stalin's troops had control of the Baltic states, Finland, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Hungary and Romania, and refugees were fleeing these countries fearing a communist take over .
 Stalin had set up a communist government in Poland, ignoring the wishes of the the majority of Poles . Stalin's government was ignored by the Polish people, ignoring their wishes .
 The Potsdam Conference ended without agreement on many issues . Stalin implemented Communist governments in Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Albania in the following months .
 In March 1946, Churchill described the border between Soviet controlled countries and the West as an 'iron curtain' In the following years, Stalin tightened his control over Eastern Europe . Churchill describes the border as 'iron curtains'
 The secret police imprisoned anyone who spoke out against the Communist rule, or might do in the future, in the Soviet Union . In the 1930s, the secret police were responsible for imprisoning anyone who might speak out .
 In October 1947, Stalin set up the Communist Information Bureau to co-ordinate the work of communist parties across eastern Europe . The bureau was set up by Stalin in October 1947 .
 Cominform regularly brought leaders of each communist party to Moscow to be briefed by Stalin and his ministers . Cominin often brought leaders from each party to Russia to meet with Stalin and ministers .
 He spotted independent minded leaders and replaced them with those who were more loyal to him . He spotted independently minded leaders who he replaced with loyalists .
 Only communist leader who escaped his control was Tito in Yugoslavia . Tito was the only communist leader to escape his control of Yugoslavia .
 In the 1930s, other countries such as France and Britain had been as important in international affairs, but this changed after the war . This changed after World War II, with the rise of the Cold War becoming more important .
 USA recognised the responsibility of being a 'superpower' and set itself firmly against the policy of 'isolation' that it had followed during the 1930s . USA recognises the responsibility to be a superpower .
 Roosevelt, Churchill and Truman accepted that Soviet security needed 'a sphere of influence' they had not expected such complete Communist domination . As such, American reaction to Soviet expansion was strong .
 Truman could only see the spread of communism, Truman said . Stalin argued that he was just making himself secure, but Truman disagreed with him . Truman argued that Stalin was trying to make himself secure .
 After German retreat in 1944, there were two rival groups in Greece the monarchists and the Communists who wanted to rule the country . Monarchists and Communists were rivals in Greece .
 The communists wanted Greece to be a Soviet republic, the monarchists wanted the return of the King of Greece . The monarchists were monarchists who wanted to return the king of Greece.
 In 1945, Churchill sent troops in order to 'restore order' but in fact the British supported the monarchists, and the King was returned to power . The King was eventually restored to power in 1945, but the British did not support him .
 USSR protested to the UN that British troops were a threat to peace in Greece in 1946 . In 1946, the USSR protested against the presence of British troops .
 The UN took no action so the communists tried to take control by force . The UN did not take action and the communists took control of the situation . The communists took over from the UN .
 The British could not afford the cost of such a war and announced in February 1947 that they were withdrawing their troops . The British were forced to pull out of the war in 1947 .
 The USA was prepared to send money, equipment and advice to any country threatened by a Communist take-over . Under this policy, the USA would send money and equipment .
 Truman believed that Communism succeeded when people faced hardship and poverty . Truman believed people should face hardship when they faced hardship . Truman believes that Communism succeeds when people face hardship .
 In 1947, he sent General George Marshall to assess the economic state of Europe . In 1947 he was sent to inspect the state of the continent .
 Marshall suggested about $17 billion would be needed to rebuild Europe's prosperity . Marshall suggested that Europe's economy would need to be rebuilt to rebuild itself .
 Until 1948, Czechoslovakia had been ruled by a coalition government which tried to act independently of Moscow . The coalition government included some communists, including some communists .
 In March 1948, Communists came down hard, taking over the government . The government was overthrown by the Communist Party in March 1948 .
 Anti-Soviet leaders were purged and one pro-American leader, Jan Masaryk, was found dead below his window .
 The communists said he had jumped; the Americans suspected that he had been pushed . The Americans suspected he had fallen out of character .
 Congress accepted the Marshall Plan and made $17 billion available over a period of four years . The Marshall Plan was made available to the U.S. Congress accepted it and accepted it .
 Marshall Aid was extremely generous, one of the other, it was self motivated . While on the one hand, Marshall Aid is extremely generous . It is self motivated.
 The Berlin Blockade of 1948 brought the two superpowers dangerously close to was key to the start of the Cold War . The Berlin blockade was a key moment in the history of the Berlin blockades .
 The USA and UK combined their zones of Germany into 'bizonia' and introduced a new currency .
 Stalin felt that the USA's handling of Western Germany was provocative . The new currency was trying to undermine his influence in the East, Stalin said .
 He could do nothing about the reorganisation of their zones, or the new currency, but he could stamp his authority on Berlin . Berlin's new currency will be the first of its kind .
 It was deep in the Soviet zone and linked to western zones of Germany by vital roads, railways and canals . It was linked to the western zones by roads and railways .
 In June 1948 he blocked all these supply routes, cutting of the 2 million strong population of Western Berlin from Western help . The blockade was the first time Western Berlin had been cut off from Western aid .
 West Germany, or 'trizonia', formed by the combination of the zones of France, the UK and USA in May 1949 .
 East Germany was formed from the Soviet zone in October 1949 . It was officially known as the Federal Republic of Germany East Germany . East Germany is now known as Germany's East Berlin .
 From the American point of view, it was an oasis of democratic freedom in the middle of Communist repression . From the Soviet point of point, it . was an invasive cancer growing the workers paradise of East Germany . Throughout that time it remained a powerful symbol of Cold War tensions .
 The Berlin Blockade set out a pattern for Cold War confrontations . More importantly, it set out pattern for a pattern of Cold War confrontation .
 If they allowed Stalin to take control then the Western zones of Germany might be next . The West may be next if they allow him to take over the country .
 In June 1948, the Allies began airlifting supplies into Berlin . Instead of backing down, they began airlift supplies into the city .
 If the USSR shot down one of the planes, the Soviets would have committed an act of war . Now, if the Soviets shot down a plane, it would have been a war crime . The plane was shot down by the Soviet Union .
 After the Berlin Blockade, the two superpowers realised more than before that they were in competition for world domination . After the . Berlin blockade, they realised that .
 They began to build up their armies and weapons, and this eventually turned into a nuclear arms race . It began to turn into an arms race between the two countries . The two nations began building up armies, weapons and nuclear weapons .
 This was the first time the U.S. had signed up to a peacetime military alliance . The alliance is the first of its kind in peacetime .
 It represented, perhaps, just how far America was prepared to go to prevent the spread of communism .
 It also showed that Western powers believed war was a realistic and maybe even imminent possibility . The U.S. believes war is a realistic possibility, according to experts .
 In 1955, the USSR created the Warsaw Pact an alliance of communist states . Arguably, both sides were to blame for the start of the Cold War .
 Often, one side unfairly interpreted the other's actions as provocative and aggressive . Often, what was seen by one side as a justified act of self-defence, was seen as a threat by the other .
 Differences in their systems of government communism versus capitalism meant war, or conflict at the very least, was inevitable . Soviet expansionism / Western support for a prosperous Germany The Berlin Blockade
 There was much mutual hostility between leaders notably Truman, Roosevelt and Churchill, and Stalin . Stalin was the subject of much hostility between Truman and Roosevelt .
 The countries had many natural disagreements which could not be resolved, such as how to deal with Germany . However, blame could be placed with either one of the superpowers .
 Truman actively suspicious of Stalin, and unafraid to air his views publicly Truman Doctrine and Marshall Aid Interprets Soviet expansionism as trying to take over Europe, etc. America shouldn't have got involved in such a war .
 Control of eastern Europe takes over countries freed from German occupation, ruthlessly eliminates opposition, rigs elections etc. etc. Ruthless elimination of opposition, rigorizing opposition, rigging elections, etc. takes place in eastern Europe .
 During the late 1940s, most of Eastern Europe fell to the USSR . In 1949, Communist forces, under Mao Zedong, took control of China . In 1950, Communist North Korea invaded the South, and after several years, United States troops were only able to push the Koreans back
 NATO was formed in 1949, followed by the South East Asia Treaty Organisation in 1954 . Central Treaty Organisation also formed in 1954 and Central Treaty in 1955 .
 It felt threatened by the American alliances, and accused the USA of trying to encircle the Communist world . The U.S. felt threatened, and felt threatened .
 The USA built up a large arsenal of nuclear weapons, and strengthened their conventional forces . The U.S. built up an arsenal of weapons, including nuclear weapons .
 The American Strategic Air Command kept a fleet of 12 B52 bombers armed with nuclear weapons in the air 24 hours a day . They kept soldiers and weapons constantly ready for action .
 They supplied arms and soldiers to allies, and sited some of their own nuclear weapons in friendly countries . The U.S. supplied arms, soldiers and other nuclear weapons to allies in the region .
 The Soviet Union responded by building up its own conventional and nuclear forces . The Soviets built up their own nuclear and conventional forces in response .
 USA and USSR competed with each other to produce bigger, more powerful, quicker and cleverer nuclear weapons . Throughout the 1950s, the U.S. and USSR produced bigger and more powerful weapons .
 The Nuclear Arms Race developed throughout the 1950s . This became known as the Nuclear War of Nuclear War .
 The Soviets took the lead in missile technology in the early 50s . The Soviets built on the achievements of their successful space programme .
 The success of the missile programmes helped Khrushchev to silence his critics . The successful missile programme helped him silence critics of his actions .
 The American public was alarmed by the idea of a 'Missile Gap' in the 1950s . The arms race strengthened fears of a nuclear war in both the U.S.
 American military commanders were happy to play along, as it helped them get funding from the government for new weapon systems . U.S. military commanders said it was a good way to get funding for weapons systems .
 By 1959 the Americans had developed their own ICBM systems Atlas and Minuteman missiles were as fast to reach their target as Soviet missiles . Still, the United States carried on with its missile programme to 'narrow the Missile Gap'
 The USA stationed missiles in Europe and Turkey which could reach the USSR in just a few minutes . The USA developed Polaris missiles, fired undetectably from submarines .
 Americans owned most of the businesses on the island, and they had a huge naval base there . Americans had a large business in the area, and the base was a naval base .
 The Americans also provided the Cuban ruler, General Baptista, with economic and military support . Baptista was a corrupt dictator, very unpopular in Cuba, and was very unpopular with the country .
 Fidel Castro overthrew Baptista in 1959 after a three year guerilla campaign . Baptista was an opposition to Castro's regime .
 Castro was a charming, clever but ruthless politician . He had many of his political opponents killed, arrested or exiled . Castro's vision for a better Cuba won over the majority of Cubans .
 At first, the USA was taken by surprise by the revolution, and so decided to recognise Castro as the new leader of Cuba . Castro was the first Cuban leader to be recognised by the USA .
 He took their land and shared it between his supporters in Cuba's peasant population . The land was shared between the peasants and those who supported him .
 Eisenhower authorised the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency to investigate ways of overthrowing Castro . As early as June 1960, he authorised the CIA to look at overthrowing Cuba .
 President Kennedy supplied arms, equipment and transport for 1400 anti-Castro Cuban exiles to invade Cuba and overthrow the Cuban leader . The Bay of Pigs was a direct invasion of Cuba, not an invasion .
 The half-hearted invasion suggested to Cuba and the Soviet Union that the USA was still unwilling to get directly involved in Cuba . The invasion failed disastrously and all had been captured or killed within days .
 Soviet leader Khrushchev was particularly scornful of Kennedy's weak attempt to oust Communism from Cuba .
 Historians argue that the fiasco further strengthened Castro's position in Cuba . Historians say Castro's Cuban government was strengthened by the fiasco .
 In May 1962, the Soviet Union announced publicly for the first time that it was supplying Cuba with arms . The Soviet Union then announced publicly that it had begun supplying Cuba .
 By July 1962, Cuba had the best equipped army in Latin America . Cuba had thousands of Soviet missiles, patrol tanks, radar vans, missile erectors, jet bombers, jet fighters and 5000 Soviet technicians .
 The big question was whether the USSR would but nuclear missiles on Cuba . The USA seemed ready to tolerate the supply of conventional weapons, but the USSR seemed to be ready to use it .
 Despite Khrushchev's claim, it was soon discovered that the USSR had been building nuclear missile sites in Cuba . The USSR was soon found to be building missile sites .
 This confirmed that some of the projects are nearly finished but others are still being built . This confirmed some of them are nearly completed but some are still in construction .
 Experts said the most developed would be able to launch missiles in just seven days . Experts said that the most advanced would be capable of launching missiles in a matter of days .
 This was the first time any Soviet leader had placed nuclear weapons outside Soviet soil . The USSR had supplied many of its allies with conventional weapons but this was a first time .
 Khrushchev was acutely aware of the fact that the USA had more long range missiles than the USSR . The USA also had medium range missiles in Europe and Turkey, as well as medium range .
 Khrushchev probably hoped to strengthen his own position in the USSR by forcing Kennedy to allow the missiles or at least get Kennedy to give some concessions . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev was the one who had urged the USSR to rely on nuclear missiles . Furthermore, the superiority of U.S. missiles undermined his credibility in the USSR . The superiority of United States missiles undermined the USSR's credibility .
 It was the only Communist state in the West, and had become willingly Communist rather than as a result of an invasion by the Red Army . It was not the first Communist state to join the West .
 On Tuesday 16th October, President Kennedy was informed of the discovery .
 The USA could still destroy the Soviet Union so the USSR would never use the missiles in Cuba . The USSR could still use the U.S. to destroy Cuba's missiles .
 Surgical air attack would destroy the missiles before they were ready to use . To do nothing would be a sign of weakness, it would destroy them before use .
 The attack would inevitably kill Soviet soldiers, and the USSR might retaliate at once . The attack was inevitably killed by the Soviet soldiers .
 Diplomatic pressures would avoid conflict and the USSR might be forced to back down . The USSR might back down and avoid conflict . The Soviet Union might also back down, but it might not want to avoid conflict.
 If the USA were forced to back down, it would be a sign of weakness . However, the USA would be weakened if they backed down . It would be the first time the U.S. has been forced to withdraw from the World Cup .
 It would show that the USA was serious, but it would not be a direct act of war . Blockade would show U.S. was serious but not a direct war .
 The USA had a strong navy and could still take the other options if the blockade didn't work . The U.S. could still use the blockade if it failed to work, says CNN.com .
 The missiles would not solve the main problem the missiles are already on Cuba . However, it would not be the only problem .
 The Soviet Union might retaliate by blockading Berlin as it had done in 1948 . Berlin may also be blocked by the Soviet Union as it did in 1948.
 On Saturday 20th October, Kennedy decided on a blockade of Cuba . This option wasn't as likely to result in an all out war as an alternative would have been .
 Kennedy announced the blockade and called on the Soviet Union to withdraw its missiles . On Monday 22nd October, Kennedy announced that the blockade had been imposed .
 Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev saying that Soviet ships would not observe the blockade . Kennedy received the letter on 23rd October, 1962 .
 At 10.32am, the twenty nearest Soviet ships stop or turn around . Then, suddenly, at 10.30am, they turn around. The twenty nearest ships stopped or turned around .
 On Thursday 25th October, intensive aerial photography revealed work on the missile bases was still continuing rapidly .
 In the morning, Khrushchev sent a second letter revising his proposals . The condition for the removal of the missiles is the removal U.S. missiles from Turkey, he said .
 The president was advised to launch an immediate reprisal attack on Cuba . He was told to launch a retaliatory attack on the island nation .
 He also decided to ignore Khrushchev's second letter, but accepted the terms suggested in the letter of the 26th October .
 He said that if the Soviet Union does not withdraw, an attack will follow . The Soviet Union is expected to withdraw from Syria .
 Kennedy came out of the crisis with a greatly improved reputation in the U.S. and the West . For the USA, the crisis was the greatest success in the world .
 Kennedy did have to remove the missiles from Turkey, though it was done in secret . Kennedy removed the missiles in a secret operation .
 Kennedy also had to accept that Castro's Cuba would remain Communist in America's own backyard . Kennedy also accepted that Cuba would continue to be Communist in its own backyard.
 In public Khrushchev was able to highlight his role as a peacemaker . For the USSR in public he had been able to play a key role in peace .
 Keeping Cuba safe from U.S. action was a major achievement for the Soviet Union . The Soviets were able to keep Cuba safe in Cuba from American action .
 The crisis exposed the USA to criticism among some allies, who thought it unreasonable of USA to have missiles in Turkey but object to those in Cuba . However, there was no denying that Khrushchev had been forced to back down and remove the missiles . It was agreed that the removal would
 The Soviet military was particularly upset about the terms of the withdrawal . The Soviet government was particularly unhappy with the terms .
 They were forced to put missiles on the decks of their ships so that the Americans could count them . The missiles were placed on their ships to be counted by the U.S. They were then put on the deck so they could be counted .
 A permanent 'hot line' was set up between the White House and the Kremlin . Both leaders had seen how their game of brinksmanship had nearly ended in nuclear war. Both leaders were subsequently more willing to take steps to reduce the risk of nuclear war .
 It did not stop the development of weapons but it limited tests and was an important step forward . The tests were limited but limited tests were important steps forward, experts say .
 It was clear that the USSR could not match the USA in terms of weapons, but it did not need to . The USSR did not have the ability to match the U.S. with its weapons .
 For Castro's Cuba Castro was upset by the deal that Khrushchev made with America, but he had little choice . Castro was unhappy with the deal, but was forced to take it in .
 Cuba remained an important base for Communist supporters in South America . The nuclear missiles were removed by Cuba but Cuba remained a key base for communist supporters .
 Cuban forces intervened in a civil war in Angola in the 1970s . Castro also kept control of the American companies and other economic resources he had nationalised after the revolution .
 Their rule gave rise to a strong resistance movement under the leadership of communist Ho Chi Minh . Their rule was overthrown by the communist government in Vietnam .
 When WW2 ended, the Viet Minh controlled the north of the country . In 1945, they entered Hanoi and declared Vietnamese independence .
 Between 1945 and 1954, France fought to take back control of Vietnam Ho . Ho was supported by China, who had turned Communist under Mao Zedong in 1949 . France supported by the USA, who poured $500 million into the war each year .
 Under the terms of the ceasefire between the French and the Viet Minh, an election was to be held within two years to reunite the country . The election would be held in two years .
 In 1955, the USA helped Ngo Dinh Diem to set up the Republic of South Vietnam . The U.S. helped Diem establish the country's Republic of Vietnam .
 America supported him because he was bitterly anti-Communist . He was prepared to imprison or exile Communists . America supported his anti-communist policies .
 The National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam formed in December 1960 . It included South Vietnam opponents of the government, but also large numbers of Communist North Vietnamese .
 Peasants who didn't support the Viet Cong faced intimidation/violence . The Viet Cong started a guerilla war against the South Vietnamese government . Peasant leaders faced intimidation and violence .
 Using the Ho Chi Minh trail, the Viet Cong send reinforcements and ferried supplies to guerilla fighters . The trail ferried reinforcements and supplies to the guerillas during the war .
 The fighters attacked South Vietnamese government forces, officials and buildings, gradually making the countryside unsafe for government forces . They attacked government forces and officials, making the country unsafe .
 By 1962, President Kennedy was sending military personnel to fight the Viet Cong . They also attacked American air forces and bases . President Kennedy sent troops to fight them .
 Kennedy said that the USA would not 'blunder into war, unclear about aims or how to get out again' In 1963, Kennedy was replaced by Johnson, who was more prepared to commit the USA to a full scale conflict .
 In August 1964, North Vietnamese patrol boats opened fire on U.S. ships in the Gulf of Tonkin . The incident occurred in August 1964 .
 Congress immediately passed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, giving Johnson the power to 'take all necessary measures to prevent further aggression and achieve peace and security'
 They supported France in Vietnam in Vietnam and opposed the Viet Cong and Viet Minh . They supported the French in Vietnam .
 President Eisenhower and Secretary of State JF Dulles were convinced that China and the USSR were trying to spread Communism throughout Asia . Eisenhower and Dulles believed China and USSR were spreading Communism .
 They believed that if Vietnam fell to Communism, then so would other Asian countries . They believed if so would many other Asian nations fall to Communism .
 In the 1950s and 1960s it was a sure vote winner for election candidates to talk tough about Communism . A sure vote loser to look weak on Communism would look weak in the 1960s and '60s .
 JF Kennedy promised to continue the tough policies of President Eisenhower during his 1960 campaign . Kennedy's 1960 campaign promises to continue tough policies .
 A controversial view is that some powerful groups in the USA wanted a war . The Military-Industrial Complex is a controversial view of the U.S. military .
 Government gave huge budgets to military commanders, which were spent on weapon contracts with big businesses . The government gave huge amounts of military equipment to commanders .
 In early 1965, the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese Army had about 17,000 soldiers . Both the military and big businesses gained from conflict .
 They were well supplied with weapons and equipment from the USSR and China . But they were outgunned and outnumbered by the South Vietnamese and United States forces .
 In November 1965 in La Dreng Valley, U.S. forces killed 2000 Viet Cong for the loss of just 300 . For example, in November 1965, in Vietnam, the Viet Cong were killed for the death of 2000 . The United States killed 2000 in the same area for the
 Ho Chi Minh believed superior forces could be defeated by guerilla tactics, which he had used successfully before against the Japanese and French . This didn't daunt him, he believed that superior forces can be defeated .
 Guerilla warfare was a nightmare for the United States army . Guerillas didn't wear uniform and so were hard to tell apart from the peasants . Retreat when the enemy attacks and Raid when they are attacked . Pursue when an enemy retreats . Pursuit when an opponent tires .
 They worked in small groups with limited weapons . They disappeared into the jungle, villages or tunnels after attacking .
 The guerilla tactics were designed to wear down the United States soldiers and wreck their morale . Not only were the tactics effective at destroying U.S. forces and arms, but they were also worn down by the guerillas . The tactics were also designed to wreck the U.
 These booby traps could be as simple as trip wires or pits filled with sharpened bamboo sticks . The traps are simple and could be simple .
 There were also more sophisticated traps, such as The Bouncing Betty land mine, which would be thrown into the air when triggered and then explode . One of the least popular jobs was going 'on point'
 Overall, booby traps accounted for about 11% of United States casualties . 51% of casualties were caused by 'firefights' The Viet Cong and NVA knew they could not compete with American firepower .
 This meant that the Americans could not use their artillery or air power because of the danger of hitting their own troops . The Americans were not able to use their air power or artillery because it was too dangerous for them to hit their troops .
 Ho knew how important it was to keep the peasant population on his side . This tactic was sometimes known as 'hanging on to American belts'
 The majority of people in both North and South Vietnam were Vietnamese . They made up the majority of the population in both countries .
 VC fighters were expected to be courteous and respectful to peasants . As such, the VC fighters are expected to respect peasants .
 The Viet Cong often helped peasants in the fields in busy periods . However, the Viet Cong could also be ruthless . They often helped the peasants in their fields .
 They were prepared to kill any peasants who opposed them or stood in their way . The peasants were prepared for killing any peasants .
 They also conducted a campaign of terror against the police, tax collectors, teachers and other employees of the South Vietnamese government . They also targeted the police and tax collectors .
 Between 1966 and 1971, the Viet Cong killed an estimated 27,000 civilians . The Viet Cong were responsible for more than half a million deaths in Vietnam .
 Arguably the greatest strength of the Viet Cong fighters was that they simply refused to give in . The Viet Cong refused to surrender in the face of the enemy .
 The VC depended on supplies from North Vietnam that came along the Ho Chi Minh trail . The VC relied heavily on supplies that came from the North Vietnam trail .
 United States and South Vietnamese planes bombed this constantly, but 40000 Vietnamese worked tirelessly to keep it open . U.S. and South Vietnam planes bombed the site constantly .
 The total of VC and North Vietnamese dead in the war has been estimated at 1 million, far higher than U.S. losses .
 Operation Rolling Thunder involved bombing of military and industrial targets in North Vietnam . Bombing was a key part of the United States strategy . However, whatever the casualties there were always replacement troops available .
 It was the beginning of an air offensive that was to last until 1972 . The lists of targets soon expanded to include towns and cities in North and South Vietnam, as well as Laos and Cambodia .
 More bombs dropped on North Vietnam than were dropped in the whole of the second world war on Germany and Japan . More bombs were dropped on Vietnam than those dropped during the war .
 The Americans used 82 million litres of Agent Orange . Napalm was used to destroy jungles where guerillas might hide .
 Bombing could not defeat a guerilla army, so U.S. commander General Westmoreland developed a policy of search and destroy . The U.N. was forced to find and destroy the guerillas .
 He established secure and heavily defended bases in the South . U.S. and South Vietnamese forces could launch search and destroy raids from helicopters .
 They would defend on a village and destroy any Viet Cong forces that they found . They would also destroy any . Viet Cong . forces that . found .
 Overall, the U.S. tactics throughout the conflict in Vietnam were much more conventional than those of the Communists . The Communists largely employed a style of guerilla warfare . The United States tactics were more conventional .
 The use of guerilla warfare suited the Vietnamese terrain, which was largely covered with forest/jungle . The use was used in the Vietnam War .
 The Communists' superior knowledge of their surroundings turned into a significant advantage . Furthermore, it turned the Communist Party's superior knowledge into an advantage .
 Guerilla attacks and booby traps succeeded to some extent in destroying United States forces and equipment . U.S. forces were attacked by guerrillas in Afghanistan .
 More importantly, they wore down U.S. soldiers and contributed to their deteriorating morale . "They wore down United States soldiers," said the author .
 Close quarter attacks eliminated the U.S. advantage of advanced artillery and air power . Close quarters attacked eliminated the United States advantage .
 Guerilla fighter didn't wear uniform, meaning they were often unidentifiable . Guerilla fighters were often not identified by uniform .
 This helped turn United States public opinion against the war, which contributed to America's withdrawal . This helped to turn U.S. public opinion, which led to the withdrawal .
 Strong campaigns against Hanoi and port of Haiphong forced North Vietnam to negotiate . It damaged North Vietnam's war effort and disrupted supply lines . It enabled the USA to strike even when reducing their ground forces .
 The United States air power couldn't defeat the communists, only slow them down . The U.S. air power was used only to slow down the Soviet Union . Air power didn't stop the Soviets, only slowed them down.
 The U.S. had problems aside from fighting against a committed guerilla army . The United States had problems with the guerillas .
 Low morale and inexperience was a serious problem as the war progressed . Low morale was a major problem for the British Army in the early 1940s .
 After 1967, an increasing number of troops were drafted; they had not volunteered for the forces as a career . This was mainly due to the fact that, after 1967, a growing number of soldiers were drafted . The draft was due to be drafted after 1967; many of them had not
 The soldiers knew very little about the country they were fighting for, and cared little about their cause, in contrast to the Viet Cong . The soldiers were very little interested in their cause .
 Majority of troops were from poor and immigrant backgrounds . Those privileged enough to be going to university could delay the draft .
 Many soldiers turned to drugs, and sold drugs, food etc. on the black market . Around 18% of deaths were from factors other than combat .
 General Westmoreland introduced a policy of giving troops just one year service . To tackle these problems, he introduced a one year policy .
 Vietnam's neighbours were another problem for the U.S. forces . Vietnam's neighbour was another problem .
 Neighbouring countries were sympathetic to the Viet Cong, and political considerations meant that the U.S. could not send its forces into Cambodia or Laos .
 They could retreat to these other countries to reinforce their losses and get new equipment, ammo etc. etc. The U.S. could retreat from these countries to get new ammunition, ammo and equipment .
 These states were used to supply forces along the Ho Chi Minh trail . They also used these states to supply their forces along their trail .
 U.S. tactics were based on attrition, and this inevitably led to large numbers of civilian casualties . However, the United States tactics were used to defeat the Soviet Union .
 The My Lai Massacre marked a turning point in public opinion towards the war . The massacre marked a turn point in the war's public opinion .
 It was the clearest evidence that the war had gone deeply wrong. It deeply shocked the American public and was the most shocking evidence that it had gone wrong .
 In March 1968, a unit of young American soldiers started a search and destroy mission in the Quang Ngai region of South Vietnam . The mission was part of a mission to destroy and destroy targets in the region .
 Most were under the impression that they had been ordered to kill everyone they found in the village . They were told to destroy all houses, dwellings and livestock, and most were under impression they were ordered to .
 Most villagers would have left for the market as it was Saturday, they were told . They were also told that most villagers would not have gone to the market that day .
 The commanding officers' report said that twenty non-combatants had been accidentally killed but the rest of the dead were recorded as Viet Cong . The officers involved were praised; soldiers took the event as a normal and inevitable part of war . 12 months later, a letter arrived in the offices
 It was written by Ronal Ridenhour, a soldier who had served in Vietnam . He personally knew many of those who had taken part in the massacre .
 'Life' magazine published photos of the massacre from an official army photographer . He had evidence of something 'dark and bloody' that had occurred in My Lai . He asked Congress to investigate .
 In 1971, he was found guilty of 22 counts of murder, and was sentenced to life imprisonment . In 1971 he was convicted of murdering 22 people and serving a life sentence .
 The Vietnam War was covered extensively by the media, especially in its latter stages . It was also covered extensively in the media's coverage of the war .
 The coverage undoubtedly contributed to the U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam, as it had a massive effect on public opinion towards the war .
 In the early stages of the war, the media largely followed the official line of policy and supported the government . There was some disagreement when the media reported the Buddhist protests against Diem .
 Even when the U.S. became directly involved in Vietnam, the media-government relationship remained good .
 The United States Army created the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam to liaise with journalists . The U.S. Army was responsible for liaising with journalists in Vietnam .
 Journalists could be accredited by the MACV and get transport to war areas, interviews, briefings with commanders etc. Journalists could also be accredited with MACV .
 In return, they agreed not to reveal any information that could help the enemy . In exchange, they were promised not to give any information to the enemy.
 Editors in the U.S. rarely wanted to publish bad news stories about Vietnam, for fear of being accused of undermining the war effort . Vietnam was a major source of conflict in Vietnam .
 Television is taking over from newspapers as the most important source of news, says President Obama . Television was taking over the role of news from newspapers, he says .
 Television gave a more raw account of war . U.S. TV had shown United States Marines using Zippo lighters to set fire to Vietnamese villagers' homes .
 US Admiral Grant Sharp and General Westmoreland both claimed that the media undermined the war effort . US Admiral Sharp and Gen. Westmorelland both said the media had undermined the efforts of the war .
 Many commentators have put forward the view that media crippled the war effort in Vietnam . Many other commentators have also put forward a view of media crippling the war .
 Casualties and war weariness were the reasons why support for the war dropped, not the media . War weariness was the reason for the drop of support for Iraq War support, not media .
 Less than 25% of reports showed dead or wounded, and usually not in any detail . Less than a quarter of those who died or wounded were killed or wounded .
 Research shows that from 1965-70 only 76 out of 2300 TV reports showed heavy fighting . Research shows only 76 per cent of TV reports reported heavy fighting during the war .
 As opinions turned against U.S. involvement in Vietnam, anti-war protests quickly gained momentum . Anti-war protesters gained momentum in Vietnam .
 Vietnam war highlighted racial equality, as there weren't many African Americans in university so not many could escape the draft . Civil rights campaigners were prominent in the movement . The Vietnam war was the focus of the Vietnam War .
 30% of African Americans were drafted compared to only 19% of white Americans . This meant that 30% were drafted . Only 19% were white .
 The money being spent on the Vietnam war couldn't be spent on improving social conditions in America, he says . Furthermore, the money was spent on Vietnam war instead of improving America's social conditions .
 Students were also powerful sources of opposition to the war . Many did not want to be involved in a war they did not believe in or found morally wrong . To them, Vietnam became a symbol of defeat and moral corruption .
 Frequently, the protest would involve the burning of an American flag . Frequently it involved burning of the American flag.
 A criminal offense in the USA, it was a powerful symbol of the students' rejection of their country's values . The students' refusal to take part in the U.S. is seen as a symbol of their values .
 In many ways it forced the United States leadership into a withdrawal from Vietnam . It brought Johnson, and most of America, to the realisation that the war could not be won militarily . From 1965-67, the official view was that the U.S. was killing significant numbers
 In 1968, one Viet Cong commando unit tried to capture the United States embassy in Saigon . U.S. forces had to fight to regain control room by room . The Tet Offensive was the first major offensive to break into Saigon in 1968 .
 The people of South Vietnam did not rise up and help them, as had been hoped . The people in South Vietnam were not as strong as they had hoped for .
 There were nearly 500,000 troops in Vietnam and the USA was spending $20 billion a year on the war . The U.S. spent $20billion a year in Vietnam .
 US and South Vietnamese forces quickly retook the towns captured in the offensive . But enormous amounts of artillery and air power were used, many civilians were killed and the ancient city of Hue was destroyed .
 Until this point, media coverage of the war had been generally positive . Some journalists had been starting to ask difficult questions in 1967 .
 Following the Tet Offensive, President Johnson reduced the bombing campaign against North Vietnam . President Johnson instructed his officials to begin peace negotiations with the Communists .
 Johnson also announced that he would not be seeking re-election as President of the United States . Johnson will not be running for re-elected .
 In the following election campaign, both Republican and Democrat candidates campaigned to end U.S. involvement in Vietnam in Vietnam .
 Anti-Vietnam feeling was so strong that this was really their only choice if they had supported continuing the war they would have had no chance of being elected . The anti-war feeling was really the only choice they had to choose .
 Richard Nixon was elected in November 1968 as President of the United States . He was elected to be the first president of the U.S. to be elected .
 Between 1968 and 1973, he and his National Security Advisor, Henry Kissinger, worked tirelessly to end U.S. involvement in Vietnam . The Vietnam War ended in 1973 .
 This was not easy as the question of how to contain world communism, which had initially caused the U.S. to enter Vietnam, hadn't gone away . The question of containing world communism had not gone away when the US entered Vietnam .
 Kissinger had regular meetings with the chief Vietnamese peace negotiator, Le Duc Tho . Kissinger met with Tho from early 1969 to discuss the Vietnam War . Tho was a key figure in the negotiations .
 In January 1973, in Paris, a peace agreement was signed by Nixon, Le Duc Tho, and Thieu . Nixon, Thieu signed a peace deal in Paris in 1973 .
 In Vietnam, Nixon began the process of Vietnamisation building up South Vietnamese troops and withdrawing United States troops .
 Nixon increased bombing campaigns against North Vietnam to show he was not weak . Nixon increased bombings to show that he wasn't weak .
 It isn't clear whether Nixon really believed he had secured a lasting peace settlement . Nixon believed he was close to reaching a lasting settlement .
 By April 1975, Saigon, the capital of South Vietnam, had fallen to North Vietnamese Communists after a major military offensive launched in December 1974 . Without U.S. funding or support, which had been refused by Congress under both Nixon and Ford, the South Vietnamese government could not survive
 News images of desperate men, women and children trying to clamber aboard American helicopters were a symbol of American failure in Vietnam . U.S. Embassy helicopters were seen clambering aboard from the United States embassy in Saigon .
 After 30 years of constant conflict, the struggle of opposing groups for control of Vietnam had finally been settled . The conflict was settled after 30 years .
 Use this set whenNearlyVisible { googletag.defineSlot.addService; }); }); }); Comments Laura report: Thank you so much!
 The Cold War, 1945-1975 3. / 5 based on 3 ratings GCSE History OCR Cold War 1945- 1975 3. . / 5 . based on three ratings . Cold War was the Cold War between 1945 and 1975 .