 The crisis began on October 14, 1962 and lasted for 38 days until November 20, 1962 . The crisis lasted 38 days, ending in November 20 .
 The Cold War was closest to becoming nuclear war, and could have turned to world war three . It is regarded as the moment when the Cold War could have become nuclear war .
 Soviet government determined in 1959 that any future war would be largely nuclear and would likely be a world-wide war . The Soviet government decided in 1959 any future nuclear war would likely likely be nuclear . Soviet government said any nuclear war was likely to be a 'world-wide' war .
 Under Khrushchev, the Soviet government focused increasingly on rockets and missiles instead of conventional military forces . The move was in response to the new administration of Kennedy and his accompanying rearmament program .
 The Soviets installed nuclear weapons in Cuba, a Caribbean nation off the coast of Florida with a Communist government . The Soviets decided to install nuclear weapons, in the form of medium and short range ballistic missiles .
 Castro sought Soviet support after collapse of relations with the U.S. due to the Cuban Revolution . Castro had sought support from the Soviet Union after the collapse of its relations with America .
 Soviet reasoning was two-fold — first, to defend this new Communist state from an American or American-sponsored invasion . Second, to shift the nuclear balance of power away from the United States by putting American cities directly within the range of Soviet missiles .
 A U-2 flight in late August photographed a new series of SAM sites being constructed in Cuba . Kennedy told Congress that there were no offensive missiles in Cuba on September 4 . Kennedy said in September that the missiles were not being fired at Cuba .
 On the night of September 8, the first consignment of SS-4 MRBMs was unloaded in Havana, Cuba . A second shipload arrived on September 16, and a third arrived in Havana on September 17 .
 A number of unconnected problems meant that the missiles were not discovered by the Americans until October 14 . A U-2 flight of October 14 clearly showed the construction of an SS-4 site near San Cristobal .
 Initially, the U.S. government kept the information secret, telling only the 14 key officials of the executive committee . The United States government kept it secret for years .
 The word quarantine was used rather than blockade for reasons of international law . Quarantine was used in keeping with the Quarantine Speech of 1937 by Franklin D Roosevelt .
 The choice was reduced to either a naval blockade and an ultimatum, or a full-scale invasion . The choice between the two options was either a blockade or an invasion .
 A blockade was finally chosen, although there were a number of hawks who kept pushing for tougher action . A blockade of the Strait of Hameramer was finally decided .
 Kennedy spoke to the U.S. people in a televised address on October 22 . Kennedy's address was broadcast from October 22, 1963 . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The United States was surprised at the solid support from its European allies and also from much of the remaining international community . The U.S. was surprised by the support of European allies .
 When Kennedy openly publicized the crisis, the entire world was put in a state of terror . The entire world, including the U.S. and the United States, was put into a state-of-terror state .
 People began talking and worrying openly about nuclear Armageddon . drills for such an emergency happened almost daily in many cities . People began to worry openly about such a nuclear apocalypse .
 The case was proved on October 25 at an emergency session of the UN, during which U.S. ambassador Adlai Stevenson showed photographs of Russian missile installations in Cuba . Soviet ambassador Valerian Zorin had denied their existence .
 Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy on October 23 and 24 claiming the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the peaceful intentions of the Soviet Union . However, the Soviets had delivered two different deals to the American government .
 The second deal was broadcast on public radio on October 27, calling for the withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey in addition to the demands of the 26th . The deal also calls for withdrawal of United States missiles .
 The crisis peaked on October 27, when a U-2 was shot down over Cuba and another U.2 flight over Russia was almost intercepted . The crisis began in Cuba and Russia .
 Kennedy responded by publicly accepting the first deal and sending Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to accept the second in private the small number of Jupiter missiles near Izmir, Turkey would be removed . The second deal was the agreement to remove Jupiter missiles from Izmir .
 Khrushchev ordered the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba on October 28 . The Soviet ships turned back and the Soviet missile fleet was forced to turn back .
 The compromise satisfied no one, though it was a sharp diplomatic embarassment . Khrushchev and the Soviet Union were seen as backing down from a situation that they had created . The compromise was seen as a diplomatic embarrassment .
 Khrushchev's fall from power a few years later can be partially linked to Politburo embarrassment at both his eventual concessions and his ineptness in sparking the crisis .
 Curtis LeMay told the President that it was ""the greatest defeat in our history" and that the U.S. should invade immediately . LeMay said the defeat was the greatest defeat of our history .
 In early 1992 it was confirmed that Cuba had tactical nuclear missiles available . General Anatoly Gribkov, part of the Soviet staff responsible for the operation, stated that the local Soviet commander, General Issa Pliyev, was prohibited from using them even if the United States had mounted a
 In the Essence of Decision, Graham T Allison and Philip Zelikow use the crisis to illustrate multiple approaches to analyzing the actions of the state .
 The intensity and magnitude of the crisis provides excellent material for drama . Thirteen Days stars Kevin Costner, Bruce Greenwood and Steven Culp in the movie .