 There have been radar sightings of Soviet missiles heading fo the U.S. Suddenly, an aide enters the room with word of radar sightings .
 In less than five minutes the advisors must decide to launch a nuclear counterattack against the Soviet Union or to wait to see if there has been a technical error .
 The president and his advisors glance nervously at the radio receiver that will transmit the latest update on the situation from NORAD command headquarters . NORAD is based in the United States and based in Denver, Colorado .
 Hardliners argue that the nation must launch its missiles before United States defenses are weakened by a Soviet first strike . The U.S. must launch missiles before a Soviet strike, hardliners say .
 Others insist that World War III should not be started on the basis of uncertain data . Others say the data is not reliable enough to predict the outcome of the war .
 The ""actor"" playing Kennedy breaks up and cannot return to the simulation until he has stopped laughing . He cannot return until he stops laughing .
 It was clear that we needed an affective ""hook"" to draw students into the process and to maintain their interest throughout the week . The important for the te program were intel motivated adolescen dard academic lectu tional ""carrots"
 A simulation seemed to be the most effective way to establish a link between the affective concerns of the students and the material we wished to present . The simulation was the most successful way to reach out to students and their concerns .
 Game situations can provide a sense of power and competence that too often is lacking in adolescents' daily lives . It can give them the opportunity to try out different approaches to life with minimal risk . Game situations provide them the chance to try new ways of life without risk .
 The desire to look good before their peers provides a strong additional incentive to play an active role in the simulation . It is also a strong incentive to encourage people to take part in simulation .
 If a simulation is well designed and managed, this emotional substratum can be a powerful force bonding students to the learning situation . But, if a simulation can be well designed, it can be difficult to manage, say experts .
 We were drawn to the simulation because it offered a more active form of learning . We were also drawn to a simulation because of its 'active' learning, we said .
 In a simulation, the passive abstractions of textbo history are replaced by a decision-making process in which studen themselves must make immediate use of the knowledge they are gainin . We wanted the students to encounter the events of October 1962 not as a list of inert facts or dates
 Students are forced to operate within the mentalit6 of the era and to recognize the differences between the world of the 1950s and early 1960s and that of the late 1980s .
 Use of role playing could help students develop the ability to see issues from multiple perspectives . Role playing is appealing because it can help students see issues differently .
 It was hoped that the process of embodying these perspectives would help students move more rapidly through cognitive development .
 This affective learning and tolerance that it encourages would, we hoped, have a pedagogical value over and above any historical content that was absorbed in the simulation . We hoped that this would have an educational value, over and over, over the historical content, we said .
 The Cuban missile crisis was the subject of a new simulation . The simulation is based on a simulation of the Cuban missile war . The Cuban crisis was a time-saving exercise .
 There was a basic conflict with obvious gains and losses, a great variety of different roles, and opportunities to introduce a limitless amount of nuance and complexity into the teaching situation .
 The excitement of being personally involved in decisions of such historical importance naturally drew students into the process . The events and personalities involved in these events were extraordinarily dramatic, and the excitement of having personally involved involved in such historical decisions drew students .
 The Cuban missile crisis offered a richness of historical material, a natural game structure, and a means to draw students into the kind of teaching situation we desired . The game was a way to teach students about the missile crisis .
 So Because of a particular So Because group each with a student team of fifteen on a side . It w of a group of students with a team of 15 on each side .
 These teams would be decision makers a would meet together, under the leadership of a ""Kennedy"" or ""Khrushchev"" played by project leaders .
 Early in the planning process we discarded the notion of giving t students grades, and there was to be no scoring system . There was also to be a lack of a scoring system, which was discarded .
 On the hand there was the competition between the U.S. and the So Union . On the other hand, the United States and the European Union were united .
 The students could be expected to identify quickly with their natio and to strive to protect its interests against the other .
 The roles were created in such a manner that conflicts were sur to develop within the leadership elite of each nation . On t other hand, we created the roles in such an . manner that . conflicts were allowed to develop among the leadership . elite of nations .
 Competitio between factions within each nation for control of foreign policy provide a motivation for full participation in the simulation .
 We were relatively certain that the students on the American side would readily grasp the ideological differences between the Kennedy advisors . We were hoping the students would grasp the differences between Kennedy advisors.
 We were less sure, however, that conflicts would develop among those playing the roles . We were also less certain that the conflict would develop in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev told all the Soviet players that a two-thirds vote by the Central Committee could temporarily depose and remove any member from voting status . Khrushchevitch: "We told all Soviet players"
 We knew that the students would have to be provided with a great deal of information if they were to make intelligent choices in the course of the simulation . The students were provided with information to help them make intelligent decisions .
 Each participant received a general cover letter introducing the simulation, background readings on the history, politics, geography and international relations of Soviet Union . A biography of the character the student was to play was also included in the cover letter .
 The biographical sketches provided crucial background information and served to orient the students toward a particular ideological and political position . The biographies provided crucial information .
 Some of the roles were specifically chosen and shaped to produce hardliners . The roles were created to create hardliners in the U.S.
 Others were more conciliatory, while a third group was left in the middle to be swayed by arguments from the two extremes .
 Each character was given specific goals (for example, to build the prestige of Soviet rocket forces or to protect the political base of the Kennedy administration regardless of foreign policy considerations) Groups of characters were clearly linked as potential allies .
 This background information was augmented by other materials presented during the simulation . The simulation was created by a team of scientists and engineers at the University of Cambridge .
 "Early on we decided never to depart from the fictional frame of the Cuban missile crisis during the hours the students were with us," says the author .
 "We did everything possible to reinforce the illusion that students really were Soviet or American leaders living in the early 1960s," author says .
 If it was necessary to lecture the students on the Berlin question or the military balance in 1962, an appropriate diplomatic or military ""specialist"" came to each group and briefed them .
 The illusion, of course, was not complete, and there were occasions when the same staff member had to play the role of several different experts .
 Soviet and U.S. military uniforms helped give a sense of reality to the event . The students were willing to remain in their roles and to ask the appropriate questions .
 "We were determined from the beginning, however, that these briefinglectures should be complemented with a more active form of learning," says the author of the book .
 A magazines and from to sources of infor to the Martinsville, I a large body of mate use to support their . This information p during the simulati might be asked to st anti-communism in about civil defense in geography texts to industries .
 Sovi music, ""Hero of Sovi", was created by role-players . Role playing helped to establish to sustain the simulation . Sovi's music is called "Hero of the Hero"
 Everyone had to have a clear idea who was supposed to be doing what, when, where, and with what materials at each moment in the five days of the simulation .
 We were faced with the problem of reconciling all this planning and structure with the freedom of choice that lies at the heart of the simulation experience . But we were faced by the challenge to reconcile the structure and structure of the game .
 The affective advantages of a simulation---motivation, active learning, and exploration of perspectives--are all rest on the ability of the students to explore spontaneously the possibilities inherent in the historical situation .
 The freedom to make choices meant that the precise direction of the simulation was unpredictable . The freedom of making choices meant the exact direction was unpredictable for the simulation .
 The simulations required a plan, a structure for decision making, and an orderly unfolding of events, and some form of closure at the end . Yet, like all simulations, our project required a systematic introduction to the necessary background, a structured structure, and a plan .
 The need for spontaneity always had to be balanced against the necessity of a certain level of predictability, says Simon Cowell . Cowell: "I'm not going to be able to predictability. I'm going to have to be unpredictable"
 Historical nature of simulation created special problems, for the students' decisions could never be allowed to take them beyond the bounds of historical possibility . Moreover, the historical nature of the simulation created problems .
 If gross anachronisms and historically inappropriate options were allowed to enter the playing of the simulation, then its entire teaching function would have been thrown into doubt .
 It was necessary to distinguish carefully between the area of freedom, in which the student was allowed to make particular decisions, and the historical context, which allowed certain choices .
 We could allow students to opt for policies different than those actually pursued by U.S. and Soviet leaders in October 1962 . We had to be certain that these choices never departed too far from policies that might actually have been considered seriously at the time .
 The functioning of the game and the maintenance of historical plausibility required limits on the directions the simulation might take . Thus, the functioning of . the . game and . the maintenance . of historical . plausibility . required limits . on the direction the simulation may take .
 "We could not dictate the precise choices made by the students without destroying the very mechanism that made the system work" The only option open to us was to remain prepared to improvise constantly and to intervene regularly in order to keep the simulation on track .
 The ""Kennedys"" and ""Khrushchevs,"" who were staff leaders of the project, were "our first line of defense" The project's staff leaders were "the first line-of-defense,""
 All decisions by the student groups had to be discussed with these leaders before they could be implemented in order to avoid anachronistic policies .
 The project director, the staff from the Gifted and Talented Program, and the teacher-interns were available to do basic research, to prepare and deliver oral briefings to the groups . Papal pronouncements, CIA and KGB reports, or mythical events were needed to keep the simulation
 Teachers could be counted on to find information quickly . When some bit of background information became important to the decision-making process of one of the groups, teachers could find it quickly .
 Southern and Underwood proved to be superb improvisational role players . At crucial moments they assumed various identities and interacted with the American or Soviet groups .
 At the end of each day the staff participants would meet to compare notes and coordinate plans for the next day . At the time of the day, staff members would meet for the day to discuss plans and compare notes with each other .
 Small staff teams responded to problems as they arose . Decorum-based decision-making structure is now decentralised .
 The value of this complex structure was clear when the students in our simulation proved to be far less willing to risk war and far more prepared to compromise than their counterparts a quarter-century ago .
 Although this may be encouraging for the future of our species, it posed serious problems for the project . The project is now in the process of finding a new species of fish .
 The students threatened to solve the missile crisis, as well as a great number of other contemporary problems . On the third day of a five-day session, the students discussed a range of contemporary issues .
 'We felt it was necessary to give them a greater sense of the kind of obstacles that can intervene to make the maintenance of peace difficult. But, more importantly, on the level of pedagogy, we felt it would be necessary to .
 President Kennedy had dreaded an accidental encounter of U.S. and Soviet jets over Alaska . Therefore, we introduced, not only those complications that actually threatened negotiations in 1962, but also other complications, which President Kennedy feared .
 A Soviet freighter was accidentally sunk by an American ship as it reached the blockade line . Just at the moment when it appeared that the U.S.-Soviet groups had reached a compromise, we manufactured an incident . The incident occurred at the time of the incident .
 "Pounding his shoe on the table, our ""Khrushchev"" denounced the United States in flowery and dramatic language and led his delegation out of the negotiations .
 We also wanted to give the students a sense of the difficulties of decision making under the tight time constraints of the nuclear age .
 Each of the Soviet and American groups was at some point presented with reports of incoming enemy missiles . The Soviets and U.S. groups were presented with missile reports .
 The students were then forced to decide whether to launch an immediate counterattack . A military officer with a radio transmitter constantly reminded them how many minutes remained before the expected explosions .
 The result in three of the four groups was an intense experience, which we hope was later combined with background information provided on the arms race to produce a greater understanding of the problems of our era .
 In the fourth case, the result was that described at the beginning of this article-an invasion of chance into our carefully constructed system that added nothing to our attempts to simulate reality, but did help bond that particular group of students to the project through humor .
 "The unfolding of the simulation required a real commitment to improvisation," the author says .
 It's crucial to recognize that this flexibility was in no way antithetical to the careful planning that preceded the session .
 "The ability of the staff to depart from the initial plan rested on the clarity and thoroughness of that plan," said staff . The ability to depart was "a matter of principle," said a spokesman .
 Having a clear idea of what was supposed to happen, we could easily change particular elements without fear that the entire structure would collapse . We can easily change elements without fearing that the whole structure will collapse. We can also easily change things without fear of collapse .
 The unfolding of the simulation across five days was exhilaratingand exhausting-experience . The unfolding was an exhilarating and exhausting experience for the team .
 We were impressed with the ability of most of the students to re-create historical roles and to play them effectively . We were quite impressed with their ability to play historical roles .
 They were able not only to repeat, but also to make active use of the information they had been taught and to function within the mentalit6 of the Soviet and American leaders .
 Like the leaders of the period, they managed to avoid war, but as a group the American players were generally less willing to risk nuclear war than were their historical counterparts .
 The expected ideological splits occurred in all the groups, although we found that personalities of the students sometimes overpowered their roles . We found personalities of students sometimes over-run their roles.
 The students' adherence to the basic structure did not inhibit their enthusiasm or creativity . And som within the ideological furore of the students, the students said .
 "Some of them threw themselves so thoroughly into their roles that we had to face unexpected difficulties," says the director . Some of the actors were so thoroughly involved in their roles they had to deal with unexpected difficulties .
 Some students arrived so well versed in the period that the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was revealed well before we had intended .
 Three-point plan for settling the Berlin questio might have changed the course of history had it been seriousl considered at the time .
 Another, playing General Maxwell Taylor, broug with him books written by the general in the late 1950s . Another played a hawkish general with su gusto that the staff and many of the other students began to feel unea around him .
 At times, the playful side of adolescence came out, as the Soviets secretly distributed sheets denouncing Kennedy's indiscre tions with Marilyn Monroe . A K.G.B. agent was caught hiding cassette recorder in a room to be used by American teams .
 One of the Soviet groups also made ample u of its ability to remove Khrushchev from voting status . Twice ousting him from power and twice bringing him back when crises called for leadership .
 Most of the time the students seemed to be playing the roles in a very productive manner . The students were pouring over maps and studying back ground briefing papers .
 In retrospect, there are several important changes that would have made the simulation more effective . The simulation was designed to simulate the effects of the weather .
 Students could discuss the material from their own perspectives rather than from those of their characters .
 This wa less important than it would have been in the context of a course in which students must be prepared for exams . This was not the case, but it was important to be prepared .
 The students leave the simulation each day to be certain that they do not carry the emotional strains of the conflict or the racism, sexism, or militarism of the historical situation back into their everyday lives . But the emotional and ideologica links with roles must be severed as the students leave
 If this simulation is repeated, the single long debriefing session at the end of the week would be supplemented with brief daily sessions in which students could put the events of the day in perspective . Students could also have daily debrief sessions to put the day's events into perspective .
 The problem of gender roles posed by the simulation is less easily remedied . The simulation is based on a simulation of a computer-simulated world .
 Many of the women students were able to play the roles of their male characters quite effectively, but some of them were less engaged in the process than their male counterparts .
 Debriefing sessions could have been used more effectively to give these women a voice outside of the context of the simulation . Debrief sessions could also have been more effective to give them a voice .
 The very notion of historical simulation poses questions concerning sexism, racism, and the desirability of social inequality, which instructors cannot afford to ignore .
 Had this simulation been part of a regular course, it would also have been necessary to pay a great deal of attention to the relationship between the structure of the simulation and the broader structure within which it was being used . The simulation was designed to test the effectiveness of the course itself .
 We could allow students to pursue different research projects without fear that some of them were being better prepared for a future exam than others . We could let students pursue different projects without fearing that some would be better prepared .
 If this simulation had been part of an academic course, it would have been necessary to have added special structures that would have synthesized the separate experiences of different students . Some students would have easier access to material than others .
 Despite these concerns, we believe that the project was a success, says CNN.com .
 The structure we had developed before the simulation began allowed the staff and the students the flexibility and spontaneity to make the sessions an exciting and perhaps, perhaps, even unforgettable experience .
 The vast majority of the students seem to have learned a great deal about a crucial period in world history . The students appear to have been impressed by the lessons .
 The dramatic and active form in which students experienced this learning is apt to give it more staying power than material learned in less striking or more passive ways .
 There was ample evidence in the policy debates and in the general discussion at the end of the simulation that many of the students grappled seriously with the moral and political issues raised by the simulation .
 Many students were disturbed by the kind of decisions they had to make when they were playing their character . The simulation raised some basic ethical questions about the nature of political action which may be important later in their lives .
 The students experienced the intricacies of group decision making and the moral complexities of struggles over ideology and power . The students also experienced the complexities of group decisions .
 Some of the students left the simulation with their preexisting opinions confirmed . Others gained a better sense of the ambiguities of real historical decisions .
 Whether they played with the American or Soviet teams, most of them emerged with a greater awareness of fact that all moral right never rests with any nation, that real questions are never simple .
 Simulation simulations can encourage more active learning, say researchers . Simulations can encourage students to take part in the classroom, say the researchers .
 He had previously managed a team that had created a major simulation of social history from 1789 to 1912 for use in a freshman survey of modem European history .
 Roger Beck, a graduate student in African history, had experience teaching junior high school students which would prove very useful in helping the other members of the team .
 Bill Bishel, a graduate student in United States history, and Peter Holquist, an undergraduate preparing for graduate work in Russian history, had no previous experience in designing simulations . Their expertise in their areas of historical research provided a crucial dimension .
 It is impossible to overemphasize the contribution of all these individuals in the development and unfolding of the simulation . The simulation was created by a team of scientists and engineers .
 Southern and Underwood were extraordinarily effective at improvising and role playing during the course of the simulation, and their counsel was absolutely invaluable . The pair were "extraordinarily effective" at improvisation and role-playing during the simulation .
 Keeping the groups down to fifteen allowed the students to interact within relatively small groups . Keeping the students down to 15 allowed them to interact with each other in relatively smaller groups .
 Half of the students were engaged in a symmetrical stuggle in another area of the building . While one set of Soviet and American leaders was locked in combat in one area .
 At the beginning of the simulation there was no mention of the Cuban missile crisis . The Soviet and American groups met in complete isolation from one another .
 Each group was given crucial background information that it could use in the days ahead . Groups were encouraged to expect that the focus of conflict would be Berlin, not Cuba .
 This response was conveyed to the Soviet teams through diplomatic messages or intelligence reports, then a process of spontaneous interaction began . The response was relayed by diplomatic messages, intelligence reports and then by spontaneous interaction .
 Of all these materials, the biographies were the most important and the most time consuming to produce . Of all the materials, biographies are the most difficult to produce.
 Ranging from two to two-and-a-half single-spaced pages, these life histories rested on a good deal of historical research . The life histories are based on two-to-three pages of pages .
 All of the American characters were real, and the details of their biographies were based on standard historical sources . The biographies of all of the characters are based on historical sources and historical facts .
 The Soviet characters were more difficult to draw, in part because biographical information concerning Soviet leaders is sketchy . The students' lack of familiarity with Soviet politics and society made it necessary to draw the differences between ideological factions and interest groups clearly .
 Some of the Soviet characters were based on real figures, while others were composites of several leaders . Therefore, some of the characters were composite of real figures .
 The biographies convey the kinds of experiences Soviet leaders had had in the decades before 1962 . But, in all cases, the biographies conveyed the basic conflicts and positions that underlay Soviet politics at the time .
 A reference to American missiles in Greece somehow found its way into a treaty negotiated by one of the U.S.-Soviet pairs . The treaty could not be conveniently removed, despite the fact that no United States missiles were stationed there in 1962 . No United States missile was stationed in Greece in
 Only in the debriefing at the end of the simulation was it possible to correct this historical error . The error was only corrected by the team at the time of simulation .