 These nine insights get at the heart of what America can learn today from its closest brush with nuclear war . From the realities of containment to the need for a strong Navy to the role of multilateralism in a crisis, these nine insights reveal what the U.S. can learn from
 Harvard Kennedy School's Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and Foreign Policy magazine sponsored a contest for scholars and citizens to reflect on the lessons of the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . Historians agree it was one of the most dangerous moments in human history .
 The confrontation brought the world to the brink of nuclear war over 13 days in October 1962 . Their challenge was to present the most persuasive, original lesson flowing from the confrontation .
 We've collected the top three finalists in three categories - the general public, scholars, and students - and presented their insight into the crisis .
 The Cuban missile crisis taught the U.S. what containment feels like . Zachary Elias, an undergraduate at Dartmouth College in Hanover, NH, is the winner of the contest . Elias: The Cuban crisis taught us what containment felt like .
 The lesson from the crisis is the extent to which containment is terrifying for the country being contained . The lesson is that containment can be terrifying, and the country is being contained, says CNN.com .
 At the time, U.S. nuclear missiles were stationed in range of Soviet cities as a means of containment . But, for United States policymakers, it was unthinkable that the United States could end up in a similar position .
 U.S. policymakers were inclined to compromise with the Russians on containment policy . They traded nuclear warheads in Turkey for those in Cuba to lessen the direct military threat posed to each nation .
 This is a lesson to keep in mind when deliberating the best means of dealing with rising powers . This is an example of the best way to deal with the rising powers in the world .
 When making policy concerning the rise of China, one would do well to remember that military containment and antagonism makes the contained country feel threatened, which in turn makes aggression more likely in response to U.S. provocations . The United States should not be worried about China's rise,
 It took trust, diplomacy, and compromise to resolve a crisis that was precipitated by military buildup, as dictated by standard realist power calculus . The U.S. responded to the crisis with trust and diplomacy to resolve it .
 While it is unlikely that China will be able to challenge U.S. power as the USSR did during the Cold War, one should remain cognizant of the fact that surrounding another state with military threats is less likely to spur long-term trust and cooperation .
 In a democracy, the need for broad public support to engage in a dangerous confrontation can have lasting unintended foreign policy consequences . The need for public support can have long-term unintended consequences, says Julian Zelizer .
 Foreign policy tunnel vision can last for generations because of "accepted truths" trumpeted to justify confrontation . Tunnel vision is a form of tunnel vision that can last generations .
 Since 1962 U.S. foreign policy stewards have been hamstrung on Cuba since 1962 . So much patriotic capital was invested in villainizing Soviet Cuba and Fidel Castro . Since 1962 the U.N. has been reluctant to engage in Cuba .
 The martyrdom of JFK compounded this by making it unholy to question his taking us to the brink . JFK's martyrdom made it impossible to question whether he took us to brink .
 The Vietnam War traded on American patriotism in a similar way to the Missile Crisis . But the success of that rallying cry was mixed, and petered out feebly at the end .
 The U.S. made friends with the same regime in Vietnam as was in power at the end of that war . Yet that enabled, in only 40 years, the United States to make friends with that regime .
 U.S. patriotism necessarily invoked at that time, and since, has rendered it verboten in polite company to ask if perhaps the United States should not have dropped those bombs .
 The U.S. stands alone on Cuba . The United States enjoys solidarity with the EU, the U.N. and other countries on international embargo programs .
 Not even our closest allies agree with the U.S. sanctions on Cuba, says U.K. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . Obama administration has imposed new sanctions on the Cuban government .
 In 1962, in priming its population for a dangerous confrontation, the U.S. painted itself into a corner with respect to future dealings with Cuba and Fidel Castro . The United States painted itself in a corner .
 The name of the man who made the decision during the Cuban missile crisis did not have the name of John Kennedy or Nikita Khruschev . Instead, it was named Vasili Arkov .
 Deputy commander of Soviet submarine in need of oxygen urged his superior to take vessel to surface for air instead of engaging American warships with its armed nuclear torpedo .
 A single man smoking a cigarette can burn an entire parched forest . During crisis, during crisis, one minor actor can effect major sequences . It is true that a single man can burn a forest, but a single actor can affect a major sequence .
 While world leaders command in crises, they do not sail the ships or pull the triggers, they don't pull the guns . World leaders command when they are in crisis, they are not in charge .
 It is imperative that statesmen be aware of minor actors in the background or better yet, in military terms, the minor actors on the ground . In today’s interconnected world, the interconnected world galvanized by social media, a single citizen — or in today's interconnected world —
 Arkhipov will always live in obscurity under the shadow of actors named Kennedy or Khruschev . Unfortunately, however, the name of an actor like Arkhiprov will always be a name like Kennedy .
 Reid Pauly, research assistant to Scott Sagan at Center for International Security and Cooperation at Stanford, Stanford, CA Lesson: Multilateralism is key. Reid Pauley, research associate research assistant at the center for international security and cooperation at Stanford .
 One rarely hears scholars or policymakers cite the CMC as a success of multilateralism, but we would be wise to reflect on its importance during October 1962 . The CMC was founded in 1961 in New York .
 A naval blockade of Cuba was a good decision, recall that blockades constitute acts of war . While hindsight can tell us that a naval blockade was good, remember that it was an act of war. Blockades are acts of warfare.
 The United States could have imposed a blockade without approval, but instead it aligned its decision with international norms . The U.S. invoked the OAS charter’s right to take collective action in the face of an ""armed attack or…an act of aggression that is not an
 Khrushchev would not have seen U.S. actions as escalatory acts of war . The nuanced decisions made it difficult to interpret the situation as an escalatory act of war, he says .
 The U.S. made good use of United Nations channels to facilitate clear communication of messages to the Soviets, like specifications for the size of the quarantine zone . The United States then used U.N. channels to communicate with the Soviets .
 These decisions, while minimized in the retelling of such a dramatic tale, were crucial to the successful receding of tensions . These decisions were crucial in the success of the war in Iraq .
 Multilateralism provides added benefits, such as creating a marketplace of policy ideas, testing the morality of alternatives, and the legitimating of threats and the use of force . It also legitimates threats and force, and tests the morality .
 There are many important lessons to learn from the dark days of October 1962, one we often ignore is that multilateralism is key . Multilateralism was key to the success of the U.S. in the 1960s .
 A flexible military force, including a strong navy, gives policymakers a wide range of response options . A flexible and varied military force gives policymakers an array of options, including the navy .
 A few years before the Cuban missile crisis, the military underwent a significant debate to determine its post-war future . The Cuban military faced a major debate about its future in the years before .
 The Cuban missile crisis demonstrated that continuing to equip the nation’s military with a vast array of capabilities was still valuable because it gave the president several options with which to respond to the situation .
 While the Air Force immediately demanded offensive air strikes and the Army suggested a ground invasion, the Navy provided a scaled response that sent an effective signal without the use of violence .
 A naval option kept Americans off of Cuban soil and out of immediate danger . Yet showed enough American resolve to convince the Soviets that the battle wasn’t worth fighting .
 Crisis management may require upending long-established military doctrine, plans, and policies . Crisis management requires upending military doctrine and plans, says CNN's John Sutter .
 By the time of the Cuban missile crisis, thousands of nuclear antiaircraft weapons were deployed around dozens of cities and defense sites in the U.S. Thousands of nuclear anti-aircraft weapons had been deployed .
 These surface-to-air missiles were created to destroy Soviet bombers . The large and lethal aerial blast they produced offered the greatest chance of destroying nuclear-laden attacking Soviet bombers.
 The military had the authority to use these weapons without presidential consultation if commanders believed an attack was underway . The military also had the power to use the weapons without president's approval .
 For five years, the widespread and ready expenditure of defensive nuclear arms to counter a nuclear air raid had been the basis upon which air defense units had been trained, equipped, and operated . Air defense units were trained and equipped to respond to a nuclear attack .
 The discovery of IL-28 bombers in Cuba induced quick preparations to guard against a non-nuclear strike on the southeastern U.S. Existing arrangements with the possibility of defensive nuclear expenditure, dangerously raised the risk of escalation, dangerously .
 This was so, especially if nuclear use resulted from a lower-level decision, and even if it occurred over the United States . This was especially true if it happened over the U.S., especially if it resulted in a nuclear use .
 Despite objections from the North American Air Defense Command, air defense forces protecting Florida were prohibited from using nuclear arms . Despite objections, despite objections, the forces were not allowed to use nuclear weapons .
 Army antiaircraft battery near Miami was equipped only with conventional missiles . Unlike units at permanent emplacements in other states, it was only equipped with conventional missile launchers .
 Air Force fighters flown to Florida did not carry nuclear weapons like those fitted to the balance of the interceptor force .
 These actions required overcoming many challenges, including instituting new directives and obtaining sufficient munitions . These actions were necessary to overcome many challenges .
 Instead of being rigidly devoted to existing plans, officials acutely perceived their limitations and deftly ensured that alternatives were properly developed and implemented .
 The morality of using weapons to reach a resolution must be considered in order to prevent a catalyst for greater conflict and subsequent death . Eden Rose Niles, Colorado Academy High School, Denver, CO.
 RFK recognized that it could turn crisis into global conflict . RFK considered the morality of a strike, but said it was not necessary .
 His decision to oppose the strike allowed for a patient approach and consideration of the broader moral issue . Consequently, he opposed the strike, allowing for the patient approach .
 This provided time for Kennedy’s administration to weigh non-lethal options, eventually culminating in the quarantine . International diplomacy allowed for international diplomacy to be the source of resolution .
 "My lesson draws from how missiles and other modern weapons do not require tedious preparations but rather can be deployed at the push of a button," says the author of the book .
 Leaders must consider morality carefully before choosing military action as a first response, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Leaders need to be careful about the morality of military action"
 Kennedy knew violent actions would receive violent reactions . Kennedy's empathy cultivated through the moral question, Kennedy said . Kennedy also knew that violent reactions would be violent .
 Deciding to refrain from weapons and working with the Soviets diplomatically resolved tensions without losing lives . Deciding not to use weapons, the U.S. decided to work with the Soviet Union diplomatically to avoid bloodshed .
 In today’s crises, weapons evolve to allow even less connection between those who employ violence and those who receive its consequence . Weapons evolve to let even less connect between those employing violence and receiving its consequence.
 Maintaining the question of morality is increasingly important to ensure that military action does not abandon the human element and thus inspire new enemies . The U.S. should not abandon human element in military action, it is important to maintain morality .
 This is especially true when there is seemingly less time to consider non-lethal options before media drowns out sober and patient approaches to resolution . "Drastic and patient" approaches to resolving the crisis are needed, says Dr. John Sutter .
 Avoidance of nuclear confrontation has no alternatives and therefore alternatives to nuclear confrontation should be sought . Forethought leaders know that some decisions may as well be — final .
 "The world just cannot afford to resort to nuclear confrontation," David Cameron says . The world cannot afford nuclear confrontation, he says .
 Fifty years since the Cuban missile crisis, however, this universal truth is still not universal enough . The world continues to be terrified from the power of weapons for mass destruction .
 In 1962, key players took their time to think about the alternatives, see through what was not obvious, and respond with foresight and leadership . Key players in 1962 were able to see through the alternatives and respond to them . The U.S. government has been in touch with the
 50 years of high technology and innovation in between, statesmen can still choose to appeal to their own reason to decide what decisions they make . Today, 50 years after the war of technology, statemen can choose their own reasons to make decisions .
 Leaders should be reminded that some decisions can only be made once and for all . Today, more than ever, leaders must remember that decisions can't be made in advance .
 Evidently some human species-generated decisions may as well turn out to be truly and finitely — final . Evidently, some human decisions might as well be final .
 Statesmen should remember to seek creative solutions to the peace and war challenges of today, while honoring the lessons from the Cuban missile crisis .
 A sense of urgency is due, of course, before we all face one nuclear crisis too many, too many . A sense is due to be given, but it's not enough .
 My lesson from The Cuban missile crisis of 1962 is that valuing pride and zero-sum mentality will only result in apocalyptical events . Think again… Think again .
 The engine that choo-choo’ed the Cold War to the Missile Crisis was pride, says President Obama . The engine of the crisis was pride .
 As Russia and the U.S. fought their zero-sum game of proxy wars that would later devastate Pakistan and create Al Qaeda, they were blinded by nationalism and pride . The U.N. and Russia were blinded to nationalism and national pride .
 Had Russia and America come to cooperate earlier, hegemony and psychological, soft power would no longer be the current day criterion for success . Soft power is no longer a criterion of success in Russia and the United States .
 U.S. statesmen of today should learn that cooperation is the only path to a brighter tomorrow, says President Obama . As such, American statesmen should learn cooperation is only path for a brighter future .
 Congress shows what happens when the quest for pride supersedes cooperation . Today’s Congress shows that this is not the case of cooperation .
 The recent political deadlock is caused by statesmen who reject or pass bills before even reading them because they simply have no intention in letting the opposing party gain power . The recent deadlock was caused by statemen who rejected or passed bills before reading them .
 This zero-sum mentality cannot sustain itself over long periods of time without bipartisanship, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "Bipartisan politics is not a solution to the problem"
 The scope of such a lesson should be extended into foreign policy . The scope should be further extended into the foreign policy of the U.S.
 Diplomats must always recognize that countries can mutually benefit from diplomacy . Whether it be the conflicts with our frenemy, China, or the Middle East, statesmen must always be willing to engage in diplomacy .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, RFK and Dobrynin valued common ground, allowing them to set aside win-loss mentality and nationalistic pride for a desperate solution .
 It stands now as a test of how far Humans would go before abandoning zero-sum mentality and pride . It is now a test for how far humans would go if they abandon zero-sport mentality .
 It shouldn’t take risking millions of lives before coming to an agreement, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The U.S. State Department says it is working on a solution to the crisis .
 Sudanese man waves his country's flag during protests in the capital Khartoum . Protests mark the second anniversary of the revolt that toppled the previous government, on Dec. 2020 .
 Self-delusion and negligence stopped governments and aid agencies from facilitating a genuine and lasting transition to democracy in Sudan . The Sudanese government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Soldiers carry a coffin of 20-year-old Russian serviceman in Saint Petersburg . Soldiers carry the coffin of the serviceman, 20, to a funeral home . The soldier was killed in the Russian city of Saint Petersburg, Russia .
 Russia Botched its early War Propaganda Campaign, but now it’s Doubling Down . Russia Botches its early war propaganda campaign, and now it's doubling down . Putin's “zampolits’ and the Russian Orthodox Church are spearheading a new ag
 South Korean President-elect Yoon Suk-yeol dines with Maj. Maj. Dmitry Adamsky . The South Korean president-elect will be sworn in as president of South Korea .
 U.S. 2nd Infantry Division is based in Pyeongtaek, South Korea, on April 7 . The division is part of the United States 2nd and 3rd Infantry Division .
 The return of major conflict is leading Asian countries to boost their militaries . Ukraine has Ukraine has Asia thinking about war, and Asia is thinking about it .
 The Cuban missile crisis taught the United States what containment feels like . The lesson from the crisis is the extent of which containment is terrifying for the country .
 The USSR placed its own nuclear missiles in range of American cities . U.S. policymakers were inclined to compromise with the Russians on a compromise policy .
 Since 1962 U.S. foreign policy stewards have been hamstrung on Cuba, because so much patriotic capital was invested in villainizing Soviet Cuba and Fidel Castro . Since 1962 the United States has had a tunnel vision that can last for generations because of tunnel vision .
 The U.S. enjoys solidarity with the EU, the U.N. and other countries on international embargo programs regarding Iran, Syria, North Korea, and Sudan . But the United States stands alone on Cuba . It is not politically astute to disagree with the notion that the use
 Vasili Arkhipov made one of the most remarkable decisions during the Cuban missile crisis . As a conflict develops, minor actors play the biggest roles in the conflict .
 Reid Pauly, research assistant to Scott Sagan at the Center for International Security and Cooperation at Stanford, Stanford, CA, won the award .
 The United States could have imposed a blockade without approval, but instead it aligned its decision with international norms . The U.S. invoked the OAS charter's right to take collective action in the face of an &quot;armed attack or...an act of aggression that is not
 Adlai Stevenson's presentation of photographic evidence legitimized American military mobilization by framing the crisis as an act of Soviet aggression . The United States then made good use of United Nations channels to facilitate clear communication of messages to the Soviets .
 Multilateralism provides added benefits, such as creating a marketplace of policy ideas, testing the morality of alternatives, and the legitimating of threats and the use of force .
 A flexible and varied military force, including a strong navy, gives policymakers a wide range of response options . A few years before the Cuban missile crisis, the military underwent a significant debate to determine its future .
 Because the American response was offshore and out of sight of the Cubans, it deescalated tensions while simultaneously applying pressure on Soviet leadership . The U.S. response to the Cuban crisis deescalates tensions and applies pressure on Russia .
 By the time of the Cuban missile crisis, thousands of nuclear antiaircraft weapons were deployed around dozens of cities and defense sites in the United States . Crisis management may require upending long-established military doctrine, plans, and policies .
 For five years, the widespread and ready expenditure of defensive nuclear arms to counter a nuclear air raid had been the basis upon which air defense units had been trained, equipped, and operated . The crisis spurred military leaders to make changes .
 Despite objections from North American Air Defense Command, air defense forces protecting Florida were prohibited from using nuclear arms . This was so, especially if nuclear use resulted from a lower-level decision, and even if it occurred over the United States .
 The new arrangements contravened long-standing procedures . These actions required overcoming many challenges, including instituting new directives and obtaining sufficient munitions .
 Winner: Eden Rose Niles, Colorado Academy High School, Denver, CO . Lesson: When military action is viable as a first response, morality of using weapons to reach a resolution must be considered .
 Kennedy knew violent actions would receive violent reactions . This ensures that empathy for fellow humans remains in our actions . Kennedy's moral question was cultivated through the moral question .
 In today's crises, weapons evolve to allow even less connection between those who employ violence and those who receive its consequence . Deciding to refrain from weapons and working with the Soviets diplomatically resolved tensions without losing lives .
 Avoidance of nuclear confrontation has no alternatives and therefore alternatives to nuclear confrontation should be sought . Forethought leaders know that some decisions may as well be -final .
 50 years of high technology and innovation in between, statesmen can still choose to appeal to their own reason . Back then, people seemed to have gone back to their senses .
 Evidently some human species-generated decisions may as well turn out to be truly and finitely -final . So, statesmen should remember to seek creative solutions to the peace and war challenges of today, while honoring the lessons from the Cuban missile crisis .
 My lesson from The Cuban missile crisis of 1962 is that valuing pride and zero-sum mentality will only result in apocalyptical events . Think again...
 Had Russia and America come to cooperate earlier, hegemony and psychological, soft power would no longer be the current day criterion for success . As such, American statesmen of today should learn that cooperation is the only path to a brighter tomorrow .
 This zero-sum mentality cannot sustain itself over long periods of time without bipartisanship . The scope of such a lesson should be further extended into foreign policy, he says .
 The Cuban missile crisis was not an issue of good versus evil . RFK and Dobrynin valued common ground, allowing them to set aside win-loss mentality and nationalistic pride .