 The news of Castro&#039;s death spread slowly among Friday night revelers on the streets of Havana . Days later, Castro wrote a scathing newspaper column condemning Obama and reminding Cubans of the many U.S. efforts to overthrow and weaken the Communist government .
 One famous club that was still open when word came in quickly closed . Some residents reacted with sadness to sadness to the news .
 Fidel Castro's body will be cremated, according to his wishes . A large crowd waving Cuban flags cheered, danced and banged on pots and pans in Miami . Castro was a public figure that the whole world respected and loved, student says .
 He wrote newspaper commentaries on world affairs and occasionally met with foreign leaders . He lived in semi-seclusion in Cuba but left a huge void in the country he dominated .
 Fidel Castro led the revolution that ousted U.S.-backed dictator Fulgencio Batista on Jan 1, 1959 . The big test is handing the revolution over to the next generation, expert Phil Peters says .
 In 1962, the U.S. imposed a damaging trade embargo that Castro blamed for most of Cuba&#039;s ills . He expanded his influence by sending Cuban troops into far-away wars, including 350,000 in Africa .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and United States President John F Kennedy agreed the Soviets would withdraw the missiles in return for a United States promise never to invade Cuba .
 Food, transport and basics such as soap were scarce and energy shortages led to frequent and long blackouts . Castro undertook a series of tentative economic reforms to get through the crisis . The economy improved when late socialist leader Hugo Chavez came to the rescue with cheap oil .
 Cubans earn on average the equivalent of $20 a month and struggle to make ends meet . Education and health care are free and many basic goods and services are heavily subsidized . Others see him as an autocrat and feel he drove the country to ruin .
 Castro had been in poor health since an intestinal ailment nearly killed him in 2006 . Castro formally ceded power to his younger brother two years later . Castro has been in ill health since his illness was nearly fatal .
 Cuba's President Raul Castro announces the death of his brother, Fidel Castro, in a still image from government television in Havana, Cuba November 26, 2016 .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro greeted by United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros Ghali on his arrival at Bella center conference hall in Copenhagen . Castro was greeted by U.N. Secretary of State Boutros . Ghali .
 Fidel Castro died on November 26, 2016 according to a statement from the President of Cuba, Raul Castro . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban government in the 1960s .
 Fidel Castro died late on November 25, 2016 in Havana, his brother, President Raul Castro, announced on national television . Fidel Castro was a Cuban revolutionary icon who died in Havana . Castro's brother, Fidel Castro, was Cuban president of Cuba .
 Raul Castro appeared on state television to announce his brother's death . Wearing an olive coloured military uniform, he appeared in state television .
 Castro's remains will be cremated on Saturday, according to his wishes . Castro's ashes will be buried in New York City, New Jersey, on Saturday .
 Get ahead of the day with the morning headlines at 7.30am and Fionnán Sheahan's exclusive take on the day's news every afternoon .
 Cuba agreed to re-establish diplomatic ties with the United States in December 2014 . Fidel Castro offered only lukewarm support for the deal, raising questions about whether he approved of it .
 He did not meet Barack Obama when he visited Havana earlier this year . It was the first time a U.S. president had stepped foot on Cuban soil since 1928 . 'Castro is dead and Miami is alive'
 Castro wrote a scathing newspaper column condemning Obama's "honey-coated" words . He reminded Cubans of the many U.S. efforts to overthrow and weaken the Communist government .
 The news of Castro's death spread slowly among Friday night revelers on the streets of Havana . The death of the former Cuban leader was announced on Friday night .
 Havana student Sariel Valdespino: "Whatever you want to say, he is a public figure that the whole world respected and loved"
 A large crowd waving Cuban flags cheered, danced and banged on pots and pans in Miami . Many exiles from Castro's government live in Miami, where many exiles live .
 Ailing Cuban leader Castro said on February 19, 2008 that he will not return to lead the country . Castro seized power in an armed revolution 49 years after he seized power . Castro said in 2008 he will retire as head of state .
 Fidel Castro, who led a rebel army to improbable victory in Cuba, embraced Soviet-style communism and defied the power of 10 U.S. presidents during his half century rule . Fidel Castro has died at age 90 . The former Cuban president was known for his defiance of the U.
 The bearded revolutionary survived a crippling U.S. trade embargo as well as dozens, possibly hundreds, of assassination plots . He died eight years after ill health forced him to formally hand power over to his younger brother .
 Cuban President Raul Castro has announced the death of his brother Fidel Castro at age 90 on Cuban state media on Friday, Nov., Nov., 2016 . Fidel Castro's death was announced on state media Friday .
 Fidel Castro formally stepped down in 2008 after suffering gastrointestinal ailments . His public appearances have been increasingly unusual in recent years . Fidel Castro's public appearances are increasingly unusual .
 He was demonized by the U.S. and its allies but admired by many leftists around the world . He was a hero of leftist revolutionaries in Latin America and Africa . He died in 1994 at age 81 .
 After Nelson Mandela was freed from prison in 1990, he repeatedly thanked Castro for his firm efforts to weaken apartheid . Castro family torn by dysfunction and disagreements . Nelson Mandela thanked Castro in 1990 for his efforts in weakening apartheid .
 "Our turn comes to all of us, but the ideas of the Cuban communists will remain,"" he said . Cuban president: "We're not going to go away, but we're going to live here"
 Castro was last seen by ordinary Cubans in photos with Vietnamese President Tran Dai Quang earlier this month . Castro last seen in photos showing him engaged in conversation with the Vietnamese President .
 Castro crossed swords with 10 U.S. presidents while in power and outlasted nine of them . Transformed Cuba from a playground for rich Americans into a symbol of resistance to Washington .
 He fended off a CIA-backed invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 as well as countless assassination attempts . He fought off an assassination attempt by the CIA in 1961 .
 Cuban former president Fidel Castro shaking hands with Pope Francis in Havana on September 20, 2015 . Fidel Castro and Pope Francis shook hands hands with each other .
 Cuban former president Fidel Castro shaking hands with Pope Francis in Havana on September 20, 2015 . Fidel Castro was Cuban president of Cuba from 1961 to 1961 . Castro was elected to Cuba's first president in 1961 .
 Castro was famous for long, fist-pounding speeches filled with blistering rhetoric, often aimed at the U.S. Wearing green military fatigues and chomping on cigars for many of his years in power, Castro wore green fatigues . Castro's speeches were filled with
 At home, he swept away capitalism and won support for bringing schools and hospitals to the poor . At home he sweeps away capitalism, bringing schools, hospitals to poor .
 He created legions of enemies and critics, concentrated among exiles in Miami who fled his rule . But many saw him as a ruthless tyrant, including ex-fleeves in Miami .
 It is not clear if U.S. President-Elect Donald Trump will continue to normalize relations with Cuba . Trump pledged to close the United States embassy in Havana once again in November .
 Castro's death would once have thrown a question mark over Cuba's future . Raul Castro is firmly ensconced in power in Cuba . The death of the former Cuban president would have been a shock .
 He wrote newspaper commentaries on world affairs and occasionally met with foreign leaders . He lived in semi-seclusion. He wrote about world affairs .
 The passing of the man known to most Cubans as ""El Comandante"" the commander or simply ""Fidel"" leaves a huge void in the country he dominated for so long .
 Cuba's communist leadership underlines the generational change in Cuba's leadership . It also underlines a change in the leadership of the Communist Party .
 Others in their 50s include Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez and economic reform czar Marino Murillo . Others include foreign minister Bruno Rodriguez .
 The big test is handing the revolution over to the next generation and that will happen when Raul steps down,"" Cuba expert Phil Peters said before Castro's death .
 Fidel Castro led the revolution that ousted U.S.-backed dictator Fulgencio Batista on Jan 1, 1959 . A Jesuit-educated lawyer, Fidel Castro was a leader of the revolution . Castro was born in 1961 .
 Aged 32, he quickly took control of Cuba and sought to transform it into an egalitarian society . He sought to turn it into a society that was egalitarian society.
 His government improved the living conditions of the very poor, achieved health and literacy levels on a par with rich countries . His government also rid Cuba of a powerful Mafia presence . Cuba also rid itself of Mafia presence and rid itself from a powerful presence .
 He tolerated little dissent, jailed opponents, seized private businesses and monopolized the media . But he also tolerated little opposition and jailed opponents . He also took control of the media and seized private business .
 Castro's opponents labeled him a dictator and hundreds of thousands fled the island . Hundreds of thousands of people were forced to flee the island in Cuba . Castro was labeled a dictator by his opponents .
 Many dissidents settled in Florida, influencing U.S. policy toward Cuba and plotting Castro's demise . Many dissidents are now living in Florida .
 Some trained in Florida swamps for the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion . Some even trained in the swamps .
 Castro blamed the U.S. embargo for most of Cuba's ills, using it to his advantage to rally patriotic fury . In 1962, the United States imposed a damaging trade embargo that Castro blamed . Castro used it to use as a rallying cry for Cuban unity .
 President Obama has expanded his influence by sending Cuban troops into far-away wars . Over the years, he has sent 350,000 troops to fight in Africa . The Cuban president has sent hundreds of thousands of troops to Africa .
 They provided critical support to a left-wing government in Angola and Namibia . They contributed to the independence of Namibia in a war that helped end apartheid in South Africa . They also contributed to Namibia's independence from apartheid-era South Africa in the war .
 He also won friends by sending tens of thousands of Cuban doctors abroad to treat the poor and bringing young people from developing countries to train them as physicians . Castro was the son of a Spanish immigrant who became a wealthy landowner .
 Fidel Castro launched his revolution on July 26, 1953, with a failed assault on the Moncada barracks in the eastern city of Santiago . Angry at social conditions and Batista's dictatorship, Fidel Castro was angry at the conditions of social conditions .
 He was sentenced to 15 years in prison but was released in 1955 after a pardon that would come back to haunt Batista . Batista's pardon would have come back and haunt him .
 Castro went into exile in Mexico and prepared a small rebel army to fight Batista . Castro is now living in exile and fighting in Mexico .
 It included Argentine revolutionary Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, who became his comrade-in-arms . The Argentine revolutionary was a member of the revolutionary movement .
 Only 12, including him, his brother and Guevara, escaped a government ambush when they landed in eastern Cuba . Only 12 of them escaped the government ambush, including his brother .
 Taking refuge in the Sierra Maestra mountains, they built a guerrilla force of several thousand fighters . Along with urban rebel groups, they defeated Batista's military in just over two years .
 Castro allied Cuba to the Soviet Union at the height of the Cold War . The Soviet Union was Cuba's principal benefactor for three decades .
 Castro urged the Soviets to launch a nuclear attack on Cuba . Castro was convinced that the U.S. was about to invade Cuba .
 The United States secretly agreed to remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey . The U.S. also secretly agreed with Turkey to remove nuclear missiles . The deal was part of a secret agreement to remove the missiles .
 Food, transport and basics such as soap were scarce and energy shortages led to frequent and long blackouts . Food and transport were scarce in the country during the country's worst years .
 Castro undertook a series of tentative economic reforms to get through the crisis . Castro's reforms include opening up to foreign tourism, opening up tourism .
 The economy improved when Venezuela's late socialist leader Hugo Chavez came to the rescue with cheap oil . Castro looked up to Castro as a hero, and the economy improved in the 1980s .
 Economic downturn in Venezuela since Chavez's death has raised fears it will scale back support for Cuba . Aid from communist-run China also helped, but an economic downturn in the country has led to fears it may scale back .
 Cuba's population of 11 million has endured years of hardship, although not the deep poverty, violent crime and government neglect of many other developing countries . Plagued by chronic economic problems, Cuba's economy has been plagued by chronic unemployment and violence .
 For most Cubans, Fidel Castro has been the ubiquitous figure of their entire life . Fidel Castro is the most prominent figure of the Cuban people .
 Many still love him and share his faith in a communist future, and even some who abandoned their political belief still view him with respect .
 Others see him as an autocrat and feel he drove the country to ruin . But others say he is responsible for the collapse of the country .
 Cubans earn on average the equivalent of $20 a month and struggle to make ends meet . Education and health care are free and many basic goods and services are heavily subsidized . Cubans struggle even in an economy where education is free .
 It was never clear whether Fidel Castro fully backed his brother's reform efforts in recent years . Fidel Castro's brother Fidel has been involved in Cuba reform efforts .
 Fidel Castro, Cuba’s former president and leader of the Communist revolution, has died aged 90, state TV has announced . The Cuban revolutionary and president in his own words Fidel Castro has died .
 Latin America Secrecy shrouded details of Fidel Castro's health . Fidel Castro would always laugh off speculation about his health .
 Crowds welcome Fidel Castro's death with street celebrations in Miami . 'Castro is dead and Miami is alive'
 Fidel Castro's rule of nearly five decades split many a Cuban family between exile and solidarity with the communist revolution including his own . The Castro family is torn by dysfunction and disagreements . Fidel Castro ruled the country for nearly four decades and ruled for decades .