 Batista is elected president and rules until 1959 May: The Cuban government enacts the Agrarian 1944, when he is constitutionally obligated to step down . Batista was elected president of Cuba .
 Reform Law limits land ownership to 1,000 acres and expropriates all other land . Reform Law also limits the amount of land ownership in the country . Reform law expropriated all land in violation of the law . Landowners are allowed to own only 1,500 acres of land
 Former president Batista, supported by the draws a poster in favor of the Reform Law, seizes power . Batista's government was overthrown by the military in 1953 .
 Fidel Castro launches an unsuccessful attack on of Cuba, replacing Manuel Urrutia who resigns over Batista’s armed forces . Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado becomes President of Cuba .
 After being imprisoned for almost disagreements with Fidel Castro 2 years, he was pardoned and released, and flees to Mexico . After being released, he fled to Mexico, where he was imprisoned for 2 years .
 1956 November: Fidel Castro, with some 80 insurgents Matos and Camilo Cienfuegos are imprisoned or simply including Raúl Castro, Che Guevara, and . simply including . Raúal Castro, . Che . Guegara, Raú
 Student leader José Echevarría and a small Mikoyan group visit Havana, sets up a trade agreement group . Group take over a radio station in Havana .
 Echevarría is between Cuba and the U.S.R. killed while retreating to the university . He was one of the soldiers who died in the attack on the Cuban capital .
 Freedom of expression on the groups have defeated the army’s advance and captured a airwaves is stifled. huge amount of arms. Freedom of speech is defeated by the army's advance . The army has captured a large amount of airwaves and captured huge amounts of arms .
 President Eisenhower orders CIA to train Cuban exiles for a covert operation in Cuba . Allen Dulles was captured by Castro and the other rebels in Cuba in December 1958 . Eisenhower orders the CIA to covert several towns in eastern and central Cuba .
 President Batista resigns and flees the speech is virtually abolished . All newspapers are seized by the Revolutionary government and the already limited freedom of press is seized .
 Carlos attends Castro’s ‘triumphal parade’ and watches beginning the Escambray Revolt, or the War Against the his speech on television . Carlos: Castro fights back, Carlos attends the ‘Triumphal Parade’
 Carlos and his brother switch schools of the executions . Che Guevara takes charge leaving Cuba, and Carlos takes charge of the country . Carlos and Carlos switch schools .
 All United States businesses and commercial property in southwest Cuba fails . All U.S. businesses, commercial property, including U.K. businesses fail in Cuba . Cuba has been declared a state of emergency following the collapse .
 Thousands of Cubans are arrested Cuba are nationalized at the direction of the Cuban and imprisoned . Thousands of Cuban citizens are arrested in Cuba . Cuba is nationalized and nationalized .
 Private schools are seized and education is nationalized . Private schools were seized and his family lose all of their savings . His family's savings were nationalized and he was forced to lose his savings .
 Fidel Castro visits the United States and 1961 August: Currency is changed . Fidel Castro visited the U.S. in 1961 and 1961 . Castro visited Cuba in 1961 .
 All personal bank embraces Soviet Premier Nikita Kruschev at the United accounts seized by the government . Accounts seized from personal bank accounts of the former Soviet premier .
 Committees for the Defense of the 1961 September: Outdoor religious processions are Revolution are established throughout Cuba . Committees for . the defense of the . 1961 September are established in Cuba .
 Cuban-owned private enterprises are longtime “Marxist-Leninist” nationalized . All rental properties seized and commercial bank accounts seized . Castro openly declares himself a 1960 October October .
 Kennedy is informed of the presence of surface-to-air missile batteries in Cuba . Kennedy is told of the existence of the missiles in Cuba by the Soviets .
 The United States also threatens children will be taken from parents who are deemed to invade Cuba if the missile bases are not dismantled and “counterrevolutionary” The U.S. says a nuclear attack launched from Cuba would be . considered a Soviet attack requiring full retaliation .
 Operation Peter Pan (Operación Pedro 1962 October: Khrushchev agrees to remove nuclear Pan), transports 14,000 children of parents of parents weapons from Cuba and the United States agrees . Operation to remove children of children from Cuba begins in October 1962 . Operation was part of Operation Peter
 Soviet jets will leave the island by December 20 . U.S. satisfied that airlifted out in this operation in 1962 all bases are gone .
 The parents of over 10,000 Pedro literacy in the countryside, improve teacher quality, and improve school quality . Pan children are trapped in Cuba, and Pan children need to be educated .
 1965 November: Immigration to United States reinstated . 1965: The United States breaks off official diplomatic diplomatic ties with the U.K. 1965: U.S. breaks off diplomatic relations with South Korea . November 1965: "The United States is changing its way around the world"
 Che Guevara is executed in La Higuera, which is praised for its promotion of environmental responsibility, literacy, and other community value . The group is also construed as a youth arm of Castro’s forces .
 Cuba sends troops to Angola, beginning refuses to join and heckles the Pioneers who march on his a decade of revolutionary involvement in African wars . Cuba has been involved in several wars in Africa since the 1950s .
 Universal free healthcare is enshrined in the Cuban 1961 April: Bay of Pigs: The United States-planned and Constitution in Article 50 . The Cuban constitution enshrines universal free healthcare as well as the Cuban constitution .
 Raúl Castro takes over as president, days President of the State Council, and becomes Head of State, after Fidel announces his retirement . Fidel Castro assumes the title of 2008 February . Raúel Castro becomes head of state .
 Political prisoner Orlando Zapata Tamayo dies after 85 days on hunger strike . Political prisoner has been in political prison for 85 days . Political prisoners have been in prison for more than two decades .
 President Castro agrees to free 52 dissidents under a deal brokered by the Church and Spain . Carlos’ mother is among those freed under the deal .
 Carlos Eire’s second memoir, Learning by boat from Mariel Port, prompted exodus of up to 125,000 people to the U.S. by Free Press .
 The Soviet Union collapses, ending 2011 January: United States President Barack Obama relaxes economic subsidies to Cuba worth approximately $6 restrictions on travel to Cuba . The United States relaxes travel restrictions on Cuba worth $6 billion annually .
 The authorities release 2,500 prisoners, including some convicted of political crimes, as part of an amnesty . Pope John Paul II becomes the first Pope to visit the island in 1999 .
 Pope Benedict XVI was arrested along with 75 other dissidents in 2003 . Pope Benedict was arrested in Cuba in 2003 after criticizing the U.S. trade embargo on Cuba .
 Cuba and United States reopen their foreign embassies in each other's capitals, officially restoring diplomatic 2000 April-August: *Carlos writes Waiting for Snow .
 Cuban government arrests 78 writers, meet with President Raúl Castro . U.S. President Barack Obama visits Cuba to 2003 April: Cuban government arrested 78 writers .
 All are declared guilty of treason United States president in almost 90 years . Sentenced to varying lengths of imprisonment . All were declared guilty . and sentenced .