 It was fought in the fields of ideology, coalitions, political influence, technological development, scientific development, and space and military stock piling . The battle was fought over ideology, politics, technology and space .
 The reason for this new and almost sublimated form of war was the advent of the nuclear age . The nuclear age was the birth of the world's first nuclear weapons .
 Both the USA and the USSR had thousands of nuclear missiles pointed at each other . Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had nuclear weapons pointed at other nuclear missiles .
 Any first strike would lead to retaliation and mutually assured destruction . Any strike would have to be followed by retaliation and mutual destruction .
 Although the nuclear stock piling grew out of distrust, the outcome of mutually assured destruction was a degree of trust . The nuclear plant pile pile pileings grew from distrust, but the end result was mutual assured destruction .
 Khrushchev: Despite distrust, despite distrust there can be trust in Russia . He says it was a sense of trust that despite distrust, the other is “of sound mind”
 The crisis began in mid October 1962, when the United States became aware of Soviet missile sites being constructed in Cuba . The U.S. administration was aware of the sites being built .
 In an attempt to halt the importation of nuclear warheads into Cuba, Kennedy instituted a naval blockade of Cuba . The blockade was meant to stop the import of nuclear weapons into the country .
 The USA was on the verge of an invasion when a diplomatic solution was reached on the 28th October . Knowing this fact with hindsight is chilling, it is chilling .
 The Crisis was a minefield of potential triggers for global thermonuclear war . Crisis was the 'minefield' for potential triggers . The crisis was a 'potential trigger' for global war .
 The vast majority of the world only watched and did not contribute to the crisis . But the vast majority did not .
 The White House and Moscow are in touch with each other . Navigating through this minefield was a difficult task for Obama administration officials .
 It was within and between these two small groups that this major inter-group struggle was played out . The struggle was between small groups of small groups in the United States .
 The Crisis was carried forward by the fears, plans, hopes, assumptions, and suspicions of these two small groups . The Crisis is carried forward in the form of the fears and hopes of these small groups of people .
 An audio recording system was installed in the White House in 1940, enabling Presidents to secretly record discussions at their own discretion . The White House was first set up in 1940 .
 President Kennedy had the system upgraded in 1962, only months before the Crisis . President Kennedy was particularly keen on using the system during the crisis .
 The following analysis focuses upon the discussions of Kennedy and his advisors as they tried to deal with the puzzling and threatening actions being undertaken by the USSR in Cuba . The analysis focuses on Kennedy's discussions with his advisors about the situation .
 In the absence of direct verbal communication with Moscow, Kennedy and his advisors had to work hard to interpret the significance of the Soviet actions which they observed, the public statements with Khrushchev made and the letters sent to Kennedy .
 On this limited basis, Kennedy and his advisors had to decide how to respond . They struggled to understand how their potential responses would be interpreted by the world .
 They were forced to reflect upon possible ulterior motives for each of Khrushchev’s moves, and yet, as we will see, they were also forced to trust in him as a rational actor . As well as reflecting on his motives, they will see that they were forced
 Analysing these discussions provides a window on the dynamics of trust and distrust as they directly feed into and contribute to a potentially catastrophic global crisis .
 White House transcripts show the way Kennedy and his advisors represent the USSR in general and Khrushchev in particular . The transcripts show how Kennedy and advisors represented the USSR and the USSR .
 The differentiation between ingroup and outgroup usually entails denigrating the outgroup and positively affirming the ingroup . The differentiation usually involves denigration of an outgroup .
 During the Cold War, outgroup denigration of the ‘red menace’ was widespread in Allied propaganda .
 No such denigration is evident in the White House transcripts . However, no such denigrations are apparent in the transcripts .
 But in these cases, the denigration is very slight and seems to be done almost in jest . The denigration was very slight, but it was done in a jest, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The term “demonologists’s” seems to satire simplistic denigration of the Russians . Especially the term ‘demonologist’ seems to satirize simplistic denigrations .
 The responses to this question reveal an uncertain but nuanced understanding of Khrushchev’s motives and situation . The responses reveal a nuanced but uncertain understanding of the situation and circumstances .
 President could use it to try to trade something in Berlin, say he'll disarm Cuba if we’ll yield some of our interests in Berlin and some arrangement for it . Several possibilities, Mr President possibly use .
 CNN.com: "This is a way to balance it out a bit. In view of that he’s got lots of MRBMs and this is a bit of a way of balancing it out."
 Ball: "I’m sure his generals have been telling him for a year and a half that he was missing a golden opportunity to add to his strategic capability" Ball: Yes. I'm sure . I’s sure . His generals have told him for years that he
 "I think you look at this possibility that this is an attempt to add to his strategic capabilities," he says . "You look at the possibility that ... this is a possible strategy," he adds .
 Such simplistic understandings would lead Kennedy to make detrimental decisions, he says . Kennedy's actions should not be taken seriously, he adds .
 Each of the reasons put forward assume that Khrushchev is a rational actor . The reasons for the reasons are that he is not irrational or irrational .
 Khrushchev aims to trade his newfound advantage in Cuba for a development in Berlin . One possible reason, put forward by George Ball, is to trade Cuban advantage for Berlin .
 At this time West Berlin was isolated and completely surrounded by Communist East Germany . The Communists were keen to annex it, and the Communists wanted it to be annexed .
 A second explanation, developed by Alexis Johnson, is that Khrushchev may be trying to do what the USA had done a number of years earlier . Alexis Johnson: 'Khrrushchev tried to do something similar to what the U.S. had done'
 Previously in the Cold War, it was the USA that was at a military disadvantage, because the USSR had more advanced long-range rockets . The USA was the U.S. at a disadvantage because of the USSR's more advanced rockets .
 The USA positioned missiles in Europe, in order to make their shorter range missiles more strategic .
 The USSR was behind the USA in the development of Inter-Continental Ballistic Missiles . But by 1962, the tables had turned and the US had already developed the missiles .
 Johnson speculates that maybe the Soviets are trying to gain the same advantage that the USA previously gained . The Soviets may want to gain a similar advantage, Johnson says .
 In the present case, the evidence does not support such an account, the judge said . However, he said that in the case, there was no evidence that such a case had been made .
 There is minimal evidence for denigrating the outgroup, but there is arguably more evidence for identification than differentiation . Not only is there minimal evidence . But there is more evidence that identification is more important than differentiation, says author .
 Johnson’s argument that Khrushchev may be trying to gain a strategic advantage is based on identifying with the Soviet position, he says . Johnson: ‘I’m trying to identify with the Soviets' position .
 In the past the USA had been in a similar position, and they had moved missiles into Europe . The U.S. has been in similar position in the past, and had moved missile into Europe.
 This example of perspective-taking through identification is not isolated . This example was not isolated. It is not the only example of identification through identification .
 They, no more than we, can let these things go by without doing something. They, like us, can't let them go by . They can't do nothing. They must do something. We can't wait for them to do something .
 Kennedy’s concern is that an invasion of Cuba might force the Russians into a situation in which launching the missiles becomes necessary . Kennedy: They can't, after all their statements, permit us to take out their missiles, kill a lot of Russians, and then do nothing . (
 The USSR has made public its commitment to protect Cuba in the same way that the USA had made public their commitment to protecting West Berlin . The USSR made the same pledge as the U.S. did to protect West Berlin in the 1960s .
 These public commitments are difficult to renege upon, precisely because they are public . These commitments are public, and they are very hard to re-negotiate .
 Kennedy feels the potential danger of creating such a situation because this is the situation that he himself feels he is falling into . Kennedy: "I feel like I'm falling into a situation that I'm going to fall into," he said .
 Kennedy’s insight into Khrushchev's situation comes through identification not differentiation . Kennedy's insight comes from identification, not differentiation, as well as differentiation, he says .
 I suggest this is because of a combination of distrust and necessary engagement . I suggest that this is due to a lack of trust in the government . The government has been in touch with the world for more than a decade .
 Simplistic denigration is a luxury born of distance and non-engagement, says Simon Tisdall . "Simplistic denigrations are a luxury," he says .
 Given that Kennedy and his advisors could not take the world or actions of Khrushchev at face value, they were forced to elaborate an intricate representation of his motivation . Given that . Kennedy and . his advisors couldn’t take the . world or . actions of the . actions at
 It would be naïve to simply categorise Khrushchev as an outgroup member, and dismiss him as mad or bad . In such a context it would be naive to simply dismiss him from the world .
 And positive self differentiation would only lead to hubris and over-confidence, he says . And it would lead to overconfidence and hubris, he adds .
 In order to out-manoeuvre Khrushchev, Kennedy and his advisors had to understand him as accurately as possible . Distrust in this context implies that the other has an ulterior motive .
 Both the USA and the USSR were, despite their differences, in very similar positions in the Cold War, facing similar political, international, external and technological constraints . Identification enabled perspective taking because both sides were facing similar constraints .
 This similarity became, through identification, a useful resource in understanding and domesticating the untrustworthy mind of Khrushchev . This similarity was used to identify and domesticate the mind of the Soviet leader .
 The crisis began with public denials by the USSR that it had introduced offensive weapons into Cuba . It was claimed that the weapons were brought into Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet administration insisted that the missiles were only for defensive purposes . Then, once the missiles are discovered, the Soviet government insisted that they were only defensive . The missiles were discovered in the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy and his advisors never take this account at face value . However, Kennedy's advisors never took this account of Kennedy's actions at all face-value . Kennedy's administration has a history of missteps .
 Maybe Khrushchev is trying to gain a strategic advantage, or a psychological advantage or maybe a trade . Maybe he wants to gain an advantage, maybe a strategic or psychological advantage . Maybe it's a trade deal .
 Even in this extremely distrustful relationship, there are domains of taken-for-granted trust . Even in the relationship, trust is still being taken for granted .
 If he were only to be distrusted, then he could not be negotiated with and thus the only course of action would have been violence . The only way to deal with him would be violence, he said .
 The full extent of this trust in Khrushchev as a reasonable and rational actor becomes evident when we examine the moves and counter-moves being made in the negotiation process . The trust is evident in the negotiations process, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In response to discovering the missiles in Cuba, Kennedy’s military advisors recommended a military strike . Kennedy's military advisors had recommended a strike on Cuba .
 President Kennedy opted for a blockade because he was worried about a direct attack providing justification for a Soviet incursion into Berlin . However, President Kennedy instead opted to opt for a direct strike .
 Khrushchev draws an equivalence between the nuclear missiles which the USA has in Turkey and the missiles in Cuba . The U.S. has a range of missiles in Turkey .
 If Soviet missiles should not be in Cuba, he argues, then it follows that the American missiles shouldn't be in Turkey . He argues that the U.S. should not have missiles in Turkey because it is in Cuba .
 JFK offered to withdraw missiles from Cuba if Kennedy withdraws missiles from Turkey . Kennedy offered to pull missiles out of Cuba if he withdraws them from Turkey if he withdrew them from Cuba . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy is quick to recognise this as a deft political move because it sounds so reasonable . Kennedy is also quick to recognise that this is a deft move because of the fact that it sounds reasonable .
 It’s going to be tough in England, I’m sure, as well as other places on the Continent, says Paul McCartney . It's not the first time he's been in charge of the World Cup, he says .
 If we then are forced to take action, this will be, in my opinion, not a blank check, but a pretty good check to take on Berlin on the grounds that we are wholly unreasonable . If this is the case, we will be forced to act on the basis that we
 "Emotionally, people will think this is a rather even trade and we ought to take advantage of it," he says . "We ought to be taken advantage of this," he adds .
 "It makes it much more difficult for us to move with world support. Therefore, it makes it difficult for them to move," he said . "We need to have world support," he added .
 Kennedy suspects the argument will go down well in Europe . It is the kind of argument which, Kennedy suspects, will go well in the EU .
 Kennedy says the deal means that if the USA does invade Cuba, then that will provide justification, a “blank check,” for a Russian move on Berlin . Kennedy: If the U.S. does invade, it will provide a ‘blank check’ for a
 The only defensible position that the USA has is that ‘work is going on’ on the missile sites in Cuba . The only Defensible position is that the U.S. is that it is ‘working on” on missile sites .
 The USA could even argue that the messy negotiations are merely a “shield” providing cover from an invasion while the missiles are made operational . The U.S. could argue that it is merely a "shield" providing cover for an invasion .
 Khrushchev’s proposed deal would be discussed until work on the missile sits ceased .
 Khrushchev will be forced to reject the deal because he wants the missile sites to be completed so as to strengthen his hand . Kennedy and his advisors say such a statement will appear reasonable .
 President Barack Obama is expected to make a decision in the next 24 hours . Obama has been criticized for not taking action to disarm the weapons of ISIS militants .
 "We’ll be glad to discuss these matters. Then we will say that under those conditions, we’re glad to talk," she says . "Under those conditions," she adds .
 "If we don’t say that, he’s going to say that we rejected his offer," he says . "But I think that if we don't say that," he's going to have public opinion with him," he adds . "I think that he�
 "We should insist that, he should stand still now. So, I think our only hope is to escape from that is to say that, we should insist he should stop now," she says .
 This would help reposition the USA as a rational actor in the eyes of the world . However, it would not enable the USA to invade Cuba, because if they did invade then Khrushchev would still have a ‘blank check’ for invading Turkey .
 Robert McNamara the Secretary of Defence proposes the following course of action . Mr McNamara proposes a new policy to deal with the situation .
 He suggests secretly removing the nuclear missiles from Turkey and then invading Cuba announce that the missiles have been removed from Turkey .
 The Soviets are very likely to feel forced to respond with military action someplace, particularly if these missiles – Jupiter missiles – are still in Turkey . The Soviets may have to respond to the threat posed by Turkey .
 We might be able to either shift the area in which they would apply their military force, or give them no excuse to apply military force . By taking out the Turkish Jupiters and the Italian Jupitsers before we attack Cuba, we might give the military an excuse to
 The interesting thing about this idea is again the importance of being reasonable and having justifications . It's important to be reasonable and have justifications, says CNN.com .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were constrained by the need to act rationally, to act with justification and to appear reasonable . A major constraint operating on both was the need for acting rationally and acting with justification .
 Invading another country, whether that is Cuba or Turkey, is not simply a question of military ability, it is also a matter of justification . Invading a country is not just a military ability but it's also a key question of justification, writes CNN.com's John Sutter
 World opinion is the guarantor of the rationality of Kennedy's and of Khrushchev’s actions . World opinion as a superaddressee as a . superaddresssee , is the . guarantor . of the . rationality of the actions of Kennedy . and Khrush
 Often this superaddressee is objectified in the UN or a particular nation’s point of view . The superaddresssee is often objectified by the UN, or by a particular country .
 No matter how tempting an invasion or an air strike on Cuba may be to Kennedy, he cannot initiate these measures if they will appear unreasonable or unjustified according to world opinion . Kennedy cannot initiate such a strike if it will appear unjustified to the world, he says .
 Kennedy assumes that Khrushchev too is subject to the gaze of world opinion, and Kennedy uses this knowledge to interpret and predict his actions . But by the same token, Kennedy assumes he too is a subject subject to world opinion .
 While Kennedy and his advisors are sceptical of Khrushchev’s moves and his motives, at a non-reflective level they trust him to act in a way which could be deemed reasonable by the normative standards of rationality maintained in world opinion .
 World opinion seems to be a guarantor for world leaders to trust each other to act rationally . In the same way that mutually assured destruction is the guarantor of not initiating a first strike, world opinion is also guarantor . World opinion is guarantor that world leaders will act r
 The advent of nuclear weapons introduced a new form of war . Between trust and distrust is the difference between trust and trust .
 This new mode of war was fought more in the political arena than in the battlefield, writes David Frum . The weapons of the battlefield gave necessary weight to threats, guarantees and political posturing .
 Fear of nuclear war caused each side to be cautious, but on the other hand, because each side knew that the other side was inclined to caution so it encouraged each other to try and bully . The other side would be cautious and back down, so each side tried to bully the other
 The dilemma is that if one is scared and does not engage in brinkmanship, then one’s opponent is likely to make ever escalating demands . The dilemmas are that one must be scared and avoid escalating demands, writes David Cameron .
 Bertrand Russell scathingly compared brinkmanship to playing a game of chicken with nuclear weapons . Russell: 'Bertrand Russell compares brinkmanship with playing chicken with nukes' Russell: "It's like playing a chicken game with chicken"
 In brinkmanship the aim is to push the other far enough so that they back down, but not so far as a war results . The aim of brinkmanship in brinkmanship is not to be seen as aggressive, but to push it further .
 In the White House transcripts there is discussion about how much Khrushchev has been pushed and can be pushed . In the transcripts, there are discussion about the limits of what can be done by the government .
 I don't think I can give a definitive view today as to what the real attitude of the Soviet Union is on this matter . But I don’t think I’m able to give a . definitive view of the . real attitude today .
 "Our best judgement is that they are scratching their brains very hard at the present time and deciding just exactly how they want to play this," says Simon Tisdallan .
 There is no confirmed frozen Soviet reaction to the situation, as yet . Rusk is uncertain about how close Khrushchev is to the brink and draws into the analysis a communication from Khrushvic to Bertrand Russell .
 Khrushchev’s response to Russell suggests that he is some distance from the brink and that if pushed to the brink would back down, Rusk says . Rusk points out that Khrushchev's response to the question suggests he is both some distance away and some distance
 Khrushchev sends a letter to Kennedy offering to remove the missiles in response for a guarantee from the USA not to invade or interfere with Cuba . On the night of the 26th the missiles were removed from Cuba . The U.S. agreed to remove them in exchange for a U
 A second letter arrived asking for a guarantee of Cuba’s sovereignty and for the removal of the missiles in Turkey . Cuba also asked not only for guarantees of its sovereignty but also for removal of missiles from Turkey, the letter said .
 Vice President Johnson and Llewellyn Thompson discuss the second letter in terms of brinkmanship . Johnson and Thompson talk about the letter to the White House .
 I think they’ll change their minds when we take any forceful action’ (27th October 1962, Zelikow & May, 2001b,471472) There are two possible interpretations of the letter .
 Either it is Khrushchev engaging in brinkmanship, or trying to get more out of the USA and confident that they will back down . Either either it is either a ploy to get the U.S. to back down and back down, or it is a bluff .
 Thompson suggests taking some “forceful action” may make the Soviets change their minds . If this is the interpretation, then, as Thompson suggests, then the U.S. may change their mind . Thompson: "Forceful action" may make it happen .
 Ironically, although brinkmanship creates distrust, it is actually premised upon a certain trust . Ironically, this is because it is premised on trust, rather than brinkmanship, it creates distrust .
 Brinkmanship is a form of communication or negotiation, and as such it presupposes that the other is a rational actor who wishes to avoid nuclear war . Brinksmanship is an attempt to avoid a nuclear war.
 By engaging in brinkmanship one is trusting that the other when pushed to the brink will be rational enough to back down rather than let catastrophic consequences follow . It's hoped the other will back down and back down, but the consequences will follow .
 It brinkmanship presupposes trust in a rational opponent, then convincing one's opponent that one’s actions are no longer rational should be an effective move . It is brinkmanship, which involves convincing your opponent that your actions are irrational .
 One way of doing this is to try and convince one’s opponent that one is crazy and without concern for the future . One way is to convince one's opponent that such a thing is crazy is without concern .
 Such a strategy would have been effective for either Kennedy or Khrushchev to pursue, it would have the unintended consequence of meaning a widespread loss of public support . Such a policy would have led to a widespread public loss of support, writes Peter Bergen .
 Neither political system could tolerate a leader who attempted to appear unstable and unpredictable, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Robert Kennedy hit upon an alternative strategy for convincing Khrushchev that President Kennedy’s actions might cease being rational . Robert Kennedy, however, hit upon the alternative strategy . President Kennedy's actions might be rational .
 Robert Kennedy suggested that his brother, the President, was losing control in the White House and that there was a risk that militant elements might take over . Robert Kennedy did this by suggesting that there were a risk of militant elements .
 Khrushchev should no longer assume that USA policy in Cuba would be rational and bound subordinated to world opinion, he said . The implication was that the U.S. should not assume that U.K. policy was rational or rational . The U.N. embargo on Cuba
 President Kennedy sent his brother to meet Anatoly Dobrynin, the Russian Ambassador in Washington . President Kennedy's brother was in Washington to meet the Russian ambassador to Washington .
 This meeting is widely regarded as heralding the resolution of the Crisis . This meeting was held at the end of the 1980s .
 President Kennedy would guarantee the sovereignty of Cuba in exchange for the USSR withdrawing its missiles . The deal would see the USSR withdraws its missiles from Cuba . President Kennedy made a public announcement in which he would guarantee Cuban sovereignty .
 If USSR withdrew missiles from Cuba, the USA would follow by removing its missiles from Turkey . Second, there was a secret promise that if the USSR withdrew the missiles, the U.S. would follow .
 This second message was never written down, and was to be considered void if it was leaked to the public . It was never recorded, and would have been considered a breach of privacy .
 The next day Khrushchev announced the public acceptance of the first message and that he would withdraw the missiles . These two agreements are seen to be the basis of the solution to the Crisis . The next next day, the next day the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw missiles .
 Third message was not meant to appear as a communication. That is to say, this third message was intended to be a communication, not a message .
 Robert Kennedy merely indicated, as if in passing, that President Kennedy might be losing control of the situation . Robert Kennedy said, "I'm not sure what's going on here," but that he was concerned .
 Although an implicit communication, the message certainly reached Khrushchev, it certainly reached him . The message was a message of support for the U.S.
 "In fact we are under pressure from our military to use force against Cuba," says President Obama .
 Even though the President himself is very much against starting a war over Cuba, an irreversible chain of events could occur against his will . Even though he himself is against starting war, the President may not want to start a war .
 President appealed directly to Chairman Khrushchev for his help in liquidating this conflict . That is why the President is appealing directly to him for help, he says .
 If the situation continues much longer, the President is not sure that the military will not overthrow him and seize power . The situation continues, he says .
 JFK succeeded in creating the impression on both Dobrynin and Khrushchev that President Kennedy might be losing control, and thus that the USA might actually be sliding over the brink . What is important is that he succeeded in making the impression that the U.S. might be slipping over
 Robert Kennedy’s third communication, which was ‘given off,’ was an unconventional, but nonetheless highly effective act of brinkmanship . I suggest that Robert Kennedy's third communication was 'given off' Robert Kennedy .
 Given that brinkmanship assumes a rational opponent, convincing ones opponent that one is no longer able to act rationally compels one’s opponent to back down . The next step is to convince one of these people that one can’t think rationally .
 If one believes that one’s opponent in such a game is no longer in control of their actions, then one has to back down . If one's opponent is not in control, one must back down, and that is the result of this .
 The key to this move is shattering the trust that one's opponent has that one’s action is volitional and rational, he says . The key is to shatter the trust one has that an opponent has to think that one of his actions is rational .
 The first was concessionary while the second was more demanding seeking a guarantee for Cuba and the removal of missiles in Turkey . The first is concessionary . The second is more demanding .
 They wondered whether Khrushchev was still in control of the situation in the Soviet Union . They wondered if he still had control over the situation .
 A U-2 spy plane has been shot down by SAM missiles while flying over Cuba . Other planes have been shot at with flak guns . The U.S. has not been able to communicate with the Cuban government .
 President Kennedy and his advisors try to interpret the shooting as a rational act . President Kennedy's advisors tried to argue that the shooting was not a rational event .
 "They assume that the act is communicative, and they try to reconcile it with the letters they had received from Khrushchev," she says . They assume that they are communicating, she says.
 Both the second letter and the shooting are interpreted in the light of each other, and both are interpreted as brinkmanship . The second letter is interpreted in terms of the shooting .
 Khrushchev, it is assumed, is deliberately pushing the crisis closer to the brink . It is assumed he is pushing the situation further into a precipice .
 Kennedy’s advisors say not to back down, but to up the ante in return . The most common advice from Kennedy's advisors is to not back down . Kennedy's advisers say he should not be intimidated by the threat of losing ground .
 It is argued that the Soviets will take advantage and become more strident in their demands . Otherwise, it is argued, it will take the advantage . The U.S. has been accused of being too aggressive in its dealings with the Soviets .
 In actuality the shooting was not an escalation on the part of Khrushchev . In actualities the shooting occurred in the early 1950s . In fact, the shooting did not involve an escalation .
 Kennedy and his advisors believed Khrushchev's act was enough to launch an invasion of Cuba . This act gained such significance as a hard-line communication that it was sufficient basis for an invasion . The act was seen as a 'hard-line' message to Kennedy and advisors .
 This miscommunication brought humankind possibly as close as it has ever come to nuclear war . Nevertheless, this miscommunication has brought humankind perhaps as close to a nuclear war as possible .
 This potentially catastrophic miscommunication is revealing about the dynamics of communication in a context of distrust . It is revealing that this is a sign of distrust in the U.S.
 In such a context, ambiguous communication becomes more of a projective test than an actual communication . In such an instance, ambiguity is more of an attempt to communicate than a communication .
 During verbal communication people provide ongoing feedback about their understanding of a communication . During verbal communications people provide feedback about the understanding of each other .
 These demonstrations of comprehension create opportunities for third turn repairs in which misunderstandings can be detected and corrected . These demonstrations are examples of comprehension .
 First, there was the formal channel, in the form of letters sent by telegram usually via embassies . Then, there were the formal channels, such as telegram and telegram, sent by embassies .
 This channel was slow, with letters often taking 12 hours to get from one leader to the other . In a number of instances the letter arrived disjointed with some hours delay between the parts .
 Second, there were informal channels which occurred through face-to-face interactions . Third, there was informal channels that occurred through informal channels, such as informal channels .
 These interactions occurred between proxies who reported back directly to the leaders . These proxies are proxies who report back to leaders .
 Dobrynin’s memo on the meeting was collected by bicycle courier who sent it by Western Union telegram . In fact, the memo was sent by a bicycle courier, who collected it by telegram from a Western Union messenger .
 Each leader made public announcements knowing that the other side was listening to them . Each leader's announcement was made in advance of each other .
 This means of communication was usually speedier than the formal and informal channels, and thus was used frequently . Indeed, this means of communicating was often faster than formal channels .
 Public communications have the problem of reaching too wide an audience . Public communications often reach too much of a wide audience . But it's not always enough to reach too many people .
 Kennedy agreed with Khrushchev to remove missiles from Turkey, on condition that this part of the deal would not reach the public . Kennedy agreed to remove the missiles on the condition that they would not be publicly disclosed .
 Robert Kennedy's communication that President Kennedy might be losing control would not have been suited to the public channel . Similarly Robert Kennedy’s communication that Robert Kennedy might have been losing control wouldn’t have been best suited to public channels .
 The formal and informal channels were too slow and the public channel was too public . The formal channels were 'too slow' and 'too public' The public channel is too public, the government said in a statement .
 In June 1963, the USA and USSR signed a memorandum of understanding to establish a direct communications link between the Kremlin and the Pentagon . The USA and the USSR agreed to establish the link in June 1963 .
 The first implementation of the hot line did not have any voice component . However, there was no red phone, indeed, there were no red phones .
 The architects of the system feared that direct voice communication, with direct translation, might be too rapid, potentially leading to mis-translation or mis-reading .
 The first system was a teletype system that could transmit a page of text in three minutes . The first teletype was the first system to transmit text messages .
 To use the system, the President would send a message by phone, or messenger, to the Pentagon . The system would be used by the President .
 The message would then be verified with the president, before being encrypted and transmitted to the Kremlin in English . The message is then verified and transmitted in English to the president .
 In the basement of the Kremlin, the message would be decrypted, translated and conveyed directly to the Premier . The message would have been decrypted and translated directly to Premier .
 The hot line was first used in 1967 during the Arab-Israel war, when Israel launched a surprise attack on Egypt . The line was used during the war, and was used by Israel in a surprise surprise attack .
 Fearing that the situation might escalate and that there would be a retaliatory attack on Israel, the United States military deployed an aircraft carrier to be ready to defend Israel .
 The message caused a stir, not least because it was the first time that the hot line had been used .
 Using the hot line, President Johnson was able to reassure Premier Kosygin that the USA did not want a war . President Johnson used the phone to tell Kosygen that the U.S. was not going to war .
 Over the six days of the war, 20 messages were sent over the hot line . Premier Kosygin had anticipated a war that he had anticipated was averted . The war ended in a stalemate .
 It is manned on both sides 24 hours a day, and it is tested every hour . The mission is manned by both sides of the border, and is constantly monitored .
 It is fruitful to speculate about the reasons for the success of the hot line, says author . The hot line has been a hot line for more than 30 years .
 The hot line persists because it serves an important communicative function . "The hot line continues to serve as a hot line for people in need of communication," the caller says .
 Kennedy and his advisors were distrustful of Khrushchev because they didn't know his mind or his motivations . Kennedy was distrustful in part because he did not know what his mind was going on .
 The means of communication between the leaders was limited, and, because of the distrust, much emphasis was placed on military manoeuvres .
 Modern armies are so complex, with so many people in the chain of command, that unintended actions are likely . Unmanual actions are often likely, with unintended actions likely .
 The U-2 spy plane was the first U.S. spy plane to be shot down by a U.N. mission in 1980s . The U.2 plane was downed by Soviet Union forces in 1982 .
 The medium of military manoeuvres as a medium of communication is slow, unreliable, and does not afford third turn repairs . Military manoeuvres are slow and unreliable and do not afford repairs, says the author .
 The hot line, on the other hand, enables interrogating the mind of the other, and holding the other to rational account . The line enables interrogators to interrogate the mind, and hold the actions of the others to account .
 The hot line enables misinterpretations to be voiced and repairs to be initiated . Hot line allows misinterpretations and repairs can be initiated.
 The dynamics of social categorisation which are assumed to underlie intergroup conflict do not hold. First, in a context of highly reflective distrust where there is a necessity to engage with the other and try to out-smart the other .
 Social categorisation assumes that intergroup conflict is based upon the positive differentiation of the ingroup from the outgroup . The social categorisation of social groups is based on a positive differentiation . Social categorising assumes that social groups are divided into groups .
 Kennedy and his advisors would be foolish to simply denigrate their opponent or to dismiss his perspective . However, Kennedy's advisors would not be wise to simply deny their opponent's perspective .
 Khrushchev's government is trying to understand the mind of the Soviet leader, says historian . "They make every effort to understand what happened to him and his situation"
 One particularly useful resource is identification, which recurs several times, is identification .
 By identifying with Khrushchev, Kennedy and his advisors were better able to understand and thus negotiate with him . Kennedy and advisors were able to identify with Khruschev, says historian .
 Kennedy is deeply distrustful of Khrushchev and his motivations, but at a more implicit and taken-for-granted level there is a remarkable degree of trust in Khrush . Second, although at a reflective level Kennedy is very distrustful, he is deeply wary of his motivations
 Analysis of the actual negotiation process shows both Khrushchev and Kennedy trying to impale each other upon the horns of world opinion . Analysis shows both of the two sides trying to get their hands on the horns .
 Each side sought to justify their actions while undermining any justification for the actions of the other . The U.S. government and the U.K. government have been accused of being complicit in the deaths of Americans .
 The guarantor of this rationality, I have argued, is the gaze of world opinion, says David Cameron . Cameron: "I have argued that world opinion is a matter of rationality"
 Third, brinkmanship again presupposes trust in the other as a rational being – otherwise one would be willing to risk pushing them to the brink .
 The fact that brinkmanship presupposes a rational opponent, I argued, is supported by the powerful effect that Robert Kennedy’s appeal had on Khrushchev . Robert Kennedy's appeal had a powerful effect, he said .
 Khrushchev believed that President Kennedy might be losing control, then he could not presuppose rational actions from the White House . He needed to quickly accept the terms offered to him, and quickly accept to him .
 distrust and ambiguous communications are dangerous companions, especially in the context of brinkmanship . Finally, distrust is dangerous when it comes to trust and ambiguity .
 Kennedy and his advisors thought that this was a communication of escalation coming from Khrushchev . But Kennedy thought it was a signal of escalation . Kennedy's advisors thought it would be a signal coming from the Soviet leader .
 In a context of distrust, ambiguous communications are likely to be interpreted as antagonistic . In this context, ambiguous communication is likely to lead to antagonistic relations .
 The 'hot line' was built between the Kremlin and the White House . It is this potentially catastrophic miscommunication that instigated the construction of the ‘hot line’
 In the nuclear age, the development of weapons raced ahead of the means of diplomatic communication . The development of nuclear weapons is a key part of the nuclear era .
 Letters sent via ambassadors are suited to an age in which warfare is a more drawn out affair, not to an era in which nuclear missiles travel at several thousand kilometres per hour . Letters are better suited to the age when warfare is more drawn-out affair .
 Mutually assured destruction provides a guarantee that the other will not initiate nuclear war . Mutually guaranteed destruction is a guarantee of a mutually assured destruction agreement .
 The hot line is also a technology of trust and also provides a guarantee . Hot line is a technology that can be trusted .
 The hot line makes each leader available for interrogation any time of the day or night . The line is available to anyone who wants to question their leader .
 The hot line does not give leaders time to concoct elaborate and strategic accounts . It denies leaders the opportunity to hide from awkward questions . Leaders should have more time for extensive consultation and extensive consultation, it says .
 The hot line builds trust by providing almost immediate accountability . As such it builds trust, it provides almost instant accountability . The line is a hot line that builds trust and builds trust .
 Inter-subjectivity and the interplay of culturally shared and situation specific knowledge . Interplay of cultures shared and situations specific knowledge. Inter-interplay of cultural shared knowledge and subjectivity .
 Prime Minister Fidel Castro’s letter to Premier Khrushchev, October 26, 1962 . Fidel Castro was prime minister of Cuba from 1961 to 1962 . Castro wrote the letter to the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 The last structurally provided defence of intersubjectivity in conversation . The last structure provided a . structurally . provided a defence of . intersubjectiveity in conversation.