 The attitudes of Stalin and Truman and the ideological differences between the Superpowers . The division of Germany into zones of occupation and the joint occupation of Berlin . The Soviet control of Eastern Europe, the establishment of satellite states .
 The impact of Soviet rule on Hungary was the impact of the Cold War . Rákosi, de-Stalinisation and optimism led to the death of Nagy .
 Russia was a Communist country, ruled by a dictator who cared little about human rights . Russia was ruled by an authoritarian regime that cared little for human rights, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Britain and USA wanted to help Germany recover/ to prevent large areas of Europe from coming under Communist control . Britain and the USA . wanted to . prevent large parts of Europe . coming under . Communist control.
 The USSR did not trust Britain and the USA – They had tried to destroy the Russian Revolution in 1918/ Stalin thought they had not helped the USSR enough in WW2 . Stalin thought the USA had failed to help the Soviet Union enough in WWII .
 Britain & USA did not trust USSR – Stalin had signed the Nazi-Soviet pact in 1939 . Stalin signed a pact with the Nazis in 1939 and signed the pact in 1941 . Britain and USA didn't trust USSR .
 Yalta/ Potsdam/ Salami tactics/ Fulton/ Greece/ Truman Doctrine . Truman Doctrine/ Marshall Plan/ Cominform . Czechoslovakia . The Truman Doctrine and the Truman Plan .
 Churchill, Stalin and Roosevelt agreed to Divide Germany into 4 zones (France, Britain, USA, USSR) to hold free elections in Eastern European countries/ to set up a government of Communists and non Communists in Poland . Churchill and Stalin agreed to divide Germany into four zones to hold elections in
 On the surface, everything seemed friendly, but there was tension behind the scenes . POTSDAM CONFERENCE 1.1.1: "Everything seemed friendly and friendly"
 Stalin, Truman and Atlee agreed to bring Nazi war criminals to trial/ divide Germany into 4 occupied zones . Stalin and Truman agreed to split Germany into four occupied zones in order to bring them to trial .
 'Slice-by-slice' Stalin ensured all E. Eur.countries had Communist govts 1.5% of the population . ‘Slice by-slice’ was Stalin’s ‘surgical’ tactic .
 Albania – Communists took power after the war without opposition 2. Albania – The Communists took control of the country without opposition . Albania – Albania – the Communists took over the country from the Communists .
 The Communists executed the leaders of all the other parties. Bulgaria – the Communists executed all the others . Bulgaria . Bulgaria – The Communist Party. Bulgaria .
 Russian troops stayed in Hungary . Stalin allowed elections (noncommunists won a big majority) Communists led by the pro-Russian Rakosi .
 Czechoslovakia – the Communists banned all other parties/ killed their leaders . The Communists were banned from other parties and killed all of them . The Communist Party was banned from all parties in the country for decades .
 East Germany – Russians turned their zone into German Democratic Republic . East Germany is now known as East Germany .
 U.S. supplied arms and money to defeat the Communists in Greece . United States supplied arms, money and arms to defeat Communists .
 The USA implemented a policy of ‘containment’ towards the USSR – to prevent Communism spreading any further . The US implemented a 'containment' policy to stop Communism spreading further .
 Marshall believed poverty was a breeding ground for Communism . Marshall's plan was based on Marshall's belief poverty was breeding grounds for communism .
 American introduced ‘Marshall Aid’ – $17 billion to get Europe’s economy going . American introduced 'Marshall aid’ - $17billion to get European economies going . $17bn was spent to boost European economies .
 CZECHOSLOVAKia – Communists took control Panicked the United States Senate into granting Marshall Aid THE BERLIN BLOCKADE 1. CZechoslovakia – Communist Party took control of the Soviet Union . Panicked U.S. Senate into
 Stalin closed rail + road links to Berlin . Lasted 11 months/ Allies airlifted supplies to Berlin – 275,000 flights, 1.5m tons . Berliners lived on dried eggs and potatoes . 4 hours of electricity a day .
 It seemed he would bring a thaw in the Cold War – He advocated ‘Peaceful Coexistence’/ He met Western leaders at summit meetings . He criticised Stalin, executed Beria, set free political prisoners and de-stalinised eastern bloc countries .
 In fact 1955–1963 was the time of greatest tension in the Cold War . Khrushchev used Russian troops when countries tried to leave Russian control . In fact 1953–1954 was the year of the greatest tension between the two countries .
 USSR/ Albania/ Bulgaria/ Czechoslovakia/ E Germany/ Hungary/ Poland/ Romania 3.61: Yuri Gagarin orbits the earth)/ Arms Race – USSR/ Bulgaria . Poland/Hungary/Romania 3.60: USSR/Bulgaria/Czechoslov
 Student riots on 23 October – Student riots – attcks on AVH and Russian troops . 24 October – 3 November – Reforming government led by Imre Nagy . Aimed to withdraw from Warsaw Pact from Warsaw pact .
 Janos Kadar put in control of Hungary/ 4,000 Hungarians killed/ Nagy shot. 4,500 Hungarians died/ Nagar shot. Janos . Kadar . Nagar .
 Both sides are now organised into two major military alliances . Both sides now organise into two main alliances .
 Each side felt more threatened, so consequently they built even more weapons . As a result each side felt . more . threatened, they built more . weapons . The U.S. and Russia built more weapons in response .
 The Cold War has become very serious as both sides focused on the development of the Hydrogen Bomb . The Hydrogen bomb was 2500 times stronger than the Hiroshima bomb . By the 1950s, the Cold War had become a very serious focus .
 Three Cold War crises: Berlin, Cuba and Czechoslovakia c1957–69 Berlin: the refugee problem Khrushchev’s Berlin ultimatum . Berlin: The refugee problem . The crisis was a major Cold War crisis .
 U2 the construction of the Berlin Wall and its impact . Kennedy’s visit to Berlin, 1963, was the first time U2 had visited the city .
 East Germans erected a barbed wire wall overnight (later stone) All East – West movement was stopped in 1961 . All East-West movement stopped .
 Superpower tension – U2 – Berlin Wall – Laos – Vietnam – Vietnam . Fidel Castro’s Cuba – only 90 miles off coast of America . U2, U2 and U.S. Superpower tensions – U.2 - U2 - Berlin Wall - Laos –
 Khrushchev seemed to have failed . Kennedy became the hero of the Western world . He became a hero for the West . Phone hot line was set up between Moscow and Washington .
 By the 1960s Berlin was still divided and the USSR controlled the East and the USA guaranteed freedom in the West . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 .
 Thousands of refugees escaped to West Berlin each day much to the embarrassment of the USSR . Khrushchev closed the border and ordered the construction of a wall to stop people leaving .
 Khrushchev demanded that the U.S. leave West Berlin within six months . At the Vienna Summit of June 1961, therefore, the United States left West Berlin . The Vienna Summit was held in June 1961 . The United States and West Berlin were separated from each other .
 On 13 August, Khrushchev closed the border between East and West Berlin and started building the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was built on 13 August .
 At first, the Russians regarded it as a propaganda success, but as time went on, it became a propaganda disaster . It became a symbol of all that that was bad about Soviet rule .
 Try to think of three ways that the Berlin Wall was a symbol of the Cold War in the 1950s and 1960s . President Kennedy, 1963 Revision tip Question: Use this to help revise this section .
 It was concrete proof that capitalists could never work with communists . It was 'concrete proof' that capitalists couldn't work with the communists .
 What the Berlin Wall tells us about the nature of the Cold War in the 1960s . The Berlin Wall is still standing in place in Germany .
 Experts examining photographs of Cuba taken by U2 spy planes saw what they believed to be evidence that the Russians were building nuclear missile sites in Cuba . Experts examining photos of Cuba seen what they thought were evidence that Russia was building missile sites .
 It was the beginning of a confrontation that took the world to the brink of a nuclear holocaust . The beginning of the confrontation was the start of the nuclear war . The world was on the brink .
 Kennedy felt that Khrushchev had got one over on him at the Vienna Summit in 1961 . Kennedy who had been elected because he promised to get tough with the Communists .
 In 1959, a rebel named Fidel Castro took power in Cuba, just 90 miles away from Florida . Also in 1959, Fidel Castro became president of Cuba, 90 miles from Florida.
 Before Castro took over, the government led by Colonel Batista had been a corrupt and right-wing military dictatorship, but the Americans had many business interests in Cuba . Castro took control of Cuba in 1959 .
 When Castro came to power, he nationalised American companies in Cuba . He nationalised many of the country's biggest American companies .
 The Americans stopped all aid to Cuba, and all imports of Cuban sugar . In retaliation, the Americans stopped aid to the Cuban government .
 This was a blow to Castro as sugar was the mainstay of the Cuban economy . Sugar was a major source of Cuba's economy .
 In 1960, the USSR signed an agreement to buy 1 million tonnes of Cuban sugar every year . Castro was forced to look to the USSR for help, and, in 1960, signed a deal with the USSR .
 Castro, who had not been a Communist when he took power, became a Communist . Castro was not a Communist at the time of his first term .
 In April 1961, with Kennedy's knowledge, the CIA funded, trained, armed and transported 1,300 Cuban exiles to invade Cuba . The invasion was funded by the CIA with the help of Cuban ex-cuba forces .
 They landed at the Bay of Pigs and made an attempt to overthrow Castro . They landed in a failed attempt at overthrowing Castro .
 Castro asked for and Russia publicly promised weapons to defend Cuba against America . In September 1961, Castro asked Russia to send missiles to Cuba against the US .
 The Americans discovered the missile sites in Cuba on 14 October 1962 .
 These sites brought every town in the US within range of Soviet nuclear missiles . The sites were built in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 President Kennedy called a meeting of the National Security Council and on 22 October went on TV to tell the American people that they were under threat . President Kennedy told the American public that the U.S. was at risk .
 Kennedy versus Khrushchev Revision tip and answer preparation . Identify six causes of the Cuban crisis and present them as a spider gram . Show links between the different factors .
 The threat of nuclear war became increasingly apparent . The 13 days and the effects of the crisis were the 13 days before the crisis began .
 It was vital that Kennedy and Khrushchev came to some sort of agreement the future of the world depended on it, says historian . "The world's future depends on it," he says .
 President Kennedy did not dare to invade Cuba, because that action could have started a world war . Yet he could not let the missile sites be completed . Crisis summary: President Kennedy would not have invaded Cuba .
 President Obama decided on a naval blockade to prevent Russian ships delivering missiles for the Cuban sites . With his advisers, he decided on the naval blockade .
 Russian forces were put on alert; United States bombers were put in the air carrying nuclear bombs; preparations were made to invade Cuba . U.S. bombers were also put into the air with nuclear bombs .
 Secretly, the Americans suggested a trade-off of missile bases United States bases in Turkey for Russian bases in Cuba . The Americans suggested that the U.S. bases would be in Turkey . The deal was reportedly a compromise .
 Khrushchev sent a telegram offering to dismantle Cuban bases if Kennedy lifted the blockade and promised not to invade Cuba . The ships heading for Cuba turned back, and the embargo was lifted .
 He sent a letter demanding the dismantling of the Turkish bases . Then, as though having second thoughts, he sent a second letter to the Turkish government .
 Kennedy ignored the U2 attack and agreed publicly to the first letter, and secretly to the second . However, Kennedy ignored U2's request and agreed to the letter .
 Kennedy announces a naval blockade of Cuba . One week in October 1962 Day Events . Kennedy announces naval blockade .
 B52 nuclear bombers October are deployed, so that one-eighth of them are airborne all the time . B52 bombers are deployed in the U.S.
 Kennedy warns of a full retaliatory response, if any missile is launched from Cuba . Kennedy: "We are prepared to respond to any missile launch"
 Secretly, the U.S. government floats the idea of removing missiles in Turkey in exchange for those in Cuba . The United States government is considering removing missiles from Turkey . The missiles are believed to be in Turkey .
 Khrushchev offered to dismantle the sites if Kennedy lifts the blockade and promises not to invade Cuba . Kennedy gets a telegram from the Soviet Union offering to dismantle sites if he lifts blockade . Kennedy was forced to lift the blockade .
 Khrushchev sends a second letter, demanding that October Kennedy also dismantles American missile bases in Turkey . October Kennedy ordered the removal of missile bases from Turkey .
 October Tuesday 20 Russian bombers leave Cuba, and Kennedy lifts the naval blockade . October 20 Russian planes leave Cuba . October 31, 1962, Cuban President Castro Castro was assassinated . Kennedy lifted the blockade .
 Khrushchev claimed that he had won the Cuban missile crisis . The crisis was the height of the Cold War .
 U.S. missile sites in Turkey were dismantled in November 1962 . America never bothered Cuba again (which is still a Communist country)
 The world did not see it that way at the time, because the Turkey deal was kept secret . The West saw Kennedy as the hero who had faced down Communism . The world now sees Kennedy as a hero who faced down communism .
 China broke off relations with Russia and, in 1964, he was forced to resign as Soviet leader . He was forced by China to resign in 1964 .
 The message of the cartoon was clear the world had avoided a nuclear war, but it was time for reason . The cartoon shows that the world has avoided a nuke war but it is time for a reason .
 Look back through the pages on the Cuban missile crisis, sorting the evidence to support the idea that Kennedy won the Cuban Missile crisis .
 For four months in 1968 Czechoslovakia broke free from Soviet rule, allowing freedom of speech and removing some state controls . The Prague Spring was a four-month uprising against Soviet rule in 1968 .
 Students and writers were complaining about the lack of freedom and the poor performance of the Czechoslovak economy in 1967 . There were no riots or demonstrations but, during 1967, there were no protests or riots . Czechoslovakia was the only country in the world to have a democracy in 1967
 Antonin Novotny, the Czechoslovak president, asked Leonid Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, for help . But when he asked him for help, he did not support him . He died at the hands of Czechoslovakia's communist leader in 1968 .
 Dubcek's government announced an Action Plan for what it called a new model of socialism in 1968 . It removed state controls over industry and allowed freedom of speech . Dubceks' government announced the Action Plan in April 1968, 1968 .
 Dubcek announced that he was still committed to democratic communism, but other political parties were set up in the country . Dubcec was a member of the Communist Party of the Czech Republic . Dubcke announced he was committed to a democratic communism .
 Dubcek stressed that Czechoslovakia would stay in the Warsaw Pact, but in August, President Tito of Yugoslavia, a country not in the Pact, visited Prague . Tito also visited Prague in August . Dubcec: Tito's visit in August marked the end of
 At a meeting in Bratislava on 3 August 1968, Brezhnev read out a letter from some Czechoslovakian Communists asking for help . The letter was read out in a meeting at the end of August 1968 . The Soviet leader read out the letter to the Czech
 The Brezhnev Doctrine was the USSR would not allow any Eastern European country to reject Communism . He announced that he would not be allowed to reject the Communist Party in the USSR . The USSR would never allow any of its Eastern European countries to reject communism .
 Instead of standing in front of the tanks, the people put flowers in the soldiers' hair . Instead, they stood in the tanks and put flowers on their hair instead .
 Romania had also broken free of Russian control, and was improving relations with the West . Romania was also breaking free of Russia control, according to President Vladimir Putin .
 Czechoslovakia returned to communist control and Russian troops were stationed there . Czechsoslovakia was returned to Soviet-controlled territory in 1968 .
 Half the leadership of the KSC, along with the directors of many firms, were sacked and 47 anti-communists were arrested . Half the leaders of the . KSC were sacked .
 People in the West were horrified and so were many communist countries, especially Romania and Yugoslavia . The West was horrified by the events in the 1950s and '60s .
 Compare its details with the story of the Hungarian Uprising of 1956, listing the similarities and differences . Compare the details and differences of the events in Hungary .
 Similarities • Same causes hostility to Russian control, repression, poor economic performance/poverty . Same causes . Same cause hostility to Russia control and repression, repression .
 Riots in Hungary started with riots in Hungary, but not Czechoslovakia . Czech-Hungarian riots started in Hungary in 1960s, but ended in 1989 .
 NATO had 2. million, Warsaw Pact had 4 million Mutually Assured Destruction . Both sides knew that any attack upon the other would be suicide . NATO and Warsaw Pact knew each other was a suicide risk .
 In November 1957, the Russian space dog Laika became the first animal to orbit the earth . Laika was the first dog in Russia to orbit Earth .
 Laika means ""Barker" in Russian, and her mission helped scientists understand whether people could survive in space . Laika was launched in 1966 and launched in March 1966 .
 By 1959 Both American and Russian scientists were in a race to get a spacecraft to the Moon; the Russians made it first . By 1959, the Russians had already made a spacecraft that made it to the moon .
 On 12 April 1961, Russian Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first man in space . He was the first Russian man to go into space .
 Gagarin's spacecraft, Vostok 1, completed one orbit of the earth, and landed about two hours after launch . The mission was the first manned mission to orbit the earth .
 Valentina became an important member of the Russian Government after her mission . Valentina has been awarded many honours and prizes for her achievements .
 President Kennedy promised the world that the United States would land men on the moon before 1970 . In 1963 President John F Kennedy promised that the U.S. would land the moon in the 1960s . President Kennedy said in 1963 that the moon landings would take place before 1970.
 NASA sent a robot spaceship to make sure it could land safely . NASA sent the robot to make the landing safely . The mission was the first of its kind to take part in a space mission .
 Surveyor 1 made the second soft landing on the Moon on 30th May 1966 . It was a few months after Russian probe Luna 9 landed successfully . Surveyor was called Surveyor and it landed on the lunar surface .
 Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin became the first men on the moon on 20 July 1969 . Neil Armstrong took 'one small step' to take the first step to the moon .
 Apollo 11 worked perfectly, flying them 250,000 miles to the moon, and bringing them all the way back safely to earth . Their spaceship, Apollo 11, worked perfectly .
 The policy of détente refers to the time in the 1960s-1970s when the two superpowers eased tension and tried to cooperate to avoid conflict in the Cold War . Détente in the 1970s: Helsinki and SALT 1 Helsinki .
 A number of events happened during this time period that illustrate this new policy . The new policy will be implemented in the United States .
 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty: powers with nuclear weapons agreed not to give any other countries nuclear technology . Treaty was signed in 1968 . It was the first major nuclear disarmament treaty to be reached .
 The Helsinki Agreement recognised Soviet control over Eastern Europe, concluded a trade agreement, and Russia promised to respect human rights .
 America was shocked by the Vietnam War and wanted to stay out of world affairs . America wanted to be out of the world affairs. America was not interested in world affairs, it wanted to avoid it .
 The price of oil rocketed in the 1970s, and both superpowers experienced economic problems . Both superpowers had economic problems during that time .
 Further talks were much less successful and the SALT2 Treaty in 1979 added little . Further talks in 1979 were unsuccessful and the treaty was signed in 1979 .
 In the Arab-Israeli War of 1973, America supported Israel, and Russia supported Egypt and Syria . America supported Egypt, Syria and Syria in the war of 1973 .
 The Helsinki Agreement achieved nothing it confirmed the Iron Curtain and Russia ignored its promises about human rights . The Helsinki agreement achieved nothing . It confirmed the Cold War, but it confirmed that Russia ignored human rights promises . Russia's human rights record has been broken .
 Whether there was any genuine détente between East and West in the 1970s was debated . Whether it was a genuine denteente between the two countries .
 August 2nd was also agreed that the German capital Berlin would be divided into four zones . It was agreed that Berlin would have four zones, divided into zones .
 The 1945 Russian Polish border was determined and Korea was divided into Soviet and American zones . Korea was to be divided into Russia and the U.S. zones .
 August 6th Hiroshima The United States dropped the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima 1945 . August 8th Nagasaki The U.S. dropped the second atomic bomb in Nagasaki . August 7th Hiroshima
 Stalin rejected the plan outright by Stalin and any Eastern Bloc country considering accepting aid was reprimanded severely . The plan was rejected outright by the Soviet Union .
 The French, USA and UK partitions of Germany were merged to form West Germany Germany June 24th Berlin Blockade . Russia cut all road and rail links to that sector in response to the merger .
 Those living in Western Berlin had no access to food supplies and faced starvation . This meant that those living in West Berlin faced starvation and starvation . Western Berlin residents were forced to live without food supplies .
 Food was brought to Western Berliners by U.S. and UK airplanes . Exercise known as the Berlin Airlift was an exercise known as "Bergen Airlift"
 April 4th NATO formed with member states Belgium, Canada, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom, and the United States . June 25th Korean War began when North Korea invaded South Korea .
 Summer Geneva Accords ended French war with the Vietminh and divided Vietnam 1954 into North and South states . Vietnam was divided into two states following the treaty .
 The communist leader of North Vietnam was Ho Chi Minh . The U.S. friendly south was led by Ngo Dinh Diem . North Vietnam and the United States friendly south were led by Ho Chi-Minh .
 The Warsaw Pact was formed with member states East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Albania, Bulgaria, and the Soviet Union . May 14th Warsaw Pact .
 This began as a Hungarian protest against Communist rule in Budapest . October 23rd HungarianRevolution .
 Soviet tanks entered Budapest on 24 October 1956 . 1956 was the first time Soviet tanks had entered Budapest .
 The tanks withdrew on 28th October and a new government was formed . New government quickly moved to introduce democracy, freedom of speech, and freedom of religion .
 Prime Minister Imre Nagy made a World broadcast that Hungary was under attack from the Soviet Union and calling for aid . The Prime Minister made the broadcast to the world and called for aid from the Soviets .
 Joint British and French force invaded Egypt to regain control of the Suez Canal . Suez was nationalised by Egyptian leader Nasser in 1956 .
 The attack was heavily criticised by World leaders, especially America because Russia had offered support to Egypt . The attack on Egypt has been heavily criticised, especially by America .
 The British and French were forced to withdraw and a UN peace keeping force was sent to establish order . The British, French and British withdrew from the French-occupied area .
 USSR Sputnik II carried Laika the dog, the first living creature to go into space . Talks between Nikita Khrushchev and Dwight Eisenhower broke down when a USA U2 spy plane was shot down over Russia .
 Russian cosmonaut Yuri Alekseyvich Gagarin became the first human being in space . April 12th Space Race was the start of the Space Race .
 August 13th Berlin Wall was built and borders sealed between East and West Germany . Berlin wall was built on August 13, 1961 .
 President Kennedy set up a naval blockade and demanded the removal of the missiles . President Kennedy also demanded that the missiles be removed from Cuba .
 War was averted when the Russians agreed to remove the weapons . War averted by agreeing to remove weapons on 28th October . Russia agreed to do so in exchange for removing weapons .
 November JFK Assassination JF Kennedy was assassinated while on a visit to Dallas . November JFK was assassinated .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was 22nd 1963 arrested for the murder of JFK . There has always been speculation that he was not a lone killer and that there may have been communist or CIA complicity .
 August 20th Soviet invasion of Warsaw Pact forces entered Czechoslovakia in a bid to stop the reforms known as 1968 Prague Spring . 'Prague Spring' was instigated by Alexander Dubcek .
 Apollo 11 landed on the Moon and Neil Armstrong became the first man on the 1969 Moon . December Space Race United States launched Apollo 8 first manned orbit of the Moon . August 21st 1968 and December 21st 1969 .
 Vietnam War President Richard Nixon ordered United States troops to go to Cambodia . April 30th Vietnam War marked the end of the Vietnam War .