 You may look at other publications for insight as well as any articles or news clippings pertaining to that period in history . If necessary, you may look into other publications .
 Written by the President’s brother from his unique personal perspective, this book offers insights which are not available in other accounts .
 Examining a text like this with the benefit of hindsight might lead some people to question whether or not the President and his advisors acted as effectively as they might have during the Crisis . Examining the text might lead to some questioning whether the President acted effectively during the crisis .
 I question whether other actions might have brought the conflict to a close any sooner . However, after reviewing the facts, I question if other actions could have been taken sooner .
 Robert F Kennedy lays down his blow by blow coverage of the showdown between the U.S. and Soviet Union that took place over 13 days in October of 1962 . In his book, Thirteen Days, he lays out his blow-by-blow coverage of that showdown .
 The United States confronted the Soviet Union over their installation of missiles in Cuba . The U.S. confronted the Soviets over their missile installation in Cuba.
 Robert Kennedy was part of a diverse group of advisors including Secretary McNamara and Secretary Rusk, seeking to counsel his brother, President Kennedy, regarding the best response to the Soviets deployment of nuclear warheads .
 President Kennedy built a diverse group of advisors and drew from their diverse perspectives and backgrounds to debate all the possible alternatives . Above all, this book shows how President Kennedy drew from diverse perspectives to debate the alternatives .
 The text details the discussion and action taken and not taken, sometimes following conversation and movements hour to hour . The text is written in response to a series of questions posed by people in the news .
 He vividly describes the massive pressure placed on the President and his advisory committee to seek an immediate resolution . The President is under pressure to find a resolution .
 Robert was privy to the President’s personal thoughts and therefore was able to provide a more poignant than other cabinet members . Robert was a member of the Cabinet, unlike other Cabinet members, he said .
 JFK outlines his resolution to find a peaceable, non-military alternative to the crisis . He persuades the reader to agree that the actions taken were the right actions to take . JFK’s resolution is clear and persuasive .
 The author is clearly partial towards supporting the actions taken by the President and his advisors . The author should be considered required reading on the subject .
 The clear and concise text and down-to-earth style makes it accessible to the average reader . The clear, concise text makes it easy to read for the average .
 Robert Kennedy’s unique perspective provides insight into the key players in this incident not available in most factual accounts . Robert Kennedy's unique perspective on the Kennedy assassination is not available .
 The addition of clarifying primary source documents, such as correspondence between John F Kennedy and Khrushchev, declassified photos and speech transcripts also added to the text .
 Robert Kennedy provided more in depth information on the blockade efforts which eventually were implemented and less depth on alternatives . Robert Kennedy also provided information on alternatives to blockade .
 Military attack not an option as far as I am concerned; conflict rarely been quick, they had to avoid nuclear war at all cost . Military attack was not the option as well as . I'm not sure if they would go to nuclear war .
 If the blockade had not worked, or at least contributed in moving forward the peace talks process, then an alternative would have been employed . The blockade would have contributed to the peace negotiations process, says the BBC .
 Although some people supported a more aggressive military campaign, it seems likely that this would have blown up in the United States’ face .
 The naval blockade allowed the President to more peaceably defuse the situation . Instead of the blockade, the President defused the situation, the blockade allowed him to defuse it .
 It is obvious that President Kennedy and his advisors struggled with their decision and attempt to find the best solution . President Kennedy struggled with his decision and tried to find out what he wanted to do .
 "They clearly understood the widespread impact that their decision would have. They clearly understood that they would have," the judge said . The decision was made to make the decision .
 Is it possible that the group could have come up with a solution earlier? Is there a solution to the problem? "Yes, there is a solution," says the group .
 It is possible that offering this opportunity would have hastened the resolution, but doubtful . It's possible that it would have been possible to offer this opportunity but doubtful.
 Kennedy would not have easily secured public favor for that approach, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Kennedy would have been unlikely to win public favor, he says .
 'Perhaps the days we spent in limbo were essential to the process. Secondly, I think that perhaps perhaps the days . perhaps, perhaps, maybe the days spent . needed to be in limbo,’ she says .
 Forget public opinion, yes, we could have followed Stevenson's advice earlier . We could've followed the advice of Stevenson earlier. We could have done so much more than that .
 But that would have been giving in to a single opinion without deliberation, he says . "I'm not going to give in to the opinion of anyone without deliberating," he says. "I would have given in to giving in, giving in on a one opinion, without deliber
 Kennedy was able to take advantage of Khrushchev’s willingness to save face without succumbing to the pressure to take military action . Kennedy was willing to give “every opportunity … to the Russians to find a peaceful settlement which would not diminish their national security or be a public
 Fidel Castro research papers examine the revolutionary leader of Cuba that established a communist dictatorship, closely aligned with the Soviet Union . 1960′s 1960s was a decade of unbelievable changes in all aspects of American society .
 Research papers account how the Soviet Union influenced the political leader Saddam Hussein . Iraq and the Cold War .
 The purpose of a Canada's Role in the Korean War research paper is to reveal the causes of a conflict as seemingly obvious as the Korean war cannot be easily boiled down .
 Research papers discuss the way the Cold War ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union . End of Cold War research papers discuss how the war ended with collapse of Soviet Union.
 Research papers explain the events from the beginning and conclusion of the Cold War . Cold War Timeline includes Cold War Time Line research papers .
 The War Powers Act of 1973 was designed to limit the authority of the President while running the United States . The Act was passed by Congress in 1973 .
 Art Painting, sculpture, artist biographies, film essays and media topics topics . Art painting, sculpture and film essays .
 Business case studies, business management topics, company profiles and industry specific research paper topics . Business and MBA topics include business case studies and company profiles .
 Take your MBA to the next level and use our creative business topic ideas . Use these creative business topics to help students understand business ideas .
 Economics topics from Adam Smith to OPEC and oil prices are available to give you a unique twist in any economics research paper . Many great topic suggestions are available for use in economics .
 Education We specialize in education research and have the most contemporary listing of topics available for the Education Major . We offer the most modern education research topics available .
 Sample term paper topics include curriculum standards, curriculum standards and improving educational outcomes . There isn't an education topic that we don't offer you a unique perspective on with our samples .
 Geography is sometimes difficult to introduce a unique topic to your research paper . Geography can be difficult to use as a topic for a research paper. Geography should be a topic of discussion .
 Medical Health Research Paper topics help nursing students, doctors, or medical administration professionals come up with unique presentations on common medical health topics . Topics include obesity, ADHD, Euthanasia, Osteoporosis and more .
 Military History, strategy, battles and general information is presented in a sample of research paper topics . Military history, strategy and battles are presented in the sample of topics .
 Nursing Topics written specifically for nursing students . Nursing job market, nurse anesthetists, Betty Neuman, and the History of Nursing Education are just a few of the topics you can choose .
 Philosophy can be difficult to comprehend and even more difficult to write a term paper on . Philosophy Philosophy is difficult to understand and difficult to read .
 Get well-thought-out philosophy topic suggestions from our vast array of ideas . Get well thought-out philosophical topics to consider for consideration .
 Topics such as the illusion of free will, justice in the City of God, Plato's Allegory of the Cave and many more . Topics such a topic of discussion will be discussed in the book .
 Religion Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, Judaism and other world religion topic suggestions . Religion topics include Hinduism and Buddhism .
 Science Science term paper topics that give you unique ideas for your research on anything from global warming, human genome, minerals, Neanderthals, or even more . 100's more topic ideas .
 Abortion, substance abuse, gay marriage, ethnic group research, poverty and crime, abuse, and other social topics relevant today. Today's Sociology Daily Discussion is on Facebook and Twitter .
 Technology and Computer Net Neutrality, computer viruses, and advances in technology topic suggestions. Technology and computer viruses.com .
 Get the complicated issues in technology and computer science explained through our topic suggestions . Get the latest tech and science news from CNN Tech on Sunday .
 United States History History term paper ideas vary from the Aztecs of New Mexico to Sitting Bull and early American History .
 World History research paper topics that give students unique ideas on basic history topics . Topics include Hitler, WWII, Afghanistan, Camp David and 100's more . World History World History Research Paper topics .