 The essay concludes by acknowledging the rhetorical nature of interpreting scientific images and calling for a more rhetorically informed perspective of such ostensibly logos-driven images .
 There seems to be a developing consensus that the visual cues prevalent in advertising are most often pathos-driven, appealing to our emotional selves in their effort to sell a product .
 Remotely sensed images collected by overhead platforms such as satellites and airplanes have attracted surprisingly little attention from humanities scholars who study other logos-driven visual texts .
 Remote sensing plays an increasingly important role in shaping a variety of policy decisions . Remote sensing is increasingly important in shaping policy decisions in the U.S.
 Satellite imagery is of higher quality in terms of its increased resolution and timely collection, cheaper, and more widely available than ever before . Technological advances and relaxation of governmental controls have resulted in .
 On a daily basis, more and more information is being extrapolated or interpolated from remotely sensed images and used to influence policy decisions at the local, national, and international levels .
 Online resources such as Google Maps, Google Earth and Terraserver speak to the broad availability of technology .
 Remote sensing assumes an increasingly prominent role in our society . We must ask ourselves how meaning is constructed from these images, how they are read .
 It should be clear in the current era of digitization that photography is most often not a strictly objective medium, that it does not document incontestable, infallible freeze-frames of reality, that images are easily staged or divorced from their larger contexts .
 Increasingly, cynical consumers are keenly aware of the relative ease with which a model’s features can be enhanced . Political rivals’ expression can be exaggerated, or a subject can be posed – or even placed in a new setting .
 Advertisers, politicians, and the news media continually bombard us with images that have been either subtly or grossly tweaked, cropped, edited and/or otherwise manipulated .
 Satellite imagery really is no different from the more traditional photography of which many have become skeptical about consuming at face value . Satellite imagery is just as common as traditional satellite imagery, says CNN.com .
 Satellite images are unusually subjective texts that must be read, just as we might read a literary text, and are similarly prone to potentially quite divergent readings . Even without nefarious manipulations of content – which I do not think are a common problem facing remotely sensed images, yet .
 Resolution, atmospheric conditions, collection angles, topography, and other factors from the physical world can influence how remotely sensed images are created and read .
 The U.S. bombed a Chinese embassy in China's Guangzhou, China, on Saturday . The bombing was accidental, despite the presumably sophisticated imagery available to analysts .
 Remote sensing is the logos-driven medium of remote sensing . Remote sensing has a certain empirical or scientific credibility, says the author .
 Remote sensed images are largely exempt from the skepticism that is often used to query the meanings of more conventionally acquired images or other types of texts . Worrisomely, remotely sensed images can be viewed with the help of remote sensors .
 Any deference to the authority of analysts of a scientific imaging system such as remote sensing is problematic . It denies the public the authority to fully examine decisions that are made based on readings of that system . The public should be able to examine decisions made based upon readings, the author says .
 Science is a separate social realm, one unaffected by ideologies or politics, has been a central doctrine of the hard sciences . The idea that science is unaffected by ideology or politics is central to Western science, it has been central to its doctrine .
 What science signifies depends on social, political, and cultural meanings, and what kind of science is practised and rewarded is a highly political issue . Scholarship in science studies of the last few decades has forcefully pointed out, on the contrary, that .
 Remote sensing is dependent upon social, political, and cultural influences in its construction of meaning from specific images . Remote sensing as a science, remote sensing also is dependent on social and political influences, says author .
 In 1962, Adlai Stevenson exposed the covert Soviet effort to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . Stevenson made a presentation to the United Nations Security Council in 1962 .
 Stevenson’s presentation was based upon evidence gathered from remotely sensed images collected by the U-2 spy plane . Stevenson‘s presentation is based on evidence gathered by remote sensed images from the U.2 .
 During the crisis, a glut of corroborating evidence confirmed what photo interpreters at first only suspected . Photo interpreters had only been able to interpret photos of the crisis .
 The Kennedy administration released dozens of images gathered by U-2 spy planes to prove the Soviet placement of missiles in Cuba to the American public .
 The U.S. intelligence coup was given over almost entirely to the U-2 photographs . Remote sensing was erroneously established remote sensing as a purely “objective” or “honest” form of evidence .
 Time, Newsweek, Newsweek and dozens of smaller publications had slick spreads of the U-2 photos . The photos were accompanied by slick spreads in Time and Newsweek .
 The act of taking the photos is a refined science, but by conflating the taking of photos with the interpretation of photos and ignoring the subjectivity of interpretation, a dangerous assumption was established .
 Some of the annotations indicate that the vehicles are “erector launchers” for “SS-4 medium range ballistic missiles,’ “oxidizer tank trucks,” and other menacing instruments of nuclear war .
 The photos were presumably released by the U.S. government and printed by Newsweek in order to verify the Soviets’ actions in Cuba . The equipment depicted was so specialized, and documented from such a unique perspective, that readers had no choice other than to take the government’s
 By the end of the crisis, Khrushchev and the Soviets no longer publicly contested the evidence, further bolstering the implication that remote sensing provided a categorically objective and incontestable perspective on the world .
 A U-2 spy plane photographed a Soviet medium range ballistic missile site . The site was located in the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 A U-2 spy plane photograph shows another Soviet missile launch site and associated heavy equipment . The U.2 plane was sent to the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 The photos would have been virtually meaningless without the extensive captions and annotations provided by the United States government . The U.S. government explained the threats on the Cuban ground as the photo interpreters had seen them .
 Intelligence officers would have used specialized magnification equipment, mensuration tools, and identification keys to bring out the details in the photos . But as the photos were presented to the public they had little or no intrinsically discernible meaning .
 Newsweek, Time and Time have revered the new remote sensing technologies and assigned them an unquestionable scientific authority, given the magnitude of the larger crisis that had just been averted . I do not think that it is surprising .
 The government's release of reconnaissance photos and Time and Newsweek’s coverage of the photos were somewhat odd, in that they were offered as proof of the Soviet missiles . Yet neither the media nor the public had the means to evaluate the photos independently .
 There is a disturbing irony in offering the public a set of evidence that is essentially unverifiable, an irony that would be repeated in 2003 . There is the disturbing irony that the public was offered the evidence that would not be verified .
 Six of these images appeared in five PowerPoint slides during the presentation . A total of six of the images appeared during the presentations .
 Powell’s appearance before the United Nations Security Council shows us that the U.S. government has not changed little over the past four decades . Powell: The use of remotely sensed images has changed little in the past 40 years .
 The photos contain highly technical, largely unexplained and publicly unverifiable annotations . The photos once again contained highly technical and largely unexplained annotations .
 Despite making such photos available, rather than serve as convincing evidence, these pictures demand that the public trust the government’s interpretation of events on the Iraqi ground . It appears that, despite making such . photos available .
 The four that are in red squares represent active chemical munitions bunkers . The four are located in the red squares are active chemical weapons bunkers.
 The two arrows indicate the presence of sure signs that the bunkers are storing chemical munitions . The two arrow arrows indicate that the bunker is storing chemical weapons .
 Colin Powell’s PowerPoint presentation to the U.N. in February 2003, depicts alleged chemical munitions bunkers . Colin Powell's PowerPoint presentation showed alleged chemical weapons bunkers in Syria .
 Slide 13 from Colin Powell’s PowerPoint presentation to the U.N. in February 2003, depicts alleged deception by Iraqi forces at an alleged chemical munitions bunker .
 The logic behind the government’s readings of remotely sensed images was never revealed . Buying into Powell's argument remained an act of faith, buying into his argument remained a faith .
 The Bush administration’s assumption, or at least their public argument, seems to have been that pictures simply don’t lie . Bush administration: Pictures simply lie .
 Analysts rationalized what they saw in the photos to fit preconceived notions . In retrospect, it appears that analysts, the administration, or both, rationalized the photos .
 Biological and chemical weapons programs can exist inside commercial buildings with no suspicious signatures . Chemical and biological weapons programs for the most part exist in commercial buildings .
 This means that we can gets piles of incredibly sharp photos of an adversary’s chemical weapons factories and still not know much about its chemical weapons programs . This means we can get piles of photos of a chemical weapons factory but still not much about the weapons program . We can still get
 Commission's comment is in direct opposition to Powell’s U.N. presentation . Powell referred at least a half dozen times to “signs” on remotely sensed imagery in an attempt to prove the alleged Iraqi weapons of mass destruction activities .
 The problem with pre-war imagery analysis isn’t that no signs of W.M.D. activity were spotted, but that a whole host of activities were incorrectly assumed to be associated with the program . The problem is that the images were incorrectly thought to have been associated with
 Remote sensing precluded any questioning of analysts’ or the Bush administration’s assumptions, at least within the federal intelligence bureaucracy . And the scientific status of remote sensing precludes any questioning .
 Powell's United Nations presentation is a somber reminder of what’s at stake when analysts or policy makers lose sight of the uncertainties inherent to remote sensing and overstate the possibilities depicted in individual pieces of imagery . Powell's presentation is, among other things, a sombber reminder
 Powell’s presentation was replaced entirely by false certainty . It is a subtle distinction, but these types of qualifications were absent from Powell's presentation .
 Analysts are pressured to produce a definite reading rather than a range of possible readings . The distinction is perhaps indicative of a broader shift in analytical tactics . Analysts have been criticized for over-reaching conclusions .
 Analytic ‘tradecraft’ – the way analysts think, research, evaluate evidence, write, and communicate – must be strengthened . Analytic 'tradecraft' - the way analyst thinks, research and evaluate evidence - must be stronger .
 In many instances, we found finished intelligence that was loosely reasoned, ill-supported, and poorly communicated . In many cases, the intelligence was poorly communicated and poorly supported .
 An acknowledgement that remotely sensed images are ambiguous enough to provide for a range of meanings might go a long way towards forcing analysts to re-examine their own arguments, and to produce more accurate intelligence products .
 When it came to photos of less obvious things than aircraft and SAMs, all viewers but those indispensable middlemen, the photo-interpreters, had to take virtually everything on faith . Kent continues his reflections .
 Kent’s acknowledgement that, for all their scientific origins and appearance, the credibility of remotely sensed images depends upon their purveyors is profound, especially so coming from a career intelligence professional .
 Despite the cutting-edge technology they exploit, making meaning from remotely sensed images is still fundamentally a rhetorical enterprise, governed by established rhetorical principles . Despite the technology they use, they are still fundamentally the rhetorical enterprise .
 The idea that meaning is subjectively constructed from remotely sensed images should probably come as little surprise to those of us who are experienced in working with literary texts and/ or more conventionally produced images .
 Remotely sensed images can be read by a human being before any meaning can be ascribed to it, author says . "I see these types of images as texts, as something that a human person must read," he says .
 Remotely sensed images are becoming more prolific and more influential daily . They are used to influence international policy or local zoning commission’s development policies . Images are open to a whole spectrum of questioning and counter-argument, despite their objective authority .
 At the very least, acknowledging that remotely sensed images (or any other scientific imaging systems) are subjective texts empowers citizens and consumers to question professional image readings or to at least seek second opinions .
 The correct and judicious reading of remotely sensed images may have averted thousands or millions of deaths in 1962 . The incorrect and prejudicial reading of images in 2003 has, at least in part, led to the deaths of over 4,200 U.S. soldiers and untold thousands of
 The contrast makes a compelling case for approaching scientific images with a rhetorical critical lens . That contrast, if nothing else, makes a case for using rhetorical critical lenses .
 Nate Kreuter worked as an imagery analyst for the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency from 2002 to 2004 . He worked for the agency from 2002 until 2004 .