 The Times failed to report most of the political maneuvering the White House and Kremlin executed . Not only did the newspaper only report the obvious actions of the superpowers .
 The United States Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance flew a U.S. Air Force U-2 high altitude spy plane over the inland nation of Cuba, ninety miles of the southern Atlantic tip of the United States .
 The U-2 took pictures, as always did, of the Communist nation and discovered what was determined to be missile launch sites . Central Intelligence Agency analysis determined could fire upon almost any city in America except those in the Pacific Northwest .
 Senator Capehart had been calling on the President Kennedy to either invade or blockade Cuba, as part of a campaign tour .
 From May 1962, the United States had been expanding an IRBM base in Turkey . The U.S. was expanding a base there from May 1962 .
 The USSR was attempting to establish a peace treaty with the Deutsche Demokratishe Republik which would have formally acknowledged that nation . The treaty created a politically problematic situation for NATO member nations, particularly the Allies .
 This action by the USSR would have meant that West Berlin would be contained within a sovereign and unfriendly nation, making all travel to and from West Berlin difficult if not completely impossible .
 There was, however, no evidence of Soviet desire to use the developing crisis as a negotiating position, only our American perception of it . There was no evidence that the Soviet Union was interested in using the crisis as negotiating position .
 The USSR was involved in supplying Cuba with weapons, which as of the October 15, the U.N. believed to merely be for defense against an invasion force . Also, the United Nations believed that the weapons were merely for defense .
 The Cuban Premier, Fidel Castro, is “adopting a cautious policy” by not resisting the CIA flyovers, or being caught attempting to subvert any governments of fellow Caribbean nations, the Times staff writer says .
 The search for illegal arms, those considered by President Kennedy to be of offensive capability so close to America, was unsuccessful . The reporter continued to write that all Cuban forces were going out of their way to avoid intrusive U.S. surveillance .
 The United States held onto an air of desire to control the proceedings for discussion of either West Berlin or a crisis arising in Cuba . Throughout the UN General Assembly meeting the U.S. held onto the air of . desire to . control the . proceedings .
 Three U.S. naval aircraft flew over Cuban territorial waters “provocatively and repeatedly” over three merchant vessels, Cuban officials said . The Times merely reported that Cuban officials stated that three United States naval aircraft were flying over Cuban waters .
 The Times offered no other reports of merit to the developing crisis over Soviet involvement in Cuban offensive weapons for October 16 or 17 .
 President Kennedy learned about the nearly launch-ready nuclear missiles in Cuba . Meanwhile, in the White House on the morning of October 16, Kennedy learned of the missile threat . The Cuban missiles were nearly ready to launch .
 The President set up a group of senior national security advisors, established as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The group would not be officially signed into existence until October 22 .
 Munton and Welch note that at the beginning of the crisis ExComm was very influential to the President . Yet as the period of crisis continued President Kennedy become more confident and relied less on a consensus .
 The Times had no knowledge of the administration’s immediate discussions regarding photographs taken by the U-2 .
 The Times missed the irony of ExComm’s initial suggestions of launching a preemptive strike against the missile and Surface-to-Air Missile installations . Days before the President was, in the words of the Times’ reporter, “assailing” Senator Capehart for
 The Times wrote that the Kremlin warned the United States that any action taken against Cuba would mean a war with the Soviets . But negotiations about Berlin were still welcomed, the Times wrote .
 The article continued to emphasize the significance of West Berlin in conjunction with the Soviet expansion into Cuba . The article also emphasized the importance of the West Berlin role .
 What the Times did not report was continued CIA discoveries on the United States’s southern island neighbor .
 The Times and the reporter misunderstood why the response took place . But what the Times and a reporter misunderstood was why it took place.
 The Times believed that the squadron’s move was to ensure air superiority against Cuban acquisition of Soviet MiGs . The Times believes that the move was intended to protect air superiority .
 The fact that Russian forces were amassed in Cuba to install nuclear weapons just over the horizon from the U.S. were not even implied . Russia's presence in Cuba was not mentioned in the context .
 The accumulation was really in response to the Russian forces on the island, says CNN.com . But the accumulation of the weapons was really a response to Russian forces .
 The Times had no pertinent news stories for either day clearly stated in conjunction with Cuba . October 20 and 21 finished the first week of the ‘Thirteen Days’ The Times has no news stories clearly stating that Cuba is Cuba .
 The National Security Council was briefed on the developing crisis in Cuba on Saturday . ExComm’s suggestion to blockade the Communist country was rejected .
 President Kennedy quit his three-day campaign tour early due to alleged sickness . He returned to Washington, consulted with the Air Force Tactical Air Command and reached the conclusion that an air strike and naval blockade would not fully achieve the objectives of the United States .
 The first reported Latin American countries siding with the U.S. against Cuba, the second denied any connection to war games off Puerto Rico . The first and second denied the connection to the games .
 As many as seventy-five strike aircraft had been transferred to Florida in a ready capacity . St. Petersburg noted that as many as 70 aircraft had already been transferred .
 "n undisclosed" number of United States Marines had accrued in Key West, the Times reported .
 October 22 would be the day that the entire world unequivocally learned the American position regarding Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The newspaper noted Congress’ concern and authorization for the President to act in the Caribbean, albeit for alleged war games taking place in Puerto Rico .
 The speech highlighted the knowledge of U.S. officials of the weapons residing in Cuba, the decision to impose an air and naval blockade of Cuba and President Kennedy’s desire to bring Cuba, and its Soviet suppliers into compliance with American goals .
 An article ran in the Times that offered a brief preview of what citizens could expect from the evening’s Presidential address, but no reader could have possibly anticipated the call for blockade .
 The average American experienced a sensation unlike any other during the Cold War . Americans learned the Soviet Union had reached the closest distance to the U.S. homeland ever .
 From October 14 to 22, the Times ran merely ten truly pertinent stories about the developing crisis in the small island country . The Times ran just ten truly compelling stories .
 After President Kennedy’s national address the stories printed rose to twenty-seven, on the front page alone, from October 23 to 28 . However, after the president's national address, the stories were printed .
 The USSR heralded the blockade as an ‘Armed Fist’ Over Cuba’as the blockade formed around the small nation . However, the Times noted the USSR’s return verbal volley when the blockade was heralded by the Soviets .
 October 24 was a tense time as the blockade was actively in full effect . The blockade was active during the night of October 24 .
 The attitude of the Times reporter in his article, “Khrushchev’s Misjudgment on Cuba,” once again displayed the complete lack of information available, or failure to connect information .
 The reporter writes that the Soviet Premier failed to anticipate the character of President Kennedy and did not understand the strength of American will . The reporter says the Soviet premier failed to predict the character .
 The U.S. thought the Cuban blockade derailed Soviet intentions to force the President to acquiesce on West Berlin . A front page article declared the Unites States thought the blockade derailed the Soviet intentions .
 Khrushchev felt the President had left him some breathing room in which he could maneuver . Instead, he felt he had room to maneuver . The Soviet Premier felt he could get more room from the President .
 The following day, October 25, was relatively tense but uneventful, as the first ship boarded did not occur until October 26 . The next day was October 26, when the first ships were boarded .
 The Kremlin had desired not to put fully to test the U.S. and its blockade, and expressed the desire by turning back several ships which were already in route to Cuba . The Kremlin wanted not to be tested by the blockade .
 The front page of the next day’s edition of the Times, October 27, reported a warning from the Capitol to the Soviet Union not to continue testing the United States . The next day, the Times reported that the U.S. had issued a warning .
 The United States was ready to escalate to armed conflict over Cuba, given the provocation . The U.S. is ready to respond to the provocation, the U.K. says .
 U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey could be exchanged in order to achieve removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Instead of the long-held assumption for some type of deal regarding West Berlin, the deal was discussed in the Times .
 The Times missed the opportunity to report on a missing U.S. U-2 spy plane shot down in Cuba by Castro’s forces . On October 28, a report heralded the crisis was over .
 The front page looked to protesters in front of the White House and how Midwestern votes would be affected by the crisis . The air of completion resounded throughout the newspaper .
 The missiles were to leave Cuba and the blockade withdrawn, though patrols continued . The blockade was to be withdrawn, but patrols continued.
 The world did not end that week . The U.S. felt it achieved a well deserved victory over the Soviet Union and its Communist ally, Cuba .
 The reporters wrote their understanding of the crisis from October 21 to 28 . They wrote about the crisis in Haiti .
 At no point did the reporters suggest the events could have begun on October 14 .
 The dismantling of missiles could take many months, the Times said . Never did the Times imply the dismantling could take months .
 The reports of the week careened through the frightening week and never offered an article truly fearful of a view other than that of assured United States victory . The New York Times never offered a view of the U.S. victory .
 The Times had no knowledge from the Soviet Union or on the ground in Cuba . That limited the information the Times could report to the public .
 Even when the Times had the information available to reporters, the paper often misreported it . The paper often misunderstood it and misreported the information .
 The paper of record in America looked with too tight a focus at the events on the small Caribbean nation of Cuba, which caused the Times’ articles to report incompletely the events .
 The United States, the United Kingdom and France, naturally excluding Russia . The United Kingdom, the U.S. and the United States are the only countries without Russia .
 There is a letter to the editor published on the 17th on page 38 from a political science professor, but it is only an opinion and thought exercise regarding US-Cuban relations .
 No portion of this text may be used or reproduced in any manner without the express written consent of the author .