 President Kennedy made a TV address on October 22, 1962, explaining his decision to enact a naval blockade around Cuba . Kennedy made it clear the United States was prepared to use military force if necessary .
 Many people feared the world was on the brink of war, nuclear war . Following this news, many people feared that the world would be on the verge of war .
 Each side was fully prepared to retaliate, knowing fully that would result in total annihilation of both sides . Both sides were fully prepared for retaliation, knowing that would be the result of total annihilation .
 The actions of Castro, USA and Soviet Union that help led to the October Crisis in 1962 are listed in the table .
 YELLOW to indicate the actions taken by Castro that made the USA think he was a Communist . BLUE to indicate that the USA helped push Castro into a relationship with the Soviet Union . YELOW indicates the actions made by the USA to help push Castro .
 In early October, a U2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba spots sites installing nuclear missiles . The U2 mission was a U.2 mission to find out about the sites .
 Select two options, which you think are the best options for the President to follow . Rate each option from 1 to 5 and provide an explanation for each of your ratings using you background knowledge and the sources provided .
 The Cuban Missile crisis comes to an end when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agrees to remove Russian missiles from Cuba in exchange for a promise from the U.S. to respect Cuba's territorial sovereignty .
 This ended nearly two weeks of anxiety and tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union that came close to provoking a nuclear conflict . The United States and Soviet Union were at risk of a nuclear war .
 Analyse the part played by Cuba in the development of the Cold War . Examine the role of Cuba in developing the Soviet-Cuba relationship .
 Two leaders were chosen from a different region in the development of the Cold War between 1953 and 1964 . Compare and contrast the role of two leaders, each chosen from different region .
 Compare and contrast the significance of leaders in two Cold War conflicts, each chosen from a different region, between 1950 and 1963 . The significance of each leader in each conflict has been compared to that of the Cold War era .