 It is clear now, though, that this was not Khrushchev's principal reason for acting as he did, which suggests how easily historians can jump to premature conclusions . It's clear now that this is not the reason for his actions .
 The Cuban missile crisis also shows how badly great powers can miscalculate when tensions are high and the stakes are great . More significantly, it also shows .
 Khrushchev intended his missile deployment chiefly as an effort, improbable as this might seem, to spread revolution throughout Latin America . The consequences, as they did, can surprise everyone .
 He and his advisers had been surprised, but then excited, when a Marxist-Leninist insurgency seized power in Cuba on its own, without all the pushing and prodding the Soviets had had to do to install communist regimes .
 It was enough that Cuba had gone communist spontaneously, without assistance from Moscow, in a way that seemed to confirm Marx's prophecy about the direction in which history was going . Cuba's communist revolution was enough for Marx's prediction .
 Eisenhower administration had broken diplomatic relations with Cuba, imposed economic sanctions, and begun plotting Castro's overthrow . Before it left office, the Eisenhower administration broke diplomatic relations and imposed sanctions .
 Kennedy allowed these plans to go forward with the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs landing of anti-Castro Cuban exiles . The event gave Khrushchev little reason for complacency or congratulation .
 As he saw it, the attempted invasion reflected counter-revolutionary resolve in Washington, he said . The next time it would surely be repeated, the next time with much greater force, he added .
 Eisenhower administration placed its own intermediate-range missiles in Britain, Italy, and Turkey, all aimed at the Soviet Union . Eisenhower administration had convinced itself that the ""missile gap"" did not exist . The United States could hardly object, because the U.S. had already placed its
 Kennedy and his advisers knew nothing of Khrushchev's reasoning . Those who survived were surprised to learn of it a quarter century later when the opening of Soviet archives began to reveal it .
 U-2s learned about the missile deployment in Cuba in mid-October, 1962, from the new mission the U.2s had been given of overflying the island . They saw the deployment as the most dangerous in a long sequence of provocations, extending all the way back
 The missiles would double the number of Soviet missiles capable of reaching the U.S. And this one, unlike the others, would at least double the current number .
 He could hardly have expected Americans not to respond, since he had sent the missiles secretly while lying to Kennedy about his intentions to do so . Kennedy lied to him about sending the missiles, but could hardly expect Americans to respond .
 He dispatched short-range missiles equipped with nuclear warheads that could only have been used to repel a landing by U.S. troops . He might have meant the intermediate-range missile was solely for deterrence .
 He risked his own revolution, his country, and possibly the world on its behalf . Castro was so emotionally committed to the Castro revolution that he risked his country's revolution .
 Lenin and Stalin rarely allowed emotions to determine their revolutionary priorities . But so too, of course, were those of those who fought for their country .
 Khrushchev wielded a far greater capacity for destruction than they ever did, but he behaved with far less responsibility . He behaved with less responsibility than they did in the 1960s .
 He was like a petulant child playing with a loaded gun, but he wound up getting some of what he wanted .
 The U.S. had between eight and seventeen times the number of usable nuclear weapons that the Soviet Union did . Despite what was still an overwhelming American advantage in nuclear warheads and delivery systems, the prospect of even one or two Soviet missiles hitting American targets was sufficient to persuade Kennedy to pledge
 Kennedy promised, secretly, to dismantle the American intermediate-range missiles in Turkey . Khrushchev hoped to make a visible part of the deal . Kennedy also promised to dismantle U.S. missiles .
 The Cuban missile crisis, in a larger sense, served much the same function that blinded and burned birds did for the American and Soviet observers of the first thermonuclear bomb tests a decade earlier . Fidel Castro, whom the missiles had been sent to protect, was still alive, well,
 The Cold War convinced everyone involved in it that the weapons each side developed during the Cold War posed a greater threat to both sides than the United States and the Soviet Union did to one another . It persuaded everyone, including Castro, to have been willing to die in a nuclear war .
 D-Day + 1, 16 September 1944 Souvenir Hunting on Peleliu, September 1944 . Naipaul on writing fiction and nonfiction .