 International events rarely have a profound impact on images of 40 percent of the population in most countries . People's likes or dislikes of otheT nations (Deutsch even within one or two decades) can be significant differences .
 This is the classic case of image inconclusive, the U.S. and the United States.R. following the Cuban confrontagruity, which sometimes gives rise to psychological dissonance .
 First, the affective dimension consists of pinion data from Britain, France and West Germany people's likes and dislikes of the nation in question . Second, the cognitive component consists of the inprimarily this function of compensation in its effect dividual's beliefs about the country .
 The cognitive dion public images of the two superpowers mension is sub-divided into beliefs about national capabilities and intentions . The public image of the U.S. and the world's superpowers is broken down into two categories .
 Before Cuban crisis, U.S. military and scientific capabilities were believed by many of America's friendly . The Soviet Union was believed to be well behind those of the United States .
 More people believed that America fostered are exceptionally durable and are only altered under peace than believed that the Soviet Union did so; and conditions of extreme provocation . On the other hand, widely liked than the . Soviet Union; in terms of intencertain aspects of people's images of foreign
 With data combined for the three nations, it appears the early part of 1963, when the first survey followthat Cuba served to restore the balance in favor of the Cuban missile confrontation .
 60 RESPONDING " United States AHEAD" shifts into line with the general level of feelings toward the two superpowers .
 Let us examine more closely the effect of the Cuban crisis on public opinion . Let's examine the impact of the crisis on the Cuban situation .
 To characterize public response to Cuba, we can focus on relative ""gains"" or ""losses"" attributed to each of the two major powers by the citizens of other na20 tions . CHANGES in NATION AFFECT SPUTNIK .
 The U.S. and the 10 Soviet Union confront each other in the 1980s and 1990s . The confrontation stimulated people to change their opinions of the two countries, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Soviet-American fifths of the British, French and West German respond military strength . Over three of the Soviet-U.S. fifths would have responded to the threat posed posed by the West .
 Data are averaged for surveys conducted in Great Britain, France, West Germany and West Germany .
 Most of the people who claimed Using the previously-cited criteria employed by to have changed their opinions changed their opinion as a result .
 The U.S. and the Castro government had been simmering since 1959 . The crisis itself lasted two weeks . Both nations were modified for approximately two weeks before the crisis began .
 But this does not account for all of the change . Furthermore, only gained from the confrontation. six days elapsed from the time that President Ken
 Cuban confrontation cannot be considered a cuent interpretations of the role of each disputant . From the perspective of public visibility, then, underlying the opinion shifts were substantially differthe Cuban confrontation .
 Most mulative event, for it did not "take place over a long of the people who had altered their views of the Unitperiod of time, such as four years or more"" (Deutsch ed States said that they had done so because the U.S. had shown strength
 Deutsch and MerSoviet Union indicated that it was because the ritt point to shifts in governmental policy . Most As a second characteristic of events likely to effect of the people who had modified their opinions of the changes in feelings toward nations .
 The data do permit consideration of consideration of play down the victory . onlookers throughout the the problem of congruence or balance among some of world were not bombarded with symbols and attitudes that comprise a person's total image of a sages .
 Western Europeans who expressed gen. erally favorable feelings about America or the Soviet . That the crisis did not fulfill the third criterion, Union significantly more frequently said that their that of being spectacular, would seem more difficult opinions of that nation changed .
 There is evidence sult of Cuba than did people with relatively unfavorable views of Cuba . Yet even on this point there is evidence that the event did not have negative feelings .
 In short, the opinion changes that did stimulate substantial shifts in opinion. "In short, it was a significant shift in opinion," the author says .
 Europeans recognized that the Cuban crisis was fective orientation toward the two nations, an indiprecipitated when one nuclear power challenged ancation that the event did not serve to inject dissonant other . The Soviet decision to remove the missiles information into the attitude complex referred to as from Cuba
 The outcome of the confrontation (and possibly the lack CAPABILITY AND INTENTIONS of American boasting) diminished its potentially explosive qualities in weeks that followed .
 If the three European nations are considered as a unit, the tension may also explain then the Cuban crisis resulted in increased congruity . This atmosphere of relieved tension may explain then then the crisis resulted .
 Of those rivals and beliefs about national capabilities, both scipeople who registered a change of viewpoint, the entific and military. Of those . Both scipesople who register a change in viewpoint, both . registered a . change of view .
 After Cuba crisis, public belief in American military and scientific leader became predominant sentiment . Cuban confrontaship became the predominant sentiment, but not the Soviet Union did .
 The mismissile crisis gave these people a reason for believing sile crisis had an impact on these beliefs also . The mismissionile crisis also gave them a reason to believe sile .
 In Febthat which their feelings predisposed them to believe, ruary, 1963, a number of British, French and West that America was more powerful than the Soviet German citizens .
 The rebest to promote peace was higher than the previous sponse uniformly . Even so, the event did not bring about this rebest . Even though, the rebest was high, it did not promote peace .
 In the first months of 1963 as average as average, but Soviet motives were also perceived to be well as in the next couple of years, a fairly significant more pacific than normal after its withdrawal of misnumber of West Europeans .
 In fact, net increases in British and French beFrance) continued to like the United States, but also liefs about national peace intentions .
 As long as this condition expact than the fact that the United States had not takisted, people were more or less free to come to their en military action when threatened by missiles .
 Sciencommented that Cuba decreased the likelihood of tific achievements; and military might—a person who nuclear war for the near future . For each cognitive area-peace intentions; . peace intentions; and . military might; . for each cognitive . area- peace intentions .
 If balance among attitudes is the most peaceful intentions; America is more advanced sciendesirable psychological state, there appeared to be littifically than the Soviet Union . The United States tle in the Cuban situation working in opposition to is the stronger of the two superpowers .
 With respect to U.S. military leadership, Cuba proved to be the turning point in European opinion . The Cuban crisis was a turning point for European opinion on the US military leadership . Cuba proved a key factor in Europe's view of the US in the Cold War .
 NOTES the missile crisis and throughout the latter part of the sixties, more British, French and West Germans (combined 1.1.5 million) were involved .
 The data base for the present study consists of the national total) believed in American military dominance . More Americans believed in the U.S. military dominance than those in Britain .
 Cuba spurred a France and West Germany as part of the U.S. temporary shift in beliefs about the relative standing of Information Agency's program of research into public science .
 USIA surveys are housed at the Roper Public Opinion Research Center, Williams College . Codepart of European public opinion. books and data for the USIA survey .
 The ""average" includes data from all USIA surveys asking Williamstown, Massachusetts, this question prior to the Cuban missile confrontation, beginning in 1957 . The average is based on data from USIA survey conducted in 1957 and 1958 .
 The ""average"" includes data from all USIA surveys asking tabular data, can be obtained from the author upon rethis question, beginning in 1958 and ending in 1962, prior quest .
 Martin Abravanel, 1176 to the Cuban confrontation, was a writer of 1176 . He wrote a book of letters to the Spanish king about the Cuban crisis .
 Public Opinion and the Developan Perspectives On International Affairs. Public Opinion . Public Opinion is a forum for discussion of international affairs .