 Presidents Day originated as a holiday to celebrate George Washington’s birthday on February 22nd . Presidents Day was originally a day to celebrate Washington's birthday .
 As a result of the Uniform Monday Holiday Act of 1968, the holiday was changed to third Monday in February .
 Abraham Lincoln's birthday is ten days before Washington’s on February 12th . While George Washington commemorates Washington, it also honors Abraham Lincoln .
 Ronald Reagan’s birthday on February 6th and William Henry Harrison on February 9th . Ronald Reagan's birthday is on February 5th . William H. Harrison was born on February 8th .
 In recent years, the Central Intelligence Agency has been declassifying documents and releasing historical collections giving the public access to fascinating and relatively unknown United States history .
 GPO’s book collections have been the topic of previous blog posts . These collections are made available through GPO's bookstore .
 The CIA’s predecessor, the Central Intelligence Group, was created after World War II in response to the success and usefulness of intelligence gathering during the war . The CIA was created in 1945 after the war, and the CIA was established in 1947 .
 Admiral Sidney W Souers, General Hoyt S Vandenberg, Admiral Roscoe H Hillenkoetter and General William Bedell Smith accepted President Harry S Truman’s challenge to craft an intelligence organization .
 Each man marked his tenure with his unique brand of leadership that provided his successor with the foundation needed for the next step toward the Central Intelligence Agency .
 They ran the gamut of choosing a secretary to responding to a Presidential question to an evening social event with various dignitaries .
 The book is an account of the information sharing process between the intelligence community and Presidential candidates and Presidents-elect during campaigns and administration transitions . It is an historical account of sharing information between candidates and presidents .
 The early chapters when this practice was not yet well-established provide the greatest insight to the briefing process . Early chapters provide the most insight to how briefing process began .
 Richard Nixon was running against then-Senator John F Kennedy in the 1960 election . Richard Nixon is the author of a new book, "Richard Nixon"
 At the time, there were concerns regarding the intelligence briefings on Cuba and the U.S.’s policy towards the Castro government . The Cuban government was overthrown by the United States .
 The recent revolution in Cuba that led to a Soviet-supported communist government was a hot topic during the election and the Presidential debates . The Cuban revolution led to the Soviet-backed communist government .
 Since Nixon was running for President while serving as Vice President, he was privy to information on the covert actions that had been underway in Cuba during the Eisenhower administration .
 Vice President Nixon raised concerns over what information was shared with Kennedy by the DCI Allen Dulles and how it could affect Kennedy’s positions during the election .
 This was the first time the CIA was part of a political campaign raising questions on which topics and to what extent Presidential candidates should be briefed . The CIA was involved in the campaign for President Barack Obama .
 Eisenhower administration realized that covert action planning on Cuba could be a political bombshell . Eisenhower administration had realized it could be political bombshell in October . Cuba liberation issue came to a head in October, Eisenhower administration said .
 Allen Dulles was asked whether Kennedy and LBJ were being provided information on covert action projects, specifically those related to Cuba . The vice president pulled the DCI aside to ask him if Kennedy and his running mate, Senator Lyndon Johnson, were being given information .
 Dulles said Kennedy was being told a little but not too much . Dulles gave a carefully crafted answer to the Kennedy question .
 Nixon reacted strongly to Dulles’s reply, saying, “Don’t tell anything.” According to former Agency officials familiar with the exchange, . Nixon responded strongly to the remark .
 The White House denied Kennedy had been told of any plans for an invasion of Cuba before the election . This charge prompted a formal press release from the White House on 20 March 1962 denying the charge .
 Nixon's comments were apparently based on a misunderstanding of what was included in the briefings he had given Kennedy . The White House denied the claims, backed up by Dulles, by then a former DCI, who explained that Nixon’s comments were a misunderstanding .
 Former DCI Allen Dulles led a press briefing on the information the CIA provided Kennedy and Johnson . Dulles was the CIA's chief CIA director .
 Our guest blogger is Emma Wojtowicz, Public Relations Specialist in GPO’s Office of Public Affairs . Emma is a public relations specialist for GPO .
 Critical thinking is a useful tool for academics, business people, or anyone else needing to analyze a particular scenario or set of evidence . The book explores the advantages of critical thinking over inductive or deductive reasoning .
 The absence of critical thinking can result in a major intelligence failure, says the author of a case study . Because I’m not a heavily abstract thinker, I found the author’s case study very useful in getting a better handle on how the case study was developed .
 American intelligence analysts had received so much false or exaggerated information on Soviet military activities that they seemed to believe that any such reports had to be untrue .
 Disinformation on the part of the Soviets added to the analysts’ disinclination to think critically about the intelligence they were receiving, so the discovery of offensive Soviet missiles was a total surprise to them .
 The book draws analogies to the failure of intelligence during the lead up to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and in the 2002 failure to detect the absence of weapons of mass destruction prior to the second U.S. war with Iraq .