 People anxiously awaited the outcome of a harrowing political, diplomatic and military confrontation that threatened to end in a nuclear exchange between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Across the globe, people anxiously waited for the outcome .
 President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev averted war in 1960s and 1961 . JFK was assassinated by Soviet Union in 1961 . Nikita was the prime minister of the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 Soviet missiles were only powerful enough to be launched against Europe . The missiles were launched against the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 United States missiles were capable of striking the entire Soviet Union . The U.S. missiles were able to strike the whole Soviet Union with Soviet Union missiles .
 In April 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba . The missiles were placed in Cuba in 1962 .
 In mid-July of 1962, the Soviet Union began its buildup of offensive weapons in Cuba . The Soviet Union also began building up offensive weapons against Cuba .
 The real tension lies in how the decisions were made, and how these young men handled the toughest dilemma anyone could face . That’s where the real tension is in how decisions are made .
 When you meet these people, who in some ways have come to seem larger than life, and you hear their fears in their own words, you get a very frightening sense of the incomprehensible fire power and military might that each side was marshalling .
 The nuclear guns were loaded on both sides in a stare down of global proportions, and there’s never been anything like it . The nuclear arms race was on the brink of war, but it was never before before .
 Thirteen Days now joins that vast body of work as one view of the event . Th13 Days is one of many works of art that chronicles the fall of the Great Depression .
 "It is drawn from the record, but narrowed and focused and dramatised to create a coherent, accessible and entertaining story"
 We don't offer this film as the final word or definitive document, but rather as a departure point to encourage conversation and exploration of leadership in the nuclear age whose awful spectre we all still live under . We don’t offer it as a final word but as the departure point
 Peter Almond stresses that the film should be seen as a departure point for conversation and exploration . Almond: "The film is not just about a movie, but it's about a point of conversation"
 Film revolves around the drama of the real possibility that war might break out during those days in 1962 .
 Roger Donaldson, the director, describes the film as a political thriller . The film is based on a series of political themes .
 Look again at the key events which you used earlier to compare with the story told in Thirteen Days . The story is told in the new book, "Thirteen Days"
 We are shown the events unfolding in the White House, there must have been similar dramas occurring in the Kremlin and Havana . Just as we are shown in the U.S. there must also be similar dramas in Russia and Havana, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The events shown in the film Thirteen Days reveal just how close the world came to nuclear war . The events that are shown in Th13 Days reveal how close they came to war .
 Key to the solution of the Crisis was the reaction of John F Kennedy, his brother Robert and Nikita Khruschev . Key to solving the crisis was the response of the three Kennedy brothers .
 Thirteen Days only represents the American point of view of the crisis . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in the Middle East .
 We see the crisis develop through the eyes of the president and his brother and also Ken O’Donnell, the presidential aide . We also see the president's brother and the aide's brother .
 As you look through each site think about who created it and what their particular attitude to the events might be . Think about who you are looking at each site and what you think about .