 Activating this button will toggle the display of additional content . Use this button to view the content of this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on Slate .
 Castro didn’t let anybody copy the documents, but he did say that he would release them in time for next year’s 40th anniversary of the crisis . Castro said that he will release the documents in time to next year's 40th . anniversary .
 If Castro follows through on that pledge, Slate will link to them here . Slate will feature them if he follows through .
 Castro's claim to have been made by the Commandante en Jefe of the U.S. State Department . But he says there's probably something to Castro’s claim . Castro: “I'm sure there's something to his claim.”
 Let's assume that the Cubans really did want to make public the missiles’ existence . Let’s assume they really did .
 Castro and Aragones had mentioned this before, at a conference in 1992, but had never before brandished documents . Castro said it was a 'very serious mistake' by the Spanish government .
 At a 1987 conference, a Soviet official had asked former Kennedy aides what the U.S. reaction might have been if the Soviet Union had announced prior to the crisis that it would defend Cuba with nuclear missiles .
 The Soviets' secrecy and lies gave Kennedy the moral high ground during the crisis . Even more than the presence of the missiles, it was the Soviets’ secrecy and . lies .
 The Soviet Union needed to have a balance of power against the U.S., against the similar United States missiles in Turkey and elsewhere, and agreed, out of internationalist feeling, and because the Soviets had supported us against the American blockade .
 They had beaten Hitler, they had entered Berlin, had already had a revolution that already lasted 45 years . The revolution had already been 45 years long, they said .
 Political pressures on Kennedy were already very great, and the Cold War was at its height . Remember, the political pressures on JFK were already great .
 Perhaps Kennedy would have moved more quickly to the secret Turkey-for-Cuba trade that resolved the missile crisis . The deal ultimately resolved the crisis .
 Without the shock of discovery, neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev might have felt the sense of events spiraling out of control that led both to risk humiliation rather than Armageddon . Then again, without the shock, neither of them might have been able to feel the sense that events spiraled out