 Thereafter the Cold War entered a more stable phase, as the superpowers shifted from direct confrontation to a series of proxy wars fought over the ensuing generation throughout the developing world . The Cold War began in the 1950s, when superpowers began to engage in proxy wars .
 Washington and Moscow each recognized a need for diffusing their mutual tensions in the wake of the crisis . European and Asian counterparts generally developed a greater desire for an alternative to seemingly moribund Soviet and United States leadership .
 Cuba was the focus of the crisis, but the roots of this conflict lay in long-standing Soviet and U.S. antagonism and insecurities . The roots of Cuba's crisis lay in Soviet and United States antagonism .
 The country had become a thorn in the side of U.S. leaders following Fidel Castro's seizure of power in 1959 . Castro seized power in Cuba in 1959 and has since ruled the country since then .
 Analysts in Washington debated Castro's faith in communism, but U.S. policy makers believed reputation in Latin America could not tolerate a truly radical state only ninety miles from Florida .
 Eisenhower endorsed Castro's overthrow as early as January 1960, a year before breaking diplomatic relations with his regime . President Dwight D Eisenhower endorsed the overthrow of Castro's regime in January 1960 .
 Plans for a U.S.-supported invasion by Cuban exiles were already advanced, and the new president approved the operation with minimal oversight . John F Kennedy took office the following year vowing to "oppose aggression or subversion"
 The failed Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961 proved one of Kennedy's greatest fiascos . The failed attempt to invade the U.S. was one of the biggest failures of his presidency .
 He publicly took full responsibility but swore thereafter to hold more tightly to the reins of power . He swore thereafter that he would not allow others to drive his administration to ruin .
 Kennedy appointed his most trusted advisors, including his brother, to oversee Cuba policy . He made Castro's removal one of his highest priorities in Cuba . Kennedy's brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, was appointed to oversee Cuban policy .
 Cuba's affect on U.S. security and prestige, the president believed, threatened to tilt the Cold War's delicate balance in communism's favor . The president believed the Cuban influence threatened to tip the balance in the Cold war's balance in communist's favor.
 Castro believed U.S. leaders sought his fall from power, sought Moscow's protection . The move was a move the Soviets embraced . Castro believed the United States was trying to kill him .
 Nikita Khrushchev sought parity in U.S.-Soviet relations by the early 1960s . He believed Washington's greater nuclear strength, including its nuclear missiles stationed along the Soviet border in Turkey, ensured that the Americans held the better hand .
 The two communist leaders decided in May 1962 to deploy to Cuba some eighty nuclear missiles, with range enough to place virtually the entire continental U.S. within Moscow's sights .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba offered the Kremlin a true first-strike capability, including the ability to destroy Washington without warning . America's missile deterrent was decimated by the Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy's intelligence team incorrectly determined a full five months after Khrushchev ordered the deployment of the missile deployment . Kennedy's team mistakenly determined the move was made five months later . Kennedy: Surely the Kremlin would not risk this dangerous move?
 Kennedy was infuriated to learn that a U.S. spy plane captured photos of Soviet missile-site construction in Cuba . Kennedy was angered by the photos .
 On 22 October Kennedy announced a ""quarantine"" around Cuba . While his more hawkish advisors called for an immediate strike, on 22 October he announced a 'quarantine'
 Soviet ships eventually halted just short of the quarantine line two days later . Each side continued to prepare for war in Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy and Anatoly Dobrynin developed a usable compromise . Public blustering continued, but private discussions led to a compromise .
 By 28 October full-scale war had been averted, though revelations during the late 1990s demonstrated that nuclear war was in fact closer than ever realized . Nuclear war was averted by 28 October .
 Soviet commanders in Cuba had full authorization to employ nuclear arms in defense against a U.S. invasion . One can only imagine the consequences of United States landing forces in Cuba being met with nuclear fireballs .
 It would take several years and millions in aid before he would trust the Soviets again . The Soviet Union would have to wait for years to trust the country again .
 The ramifications of this near brush with disaster dramatically changed the course of the Cold War, and Europe's role in the conflict especially . The consequences of the near-collapse in the 1950s and '60s were dramatic .
 Kennedy was shaken by the nearness of the conflict and resolved thereafter to limit the risk of nuclear warfare . Kennedy proved shaken by near-involvement of nuclear war and resolved to limit risk of war .
 He authorized a direct ""hot line"" between the White House and the Kremlin so that leaders could communicate directly during any future crisis . The U.S.-led ban on atmospheric nuclear tests followed .
 In retrospect, a decreased U.S. emphasis on potential flash points of superpower conflict followed as well, replaced by low-scale responses to communist insurgencies throughout the formerly colonized world . The U.K. responded to the communist insurgency in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Policy makers would put this ""flexible response"" strategy to the test without fear of a nuclear exchange . In areas such as Southeast Asia and Central America, U.S. policy makers would be able to put this strategy to test . The United States would then use it in areas such
 Soviet leaders drew different conclusions from the conflict, shaped by their perception that they had lost the confrontation because of the disparity of power that the missile deployment in Cuba had been designed to eliminate .
 What was needed was a ""relaxation of tension,"" he told his U.S. counterpart . What is needed is a "relaxed relaxation of tension"
 By the mid-1970s neither side could be said to have had a real advantage in this arena, especially as each possessed the ability to destroy the other numerous times over . Neither side could say they had an advantage in the arena .
 Khrushchev did not survive in power long enough to oversee this transformation, but was instead deposed in October 1964 .
 The great irony of Khrushchev's departure is that he ultimately left the Soviet Union with the very international stability, built on a foundation of nuclear parity, that he had long sought . The burden of matching the wealthier Americans would eventually cripple the Soviet economy, he says .
 Chinese leaders forged ahead with their own nascent nuclear program in its wake, determined never again to let Moscow take the lead in the East–West conflict .
 France's Charles de Gaulle would not have put the idea any differently . The idea was put forward by the French president of France in 1964 .
 He rejected the Limited Test Ban Treaty as a U.S.–Soviet ploy to limit France's right to possess its own arms . Within a year he removed his military from full participation in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and vetoed Britain's application for entry into the European Common Market .
 Cuba proved to de Gaulle that an independent strong France was needed for a true balance of powers, even if limits on French international cooperation followed . Cuba proved that an independently strong France needed to balance the world's powers .
 Macmillan's government was particularly infuriated with Washington's public expectation of unwavering support during the Cuban crisis . But unlike de Gaulle, British analysts determined to work to reform superpower relations from within rather than to break outright .
 Washington threatened cancellation of its promised Skybolt missile in December 1962 . The U.S. and U.K. threatened to cancel the missile in response to the threat .
 Britain's nuclear deterrent, its sole remaining claim to great power status, required this U.S. aid . Macmillan ultimately persuaded Kennedy to supply Polaris missiles in their place .
 The damage to their relationship of Cuba and Skybolt was immense, leading British leaders too to fear Washington's rising hegemony . Britain's relationship with Cuba was damaged by the loss of Skybolt .
 Not every state chose nuclear parity as the answer to the East–West divide . Nuclear parity is a key part of the East-West divide, but not all states chose it .
 German leaders in particular made development of this fearful weapon impossible . They feared their geographic peril .
 Castro left the crisis the only real winner, while superpower bipolarity endured its death-blow . The crisis left the country's bipolarity enduring its death blow . Castro's death was the death blow, but the crisis was a real winner .
 The tense October days allowed the Cuban leader to solidify his tenuous hold on power . For the remaining decades of the Cold War, he remained a favorite ally in Moscow and Washington .