 It has been accepted for inclusion in NotiCen by an authorized administrator of UNM Digital Repository . The article has been published on the UNM digital Repository.
 The conference covered the period from the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion to the weeks after the resolution of the crisis in late October 1962 .
 This is the sixth time officials and historians from Cuba, the former Soviet Union and the U.S. have met to discuss the missile crisis . Cuba, Russia, Cuba and the United States have met on missile crisis in Cuba .
 Cuban government releases declassified documents from US, USSR, Poland, Hungary, Mexico, and other countries . Cuban government used the occasion to release declassified document .
 Robert S McNamara, secretary of defense; Theodore Sorensen, speechwriter. Theodore Soresen. Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and Gen. Robert S. McNamara. Robert E. S. Kennedy aides and advisors Arthur Schleinger Jr., Gen. Gen.
 William Y Smith, Richard Goodwin, Richard Brugioni, Dino Brugi and William Y. Smith were interviewed by State Department official Richard Goodwin . The panelists also spoke with State Department officials and CIA analysts . The group includes State Department, CIA, State Department and State Department
 Also participating were Wayne Smith, US Embassy political officer in Havana from 1958 to 1961, as well as officers involved in naval operations during the crisis . Wayne Smith was US Embassy Political Officer in Havana .
 The Russian delegation included former defense minister, former deputy foreign minister . Former Soviet military personnel on the ground in Cuba; naval personnel on board a Soviet submarine in quarantine zone .
 President Fidel Castro and Jose Ramon Fernandez, vice president of the Cuban Council of Ministers, led the Cuban delegation . Fidel Castro was the first Cuban president to visit the United States .
 The conference was closed to the media, but participants and organizers said much of the discussion centered on the process of decision-making and the likelihood of a nuclear exchange .
 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted air strike on missile sites . Soviet military directive mandating use of all available air defense forces in case of attack .
 U.S. documents declassified last year shed new light on Operation Mongoose . President Kennedy's high-priority covert-action campaign against Castro's revolutionary government . United States planned covert actions on eve of crisis .
 These actions were to be conducted in such a way as to provide the government with plausible deniability . The actions were intended to give the government 'possible deniability' These actions would be carried out in a way to provide plausible deniable information .
 The operations planned against Cuba included sabotage of electric-generating plants, mining harbors, assassinating Castro, and overthrowing the revolutionary government . The operations were planned to sabotage power plants, mines and mines .
 Operation Mongoose was still functioning while the Soviets were installing missiles in Cuba . Operation 'Mongoose' was still working during the Soviets' installation of missiles in the country .
 Among the declassified documents are the minutes of an Oct., 1962, meeting of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board . The minutes of the meeting are among the documents released .
 Analysis of Operation Mongoose published in Cuba's official government newspaper Granma . U.S. began planning a second invasion of Cuba in early 1962 to be carried out in October, report says .
 Kennedy administration was planning to arrange pretext for a U.S. invasion of Cuba, documents reveal . Kennedy told Khrushchev's son-inlaw that the United States would not "meddle with Cuba"
 Granma: U.S. had placed counterrevolutionary groups throughout the island . Attacks were planned from a base in Florida and from the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay in southeastern Cuba .
 During the first eight months of 1962, 5,000 acts of sabotage and terrorism were carried out, report says . Some of the attacks were to destroy sugar-cane crops as well as rural stores and schools .
 Several U.S. officials later said in their writings about Operation Mongoose that it was ineptly conceived and not seriously implemented . Several United States officials said it was not serious enough to implement .
 US participants at the conference said there were no plans for a U.S. invasion in 1962 . US participants said no plans were made for an invasion in the United States .
 McNamara: "If I had been a Cuban leader, I think I might have expected a United States invasion" McNamara said in 1989, ""If I . had been the Cuban leader I think ... might have been a U.S. invasion"
 Cuban state security forces from the Departamento de Seguridad del Estado gave then President Osvaldo Dorticos a report on Operation Patty Candela . Four months after the Bay of Pigs invasion, Cuban security forces gave the then President a report .
 CIA agents with support from the Guantanamo Naval Base were to assassinate Defense Minister Raul Castro in Santiago de Cuba in conjunction with various acts of sabotage . According to the report, the CIA agents were to assassinate Defense Minister in Cuba .
 The operation contemplated a fabricated attack on the base that would serve as justification for sending U.S. marines into Cuba proper . The operation also contemplated an attack that would be justified to send United States marines into the country .
 Much of the Cuban information on attacks and subversion emerged during a 1999 civil trial in Havana . The trial heard testimony concerning acts against Cuba carried out by the U.S. since the early 1960s .
 Cuba demanded US$181. billion in compensation from the US for property damage and injury and death suffered by some 5,500 Cubans attributed to acts of US sabotage and terrorism . Cuba demanded $181.billion in compensation as a result of trial .
 Castro has dismissed that interpretation, saying he would have preferred a U.S. invasion to nuclear holocaust . Castro has said he would prefer a United States invasion to a nuclear war . Castro: "I would rather have preferred an invasion of the United States to a war"
 The Cuban view is that Cuba wanted its formal military alliance with the USSR made public in advance . Cuba wanted the missile deployment made public, the Cuban view says .
 Castro wanted Khrushchev to inform Kennedy of the plans and sent Ernesto ""Che"" Guevarra to Moscow to discuss the proposed strategy with the Soviet premier . Castro wanted Kennedy to inform him of the plan .
 A Cuban military official said the secret placement of the missiles was a mistake because it allowed Kennedy to portray Khrushchev as deceptive and to take the moral high ground . A military official told the media during the conference that the secret missile placement was the mistake .
 Khrushchev could have presented the missile deployment as a justifiable response to the U.S. placement of missiles in Turkey . Sorensen said a public announcement ""would have tied our hands,"" because a. public announcement would have tied us up .
 Khrushchev considered Castro 'irrational' and feared he would draw the USSR and the U.S. into war . Castro's preference for a public announcement may appear the more rational strategy .
 The United States and USSR tended to regard the missile crisis as an event in the Cold War and to focus on arcane weapons strategies and bureaucratic crisis management . Cuba blames US, USSR for missile crisis .
 Hilsman dismissed Khrushchev's claim that his motive was to protect Cuba from a U.S. invasion . He said that he was protecting Cuba from the United States invasion . The Cuban government was overthrown in 1953 .
 From the Cuban perspective, the crisis began long before the missile deployment . It was an incident in a United States low-intensity war against the revolutionary government that stretched back to Eisenhower's administration in the early 1960s .
 Cuba was not to blame for the crisis, he said, and placed the onus on the U.S. policy of trying to destroy the revolution . Cuba is not the only country to blame, he added .
 The Cuban thesis is that Khrushchev took advantage of Cuba's call for a military alliance and material support to make a strategic move useful to the Soviets . The Soviets then negotiated their removal without consulting Cuba, Cuba says .