 The notion struck him while on a, visit to Bulgaria in May, 1962, and kept ‘churning’ in his head throughout that visit . The notion was struck while he was in Bulgaria in 1962 .
 Khrushchev insists his purpose was not to make or threaten war against the United States . He wanted to restrain the U.S. from "spurging military action" against Cuba, he says .
 Khrushchev writes that after the Soviet strategy was explained to him, the Cuban government would go along . He would be 1 talked to later, he writes, and after the . strategy explained, he would be talked to .
 Khrushchev says he put the plan to his colleagues in the Kremlin . Upon returning to Moscow from Bulgaria he put it to the Kremlin, he says . The plan was approved by Khrushchchev's colleagues .
 I said it would be foolish to expect the inevitable second invasion to be as badly planned and executed as the first . I said that it would not be wise to expect a repeat of the first invasion .
 Khrushchev does not tell us whether his missile ploy was questioned or challenged by any other Soviet leader . We have reason to believe that the missile crisis, to say . the least, was not uniformly regarded in Moscow as a Soviet triumph .
 There is evidence that it was one of several “harebrained schemes” chalked up to Khrushchev’s account by his Kremlin colleagues at the time of his overthrow in October, 1964 . On the contrary, I there is evidence .
 Khrushchev, now an unperson in his own country, is bent on vindicating his policies in Cuba . Note how subtly he reminds his former colleagues still in power that they shared in the decision to install Soviet missiles in Cuba.
 "All this is more understandable than the errors of fact that follow in his narrative. All this is ... more understandable," he writes .
 Khrushchev says it would not have made sense for the Russians to install surface-to-air antiaircraft missiles in Cuba before putting in ballistic missiles . The Russian leader says it wouldn't have been wise to put in missiles before putting them in Cuba .
 The Russians DID install surface-to-air missiles at a number of Cuban sites before their medium-range missiles . Khrushchev knew it at the time .
 The placement of SAMs near San Cristobal, in a particular trapozoidal pattern, prompted an American intelligence officer’s surmise that a missile base might be under construction .
 Dallistic missiles were going up inside the J jerimeter protected by the SAMs . That surmise was checked out during a U-2 swoop over San Cristobal on October 14, 1962 .
 The Kremlin may have argued that many more SAMs should have been dotI ted round the Cuban shoreline in order to keep the prying U-2 planes at a safe distance . Conceivably, the hindsight argument may have been made in the Kremlin .
 Khrushchev appears to argue that no SAMs were installed during the Cold War . But to argue, he says, is plain nonsense. It's plain nonsense, he writes .
 The Khrushchev narrative takes other liberties with the truth as we know it . The truth is not the truth, it is the truth of the world .
 The facts are ihat some 20 Cuba-bound Soviet ships stopped dead in the water and that a dozen or 14 of them later headed back to Europe rather than confront the blockade .
 Khrushchev’s account of the informal but highly important crisis talks between Robert Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin suffers from the same disabilities . Robert Kennedy's account of these informal but important talks suffers from same disabilities as those of the late leader .
 President assured the President that this military buildup was not of any significance and that Khrushchev would do nothing to disrupt the relationship of our two countries during this period prior to the [1962 Congressional] election . Further, he said, he could assure the President .
 Robert Kennedy met again with Dobrynin at the Soviet Embassy on the evening of October 23 . Robert Kennedy was assassinated at the age of 50 .
 This time the President’s brother knew that Khrushchev had lied even though he continued to believe that the Soviet ambassador himself was an honest man under f great strain who just possibly was duped .
 Dobrynin * made no attempt to deny or disavow his September 4 assurances . Dobrynkinin * said no attempt was made to disavow or deny the assurances .
 Russia would not install in Cuba any missiles capable of reaching the continental U.S., President Obama says . In fact, he confirmed them, repeating his pledge .
 President Kennedy implores Chairman Khrushchev to take into consideration the peculiarities of the American system . Kennedy: "Take into consideration [Krushchev's] peculiarities [of] American system"
 If the situation continues much longer, the President is not sure that the President will not overthrow him and overthrow him . Amovinan armv power.
 Thirteen Days is reported to have occurred in the U.S. during the summer of 2011 . It is reported that the story is not the same story as the book "Thirteen Days"
 We are dealing with dimming recollections of an old man, long since removed from power and from documents that might jog his memory, whose words have been filtered through translators . Yet I am persuaded that the conversation jr something like it, occurred .
 The actual conversation i involved not an appeal for help from a be1 leaguered President about to be overthrown I by a cabal of Pentagon hawks but a deliberI ate Kennedy gambit designed to hoodwink y the Russians .
 Russian sea captains cheerfully pulled back the tarpaulins covering the outwardbound missiles . American destroyers alongside counted them, 42 all told .
 Castro refused to give up the Ilyushin-28 bombers the Russians had sent him . Castro was in control of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Castro was furious that the missiles had been formally handed over to Cuba . These, * % unlike the missiles, had been given to Cuba and had to be formally handed back to the country .
 Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, recently returned from Moscow, advised the President to keep the heat on . Ambassador Thompson: "Keep the heat up"
 It was his theory that once Khrushchev had backed down by removing the missiles, 'he was not likely to balk much longer over removing the bombers, no matter how loudly Castro protested,' he said .
 The President sent word to Moscow repeatedly, through one channel or another, that if the bombers were not promptly removed the United States Air Force would destroy them . i i on the ground .
 The Kennedy gambit was, indeed, mentioned in my book, published almost five years ago . It was mentioned in a book published almost 5 years ago.
 Khrushchev, it now appears, was l one of those who believed it could happen . Khruschev, now appears to be one of the people who thought it could .
 Khrushchev evi\ i deritly still believes he was justified in sneaking those missiles into Cuba at the risk i of a third world war . The pity of it is that he evi . i deritsly still thinks he . still believes in sneaking . into Cuba .
 If that was indeed his motive, rather than a significant alteration of the balance of terror in Russia’s favor, the Kremlin was poorly informed about President Kennedy s plans and priorities . The Kremlin may have been unaware of President Kennedy's plans .
 There is no persuasive evidence that I have been able to discover* suggesting an imminent invasion/ of Cuba at the time .
 The Pentagon had its contingency plans, of course, just as it certainly has plans to invade China or Russia itself, filing cabinets full .
 President had developed a healthy skepticism about such ventures, as even the most gung-ho of U.S. military men had reason to understand . President had been badly burned by the Bay of Pigs experience .
 Khrushchev's shaky grasp of U.S. realities may also have contributed to his decision that the missiles must, after all, be withdrawn . The missiles were withdrawn from the Soviet Union .
 If he could believe that, as the Duke of Wellington once said to a gentlemen who addressed him as Mr Smith, he would believe anything . The Duke said to Wellington that he would not believe anything.