 A synopsis of the socio-political, cultural, and spiritual aspects of Jamaican life . Nonfiction . Biography . Cultural heritage, Nonfiction. History .
 It gives a snapshot of my childhood, family dynamics, and togetherness with vivid imagery and a colloquial feeling of post-colonial Jamaica . The book is based on a collection of photographs taken in Jamaica by the author .
 It is no exaggeration to speak of Cuba as the key to the Western Hemisphere . Cuba is no longer considered a major factor in the West Indies . Cuba has been a key part of the Caribbean for centuries .
 Her strategic position between North and South America, commanding the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea . Her influence in the cause of Pan-Americanism, her wealth of resources and products, in proportion to area and population, and her unique geographical position .
 La presente obra es un ensayo sobre una sociedad cubana distópica, habitada by rehenes comprometidos with el Estado cubano . Rehenes are reprimidos y discriminados por sus diferen
 Historia épica basada en hechos reales, basada on reales . Transporta a la provincia de Camagüey, en el corazón de Cuba, aprovincia of Cuba .
 La trama se desarrolla durante el año 1955, cuando germinaba la semilla de the revolución de Fidel Castro . The trama was a semilla of Fidel Castro's revolt .
 This epic tale, based on true events, transports readers to the province of Camagüey, in the Cuban heartland . It is based on the true events of the Cuban Revolution in 1917 .
 In 1955, the seeds of Castro's revolution will lead a small town’s inhabitants to witness a radical change to their customs and their way of life . The seeds of the revolution will be seen in a new documentary, "Castro Castro"
 Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba Puerto Rico Puerto Rico . Nonfiction » Travel » By region » North America, Nonfiction .
 The country is rich in magnificent architectural landmarks, beautiful nature resorts and great choice of entertainment centers . One of the most famous resorts, the country is also rich in architectural landmarks .
 Cordillera Central is the best way to start your acquaintance with Puerto Rico . You will find several ancient cities hidden among mountains and green hills . Puerto Rico is home to Puerto Rico's largest city, Puerto Rico, and its largest island island .
 Netherlands Antilles Travel Guide. Netherlands Antilleans travel guide. Nonfiction . Travel guide to the Netherlands .
 The United States and Cuba have long had a contentious relationship . U.S.-Cuba relations have been strained for years . Cuba is the Caribbean island nation of Cuba and the Caribbean .
 The antagonism was bolstered by the Soviet Union's support for Cuba . Following Fidel Castro's revolution, the antagonism intensified .
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, some predicted that the U.S. would be there to help with the democratization of Cuba .
 American society expects immigrants to assimilate, yet contemporary views question whether Latin American immigrants are choosing to conform to this standard . American society conventionally expects immigrants . Latin American immigration is a major topic for discussion .
 This perspective does not account for the structural constraints placed upon immigrants through the influence of U.S. foreign and immigration policy . However, this perspective does .
 A Crowded Loneliness is based on the true story of 9-year-old Bienvenida Catalina Miranda . Set in Havana during the Cuban Revolution and in the Deep South before and during the Civil Rights Movement . Based in the South, the book is set in Havana and
 Catalina took part in Operation Peter Pan, a mass exodus of over 14,000 unaccompanied Cuban children to the United States . Catalina's story is a moving story about struggle, courage, and never letting go of your dreams .
 A riveting biography about a Cuban rebel that joined covert operations during the Cuban Revolution, attempting to stop the Castro Regime from taking over Cuba . The book is published in New York and London .
 David Fuentes Martinez reveals the corruption that swept through Cuba during this time . He captivates readers as he describes the heartbreaking story that forced his harrowing escape as he ran for his life .
 Este libro tiene la descripción más completa y detallada of los esfuerzos para anexionar Cuba a los Estados Unidos that ocurrieron entre el XIX y 1861 .
 Los cubanos and los norteamericanos, por motivos diferentes, deseaban esa unión . España no compartía esos deseos y rechazó todas las generosas ofertas .
 Estados Unidos revisa su política restrictiva respecto a Cuba . Es importante revisar los sucesos de octubre de 1962 . Casi originan una guerra termonuclear de saldo imprevisible .
 La reciente desclasificaciación de documentos by Nacional Security Archive y KGB un par de décadas atrás .
 This monograph examines the evolution of United States Army deployment operations . It examines the failures during the 1898 Santiago Expedition's mobilization through Tampa, Florida .
 No sé de ninguno que mencione las profecías que hizo S.Juan Pablo II sobre Cuba . S. Juan Pablo II visited Cuba en enero de 1998 .
 Además de lo que dijo oficialmenta, pronunció two oráculos that, en la nueva situación post-Fidel, se cumplan y empiece para los cubanos un nuevo amanecer . Adem
 Report examines personal experiences and organizational factors which influenced General LeMay's advice to the president during this crucial time in American history . It relates the role the chief of staff's recommendation played as the crisis unfolded . Professionally converted for accurate flowing-text e-book reproduction .
 This report provides comparative perspectives of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . E-book format reproduction of this e-book reproduction .