 No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except for brief quotations from critical articles and reviews .
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Marrs . Jim Marrs, Jim. Marrs and Jim. Bob Marrs.
 Every citizen who gave of their time, effort, and resources to study, assimilate, and disseminate assassination information should come to be regarded as an object lesson on how the individual citizen can make an impact on a system that has proven unable to police itself .
 It has been staring us in the face at least since the Zapruder film in which Kennedy’s body was thrust to the rear by a frontal shot .
 Oswald should be forgotten as Charles Guiteau, a disgruntled office seeker who was the lone assassin of President James A Garfield in 1881 . If Lee Harvey Oswald was solely involved, all information regarding him and the assassination should be available .
 Unlike Guiteau, because of the ongoing questions and controversy over the JFK assassination, virtually everyone in the educated world knows the name Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was the subject of much of the most of the country's most famous assassination .
 Basic evidence, such as location of wounds, autopsy photographs and X-rays, fingerprints, accuracy of the weapon, even the famous Zapruder film, remain controversial .
 For years now, many books and speakers, along with myriad witnesses and whistle-blowers, have brought forward bits of the truth, only to be ignored, drowned out, and ridiculed by the corporate-controlled mass media . The media has failed to present the full range of assassination information
 Anyone could have shot the president—Castro agents, Mafia hit men, rogue CIA operatives, KGB assassins, even the proverbial lone nut . The president was shot by a lone nut at the center of the country's presidency .
 Only high officials of the federal government and their financial rulers had the power to misdirect an honest investigation and keep the truth of the JFK assassination from the public for half a century . The truth was kept secret for 50 years .
 Establishment fears the loss of public trust even though their attempts through the years to stifle the truth of many issues have merely resulted in that very loss . Establishment fears public trust, but their attempts to suppress the truth have actually resulted in the very loss of it .
 In the case of the JFK assassination, trust has long been part of the problem . Trust has been a problem since the assassination of JFK in 1968 .
 When it comes to the assassination of President John F Kennedy, don’t trust any one source . Don't trust no one source. Don't be afraid to go to the source .
 Don't trust even the government’s basic documentation and pronouncements . Don’t trust even government documents or pronouncements, trust the government .
 The assassination today is recognized as a turning point in American history . JFK's assassination today was recognized as an important moment in American life .
 Beginning on November 22, 1963, American attitudes slowly changed from post-World War II optimism and idealism to cynicism and mistrust of government . Americans began distrusting government in 1963 .
 This loss of faith in government accelerated in the wake of the Vietnam War, Watergate, the Waco deaths, the Oklahoma City bombing coverup, and the many unanswered questions about 9/11 .
 The wide gulf between the official government version of the Kennedy assassination and the findings of those who have objectively studied the case has prompted cynicism and controversy .
 Crossfire provides detailed background information on the men and organizations most likely to have been involved in a plot against the president . This updated edition of Crossfire includes background information about the people and organizations who are likely to be involved .
 Also covered are the various attempts by governmental bodies to investigate and resolve what happened in Dallas .
 Attention is paid to the people behind these investigations, how they arrived at their conclusions, and the reliability of the information made available to them . Attention is also paid to people behind the investigations, including the possibility of misdirection .
 As an award-winning Texas journalist with more than fifty years of newsgathering experience, I have been in the singular position to learn the true story of the assassination .
 I have talked with many people involved, including Dallasarea government and law-enforcement officials . I have also talked with Dallasarea officials and news reporters .
 Oswald’s wife, Marina, his mother, Marguerite, and Jeanne DeMohrenschildt, were close friends of Oswald's . Oswald's wife was Marina, who was Marina's mother, and her husband, George DeMohranschildt .
 I have interviewed assassination witnesses, including James Tague, Jean Hill, Bill and Gayle Newman, Charles Brehm, Malcolm Summers, Phil Willis, and many others . I have also interviewed Malcolm Summers and Jean Hill .
 I have interviewed witnesses never questioned by the official investigations, such as Ed Hoffman, Gordon Arnold, Ester Mash, Beverly Oliver, and Madeleine Brown . Ed Hoffman and Gordon Arnold have never been questioned .
 "I lived in the Dallas area during the time of the assassination. Most important, I lived in Dallas, Texas, during that time . Most important is that I lived there during the assassination .
 Jack Ruby met Jack Ruby while visiting his Carousel Club in the fall of 1963 . Jack Ruby was a college journalism major at the time . Ruby is believed to have killed more than 100,000 people .
 In the fall of 1964, I interviewed Major General Edwin A Walker, himself a suspect . Walker was a suspect in the Vietnam War . Walker is a former member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Within five years of the assassination, I was working as a professional reporter in the Dallas—Fort Worth Metroplex . The assassination occurred five years ago today .
 A native Texan who grew up in this area, I understand its people, history, and politics . I understand Texan politics, history and politics, and I'm a native of Texan . I'm proud to be a Texan and proud of his work in Texas .
 "As a journalist, I have tried to maintain a professional objectivity. Yet, as a journalist I have always tried to be impartial," he says .
 The JFK assassination is the subject of a new book on the JFK assassination . CNN's John Sutter says he was fortunate to have the time to study the assassination as a reporter .
 I am told that mine was the first universitylevel course in the U.S. to cover the assassination . I'm told that my course was first university level course to cover it .
 Through this course, many new leads were developed—such as a witness to a gunman on the Grassy Knoll and intimidation of witnesses by Warren Commission staff members and FBI agents .
 After 30 years, I retired from UTA with my view of the assassination unchanged . After thirty years of UTA, he retired with his view of U.S. unchanged .
 Any one particular issue can be rationalized away as coincidence or happenstance, it can be thought of as coincidence . Any particular incident can be seen as coincidence, happenstances, it's not a coincidence . But it's a good thing for the world to see how the world
 Always keep in mind that the United States in 1963 was an entirely different place and time than today . Always keep a mind of the U.S. in 1963 and 1963 .
 The public had a blind faith in government, which seems hard to believe in light of today’s cynical standards . The public was blind to government, the public had blind faith, which is hard to imagine .
 The news media uncritically accepted official pronouncements and police work was conducted in an unsophisticated manner that would shock the highly trained and educated officers of today . Police work was carried out in a slip-od manner, even slip-shod manner .
 Some of the statements of others were misrepresented by investigating officials . Some were due to either ignorance or a desire to be helpful, or on orders, lied about critical evidence in the case . Others lied about some of the evidence, while others misrepresented others .
 Government agencies were fearful of rumors that might have linked Oswald to them . Government agencies feared rumors might have been linked to Oswald .
 "Not one single matter of fact in this case can be accepted uncritically," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Not every fact in the case can't be accepted unritritically"
 The very people charged with finding the truth engaged in fabrication, alteration, and suppression of evidence, as well as intimidation of witnesses, says CNN.com.com .
 Nearly forty years after that statement, nothing has been made public that warrants changing that conclusion . Today, nearly forty years later, nearly 40 years after the statement, no public information has been released .
 Americans have begun to see the lies, corruption, and outright criminal activity within their own government . With the hindsight of events such as Watergate, Vietnam, the assassinations of Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr., Ruby Ridge, Waco, the attacks of 9/11, the economic
 U.S. government officials cover up critical evidence and block any meaningful investigation . JFK assassination was a probable coup that was the likely coup that killed JFK .
 Obviously, such activity cannot be ascribed to a lone individual or even organized-crime members and certainly not Fidel Castro or Nikita Khrushchev . Fidel Castro was assassinated in 1968 .
 The plot, though not a conscious action of the government as a whole, nevertheless was homegrown . The plot was cultivated within government agencies, especially the military, especially military .
 Turn the page and join me in studying the information that collectively reveals the plot that killed Kennedy . Join me on this page to learn more about the plot to kill Kennedy .
 Unless we as a nation come to a truthful understanding of what happened to our chief elected official in 1963, we obviously cannot begin to correctly understand the events that are affecting us today or take action .
 "Not only do I seek the killers of President Kennedy, I also seek the persons who planned the probable coup against Camelot," he says . "Those who killed the confidence and faith of the American people in their government and institutions," he writes .
 I seek elementary justice—for both the accused assassin and for the United States of America. "I want elementary justice," writes CNN.com's John Sutter. "For both of these people, I want justice"
 Dallas has grown from a small way station for pioneers to a center of corporate business, insurance, banking, and oil and gas . Dallas was founded in the days before Texas became a state, but has grown to a major business hub .
 By 1963, Dallas already was the most influential city in the Lone Star State, second only to oil-rich Houston . Dallas was the city's second-largest city, after Houston .
 Dallas also had a reputation for being a stronghold of archconservatives, if not outright right-wing extremists . Dallas had gained a reputation as a conservative stronghold in recent years .
 It is well-known in Texas police circles that if a man wanted a job as a Dallas policeman, it helped if he was a member of the Ku Klux Klan, or at least the John Birch Society .
 The city police and other governmental offices were filled with members of right-wing groups . Police and other government offices were full of members of these groups . The city was filled with people from all sides .
 The city was included on a quick political trip by President John F Kennedy in late 1963 .
 The Thirty-fifth President John Fitzgerald Kennedy was the first U.S. president born in the twentieth century . He was born in 1945 .
 He was born on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, Massachusetts, in an unpretentious middle-class suburb .
 He was the second oldest son of a family that began their American life with the immigration of Patrick Kennedy from Ireland in 1848 . The Kennedys were part of the liberal Eastern Establishment .
 At age forty-three, Kennedy became the nation’s youngest president . At the time of his death, he had lived a shorter life than that of any other president .
 His brief presidency—1,026 days—stirred the emotions of nearly every American . The president's brief presidency, 1,026-days, was one of the most divisive moments in American history .
 Perhaps due to his privileged background, he increasingly appeared more concerned with great historical issues such as civil rights, war, and peace than with parochial matters of business and politics .
 Jack, as the future president was called by his friends, attended only the best schools . The future president went to the best school in America .
 A bout with jaundice forced him to drop out of college, but upon recovery, he joined his older brother, Joseph Kennedy Jr., at Harvard . Kennedy Jr. is a Harvard graduate .
 Maintaining only a C average, Kennedy concentrated on sports, particularly football . Maintained only an average of C .
 Kennedy had bouts with illness compounded by a football injury that aggravated an already-weakened spinal column . Kennedy was a somewhat sickly child, with bouts of sickness compounded by football injury . Kennedy had a very thin spinal column and a very weak spinal cord .
 Kennedy left school during his junior year to travel in Europe . His father had been appointed United States ambassador to Great Britain after generous contributions to Franklin Roosevelt’s election campaign .
 Ambassador Kennedy was forced to resign because of his undisguised admiration for Germany’s Nazi regime . After war broke out, Ambassador Kennedy resigned over his admiration for the Nazis . Ambassador Kennedy had been forced to quit after the war .
 The best-selling book Why England Slept is written by the author of a thesis at Harvard . It was written in response to a thesis that was well received at Harvard and later rewritten .
 He began to show interest in a writing career but was interrupted by joining the United States Navy two months before the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Early in the war, Kennedy served as an intelligence officer in Washington . He was transferred to the South Pacific after J Edgar Hoover told his father about young Kennedy’s love affair with a suspected Nazi agent .
 In the summer of 1943, Kennedy was in command of a Navy patrol boat, the PT-109 . Kennedy was a member of the Navy's World War II fleet .
 During a patrol in the Solomon Islands, the boat was struck and broken in half by a Japanese destroyer . The only such incident during the war was the only such an incident .
 He pulled his wounded chief engineer, Patrick McMahon, to a nearby island by swimming for four hours holding him on his back by gripping a strap of the man’s life jacket between his teeth . He pulled him to the island by holding the man's life jacket strap to his back
 Kennedy arranged for local natives to alert Navy officials to the group’s location in enemy-held territory and they soon were rescued . The group was rescued by the U.S. Navy .
 While recovering from his ordeal, Kennedy learned that his older brother, Joseph Jr., had been killed while flying a secret mission over Europe . Joseph Jr. Kennedy's brother was killed in a secret European mission .
 After the war, a reluctant Kennedy ran for and won a House seat from Massachusetts . Kennedy won a Senate seat in Massachusetts in 1964 .
 In later years, Joseph Kennedy was quoted as saying, “I told him Joe was dead and it was his responsibility to run for Congress.” Joseph Kennedy said he told him “Joe was dead. It was Joe’s responsibility”
 With the Kennedy name and Kennedy money behind him, Kennedy easily won two more elections to Congress . With the name and millions of dollars behind him he easily won more than two more .
 In 1952, he defeated Henry Cabot Lodge to become junior senator from Massachusetts . In 1952 he became junior senator . He was elected to the Massachusetts Senate in 1952 .
 By 1956, Kennedy's name was brought up as a possible running mate for Adlai Stevenson . Despite an uninspiring senatorial career, by 1956 Kennedy’s name had been brought up .
 Kennedy was edged out as vice presidential candidate by Estes Kefauver . Kennedy's graceful concession speech caused Kennedy's political stock to rise to new heights .
 Kennedy and his supporters went all out to ensure an impressive victory in his 1958 Senate reelection campaign in Massachusetts . With an eye toward the 1960 election, Kennedy went all-out to ensure a victory in the state .
 By 1960, Kennedy was ready for the Democratic presidential nomination, but there were hurdles to overcome . Kennedy was able to overcome the hurdles to become a presidential candidate .
 No Catholic president has ever been elected president . No Catholic has ever won a presidential election .
 He overcame this problem by entering —and winning—and winning —a series of state primary elections . He overcame it by entering and winning a series of primaries .
 In West Virginia, with 95 percent Protestant voters, Kennedy beat Hubert Humphrey handily, thanks to large organized crime donations made through Frank Sinatra . Sinatra helped Kennedy beat Humphrey in West Virginia thanks to donations from organized crime .
 At the 1960 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, Kennedy was challenged only by conservative Texas senator Lyndon B Johnson .
 Kennedy knew that conservative Democrats needed to win against Richard Nixon . He forged temporary coalition by selecting defeated Johnson as his vice presidential running mate . Kennedy knew he needed a coalition of conservatives to defeat Nixon .
 His selection of Johnson shocked Kennedy supporters as well as Johnson’s supporters . Kennedy's selection of Kennedy's pick shocked Kennedy's supporters and Johnson's supporters .
 Years later, Kennedy’s secretary Evelyn Lincoln revealed that the FBI director had forced the appointment of Johnson as vice president under threat of revealing Kennedy's sexual affairs . The FBI director was forced to appoint Johnson under threat to reveal Kennedy's affairs .
 There was no thought of Johnson’s qualifications as president should anything happen to Kennedy . There was also thought of his qualifications as President if anything happened to Kennedy.
 Nixon and his running mate, Henry Cabot Lodge, tried to raise the issue of experience during the ensuing 1960 election campaign . Nixon and Lodge were both running for president .
 The slogan mostly was intended to call attention to Nixon’s role as vice president under Dwight “Ike” Eisenhower . The slogan was meant to refer to Nixon's role under Eisenhower .
 Kennedy’s Catholicism was attacked by some preachers . Preachers regaled their congregations with the specter of a Vatican-dominated White House . Some preachers said the White House would be Vatican-controlled .
 The real turning point in the 1960 election apparently came in September when Kennedy and Nixon met in the first televised debates in American history . The debates were televised for the first time .
 The four debates were viewed by nearly half the nation's population . No one denies that Kennedy emerged the victor .
 Radio listeners judged Nixon to be the winner of the contest . However, Nixon was not judged .
 The debates were TV show business, anticipating today’s slick marketing of candidates . The debates are now TV show show business . The debate was a precursor to today's slick marketing .
 Kennedy with a good makeup job appeared robust and self-confident . Nixon, suffering from little makeup and five-o’clock shadow, appeared unsure of himself .
 There are very little differences in the positions of the two candidates on most issues . Their images aside, there was very little difference between the candidates .
 Kennedy called for support of the Cuban exiles in their attempts to regain Cuba from Castro . He was propounding the very program that Nixon had been pushing for many months . Ironically, the program was backed by Kennedy .
 Nixon felt compelled to attack Kennedy’s suggestions as irresponsible since, as he later wrote, “the covert operation had to be protected at all costs” and, thus, Nixon came out opposing his own plans .
 Kennedy won the election, but by one of the slimmest margins in American history . Kennedy won by a narrow margin of narrow margin .
 He polled 34,227,096 votes to Nixon’s 34,108,546—a margin of 49 percent to 49. percent . Nixon won the election by 49 percent .
 Affluent whites, college graduates, women, Protestants, farmers, senior citizens, and business and professional people mostly voted against this eastern liberal .
 Kennedy’s highest ratings in the polls during his term in office came just after the disastrous Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 . Americans rallied to their president as Americans rallied around their president .
 About 82 percent of those polled expressed approval of his handling of the situation, which prompted Kennedy to remark, “My God, it’s as bad as Eisenhower.” The poll was conducted by the White House .
 In reality, it was a quid pro quo deal in which Russia withdrew its missiles from Cuba in return for U.S. removing missiles from Turkey plus pledging not to support any further Cuban invasions . The deal was a deal between Russia and the United States .
 By the fall of 1963, polls showed Kennedy’s popularity had dropped to 59 percent, largely due to his stand on civil rights . But polls showed his support for the civil rights movement was still strong .
 His willingness to negotiate with the communist world, his attack on the tax havens of wealthy corporations had engendered fear and hatred among the most powerful cliques in the U.S. He had tried to regain civilian control over the Pentagon and its intelligence agencies . His attempts to gain civilian control
 Newsweek magazine reported that no Democrat in the White House had ever been so disliked in the South . Newsweek magazine said no Democrat was ever so unpopular in the Southern state .
 Kennedy supporters were looking toward the 1964 election, hoping for a mandate that would give Kennedy’s ambitious programs much-needed popular support . Kennedy supporters wanted a mandate for his ambitious programs .
 Kennedy had carried Texas by the slimmest of margins in 1960, largely through the efforts of the state’s powerful senator, Lyndon Johnson . Kennedy won by a narrow margin in 1960 .
 He needed the state badly in 1964, particularly if his hopes of achieving a large mandate were to be realized . The state was badly needed in 1964 .
 According to Texas governor John Connally, Kennedy first talked of coming to Texas in the summer of 1962 . Connally: Kennedy talked about his plans to move to Texas to meet the president .
 Former senator Ralph Yarborough was contacted by Kennedy aides in mid-1963 . Yarborough asked what could be done to help the president’s image in Texas, Yarborough says .
 Yarborough told this author, “I told them the best thing he could do was bring Jackie to Texas and let all those women see her.” Yarborough said . Yarborough: “The best thing I told them was to bring Jackie back to Texas”
 Kennedy and his wife made the fateful journey to Texas in November 1963 . Kennedy, along with his wife, traveled to Texas to raise money for Kennedy's image .
 On November 21, they visited Houston and San Antonio, both cities with heavy defense and space industries . The visit was part of a weeklong tour of the U.S. space industry .
 That evening, he flew to Fort Worth, landing at Carswell Air Force Base and driving to the historic Hotel Texas for the night .
 In his hotel suite, original paintings by Van Gogh and Monet had been hung on the walls in an effort to impress the Kennedys with Texas sophistication . The original paintings were hung in the walls of the hotel suite .
 Kennedy spoke at a breakfast sponsored by the Fort Worth Chamber of Commerce . Kennedy spoke in Fort Worth, Texas, on November 22 .
 Beforehand, more than 1,000 persons crowded in front of the hotel stood in light drizzling rain . The president made brief remarks .
 Lyndon Johnson arrived to introduce his sister, Lucia Alexander, to Kennedy . Vice president Lyndon Johnson introduced his sister to Kennedy at the end of the night .
 Johnson wrote in The Vantage Point that these were the last words Kennedy spoke to him . Johnson said Kennedy's last words were to him: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 As the rain clouds were breaking up, Kennedy drove back to Carswell for the eight-minute flight to Dallas . Kennedy drove from Carswell to Dallas, Texas, where he was waiting for the flight .
 Fort Worth and Dallas are so close that even before reaching its full altitude, Air Force One began its descent to Dallas . Fort Worth is so close to Dallas that Air Force 1 will begin its descent .
 Kennedy commented to Governor Connally, “Our luck is holding.” Looking out the plane’s window, Kennedy said, ‘Our luck was holding. Our luck is not holding. It's holding,” Kennedy said .
 As Air Force One landed at Love Field, the sky had cleared and a bright sun brought Indian summer weather to north-central Texas .
 The occasional cool breeze from the north was welcomed by Texans weary of the interminable summer heat . The heat often lasts well into the fall .
 It was the sort of day that stirs the blood, causing people to seek action outdoors . People went to work in the yard or attend a local football game .
 The president's motorcade route would take him from Love Field to the new, modern Trade Mart . That morning's edition had even run a small map of the president’s route, which would take his motorcade .
 President Kennedy was scheduled to attend a 12:30m. luncheon at the Trade Mart . However, this map indicated that the motorcade would travel west on Main Street through the downtown area .
 The city’s other daily paper, the Dallas Times Herald, had given a more detailed description of the route .
 Liberal senator Ralph Yarborough invited to sit with Kennedy at the head table during Friday’s luncheon . Yarborough was invited to join Kennedy at head table at the luncheon, a story said .
 The zigzag in the motorcade route would violate Secret Service procedures and place the president in a small park named Dealey Plaza . This was one of the only newspaper mentions of the route .
 The motorcade had been scheduled to pass through the downtown business section during the noon hour so office workers could watch the parade during lunch . The parade was meant to be held during the lunch hour .
 Thousands of Dallasites turned out in the balmy sixty-eight-degree weather for a view of Kennedy .
 The state’s Democrats had been aghast the previous year when a Republican, former schoolteacher and radio disk jockey John Tower, had been elected to fill Johnson's Senate seat . The previous year, a Democrat had been re-elected to replace Johnson .
 Tower was the first Republican to win a Texas Senate seat since the War Between the States . Tower is the first GOP to win the state Senate seat in the state's history . Tower was first Republican elected to the Senate in Texas since the war between the states .
 With more than seventy Democrats vying for Johnson’s seat, the vote had been so split that Republican Tower won . Tower won, much to the horror of state politicos .
 Texas conservatives were highly vocal against Kennedy’s policies toward Cuba, civil rights, and a nuclear test ban with Russia . Kennedy also wanted to rescind the 27 percent oil depletion allowance, the foundation of Texas oil wealth .
 Kennedy seemed unbeatable in 1964 election year . Everyone agreed he would be unbeatable, even his enemies .
 He still needed to win over a few key states to acquire the broad mandate he was seeking . However, he still needs to win more states to secure a broad mandate .
 Houston was the oil capital of the state, while Fort Worth and San Antonio were big defense industry centers .
 City politics was dominated by the mayor’s cohorts on the all-white Citizens Charter Association . City politics were dominated by mayor's cohorts on all-black Citizens Charter .
 Dallas has earned a reputation for being both politically bedrock conservative and intolerant of any deviation from that position . The city has a reputation as a conservative conservative city .
 A month earlier, Adlai Stevenson had been pushed, spat upon, and hit in the head with a picket sign while visiting in Dallas . Stevenson was the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations to the UN .
 Cashiered Army Major General Edwin A Walker had made the news by shoving a TV cameraman during a speech by governor George Wallace of Alabama . Just the previous Tuesday, cashiered Major General Walker had shoved a cameraman .
 Stevenson, along with others close to Kennedy, warned the young president not to journey to Dallas . Stevenson: Kennedy was warned not to go to Dallas, Texas, when Dallas occurred .
 Kennedy, Connally, and Johnson met in El Paso, Texas, in early June . Plans for a trip to Texas were finalized during a meeting between Kennedy and Connally . Kennedy's visit to Texas is scheduled to take place in November .
 A full-page ad in the Dallas Morning News ran that morning in Dallas suggesting the president was guilty of traitorous activities . On November 22, Kennedy's entourage was still evident, especially in light of the ad ad .
 A leaflet handed out along the motorcade route was not as subtle as the newspaper ad . The leaflet was handed out by the president's motorcade .
 The Kennedy entourage found the Dallas crowds large, enthusiastic, and friendly, even though a few Confederate flags flew in the background .
 The scene was chaotic despite what had been hailed as one of the tightest security efforts in recent memory . With horns honking, radios blaring, and the shouts and cheers of the crowd ringing off the sides of the office buildings, the crowd was chaotic .
 As the motorcade swept toward the central business district, it reached speeds of almost thirty miles per hour . The motorcade was seen reaching speeds of nearly 30mph .
 Once the motorcade reached downtown, crowds became larger, often spilling out into the street . Crowds grew larger once they reached downtown and the pace slowed considerably .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry led the presidential motorcade on November 22, 1963 . The motorcade was an enclosed sedan driven by Dallas police officer Jesse Curry .
 Sitting to Curry’s right was Secret Service advance man Winston G Lawson . Lawson was the Secret Service's advance man for the day .
 Kennedy’s Secret Service code name was Lancer, apparently a knockoff of the name Lancelot in the Camelot story . Kennedy was named Lancer by the Secret Service after the assassination of Camelot .
 At age fiftythree the oldest man in the White House detail is driving the limousine . William Greer, a Secret Service agent, was driving the vehicle .
 Next to Greer sat Roy Kellerman, assistant special agent in charge of the Secret Service White House detail . The Secret Service has a White House security detail .
 Governor Connally and Mrs. Connally were in the center of the car in fold-down jump seats . Governor and wife Connally sat in the car on the right side of the vehicle .
 In the rear, on a padded seat that could be raised or lowered mechanically, sat Kennedy, wearing a leather back brace . Kennedy sat in the rear of the car on a seat that was raised or raised mechanically .
 Following this security car was a 1964 Lincoln four-door open convertible carrying vice president Lyndon Johnson, Mrs. Johnson and Mrs. Nixon .
 Yarborough told this author that while the crowds on the street were boisterous and friendly, when he looked up at the offices of the big companies and corporations of Dallas, he never saw a smiling face . Yarborough: "When I looked up there, I saw no smiling faces
 The driver of his car was Texas state trooper Hurchel Jacks, and Secret Service agent Rufus W Youngblood rode to the right of him . The Secret Service agents were also involved .
 Johnson's motorcade was trailed by Secret Service guards and the rest of the motorcade . The motorcade consisted of five cars for local dignitaries, three cars for press photographers, one bus for White House staff .
 Two Dallas homicide detectives and Army Intelligence reserve unit were killed in Dallas, Texas . The victims were identified by two Dallas detectives and two Dallas police officers .
 A press-pool station wagon had been designated to follow Kennedy’s Secret Service follow-up car . For some unexplained reason it was shoved farther back in the motorcade .
 This prevented the media representatives from witnessing the assassination or capturing it on film . The media were prevented from witnessing or capturing the assassination on film.
 Everyone in the limousine appeared to be enjoying the open-air ride and the cheering admiration .
 Kennedy was beginning to feel warm in her pink wool suit and pillbox hat . Kennedy was starting to feel warmer in her wool suit .
 As the motorcade cruised into downtown area, apprehensions of the Dallas visit seemed to dissipate as quickly as the morning’s overcast .
 Bob Hollingsworth, veteran Washington correspondent for the Times Herald, had accompanied the Washington press corps to Dallas . He had accompanied them to Dallas.
 Up ahead clear blue sky could be seen past the long, dark corridor of tall buildings . The presidential car entered a small, triangular plaza at the end of Main Street .
 Dealey Plaza is named after George Bannerman Dealey, a pioneer Dallas civic leader and founder of the Dallas Morning News . The motorcade broke into the open space of Dealey plaza named after Dealey .
 It was acquired by the city for the construction of the Triple Underpass . The underpass allows railroad traffic to pass over Commerce, Main, and Elm Streets .
 The property was christened “Dealey Plaza” in 1935 . It was placed under the authority of the city’s Park Board in 1936 . Dealey Plaza is now a tourist attraction .
 Both incoming and outgoing traffic between downtown Dallas and the major freeway systems to the west is channeled through Dealey Plaza . The Plaza is a central hub for the city's downtown Dallas economy .
 Houston was flanked to the east by the Criminal Courts Building, containing the county jail and the sheriff’s office . Turning north from Main Street at the historic red, orate County Court House, Houston was also flanked by the criminal Courts Building .
 Opposite the records building across Elm Street was the Dal-Tex Building . Opposite is the Dal Tex Building . The Dal Tex building was located in the 1950s .
 Bisecting Dealey Plaza is Main Street, with Commerce Street branching off to the south and Elm Street curving in on the north . Main Street is located on the east side of the square .
 These three main arteries converge on the west side of the plaza at the railroad bridge known as the Triple Underpass .
 Facing Houston Street on the west are fountains and monuments to Dealey . Fountains, monuments to the former mayor, Dealey, face Houston Street .
 On the north and south sides of the plaza are two small arbors or pergolas, flanked on the east by a line of trees and shrubs . On the west by a wooden stockade fence about five feet high, the plaza is surrounded by trees, shrubs and shr
 The Kennedys made a ninety-degree turn from Main onto Houston in front of the Dallas County Sheriff’s Office . A phalanx of Dallas motorcycle police officers cleared the way ahead .
 Almost two dozen deputies and other lawmen stood on the sidewalk at the scene of the incident .
 Hertz Rent-A-Car sign contains a digital time and temperature display . Atop the building was a large Hertz rent-a-car sign with a digital display . Hertz rented a car from Hertz.
 The turn was so tight that Greer almost ran the limousine up onto the curb near the Depository’s front door, superintendent says . Greer nearly ran the car onto the north curb, superintendent Roy Truly says .
 The car continued a slow glide down the incline of Elm deeper into Dealey Plaza . The car maintained its position in the center lane of the three-lane street .
 The crowds thinned out as the Triple Underpass approached, and security men began to relax . Security men relaxed as the crowds thined out as they approached the triple Underpass .
 Agent Lawson, a former Army counterintelligence man now with the Secret Service White House detail, was sitting in the right front seat . Agent Lawson is a White House White House agent . He was in the lead car in the presidential limousine .
 His right arm and hand were extended slightly over the side of the car . His right hand and hand was extended over the vehicle .
 Kennedy had been waving to her left, but her thoughts were on the Texas heat . Kennedy was waving to the left but his thoughts were focused on the heat .
 Kennedy later told the Warren Commission, “And in the motorcade, you know, I usually would be waving mostly to the left side and he was waving mostly right,” he said . Kennedy later said he and Kennedy were not looking at each other very much .
 Connally had wanted to mention the warm and enthusiastic welcome for some time, but she had held back . Connally wanted to talk about the warm, enthusiastic welcome she had received .
 She caught a peripheral glimpse of Kennedy raising both hands to his neck . She looked in that direction and caught a glimpse of his reaction .
 She heard no sound from the president but noticed a blank, “nothing” expression on his face . She said she saw no movement from the White House during the speech .
 Kellerman was sitting directly in front of Connally and Kennedy when he heard a ‘pop’ to his right . Kellerman immediately looked in that direction, surveying the easternmost slope of the Grassy Knoll .
 I heard a voice from the back seat and I firmly believe it was the President’s “My God, I am hit,” and I turned around and he has got his hands up here like this . It was enough for me to verify that the man was hit
 "A flurry of shells come into the car. Now in the seconds that I talked just now, a flurry of shell shells come in the car," he says .
 Connally testified she heard Kellerman say, “Pull out of the motorcade.” She testified that Kellerman told her to pull out of a motorcade . Connally said Kellerman said to her that she was taking part in the shooting .
 The limousine indeed pulled out of the motorcade, accelerated through the Triple Underpass, up the entrance ramp to Stemmons Freeway, and raced toward Parkland Hospital .
 Driver Greer said he was busy looking ahead to the railroad overpass and never looked back . Greer says he was looking ahead when he lost control of his car .
 This is inconsistent with a film of the assassination that clearly shows Greer looking back over his right shoulder prior to the head shot . This is consistent with the fact that Greer was not looking over his shoulder when he was shot .
 Greer then testified he heard a noise he thought was a motorcycle backfire . Greer testified he thought the noise was a backfire. Greer said he heard the noise but it was not a motorcycle crash .
 Connally started to slump over after he heard the noise again and caught a glimpse of Connally starting to slump . He heard the noises again and saw Connally slump over . Connally had been in a coma for more than a decade .
 He then heard two more noises that seemed to come one on top of the other . The noises then seemed to be coming from the same direction .
 Greer said after the second noise and a glance over his right shoulder at Connally, he stepped on the accelerator . Greer: "After the . second noise, he . looked over Connally at him and stepped on accelerator." Greer says he looked into Connally's eyes
 Film taken that day shows the limousine brake lights remained on until after the fatal head shot to Kennedy . However, film taken from the scene shows the brake lights remain on .
 Connally and with films made that day, confirmed he was not hit by the first shot . Connally said he was hit by first shot, but was not struck by first strike .
 Governor said he heard a noise he took to be a shot from a high-powered rifle . Governor said just after making the turn onto Elm he heard the noise . The governor said he thought the noise sounded like a gunshot .
 He turned to his right because the sound appeared to come from over his right shoulder, but he couldn’t see anything . The sound came from over the right shoulder of the man .
 He began to turn to his left when he felt something strike him in the back . He was struck in the head by a woman in a car crash . The victim was hit by a car and died in the crash .
 Connally conscious of shots being fired other than one that struck him . Connally was critically wounded, Connally said he was conscious of the shots fired . The governor was shot in the head and hit by a single bullet .
 Connally noticed blue brain tissue covering his suit and knew Kennedy was dead . Connally was in the middle of a traffic accident when he saw the brain tissue on his suit . The president was killed in the accident .
 He also noticed blood on the front of his shirt and realized he was hurt badly, perhaps fatally . He realized he had been hurt badly and realized it was probably fatally .
 Connally heard his wife saying over and over, “Be still, you’re going to be all right,” and he felt the car accelerate . Connally: "Be still. Be still. You're going to get back in the car. You’
 She was accustomed to the sounds of motorcycle escorts backfiring and the motorcade had been a cacophony of sirens, racing motors, cheering, and shouting . She had been accustomed to motorcycle escort escorts firing, and motorcade was sirens .
 All she could do was cradle him and say, “Oh, my God, they’ve shot my husband.” She said she was too scared to look after her husband .
 "Over the years a great deal of misinformation has been presented about her next actions. Over the years she has been accused of lying to the public about her future actions . Over the past few years, she has made a number of statements about her actions .
 Many persons have stated that she tried to climb out of the car in panic or to help Secret Service agent Clint Hill, who had run to the president’s limousine .
 She crawled onto the trunk of the limousine and, reaching out, picked up a piece of her husband’s head . Actually, she crawled on the trunk and picked up the piece of his head . She reached out and reached out to pick up the head .
 Kennedy next climbed back into the limousine under her own power . Hill was desperately clinging to the car’s trunk as it accelerated .
 Her action was captured in the films taken that day, and later, sitting in Parkland Hospital, she had the object still clutched .
 If brain matter flew to the rear, this clearly evinces a shot from the front . Perhaps the reason this dramatic incident has been confused in the early years is that if brain matter flies to the back, it's not clear what happened .
 Agent Lawson was trying to signal a policeman standing with a group of people on top of the underpass . Lawson was in the lead car which was about to enter the Triple Underpass when the firing began .
 He didn't like the idea of the president’s car passing directly below these people, so he was trying to get the officer to move them to one side . The officer tried to move the president's car away from the crowd .
 Lawson may have recalled security measures in Fort Worth earlier that morning . Overpasses were cleared of bystanders and windows facing the president’s route were closed by security personnel .
 Lawson didn't think it was a rifle shot . Lawson said it sounded more like a bang instead of a crack . Lawson: "It sounded like a crack instead of bang"
 Forrest V Sorrels, head of the Dallas office of the Secret Service, was to be repeated by nearly everyone in Dealey Plaza, with some notable exceptions . This description was repeated .
 After a brief pause, Sorrels heard two more shots coming close together . After a few seconds, he heard two shots come close together, then heard another shot . Sorrel: "It's not just a shooting, it's a shooting. It's a tragedy," Sorrel
 On hearing the first burst of fire, Sheriff Decker glanced back and thought he saw a bullet bouncing off the street pavement . Sheriff Decker says he saw the bullet bounce off the pavement . The sheriff says he thought the bullet hit the pavement when he heard the first shot .
 Motorcycle officer James Chaney told newsmen the next day that the first shot missed . The first shot was fired from a motorcycle motorcycle officer .
 Another Dallas motorcycle officer, Starvis Ellis, said he saw a bullet hit the pavement . Ellis told the House Select Committee on Assassinations that as he rode alongside the car in which Decker was riding, Ellis saw the bullet . Ellis was killed in the shooting .
 Neither Decker nor Ellis was ever questioned about this extraneous bullet by the Warren Commission . Decker and Ellis were never questioned about the bullet .
 Both Decker and Curry took the car’s radio and ordered their men to rush to the top of the underpass and the adjacent railroad yards where they thought the shots had originated . The men rushed to the area where they believed the shots originated .
 Witnesses in Dealey Plaza believed shots were fired from the Grassy Knoll . Those farther back in the motorcade believed shots came from the direction of the Depository . Witnesses in the Dealey plaza believed shots fired from Grassy knoll .
 Motorcycle policeman Marrion L Baker was riding near one of the press cars . He was riding on a motorcycle when the incident happened .
 The cyclist was about to tip over because of a gust of wind and the slow speed . He had just turned onto Houston and his cycle was going to turn over . He was hit by a wind gust and his bike tipped over in the wind .
 He recognized the first sound as a high-powered rifle shot . He had just returned from a deerhunting trip and recognized the sound .
 He thought the sound came from either the Depository or the Dal-Tex building . He thought it was from either of those buildings . He said he didn't know where the sound was heard .
 Seeing pigeons fluttering off the Depository’s roof, he gunned his motor and roared up to the entrance of the building . He gunned his car and roared his motor into the entrance to the building.
 Lee Harvey Oswald calmly stood calmly standing in the second-floor lunchroom of the Depository . Within seconds, he and Depository superintendent Roy Truly would encounter Oswald . Oswald had been standing calmly in the lunchroom .
 Secret Service agent Paul Landis heard the report of a high-powered rifle . Landis was riding in the right rear of the Secret Service follow-up car when he heard the rifle shot . The incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 With Landis was Secret Service agent Glen Bennett, who thought the sound was a firecracker . The sound was heard by Landis and Bennett, but Bennett thought it was a fake .
 The Secret Service agents assigned to Kennedy all acted with remarkable sluggishness when the firing began . Kennedy was shot in the head by the president of the United States .
 The pair drank until early that morning at a "beatnik" nightspot in Fort Worth, Texas . Perhaps it was due to the visit they had paid to a ‘beatnik’ nightspot .
 Hill had not been scheduled to make the Dallas trip, but joined at the last moment only after Mrs. Hill joined at last moment . Hill was not scheduled to travel, but she joined the trip at last minute .
 Hill also thought the initial sound was a firecracker and began looking to his right for the source of the sound when he saw Kennedy grab at himself and lurch forward slightly .
 Hill had just secured a grip on a handhold when the car began accelerating . Hill had secured a hold on the car when it began accelerating again . Hill was the first person to be hit by the car in a crash in the world's most famous crash .
 Hill saw that the right rear portion of the president’s head was missing in the limousine . Hill says the president's head was removed from the backseat of the limo .
 Nearly everyone present recalled a pause of several seconds between the first burst of fire and the final two shots . These came rapidly, one on top of the other .
 It was the third and final shot, or volley of shots, that killed President John F. Kennedy . The President was killed by a single shot .
 Until then, he had been immobile and quiet, only sagging slightly to the left . He had only been there for a few minutes .
 His head pitched forward violently for a split second only to be pushed hard to the left and rear . Then his head pitched back violently for the first time . Then he was pushed forward violently and rear of the head .
 A halo of crimson liquid and tissue surrounded his head momentarily and then fell to the rear of his head . The incident took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 The head shot lifted him slightly, then threw him against the car’s backseat . He was then thrown against the backseat of the car . The car was hit by the head shot, then he was thrown out .
 Martin, who had looked to his right after the first shots, later found bloodstains on the left side of his helmet . Martin: "Bloodstains were on the side of the helmet"
 Hargis saw Kennedy's head explode and was hit by bits of flesh and bone with such impact that he told reporters he initially thought he had been shot . He was riding next to Kennedy's limousine about six to eight feet from the left rear fender . Kennedy was hit
 Presidential assistant David Powers was riding with Secret Service agents in the car directly behind the president . Powers is the president's presidential assistant . Powers was in the Secret Service car at the time .
 I commented to Ken O’Donnell that it was 12:30 and we would only be about five minutes late when we arrived at the Trade Mart . I commented that it would be 12.30 and only be a few minutes late . Ken O'Donnell: "I'm not
 Shortly thereafter the first shot went off and it sounded to be a firecracker . "It sounded to me as if it were an explosion," she said . "Shortly thereafter, the first shots went off"
 The President moved quite far to his left after the shot from the extreme right hand side where he had been sitting . I noticed then that the President moved very far . away from the shot .
 Governor Connally disappeared from sight and then there was a third shot which took off the top of the President’s head and had the sickening sound of a grapefruit splattering against the side of a wall . There was a second shot and governor Connally disappear from sight .
 The total time between the first and third shots was about five or six seconds . "The total time . between the . first and the third shots" was about 5 or 6 seconds .
 First impression was that the shots came from the right and overhead but I also had a fleeting impression that the noise appeared to come from the front in the area of the Triple Underpass . The shots appeared to be from the left and right of the front of the stadium .
 This may have resulted from my feeling, when I looked forward toward the overpass, that we might have ridden into an ambush, I said . This may be because I was worried about the possibility of being ambushed .
 Several persons in the motorcade smelled gunpowder as the cars swept through the lower end of Dealey Plaza .
 Earle Cabell, wife of Dallas mayor, was riding in an open convertible six cars back from the motorcade’s lead car . The mayor's wife was also riding in a convertible, a convertible .
 At the opening shots, the car in which she was riding was passing the Depository building . At the start of the film, she was seen riding in a car passing the building .
 Looking up, she saw an object projecting from one of the top windows of the Depository building . The object was projecting from the top of the building .
 Senator Ralph Yarborough also smelled gunpowder as the car carrying him and Lyndon Johnson drove through the plaza . Yarborough and Johnson were both in the car at the time of the incident .
 Yarborough also failed to recognize the sound of the first shot . Yarborough, a former Army infantry officer and an avid hunter, was unable to hear the first gunshot .
 "I always thought that was strange because, being familiar with firearms, I never could see how I could smell the powder from a rifle high in that building," he says . "I never could ... see how ... I could . see how you could smell that," he adds .
 It does seem strange that people would smell powder from a shot fired more than sixty feet in the air and behind them . The powder is said to have been fired from more than 60 feet in air .
 The Grassy Knoll is less than twelve feet in elevation with a breeze from the north to carry smoke to street level . However, it's not so strange, if a shot were fired on top of the Knoll, it would be less than 12 feet .
 An argument has continued over whether the presidential limousine actually stopped . Over the years, the debate has raged over whether it actually stopped on the presidential lawn .
 There is no doubt that it slowed, as in the Orville Nix film, the brake lights can been seen coming on after the first shot . The brake lights are seen coming off after the shot .
 Secret Service agent Clint Hill in the follow-up car stepped down and ran for the president’s car . Secret Service agents Clint Hill and Clint Hill were in the second car .
 Connally by stating the limousine slowed to a stop and even pulled over into the left-hand lane, although the Zapruder film shows no such movement . Connally said the limo pulled over in the left lane, but the film appears to show no movement .
 Senator Yarborough may have gotten closest to the truth of the matter when he explained to this author, “Look, you toss a ball into the air.” Yarborough .
 A Navy commander was assigned to film major events involving President Kennedy . The Navy was investigating the cover-up . The investigation was part of an ongoing investigation by federal authorities .
 Thomas Atkins was assigned as an official photographer for the Kennedy White House in 1963 . Atkins is credited with taking photos of the Kennedy administration . Atkins was a photographer at the White House for more than 50 years .
 He was riding six cars behind Kennedy and filming as the motorcade moved through Dealey Plaza . As such, he traveled to Texas with Kennedy and was photographed with a quality camera .
 Kennedy’s car had just made the left turn heading toward the freeway entrance . Kennedy was in the middle of the turn . Kennedy's car was headed toward the entrance of the freeway .
 They did not sound like shots coming from anything higher than street level . They were heard from the sound of gunfire, police say .
 Atkins assembled his footage into a movie he titled The Last Two Days . Atkins returned to Washington on Air Force Two . Atkins assembled the footage for the movie .
 Atkins’s testimony and film were not studied by either of the federal panels investigating the assassination . Perhaps this explains why neither Atkins's testimony nor his film was studied by federal panels .
 The federal authorities didn’t want to hear from a man with a “keen visual sense” and strong credentials who might have told them things they did not want . Obviously, the federal authorities .
 Witness accounts differ from the later official version of the assassination . Witness: The stories of the motorcade witnesses differed from the official version . Witnesses tell of the events in the crowd of bystanders .
 Witnesses along the motorcade route through Dealey Plaza saw many things that differed from the later official version . The crowd of witnesses along the route was very different from the official version of the events .
 Even before the motorcade arrived, men with rifles were seen by people in downtown Dallas . The Dallas mayor's motorcade is expected to arrive in Dallas .
 Phillip Hathaway saw a man carrying a rifle in a gun case . Phillip B Hathaway and coworker John Lawrence were walking on Akard Street toward Main to get an observation spot for the motorcade . Hathaway said he saw the man with a rifle carrying in a case .
 The man was in his early thirties with “dirty blond hair worn in a crew-cut” and was wearing a gray business suit . The man is described as a man in his thirtieth-old age with dirty blond hair and a crew cut .
 Hathaway said the case was made of leather and cloth and was not limp, but obviously contained a rifle . Hathaway: "The case is not limp. It's not limp" Hathaway also said it contained a case .
 Ernest Jay Owens saw a white male of “heavy build” carrying a “foreign-made rifle” out of a parking lot . This same man may have been seen later that day . Owens told sheriff’s officers the afternoon of the assassination that he was driving
 Once Oswald was captured and proclaimed the assassination suspect, there was no effort to investigate these stories further . Oswald was the only person to be captured and declared the suspect .
 Mercer told authorities she was driving a rented white Valiant west on Elm Street just past the point where Kennedy was killed about two hours later . Mercer, then twenty-three years old, later told authorities that shortly before 11 m. the day of the assassination .
 She saw a young man get out of the passenger side of the truck, walk to a long tool compartment along the side, and remove a long paper bag . While waiting for the truck to move, she saw the young man remove the bag .
 The man then walked up on the Grassy Knoll carrying the package and was lost to her sight . The package was delivered to the woman's home in the early hours .
 She described this man as in his late twenties or early thirties, wearing a gray jacket, brown pants, a plaid shirt, and some sort of wool stocking cap with a tassel on it .
 Mercer said as she pulled alongside the truck, she locked eyes with the driver . Mercer described the driver as heavily built with a round face and light brown hair . Mercer said the driver is heavily built and has light brown skin .
 She said during this time, she saw three Dallas policemen standing by a motorcycle on the underpass talking . She said she also saw three officers standing by the motorcycle .
 When she was finally able to change lanes, Mercer stopped at the halfway point of the Dallas—Fort Worth Toll Road (now Interstate 30) to have breakfast .
 As she drove on to Fort Worth, she was pulled over by policemen . They informed her of the assassination and took her back to Dallas for questioning . She was taken back to Texas for questioning.
 Persons in the restaurant had informed authorities of her comments and presence at the assassination site, authorities say .
 She was held for several hours and questioned by both local and federal authorities, although no one showed her a badge or identified himself . No badge or identification was given to her .
 FBI men came to her home and took her back to the Dallas County Sheriff’s Office, where she was shown some photographs of various men . Early the next morning, FBI men arrived at her home .
 She picked out two of the men she had seen in the truck the day before . She picked up two of them as she saw the men in the car .
 Ruby’s well-publicized shooting of Lee Oswald the next day . All this transpired prior to the shooting of Oswald . Ruby shot Oswald in the head .
 Mercer claims she again recognized Ruby as the man driving the truck and that Oswald resembled the man carrying the rifle . Mercer also claims she recognized Oswald as the driver of the truck in the Oswald shooting .
 Oswald’s mother also claimed to have been shown a picture of Ruby prior to the Sunday shooting of her son . Oswald's mother said she was shown a photo of Ruby before her son was shot .
 Mercer later claimed that her story concerning the truck and its occupants was twisted and changed by both the FBI and the Dallas County Sheriff’s Office . Mercer claimed that the FBI had twisted her story .
 Sheriff’s department statement of November 22 stated that a sign on the side of the pickup truck carried the words AIR CONDITIONING, a claim she later denied . For example, she said that the words were the words “air conditioning” on the truck .
 Investigators searched for a truck with such a sign and later served to discredit her account . This one seemingly small change in her testimony sent investigators on a fruitless search for the truck .
 Mercer convinced New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison that her signature on the sheriff’s report was forged . Mercer was able to convince Garrison that the signature on her notarized signature was forged, Garrison said .
 Mercer realized how her account disrupted the official lonenut story and she became inaccessible to the public . After telling Garrison in the late 1960s, Mercer realized that her account had disrupted the story .
 Mercer’s experience may have been partly corroborated by another Dallasite, Julius Hardie, who said he saw three men on top of the Triple Underpass carrying long arms . Hardie told the Dallas Morning News years later that on the morning of November 22, he saw the
 Hardie said he reported the incident to the FBI, but no such report has been made public . Hardie: "No such report was made public. The FBI has not made public."
 As the motorcade arrived in Dealey Plaza, it passed almost twenty sheriff's deputies standing at the intersection of Main and Houston in front of the sheriff’s office . The motorcade passed almost 20 sheriff's Deputies standing on the ground .
 Sheriff Decker said he received a call from Washington advising him and his men to stand down and not participate in the motorcade . They had gathered upon the sheriff’s orders earlier that day but Sheriff Decker told them he had received an order from Washington .
 Deputies almost unanimously agreed they thought the shots came from the railroad yards . Deputies believe the shots were fired from the Grassy Knoll .
 They all began running in that direction even before Decker’s radio order to “saturate the area of the park, railroad and all buildings” was given . They all started running in the direction of that direction, even before the radio order was given.
 I was standing in front of the Sheriff’s Office on Main Street and watched the President and his party drive by. "I was standing there and watched them drive by," he says. "It was a great day for the Sheriff's Office," he said .
 The first shot was thought to be a backfire, then the second shot and third shot rang out . "Just a few seconds later, I heard the first shot, which I thought was a backfired," she said .
 A woman unknown to me said the President was shot in the head and the shots came from the fence on the north side of Elm Street . I ran as fast as I could to Elm Street just west of Houston and I heard a woman say the president was shot . The shots come from
 Mabra, too, was on the corner of Main and Houston, so close to the President that I could almost have reached out and touched him . "I could almost . reach out and touch him. I could have reached ... touched him," she says .
 Dallas County surveyor Robert H West watched the presidential limousine move slowly toward the Triple Underpass . Across Main Street from the deputies and Mabra stood Dallas County sheriff's deputies .
 West participated in reconstructions of the assassination for both Life magazine and the FBI that convinced him the crime could not have been the work of one man . West helped reconstruct the assassination .
 Arnold and Barbara Rowland, high school students who had been married the past May, had come to town to see the president . Arnold and Barrowland, a high school couple from California, were married in May .
 Arnold Rowland assumed the men were part of the Secret Service protection . Rowland had assumed that the men would be Secret Service agents .
 The man with the rifle was in the far west window of the Depository’s sixth floor . The other man, described as an elderly black man with thin hair wearing a plaid shirt, was seen in the easternmost window, the socalled sniper's nest window .
 Rowland said he lost sight of the man with the rifle as the motorcade approached, but again saw the black man just before Kennedy arrived . Rowland says he saw the man again before Kennedy arrives .
 Rowland said he neglected to mention the black man when he talked to authorities in the sheriff’s office . Rowland: During the excitement of the moment, Rowland didn't mention the man when talking to authorities .
 The next day FBI agents came to his home and got him to sign a statement, he said . He said the next day he was told he would not be allowed to sign it .
 He recalled, “At that time I told them I did see the Negro man there and they told me it didn’t have any bearing or such on the case right then.” He said he told them he saw the man there .
 The agents “didn’t seem interested’ in Rowland’s story of the two men on the sixth floor, they did attempt to identify the man with the gun by showing Rowland photos .
 Warren Commission brushed off Rowland’s testimony after FBI agents assured them that Rowland had mentioned nothing about the black man in his earlier statements . The Warren Commission later brushed off the testimony, saying it was a mistake .
 Deputy Sheriff Roger D Craig said Rowland told him about seeing two men pacing in the Depository . Rowland’s story was corroborated by a deputy sheriff, Craig . Craig said that Rowland said he saw the men ten minutes after the assassination .
 Craig's statements, like Rowland’s, were discounted by the Commission when federal agents contradicted their testimony . Rowland and Craig were convicted of perjury in a federal court case .
 Carolyn Walther, who worked in a dress factory in the Dal-Tex Building, was a dressmaker in the building .
 About noon, she and another employee joined the crowd on the east side of Houston just south of Elm to watch the motorcade . The motorcade is expected to take place in downtown Houston .
 I had gone out on the street at about twenty after twelve to get a look at the President when he came by . The President came by at about 20 after twelve, he said .
 "I walked toward them, with the thought they maybe were hurt and I could help them," she says . "I thought they might be hurt and maybe help them. I walked . I walked toward . I thought they were hurt," she said .
 "They were going to set out to prove me a liar," she said . "I had no intention of arguing with them and being harassed," she added. "I'm not going to argue with them," she says .
 "If they didn’t want to believe it or had some reason not to, well, then, that was all right with me," he said .
 Steelworker Richard Randolph Carr was working on the seventh floor of the new Dallas Courthouse, then under construction . Carr also reported seeing a man wearing a brown coat .
 Carr says he saw a heavyset man standing in a sixth-floor window of the Depository . Carr said he saw the man in a hat, horn-rimmed glasses, and tan sport coat . Carr says the man was wearing a hat and a tan sports coat .
 Ruby Henderson, standing across Elm Street from the Depository, also saw two men on an upper floor of the building . Ruby Henderson: "Two men were seen on the upper floor"
 She saw no one above the pair on the sixth floor, she said .
 She described the shorter of the men as having a dark complexion, possibly even African American, and wearing a white shirt . The shorter man is described as having dark complexion .
 Depository employees James Jarman and Harold Norman may have been watching the motorcade from the fifth-floor window just below the so-called sniper’s nest .
 Two men were on the sixth floor of the Depository moments before the shooting . Today, such stories of two men on sixth floor have been bolstered by two films .
 One 8 mm home movie shows the front of the Depository just as Kennedy’s limousine passes the building turning onto Elm . The Depository was located at the intersection of Main and Houston, Texas .
 The film shows movement in both the corner window of the sixth floor and the window next to it . The film was shot in New York .
 FBI report acknowledges receipt of Hughes’s film . FBI says it received Hughes' film .
 In 1975, CBS television asked Itek Corporation to look again at the Hughes film . The Hughes film was released in 1975 .
 The company concluded that there were no moving images in the double window next to the sixth-floor corner window . The conclusion is still disputed by various photographic experts .
 In 1978, a second movie surfaced that supports the two-man allegation . But in late 1978, another movie surfaced supporting the two men .
 Charles L Bronson was standing just a few feet west of Hughes when he was killed . Bronson's film also shows the sixth-floor corner windows of the Depository just moments before the motorcade passed .
 Bronson’s film was viewed in 1963 by an FBI agent who reported that it “failed to show the building from which the shots were fired,” thus relegating the film to obscurity .
 The film was rediscovered in 1978 when it was mentioned in declassified FBI documents . It was discovered by the Dallas Morning News in 1978 after being mentioned in FBI files .
 Robert Groden, who served as staff consultant on photographic evidence for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, studied the film . The newspaper commissioned Groden to study the film. Groden served as a staff consultant for the committee .
 The sniper’s nest was actually being completed just prior to the shots being fired, the author says . "I think what was happening there is the sniper's nest was being completed"
 The committee did recommend that the film be analyzed further . However, the committee did say that it should be analyzed .
 Another witness was an inmate of the Dallas County Jail, located just across the street to the east of the Depository .
 Several prisoners were in a sixth floor cell on a level with the sixth-floor Depository window . Several prisoners are in a cell on the sixth floor of a cell .
 Oddly, none of the jail inmates was ever identified or sought by federal investigators despite their excellent vantage point . None of the inmates were ever sought by investigators .
 Powell even stated he could see them so clearly he saw one “fooling with the scope” on the gun . Powell said he could even see one of the men ‘fool’ with the gun on the scope .
 "We were looking across the street because it was directly straight across. We were looking at the street," she said . "We're looking across because it's directly across," she added .
 Three months later, the Commission closed shop and nothing was done . Yet, three months after that, nothing has been done .
 Confirmation of the presence of two men on the sixth floor also might have come from Canadian journalist Norman Similas, who was in Dallas for a bottlers’ convention . The two men are believed to have been in the building's sixth floor .
 On November 21, Similas photographed and spoke with vice president Lyndon Johnson, who had addressed the convention .
 Later that evening, Similas visited the Carousel Club and spent more than an hour talking with its owner, Jack Ruby . Ruby is the owner of the club, which is based in New York .
 The next day, Similas strolled over to Dealey Plaza to photograph President Kennedy’s motorcade . President Kennedy's motorcade was the first time the photo was taken .
 He stood on the south side of Elm not ten feet from Kennedy’s car at the time of the first shots, he says . He says he stood not 10 feet away from Kennedy's car .
 The picture was trained momentarily on an open, sixth-floor window on Elm Street . It was taken on the curb of Elm Street in New York .
 The camera lens recorded what I could not possibly have seen at that moment—a rifle barrel extended over the windowsill . The camera's camera lens captured the moment .
 When the film was developed later, it showed two figures hovering over it .
 After returning to Toronto, I submitted my developed negatives to a daily newspaper . Upon my return to Toronto I submitted them to a Toronto newspaper . I submitted the negatives to the newspaper .
 When they were not used on Monday, November 25, I phoned and asked that they be returned . When they weren't used on that day, I asked for them to be returned, she said .
 Later I received a fat cheque in the mail, but the one negative which clearly showed what I believe to be two figures in the window of the assassin’s nest was missing .
 I was told that this negative had somehow become lost. When I pressed for it, I was asked to explain it to the public, he said . I was later told that it had somehow been lost .
 Ronald B Fischer, an auditor for Dallas County, and another county worker, Robert E Edwards, were standing on the southwest corner of Elm and Houston, directly across the street from the Depository . Fischer, a Dallas County auditor, and Edwards, a county worker from Dallas County . Fischer
 Fischer saw the head and shoulders of a man wearing a white T-shirt or possibly a light sport shirt in a southeast corner window . Fischer says he saw the man in the southeast corner of the window . The man was seen in the corner of a southeast window .
 Fischer and Edwards shifted their attention to the motorcade . The motorcade passed their position less than a minute later . Fischer, Edwards and Edwards watched as it passed through their position .
 Fischer heard what he thought was a firecracker followed by sounds he knew to be shots . Fischer heard the sound of a gunshot . Fischer: "I'm not scared. I'm scared to die" Fischer says .
 Both ran toward the Grassy Knoll and forgot the man in the window . They both ran to the Grassy Knoll .
 Hugh W Betzner Jr. was twenty-two years old on November 22, 1963 . He was taking pictures with an old camera near the intersection of Houston and Elm .
 Betzner ran west into Dealey Plaza following the presidential limousine . After taking Kennedy’s picture as he turned in front of the Depository he ran west .
 "I looked up and it seemed like there was another loud noise in a matter of a few seconds," says the victim . "I'm not sure what happened," she says of the incident . "There was a lot of noise," she said .
 I looked down the street and I could see the President’s car and another one, another one and they looked like the cars were stopped . The president's car was seen in the White House's motorcade .
 Betzner said he then heard at least two more shots fired and saw the impact in the limousine . The driver said he heard two shots fired before seeing the impact of the limo hit the limosine .
 The motorcade then sped up and Betzner joined spectators running up the Grassy Knoll toward the wooden picket fence from where he assumed the shots had emanated from . The motorcadcade sped up as he ran toward the fence from the shots he assumed had been fired
 Near Betzner was another photographer, Phillip Willis, a World War II veteran, who took a series of pictures considered by many as the most important photos of the assassination other than the Zapruder film . Willis took the pictures, which are considered by some to be among the most
 Willis, along with his wife and two young daughters, was in Dealey Plaza to get pictures of the president and Lyndon Johnson . Willis said he knew Johnson personally . Willis and his family attended the memorial service .
 Willis snapped a photo as the presidential limousine turned onto Elm in front of the Depository . Willis then ran farther west on Elm . Willis snapped the photo, then ran further west .
 He told the Warren Commission, “Then my next shot ... caused me to squeeze the camera shutter, and I got a picture of the President as he was hit with the first shot.”
 Willis said he did not see the effects of the next shots because his two daughters, Linda and Rosemary, were running along Elm and he became concerned for their safety . Willis: "I didn't see any of the effects because I was concerned for my daughters' safety" Willis said
 Willis’s younger daughter, Rosemary, ran back to her father, saying, “Oh, Daddy, they have shot our president.” Willis said . Willis's younger daughter said, "Oh, daddy, they've shot our President. They have killed our president
 In later years, this author interviewed Willis, who refuted two of the theories to come from federal investigations of the assassination . Willis was interviewed by Willis in later years .
 The single-bullet theory of the Warren Commission states that one shot, identified by the Commission as the first shot, struck both Kennedy and Connally . One theory states that the first hit struck Connally and Kennedy .
 The House Select Committee theorized Kennedy may have bent over momentarily while out of the Zapruder camera view and thus received a back wound lower than the throat wound . The committee theorized that Kennedy bent over and may have been shot in the back .
 Ruby stood in front of the Depository building . Ruby's photo was taken immediately after the shooting .
 He was identified by people who knew him and no one else has been able to say it was someone else . People who knew the victim identified him as a man who lived with his family .
 The Warren Commission cropped the picture right through the face of the man Willis claimed was Jack Ruby . Willis claimed Ruby was the man he claimed to be Ruby .
 In recent years archivist Richard Trask argued that the man in Willis’s photo is not Ruby .
 Willis failed to mention that Willis knew Ruby before the assassination and recognized him in his photo . Willis said he knew Ruby well enough to recognize him in the photo .
 Linda Willis, who was running along Elm Street with her sister, Rosemary, told this author in 1978, “I very much agree that shots came from somewhere other than the Depository.” Linda Willis .
 "So many of the people who have decided they know what happened there weren’t even there," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: So many of those who decided they knew what happened were not even there .
 Willis and his daughters did not believe the Warren Commission or the later House committee were seriously trying to find out the truth of the assassination . Willis believed the Warren commission or House committee was not serious about the assassination of JFK .
 Willis sat on a concrete retaining wall across the street from the Depository . Behind Willis was Howard Leslie Brennan, who was to become the star witness for the Warren Commission .
 Brennan had been working as a pipe fitter on a construction project behind the Depository . Brennan had eaten lunch and then taken this position to view the motorcade . Brennan was working as an engineer at the time of the incident .
 He said he saw a man in an upper floor of the Depository shortly before the motorcade arrived . The man says he saw the man in a building on the upper floor . The motorcade is expected to arrive at the Texas State House .
 It ran in my mind that it might be someone throwing firecrackers out of the window of the red brick building . I looked up at the building and thought it might have been a firecracker thrower .
 I then saw this man I have described in the window and he was taking aim with a high-powered rifle . He was aiming at the window of the window, which he described as a 'man'
 I was looking at the man in this window at the time of the last explosion. He says he was looking in the window when the explosion happened . He says the man was in the building when the blast happened .
 Brennan rushed into the Depository to tell a policeman what he had seen . Brennan apparently was one of the only witnesses to have actually seen a gunman fire . Brennan was the only witness to see a gunman open fire from the Texas Depository .
 Later that evening Brennan was unable to pick Lee Harvey Oswald out of a police lineup . However, he was able to pick him out of the police lineup that night .
 Zapruder film shows Brennan was not looking up at the time of the shooting but, as expected, was looking toward the president’s car . Much later, it was determined that Brennan had poor eyesight .
 "Federal people" were involved in the shooting, but not Secret Service or FBI, police say . "I don't know if they were Secret Service ... but they were federal people," she says .
 He came back a nervous wreck and within a year his hair had turned snow white . Within a year he had his hair turned white .
 Brennan answered no to both questions, and after going off the record, the Commission lawyer dismissed him . Brennan was dismissed from the Commission . Brennan says he is not a member of the commission .
 Brennan’s story of a man firing from the sixth-floor window was supported by a statement made by a 15-year-old boy . Amos Lee Euins, 15, told deputies that day that a man had fired from the window . The incident occurred in the early
 Euins, a schoolboy, was standing near Brennan on the south side of the Elm and Houston Street intersection when he heard a shot . Brennan was shot dead at the scene of the shooting .
 "I started looking around and then I looked up in the red brick building," she says . "I looked up and then looked down and realized it was a very beautiful building" she says.
 "I could tell the gun was a rifle and it sounded like an automatic rifle the way he was shooting," she says . "It sounded like a rifle," she said of the shooter .
 He led the cop back to the Depository and told him of seeing a figure with a “bald spot” firing from an upper window . He said he saw a figure in the image firing from the upper window of the building .
 "I saw a gun come out of there just after I saw Kennedy and Connally go by," says John Sutter . Sutter says he saw the gun come from the scene of the shooting .
 I could only see a hand, but I couldn’t tell if was righthanded or left-handed . I was unable to tell if the person was righanded or was left handed . The woman is believed to be the mother of two children .
 They could find out that the man who killed Kennedy had somebody with him, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 They had started to go off to lunch about 12:15m. when they saw the crowds and decided to wait and see the presidential motorcade . They were about to go to lunch when they decided to see the crowds .
 As the motorcade approached, they were having difficulty seeing over the heads of the crowd . The two men moved closer to Elm Street and a bit farther west into the plaza .
 Mrs. Reid turned to Campbell and said, “Oh my goodness, I'm afraid those came from our building,” she said . Reid replied, "Oh, Mrs. Campbell, I’m afraid those were from the building"
 Danny G Arce, who worked in the Depository, also was standing near Truly and Campbell . Danny G. Arce was standing nearby when he was killed .
 There were two explosions, two more explosions, and he realized that shots were being fired . Then there were two more blasts, he said, and then there were more explosions . He said: "Then there were three explosions, then two more shots were fired"
 Another Depository employee saw a bullet hit the street at the time of the first shot . The Depository is located in the Dallas suburb of Dallas .
 Virgie Rachley testified at the Warren Commission . She had married Virgie and was Mrs. Virgie by the time she testified .
 She and others were standing near Truly and Campbell in front of the Depository facing Elm Street . She and other workers were standing on Truly, Campbell and Campbell .
 It looked just like you could see the sparks from it and I just thought it was a firecracker and I was thinking that . Somebody was fixing to get in a lot of trouble and we thought the kids or whoever threw it were down below or standing near the underpass .
 A stray bullet struck the middle of the southernmost lane on Elm Street just behind the presidential limousine . Baker told Commission attorney Wesley Liebeler that the stray bullet hit the southmost lane of Elm Street .
 He became separated from Campbell and quickly found himself back on the steps of the Depository . He was reunited with Campbell and was able to walk back to the steps .
 Moments later a motorcycle policeman pushed past him and ran into the Depository . Moments later, a motorcycle police officer pushed past the officer and ran in to the building .
 Truly caught up with him in the lobby and they moved toward their encounter with a Depository employee . Lee Harvey Oswald was a Dallas, Texas, man who had been working at the time of the shooting .
 Staff writer Mary E Woodward went to Dealey Plaza with four coworkers to get a look at the president while they ate lunch . Woodward and her coworkers were able to see the president .
 As the limousine passed, she and another writer who had seen Kennedy during the final weeks of the 1960 campaign commented on how relaxed and robust he appeared .
 Woodward heard two more shots, coming close together, and the president slumped down in the car . Woodward heard the president slump down in his car after being shot in the head . Woodward: "Two more shots" came close together .
 Gloria Calvery and Karen Westbrook, both employees of publishing firm with offices in Depository building, had gone out during lunch to see the president . They had gone to see him at the end of lunch .
 They were standing with others almost halfway between the corner of Elm and Houston and the Triple Underpass . They stood with others about halfway between Elm and . Houston .
 Both heard the first blast and saw Kennedy struck by a bullet just as the presidential limousine got directly in front of their position . Both of the men were killed in the shooting .
 Neither was asked about the origin of the shots nor were asked to testify to the Warren Commission . Yet, in March 1964 statements to the FBI, neither was simply asked .
 Millican, a coworker of Howard Brennan’s, had no difficulty in determining where the shots came from . Millican: "I don't believe it's a joke"
 Millican told authorities he was standing on the north side of Elm Street about halfway between Houston and the Triple Underpass . Millican was standing between the Depository and the Grassy Knoll at the time .
 He said he noticed “a truck from Honest Joe’s Pawn Shop” park near the Depository . Then drive off about five or ten minutes before the president arrived, he said .
 It sounded approximately like a .45 automatic, or a high-powered rifle . It sounded about like a high powered rifle or a rifle .
 Millican provided perhaps one of the clearest descriptions of the firing sequence and location of the shots . Millican was never called to testify to the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Millican's supervisor, Sandy Speaker, said his entire work crew was there and they all corroborated Millican’s story . However, Speaker said his supervisors were there and corroborated his story . Speaker said the entire crew was at the scene .
 I was the superintendent of construction for the Republic Bank project at the time . I was superintendent of . construction for . the Republic . Bank project . The Republic Bank . project .
 Millican and the whole crew had knocked off for lunch and were by the Depository building to watch the parade . Millican says he and the crew were there for lunch at the end of the day .
 I was a combat Marine with the First Marine Division in World War II, hand-to-hand combat, missions behind enemy lines, and I know what I am talking about. I was in combat with the first Marine Division . I was also a combat combat Marine .
 John A Chism, along with his wife and three-year-old son, were standing near Millican, standing directly in front of the Stemmons Freeway sign . John A. Chism was standing with his family when he was killed .
 They said the first shots were fired just as the president got in front of them . They said they saw first shots fired just before the president arrived .
 Chism told authorities that day, “And then there was a second shot that I heard, after the President’s wife had pulled him down in the seat.” Chism said .
 Jean Newman was a twenty-one-year-old manufacturing company employee who came to view the motorcade in Dealey Plaza . Newman was one of the first to witness the event . Newman: "It was a very exciting experience"
 Also near the Stemmons Freeway sign were two of the most suspicious characters in Dealey Plaza .
 Despite their activities and the fact that both were captured in several photographs, this pair was never mentioned publicly until the House Select Committee on Assassinations investigation in the late 1970s .
 Two Suspicious Men stand near each other on the north sidewalk of Elm Street acting strangely . One began pumping a black umbrella while the other waved his right arm high in the air .
 Their activities were known only through analysis of assassination photographs . Their activities are known only by analysis of photographs .
 As Kennedy’s limousine began the gentle descent into Dealey Plaza, a man can be seen standing near the street-side edge of the Stemmons Freeway sign .
 He holds the umbrella in a normal fashion and the top of the umbrella almost reaches the bottom of the sign . He holds it in a regular fashion and holds it to his side .
 In photos taken minutes before Kennedy’s arrival, the umbrella is closed and, immediately after the shooting, pictures show the umbrella was closed again . The umbrella was later closed again after the incident .
 As seen in Zapruder film, the umbrella was pumped almost two feet into the air, twirled, and then lowered . Furthermore, as seen in the film, once Kennedy is exactly opposite the man with the umbrella, it was pumped two feet in the air .
 In photos, a man appears to be dark complected, perhaps black or Hispanic . At the same time, the second man raises his right hand into the air, possibly making a fist . The second man, possibly black or Latino, appears to make a fist in photos .
 This man was located on the outer edge of the Elm Street sidewalk opposite the umbrella man, who was on the inner edge . The umbrella man is located in the middle of the sidewalk, opposite the man on the sidewalk .
 The man with the open umbrella was the only person in Dealey Plaza with an open umbrella . The man was the last person in the area with a closed umbrella .
 Under the warm Texas sun, there was no reason to carry an open umbrella at that time . The incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Two prominent theories have emerged concerning the ‘umbrella man’ and his activities that day . The “umbrella’s’ activities have been the subject of numerous theories .
 The umbrella may have been a sophisticated weapon that fired a dart or “flechette” filled with a paralyzing agent, a researcher says .
 Cutler’s theory is supported by the 1975 testimony of a CIA weapons developer who told the Senate Intelligence Committee that just such an umbrella weapon was in the hands of the spy agency in 1963 . Cutler's theory supports his theory .
 Charles Senseney developed weaponry for the CIA at Fort Detrick, Maryland . He developed a dart-firing weapon he developed as looking like an umbrella . The weapon was developed by the CIA .
 The dart gun was silent in operation and fired through the webbing when the umbrella was open . He said the dart gun fired through webbing in the umbrella when it was closed .
 Senseney said the CIA had ordered about fifty such dart weapons and that they were operational in 1963 . The weapons were operational for the first time in 1963, he said .
 Cutler theorized that the umbrella was used to fire a paralyzing dart into Kennedy immobilizing him for marksmen with rifles . In his 1970 book, Cutler theorizes that the dart was fired into Kennedy .
 He claims this theory accounts for the small puncture wound in Kennedy’s throat described by Dallas doctors, but which was altered by the time of the Bethesda autopsy . He claims that the small hole in Kennedy's throat was found in his throat .
 According to Cutler, this dart explains Kennedy’s lack of motion during the shooting sequence . Cutler: ‘This dart explains why Kennedy was motionless during the sequence .
 Cutler’s theory cannot be summarily dismissed . Since such a weapon existed and since the actions of both Kennedy and the “umbrella man” were consistent with the operation of such a . weapon, Cutler's theory can't be dismissed .
 The use of such an exotic and questionably effective weapon in such a momentous event stretches credulity . However, the use of an exotic weapon is not without credibility .
 This theory suggests that Kennedy was killed by a crossfire coordinated by radiomen . This theory is based on a theory that the president was killed in a sniper attack on Kennedy .
 The two men were among the closest bystanders to the president when he was first struck . They gave signals indicating that he was not fatally hit and therefore more shots were required .
 The two men may have been providing Kennedy with a last-second sight of who was responsible for his death, researcher Gary Shaw said . Shaw said the two men could have been giving Kennedy with an eye on who killed him .
 Shaw recalled that throughout the planning of the Bay of Pigs Invasion, CIA officers had promised an “umbrella” of air protection of the Cuban invaders . Shaw recalls that during the planning, the CIA had promised to provide air protection to the invaders .
 Kennedy refused to authorize further U.S. military support for the invasion . This “umbrella” failed to materialize because Kennedy did not authorize further support .
 According to Shaw’s theory, the man with the open umbrella symbolized the promise of an air-support "umbrella" while the dark-complected man may have been one of the anti-Castro Cuban leaders known to Kennedy .
 Kennedy may have seen the open umbrella and the face of a Cuban he knew was involved in the Bay of Pigs . He may have realized who was participating in his death and realized who it was .
 The existence of the “umbrella man’s” and the darkcomplected man is fact, says author . “The existence of this man and the woman is fact. It is fact," he says .
 Two men sat down beside each other on the north sidewalk of Dealey Plaza . While virtually everyone was moved to action by the assassination, these two men sat next to each other .
 Dark-complected man appears to put a walkie-talkie to his mouth . The dark-competent man appeared to be in a dark mood .
 What seems to be an antenna can be seen jutting out from behind the man’s head while his right hand holds some object to his face . The image was taken by Jim Towner, who took the photograph .
 Several photos taken in the seconds following the assassination show both men sitting together on the Elm Street sidewalk .
 Moments later, the man with the umbrella gets up, takes one last look toward the motorcade still passing under the Triple Underpass, and begins walking east in the direction of the Depository . Moments later he gets up and heads east in direction of Texas State House .
 The dark-complected man saunters toward the Triple Underpass passing people rushing up the Grassy Knoll .
 He can be seen stuffing some object —the walkie-talkie?—into the back of his pants . He can't be heard stuffing something into his pants.
 Despite the suspicious actions of these two men, there is no evidence that the FBI or the Warren Commission made any effort to identify or locate them . The Warren Commission did not attempt to locate the two men .
 Researchers claim the lack of investigation of these men indicated the shallowness of the government probes into the assassination . Researchers claimed the lack to investigate the men indicated a shallownness of the investigation .
 Committee finally releases photograph of the ‘umbrella man’ to the news media . Committee urges anyone with knowledge of the man to come forward .
 The “umbrella man” suddenly was identified a few weeks after this national appeal . Coincidentally—if it was a coincidence—the ‘umbrella’ man’s identity was identified weeks later .
 In August 1978, an anonymous telephone caller told researcher Penn Jones Jr. that the man with the umbrella was a former Dallas insurance salesman named Louis Steven Witt . Witt was an insurance salesman, according to the caller . Witt is believed to be Witt, a former insurance salesman .
 Jones contacted some local newsmen, including this author, and together they confronted Witt . Witt was working as a warehouse manager when he was arrested . Jones contacted a local newsman and together, confronted Witt, who then worked for a warehouse .
 Witt was in Dealey Plaza on the day Kennedy was killed . Witt refused to talk with newsmen but acknowledged that he was there that day . Witt said he was in the Plaza at the time of Kennedy's death .
 His story was comic relief compared to the intense scrutiny of witnesses like Marina Oswald and Warren Commission critics . The Warren Commission has been criticized for questioning Oswald .
 Witt says he grabbed a large black umbrella and went to Dealey Plaza to heckle Kennedy . Witt told the committee that on the spur of the moment, he grabbed the umbrella . Witt said he grabbed an umbrella and then heckled Kennedy with a large umbrella .
 He claimed that someone had told him that an open umbrella would rile Kennedy . He claimed someone told him someone would be riled by Kennedy .
 The umbrella may have symbolized the appeasement policies of British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, who always carried an umbrella . The umbrella symbolized Chamberlain's policies, experts say .
 I think I went sort of maybe halfway up the grassy area [on the north side of Elm Street], somewhere in that vicinity . I think it was somewhere in the vicinity of the Elm Street .
 My view of the car during that length of time was blocked by the umbrella’s being open . The umbrella was open when the car was driven by the driver .
 Based on available photographs made that day, none of Witt’s statements were an accurate account of the actions of the “umbrella man” who stood waiting for the motorcade with his umbrella in the normal over-the-head position .
 There continues to be no official accounting for the dark-complected man who appears to have been talking on a radio moments after the assassination . And there is still no official explanation for the man who appeared to be talking on the radio .
 The House committee failed to identify or locate this man . Witt claimed he had no recollection of such a person, despite photographs that seem to show the ‘umbrella man’ talking with the dark man .
 No one has ever admitted the possibility of radios in use in Dealey Plaza . Witt asked Witt specifically if he recalled seeing the man with a walkie-talkie .
 Others in the crowd continued to give accounts that differed with the later government pronouncements . Meanwhile, others gave accounts that differ with the government .
 Dolores Kounas was a clerk-typist with McGraw-Hill Publishing Company . The company had offices on the third floor of the Depository .
 She, along with two other McGraw-Hill employees, was standing just west of the Depository across Elm Street from Millican and the Chisms . The Depository is located west of Elm Street .
 She, too, thought the first shot was a firecracker, but after hearing a second shot and seeing people fall to the ground, she realized they were shots . She also thought she thought she was hit by firecrackers .
 I was across the street from the Depository building and was looking in the direction of the building as the motorcade passed and following the shots, I did not look up at the building . I had thought the shots came from a westerly direction in the vicinity of the viad
 Forty-four-year-old James Altgens, a photographer for the Associated Press in Dallas, arrived in Dealey Plaza early .
 President Kennedy passed through downtown Dallas on his way to the White House . The photo was taken at the west end of Dealey Plaza . The president was passing through the downtown buildings .
 Altgens tried to station himself on the Triple Underpass, but was shooed away by a Dallas policeman . The officer told him it was railroad property and only railroad employees were allowed there .
 Altgens walked around by the Depository, then on to the intersection of Main and Houston, where he took a photo as the president passed . The president passed through the intersection .
 He then ran farther into the plaza, where he made several photographs from the south curb of Elm as the motorcade approached .
 On June 2, 1964, with the Warren Commission’s investigation winding down, Altgens was finally interviewed by FBI agents . The Warren Commission's investigation was winding down in 1964, and the FBI interviewed him .
 There was not another shot fired after the President was struck in the head . There was no further shot fired .
 That was the last shot—that much I will say with a great degree of certainty. That was last shot, that much I'm certain,’s a certainty. ‘I will say that much, I'm sure, that's the very last shot,' he says .
 Altgens was never called to testify to the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was satisfied to merely cite from his FBI interrogation . Despite his vantage point and his photographic background, he never testified .
 Altgens’s photos were taken just seconds after the first shots were fired and showed a slender man standing in the doorway of the Depository . Another photo was taken seconds before the first shot was fired .
 Many people, including his mother, have claimed the man was Lee Harvey Oswald . Many people have claimed he was Oswald . The man's mother has also claimed he is Oswald .
 Near Altgens on the grassy triangle in the lower part of Dealey Plaza were all the closest witnesses to the actual assassination . The closest witnesses were a handful of people who witnessed the assassination .
 Charles Brehm, along with his five-year-old son, had watched the presidential motorcade turn onto Houston from near the front of the Depository building . The president's motorcade turns onto Houston, Texas, at the time .
 Brehm ran across Elm and stationed himself halfway between Houston and the Triple Underpass on the grassy triangle south of Elm . Brehm was holding his son when he ran across the street .
 I very definitely saw the effect of the second bullet that struck the President. I saw it very definitely, he said . The president was struck by a bullet that hit him, he added .
 That which appeared to be a portion of the President’s skull went flying slightly to the rear of the car and directly to its left . The President's car was hit by the accident .
 The skull landed in the grass not far from Brehm's location . Brehm said the piece of skull landed on the grass near him .
 Brehm, an ex-serviceman with experience in bolt-action rifles, was probably the closest witness to the fatal head shot . Brehm was a close friend of the suspect, who was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 He continued to tell his story over the years, even appearing at Dallas events concerning the assassination .
 Two significant home movies were made of the assassination . Maria Muchmore had moved from a position near Main and Houston to the center of the grassy triangle behind Brehm .
 She caught on film the final and fatal head shot to Kennedy and the disappearance of the limousine into the Triple Underpass .
 Orville Nix captured the entire assassination sequence on camera . Muchmore was shot by Muchmore's widow .
 Nix film most clearly shows the limousine coming to a halt with its brake lights on prior to the fatal head shot . It is the first time the limo has been shown to come to a brief halt with the lights on .
 Also in the Nix film are suspicious flashes of light on the Grassy Knoll, which is in the background . The film was released in November 2014 .
 Nix was interviewed by an assassination researcher some years later and asked about the direction of the shots . Nix said the shots were fired from a plane .
 Nix also said he later talked about the assassination with a friend, Forrest V Sorrels, then head of the Dallas Secret Service office . Nix said he also talked about it with the Secret Service chief, Forrest Sorrel .
 At the time of the assassination, Sorrels, too, believed shots had come from the picket fence on the Grassy Knoll, he said . He said at the time, he also believed shots came from the fence .
 The Warren Commission never called Nix to testify, although he indicated he was willing to do so to the FBI . Nix was never interviewed by the Commission, nor did the Commission have his film analyzed .
 In late 1966, Itek Corporation, which handles government contracts and is closely tied to the CIA, studied the film on the request of United Press International . The film was released by the CIA in 1966 .
 Scientists concluded that the gunman figure was actually shadows from a tree branch . Itek scientists concluded that it was actually a shadow of a tree .
 If the figure was merely shadows, it would seem that they should still be there in the later frames . The figure was just shadows, according to the film .
 Only a couple of the witnesses from the center grassy area testified to the Warren Commission . One of the best witnesses was never identified until years later when she was interviewed by an assassination researcher .
 A woman stood filming right behind Brehm and his son . Also taking films on the south side of Elm Street was a woman who stood filming on the street .
 Federal authorities were unable to identify or locate the “babushka lady’s” explosive story she had to tell . The Babushka Lady may be the reason authorities couldn’t find her .
 Beverly Oliver said she was 19 years old at the time of the assassination . She worked as a singer for the Colony Club, a strip-show club located next door to Jack Ruby’s Carousel Club .
 On November 22, she took a prototype Super-8 Yashica movie camera to Dealey Plaza . She ended up just behind Charles Brehm on the grassy triangle just south of Elm Street .
 The camera was a gift from a friend who had access to new camera technology . It was given to the family by a friend, who was gifted with new technology .
 Photos taken that day show Oliver filmed the assassination as the motorcade moved down Elm Street . Oliver was there at the time of the assassination .
 Oliver said she was approached by two men as she neared the Colony Club . Oliver said that on Monday following the assassination, two men approached her in the early hours .
 They said they knew she had taken film in Dealey Plaza and wanted to develop it for use as evidence . Police said they wanted to use the footage as evidence of her actions .
 Oliver identified Regis Kennedy as one of the men who took her film . Oliver identified him when shown photographs of FBI agents involved in the assassination . Oliver said he was a member of the FBI who took the film .
 Oliver married George McGann, a Dallas underworld character whose best man was Russell D Matthews . Not long after the assassination, Oliver married McGann .
 The committee also developed evidence connecting Matthews with associates of Florida Mafia chieftain Santos Trafficante .
 Matthews was a father figure to another Dallas thug, convicted murderer-for-hire Charles V Harrelson, the father of film star Woody Harrellson . Matthews was also a mentor to convicted murderer Charles V. Harrelsson, who was convicted of murder .
 Oliver revealed she and McGann had a two-hour conversation with Richard Nixon in a Miami hotel in 1968 . Oliver revealed that during the presidential campaign of 1968, McGann and Oliver had a conversation with Nixon .
 Watergate affair no longer seems so far-fetched after new information has been made public linking Nixon to organized crime figures . Why Nixon would meet with a well-known criminal is unclear .
 Oliver also said that two weeks prior to the Kennedy assassination, she was visiting in Ruby’s club . Oliver said she was in the club at the time of Kennedy's assassination .
 She recognized Oswald when his picture was broadcast following the assassination . She later recognized him when he was shown on television .
 A friend of Oliver's also knew of Oswald's being in Ruby’s club and spoke openly about it . Oswald was in the club at the time of the assassination .
 She remained quiet until the mid-1970s, when she was located and interviewed by Shaw and later by newsmen .
 Beverly Oliver was the object of a secret briefing by Commission attorney Robert Tannenbaum on March 17, 1977 . A transcript of this briefing was accidentally leaked to the news media . There is no mention of her or her film in the committee’s report .
 A report was not released to the public when it was prepared . Not to mention that when a report was prepared, it was not publicly released . The report was released without a release date .
 A concerted effort appeared to have been mounted to discredit her . Largely due to her hesitation in going public for so many years, she was reluctant to go public .
 Most accusations were based on flimsy arguments, such as one that claimed the shoes depicted on the person in the Dealey Plaza photographs appeared too small to fit the older and larger Oliver . Other than simply voicing disbelief, most accusations were unfounded .
 Neither Moorman nor Hill were there simply to see Kennedy . They were probably the closest witnesses to the fatal head shot other than Brehm .
 Both women had come to Dealey Plaza to take pictures of Dallas police motorcycle officers they fancied . Both women took pictures of officers they wanted to see .
 Hill had just moved to Dallas from Oklahoma and Moorman was showing her the city . He was trying to get her a date with one of the policemen who was escorting the motorcade .
 The women were stopped by a policeman at the corner of Elm and Houston . They were initially prevented from entering the grassy triangle in the center of the plaza .
 After some flirting, the officer allowed them through and they took up a position on the south side of Elm midway between Houston and the Triple Underpass .
 Hill said she was getting in a “cops and robbers frame of mind” hoping to date the policeman . Hill noticed that a van with writing on it saying UNCLE JOE’s PAWN SHOP was allowed through the police lines and drove in front of the
 She thought this was suspicious since no one else had been allowed into that short street in front of the Depository . No one else was allowed in the short street outside of the depository .
 Moorman began taking photos with Polaroid camera and handing the photos to Hill . Hill applied fixative and put them in the pocket of her red-cloth raincoat .
 Kennedy was smiling and waving to a crowd of people on the north side of Elm. Hill . Hill said Kennedy waved to the crowd on Elm Street . Hill: Kennedy was waving to people waving to the north .
 "I knew he’d never look our way because all the people were on the other side of the street," she says . "I jumped out into the street and yelled, “Hey, Mr President, look this way," she recalls .
 "I kept standing for a minute trying to see where the shots came from. But being young and dumb, I kept standing there, I thought it was a mistake," he said .
 I saw a puff of smoke and some sort of movement on the Grassy Knoll where he was. "I saw some kind of movement," he said. "He was in the middle of the road"
 "I became suspicious of this man and thought he might be connected with that truck I saw. Because of my earlier thoughts, I became suspicious," he says . "Because of his previous thoughts, he became suspicious"
 Hill said she heard between four and six shots . Hill ran across the street in an effort to locate the men she had seen . Hill said the men were men in the area .
 She claimed she recognized TV photos of Jack Ruby as the man she had seen in front of the Depository . She didn't find them, but she claimed that on the following Sunday morning she recognized photos of Ruby .
 Hill said she was standing just west of the Depository when she was taken into custody . Hill said two men identified themselves as Secret Service agents . Hill was arrested minutes after the shooting .
 A Dallas reporter had talked with Moorman and taken her to the sheriff’s office . Meanwhile, a Dallas reporter was talking to Moorman .
 Photo was taken by federal authorities, Hill said . Hill said she was later joined by Hill, who said their photographs had been taken by them .
 Bill Newman, his wife, Gayle, and their two small children were standing west of the Stemmons Freeway sign directly below the Grassy Knoll . Bill Newman was standing with his wife and two children when the incident occurred .
 I thought the shot had come from the garden directly behind me, that was an elevation from where I was as I was right on the curb . I thought it was from a garden, but the shot came from a different angle .
 Later that day, Newman was apparently the first person to publicly speak of the Grassy Knoll . Newman was interviewed later that day during a local television interview .
 Another witness, far above the crowd in Dealey Plaza, had a bird’s-eye view of the assassination . Another witness says he saw the assassination in a bird's eye .
 Many of the closest and most critical witnesses were never queried by the Warren Commission . In fact, it should be noted that many of the key witnesses never questioned by the commission .
 Those who were there can be forgiven for not providing useful information . And those who were able to provide any useful information?
 Statement given to FBI by seventy-three Depository employees were given to Warren Commission by FBI director J Edgar Hoover . Statement was made to the Warren Commission in 1964 .
 Every citizen had been conditioned for nearly four months to the idea that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin and that only three shots came from the sixth floor of the Depository . These statements were all given in late March 1964, a time in which every citizen was conditioned to believe Oswald was
 There were rumors already circulating in Dallas that it might be unhealthy to contradict the official government position on the assassination . Adding to this predetermination by both government and mass media were rumors that it may be unhealthy .
 Witnesses were questioned as to their opinion of the origin of the shots or even how many shots were fired . Incredibly, virtually none of the witnesses were questioned .
 In fact, for the most part, the participants read like pre-prepared statements simply signed by the participants . None of the participants were willing to challenge federal authorities .
 Most of the witnesses in the crowd believed shots came from the Grassy Knoll area . Even in the face of contradictions in evidence and testimony by those in Dealey Plaza, one fact seems inescapable .
 The Depository was a private company that acted as an agent for a number of book publishers, furnishing office space and providing warehousing, inventorying, and shipping .
 School systems would place orders with the publishers for textbooks and the publishers would send the orders along to the Depository . About a half dozen men acted as order fillers, collecting the books as per each order .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was an order filler for Oswald's assassin . Oswald's order fillers were ordered by the White House on November 22, 1963 . Oswald was killed in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 .
 Oswald and his wife, Marina, had separated at the time he left for New Orleans in the spring of 1963 . Oswald and Marina had separated when he went to New Orleans .
 Marina returned to Texas with a friend, Ruth Paine, while Oswald continued his activities . They reunited in Louisiana, but in September, it was decided that since Marina was about to have a baby, she would return .
 Marina Oswald was living in Irving, a suburban city west of Dallas, when Oswald arrived back in Dallas on October 3 . Oswald's wife, Marina, had been living in Dallas since Oswald's return .
 Paine said she gave Oswald Oswald, who had no driver's license, a driving lesson in her car . Oswald had no license and had no driving license .
 Oswald allegedly returned from his trip to Mexico City a week before . Oswald allegedly had returned from a trip to the Mexican capital . Oswald is accused of killing himself in Mexico City .
 There continues to be much controversy concerning this journey . However, there is still a lot of controversy concerning the journey .
 Oswald rented a room at 1026 N Beckley Avenue from Mrs. Paine . Paine drove Oswald to Dallas, Texas, where he rented the room . Mrs. Oswald died in Dallas .
 Oswald had filled out applications at the Texas Employment Commission . Oswald reportedly was looking for work at the time of his death . Oswald was reportedly looking for a job .
 Paine mentioned Oswald to neighbors, including Mrs. Paine, about the fact that he needed work because his wife was about to have another baby . Paine's wife was pregnant with another child .
 Marina Oswald, who was present at this gathering, reportedly urged Mrs. Marina Oswald to speak to Mrs. Oswald . Marina Oswald reportedly urged her mother-in-law to speak out .
 Paine agreed and called Depository superintendent Roy Truly that very day . Truly called Paine and Truly that day .
 Truly recalled getting a call from a woman in Irving who said she knew a man whose wife was going to have a baby and needed a job . Truly recalled how she was approached by a woman who knew her husband's wife was having a baby . Truly said she got the call from the
 Oswald interviewed with Truly for the job the next day, October 15 . Paine mentioned her call to Oswald later that evening and the interview was held that day . Oswald interviewed for Truly .
 The flooring on the sixth floor was being torn up and replaced . Plus more hands were needed as the flooring was torn up . The work was being done at the end of the day .
 Lee Oswald would not have had any need for Lee Oswald at that time, which is a tragic thing for me to think about . "If it hadn’t existed a week or two longer, or if we had not been using some of our regular boys putting down this plywood
 Oswald got acquainted with Frazier during his first week at work . Oswald asked Frazier to drive him to Irving, Texas, to visit his family . Oswald and Frazier got acquainted and soon became friends .
 Frazier, who had only started working at the Depository the month before, said he was eager to make friends in Dallas . Frazier: "I'm looking forward to making friends here"
 Oswald told Frazier he was staying in Dallas to take a driving test . Frazier agreed and gave Oswald a ride to Irving every weekend prior to the assassination .
 Oswald angrily told Marina he was using a fictitious name at the Beckley Avenue address and not to call him there . The next day, Oswald called the Paine home and angrily called the next day . Oswald called Marina and angrily told her to not call him at the address .
 Oswald reportedly asked Frazier to drive him to Irving after work to get curtain rods for his apartment . Oswald reportedly wanted to get some curtain rods to put in his Beckley Avenue apartment . Frazier drove Oswald to Irving on Thursday morning, November 21 .
 Frazier's sister saw Oswald place a paper-wrapped package in Frazier’s car . Frazier noticed the packet as the pair drove to work . Frazier and his sister claimed to have seen Oswald with a package and their descriptions were inconsistent .
 Oswald also said he would not be riding back to Irving as usual, but he gave no explanation . Oswald also gave no reason for his decision to not ride back as usual .
 Oswald got out of the car and walked ahead into the Depository carrying his package, Frazier says . Frazier: Oswald had one end cupped in his right hand and the other tucked under his right arm, parallel to his body .
 When Frazier entered the building, he could not see Oswald and never knew what became of the package . Frazier never saw Oswald or knew what was missing .
 Photographs made of Oswald’s Beckley Avenue room that weekend clearly show curtains in place, obviating any need for curtain rods . Furthermore, photographs made of the room that day clearly show curtain rods in place . Oswald's Beckley Ave room had no need for curtains,
 Oswald denied the curtain rod story, saying he only carried his lunch to work . Oswald told the authorities he had only taken his lunch when questioned by the authorities .
 He appeared to be carrying on normal work duties, particularly on the sixth floor, where he was assigned .
 He told the Warren Commission that as the presidential motorcade approached, he joined other Depository employees who were standing on the steps of the building facing Elm .
 Harkness radioed the police dispatcher to send an ambulance to that location at 12:18m. Harknesses radioed to send the ambulance to the scene at 12.18m .
 Parkland never recorded a patient registering at this time, and the entire incident seemed forgotten . However, Parkland did not record the patient registering and the incident was forgotten .
 There is no mention of this incident in the Warren Commission Report and the FBI didn’t get around to investigate it until May 1964 . Despite the suspicious timing and proximity to the assassination, the FBI never investigated it .
 Former employee of O’Neal Funeral Home called the FBI’s Dallas office to report the incident, adding the patient “disappeared” after arriving at Parkland . The FBI is investigating the death of the patient .
 Rike added that in the confusion at Parkland, this man had simply walked off . Rike said that the man simply walked away from the scene .
 It was Rike who later helped load the president’s body into his ambulance for the sad return to Love Field .
 On May 26, Bureau agents located the ‘victim’ after finding his name in O’Neal records . The victim was found by the Bureau of Alcohol and Drug Enforcement Agency .
 Jerry B Belknap had paid his $12.50 ambulance charge back on December 2, 1963 . Belknaps paid the bill back in December 1963 .
 Belknap said he had suffered from seizures since being struck by a car while getting off a school bus as a child . He said he has suffered seizures since he was struck by car while walking off school bus .
 He was standing near the Depository when he stepped back from the crowd when he lost consciousness .
 He was told to lie down at Parkland after asking for attention from staff . He sat on a small table and after asking attention, he was told he must lie down .
 He said a short time later there was a great rush of people who went into a different section of the emergency room . He said that a short . time later, people went to different . sections of the ER .
 Belknap said a male attendant finally brought him some water and an aspirin but that after realizing that he was not going to get immediate treatment, he walked out without registering . He said he left without registering and walked out of the hospital without paying attention .
 His exit was accomplished under the noses of security agents who were locking down the hospital . Amazingly, he was able to get out of the hospital without being spotted .
 Belknap caught a bus back downtown downtown, where he first learned of the assassination . He caught the bus back to the scene of the shooting .
 Belknap told Rose that he had been interviewed by both Dallas police and the FBI within days of the assassination . Months before the FBI’s reported investigation in May 1964, the FBI had reportedly been investigating .
 He commented that the two police agencies apparently distrusted each other and both asked him the same questions . He said that the police agencies seemed to distrust each other . He added that police officers from both agencies asked him questions .
 Belknap offered the explanation that perhaps an agent had called him on the phone and simply confirmed the results of the earlier interview . Belknaps: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was a mistake"
 Belknap also stated in 1983 that an investigator from “some committee in Washington” had contacted him within the past few years . Belknaps said in 1983 he had been contacted by an investigator in Washington .
 If this investigator was with the House Select Committee on Assassinations, there is no reference to him in its report or attendant volumes . However, if this investigator worked for the committee, there are no references to him .
 Belknap also said he lost consciousness at the scene, while the FBI report said he didn’t . The FBI report says he didn't lose consciousness . Belknaps said he also lost consciousness .
 Researchers view the incident as either a strangely convenient coincidence or as some as-yet-undiscovered plot to distract police and bystanders while assassins moved into position just prior to Kennedy’s arrival .
 Ambulance driver Rike, who died in April 2010, told this author he felt the incident was suspicious because he personally had been summoned to that same location on false calls several times in the days leading up to the assassination . Rike said he felt suspicious as he had personally been
 In fact, there may have been more than a dozen fake calls, not immediately noticed as they were spaced over separate shifts of drivers . The fake calls were spread over different shifts, not noticed until they were noticed .
 This happened up to twelve times in the two weeks preceding the assassination, said Rike .
 Kennedy motorcade was running about five minutes late, Rike says . Rike points out that if it had been on time, it would have arrived at Elm and Houston simultaneously with his ambulance .
 Speculation was that this would have congested the intersection, causing the Kennedy limousine to stop, making the president a stationary target . Speculation is that this . would have . caused the president to stop .
 Researchers agree the incident deserves further investigation . Rike and Dennis McGuire, the ambulance drivers who took Belknap to Parkland, remained there to load Kennedy’s body for the return trip to Love Field .
 Geneva L Hine, who operated the Depository’s credit desk on the second floor, felt strongly that shots had originated from within the building . Hine was one of the employees who felt strongly about the shooting .
 She told the Warren Commission she had seen President Kennedy before . She offered to answer the telephones while some of the office women could go outside to view the motorcade . She said she had been with Kennedy before and offered to help answer the phones .
 By herself, Hine watched the president’s car turn from Houston onto Elm Street . Hine: "I don’t think it's a good thing to say goodbye to the president"
 They caused the building to shake and appeared to come from within the building, she said . She said they appeared to be coming from the building .
 The most curious aspect to Hine’s statement was the cause of her leaving the telephones and venturing to the window . Hine: "I don’t know what happened to me. I’m not sure why I was in the window."
 Commission attorneys Joseph A Ball and Samuel A Stern asked Hine what she saw out the window . This most suspicious happenstance did not prompt any follow-up questions from them .
 At the time of the shooting, most people in the Depository believed the shots came from elsewhere . Most people in Texas school believed the shooting came from a source in the school .
 Steven F Wilson was vice president of a school textbook—publishing company . Wilson had an office on the third floor of the Depository . Wilson worked for a textbook publisher company .
 I heard three shots . . There was a greater space of time between the second and third shots than between the first and second . I heard . There were three shots fired at the scene .
 Elsie Dorman, who worked for Scott-Foresman Co., was in her fourth-floor office filming the presidential motorcade as it moved toward her .
 The only film made from the Depository, hers was of poor quality and did not capture the assassination . She was the only film of the assassination that was captured .
 With her were fellow workers Dorothy Ann Garner, Victoria Adams, Sandra Styles, and Sandra Styles . With her, she was joined by fellow workers .
 "We heard a shot, and it was a pause, and then a second shot, then a third shot," witness says . Witness: "It was a moment of chaos. We heard a pause. Then a pause."
 Wesley Frazier, who had driven Oswald to work that morning, was on the front steps of the Depository . Wesley Frazier was the driver of Oswald, who was killed that day .
 Police officers and so forth all over the building there. So, we started back into the building and it wasn’t but just a few minutes that there were a lot of police officers . The incident occurred in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Associated Press photographer James Altgens snapped a picture seconds after Kennedy was first struck by a bullet . The Man in the Doorway is a picture of Kennedy moments after he was shot .
 Many people suggested the man in the doorway looked amazingly like Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald's mother says he looked like Oswald in the moment .
 If Oswald was Oswald, he could not have been firing a rifle on the sixth floor . The man in the photo could have been Oswald .
 Controversy over this issue has continued to roil since the time of the assassination . The assassination has been the subject of much controversy .
 The Warren Commission concluded the man in the doorway was Billy Lovelady . The Commission, based primarily on testimony from Depository employees, concluded that he was Billy .
 After being interviewed by the FBI, Lovelady identified the man in the photo as himself . After being questioned at length, he identified himself as himself, police say .
 Lovelady, who had worked at the Depository since 1961, was one of the men assigned to lay plywood flooring on the sixth floor that day . The Depository's sixth floor floor was the last floor .
 He said he and others stopped work so they could clean up before taking a lunch break . He said that about 11:50m.m. he and other employees stopped work to clean up .
 Workers took both of the Depository’s two elevators and were racing each other down to ground level . Lovelady said the workers took both elevators to the ground level level level .
 He recalled hearing hearing Oswald shout to them to wait or send an elevator back for him . Oswald shouted to the crowd to wait for him, he said . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 After buying a soft drink, Lovelady told the Warren Commission, he went out the main door and sat on the steps of the Depository to eat lunch with some coworkers . After buying soft drinks, he said he went to the steps to eat his lunch with coworkers .
 Lovelady said he remained there as the motorcade passed by, and then heard some noises . He remained there until he heard noises from a motorcade passing by .
 “It didn’t occur to me at first what had happened until this Gloria came running up to us and told us the President had been shot,” he recalled . “I didn't think it was anything like a shooting. It didn't seem to occur to
 Lovelady, along with fellow Depository employees, joined the throng of people rushing toward the Grassy Knoll . But a short time later he returned to the Depository, entering through a back door unchallenged .
 William Shelley, Depository manager and Oswald’s immediate supervisor, acknowledged that Lovelady was on the steps of the building when Kennedy passed by . Shelley, a former Dallas, Texas, resident, said he was there at the time of the shooting .
 He too said the shots sounded like they came from west of the Depository . He also said they sounded like shots from the west of Texas .
 Wesley Frazier and a Depository clerk, Sarah Stanton, both signed statements averring they were with Shelley and Lovelady on the Depository steps at the time .
 The identity of the man in the doorway should have been the end of questions about the identity of him . The man was seen in a doorway at the time of the incident .
 On February 29, 1964, the FBI interviewed Lovelady and photographed him wearing a short-sleeved shirt with vertical stripes, totally unlike the dark, mottled shirt worn by the man in the Altgens picture .
 The shirt Lovelady was wearing that day was a broad plaid, which he said was buttoned at the neck . The shirt he was trying to sell for a large sum of money, he said .
 The man in the doorway photo appears to be wearing a dark mottled shirt open to the navel with a white T-shirt underneath, exactly what Oswald was wearing when arrested . Oswald was arrested less than an hour and a half later .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry seemed to continue to question the identity of the man in the doorway . The man was seen in a Dallas suburb of Dallas, Texas .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations considered this issue in depth . The committee considered the issue of the assassination of George W. Bush .
 Anthropologists studied the features of the man in the photograph and the committee received photographic analyses of the shirt . They had anthropologists study the features .
 Skeptics note that the HSCA Report never mentioned that the man in the doorway wore his shirt open to the navel . Skepticics noted that the report did not mention the man's shirt was open to his navel. The man was wearing his shirt to the
 Pictures of Lovelady taken that day showed his shirt buttoned to the neck . Pictures of the day showed him with a buttoned shirt on his neck .
 Museum curator and archivist Richard B Trask wrote about reenactment photos of Lovelady shot on Depository steps in 1971 .
 This is not the only allegation of photographic alteration in the assassination case . As will be seen, this is also alleged to have been altered .
 The collars of the two shirts ‘furl’ differently, with Oswald’s assuming the look of a false lapel . David Wrone pointed out that the collars  “furls” differently . Oswald's lapel appears to be a false
 They said by proving that the man in the doorway could not be Lovelady, it appeared by default that it was Oswald . They said that by . proving that man in . the doorway was not the man who appeared to be Oswald, they said .
 Oswald said it was Shelley, his immediate boss, who told him to go home, as there would be no more work that day . Shelley denied even seeing Oswald any time after the shooting .
 Most Depository employees had left the building by about 2m after being told there would be no more work that day . Depository workers were told they could not stay in the building for the next day .
 Shelley also made it clear that after the shooting he and Lovelady moved toward the railroad tracks and finally reentered the Depository through the rear door . Shelley also said that after shooting he moved toward railroad tracks . Shelley said he and lovelady went to railroad tracks before re
 If Oswald did indeed encounter Shelley, it would have had to be prior to or during the assassination and not afterward . Shelley would have been Shelley's last encounter with Oswald before or after the assassination .
 Suspicion still lingers about the identity of the man in the doorway . Lovelady said he was sitting on the steps and the man is standing, peering around the edge of the alcove .
 If it can ever be conclusively demonstrated that the man in the Depository doorway is Lee Oswald, the case for his committing the crime six floors above completely falls apart .
 No one has unquestionably placed Oswald on the sixth floor at the time of the shooting . Oswald was on the 6th floor when the shooting occurred in Dallas, Texas .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry admitted to newsmen, “We don’t have any proof that Oswald fired the rifle, and never did.” In later years, Curry admitted that Oswald never fired the gun . The police chief said in later years that he had no proof
 Oswald told Dallas police he was eating lunch on the first floor of the Depository at the time of the shooting . Oswald said he was in the “domino room’s’ first floor, the ‘domino’ room, when the shooting occurred .
 Bonnie Ray Williams was one of the Depository workers who were laying plywood flooring on the sixth floor that day . Williams was laid on the flooring flooring at the end of the day .
 Williams told the Warren Commission he thought the others planned to gather on the sixth floor to watch the motorcade . He returned there with his lunch, consisting of chicken, bread, and a bag of chips in a brown paper sack .
 He said he saw no one else on the sixth floor, which was one large open area . The sixth floor is one large area, he said .
 Kennedy's motorcade was running approximately five minutes late, this means there was no one in the sixth-floor window at the time Kennedy should have arrived in the street below . The motorcade should have left the window five minutes earlier .
 FBI report: Williams said he left the sixth floor after about three minutes . Williams was quoted as saying he left after three minutes in 1964 .
 Williams denied ever saying that and it is reasonable that he couldn’t have eaten his lunch in only three minutes . However, Williams denied that he ever said that .
 News media made a great deal of comment about the chicken bones and lunch sack found on the sixth floor . At the time of the discovery, the news media had made a large amount of comment .
 Many people thought this proved that Kennedy's assassin had patiently eaten his lunch while waiting for Kennedy to arrive . Many thought it proved that this proved he was a cold and calculating assassin . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Williams saw two other workers, Harold Norman and James Jarman, on the fifth floor . Williams joined them to watch the motorcade . Norman Norman and Jarman were among the workers who watched the event .
 Williams and Norman were captured in a photograph taken that day as they leaned out of the fifth-floor window directly below the famous sixthfloor “sniper’s” window to view the president .
 After the President’s car had passed my window .. . was a loud shot—first I thought they were saluting the President, somebody —even maybe a motorcycle backfire . After the . President's car had been passing my window, I thought it was a gun shot .
 The second and the third shot was closer together then the first shot . "I really did not pay any attention to it, because I did not know what was happening," he says . The first shot was "closest together"
 The second shot, it sounded like it was right in the building . It even shook the building, the side of the building we were on. The second round of fire shook the area, the building where it happened .
 We saw policemen and people running, scared, running—there are some tracks on the west side of the building, railroad tracks . We saw people running and running, police said .
 "We know the shots came from practically over our head. And we thought . We know . We thought . . And we know . . we know that we know they came over our heads .
 Norman said he and Jarman had eaten lunch in the domino room on the first floor . Norman said they saw other Depository employees, including Lovelady, sitting on the steps of the steps . Norman: "We're not going to believe it was a mistake"
 As the motorcade approached, they took an elevator to the fifth floor and got seated in a southeast corner window . Williams and Williams were joined by Williams moments later .
 Later he said he even heard the sound of the bolt working on a rifle above them . He said he heard the bolt work on the rifle above .
 Norman says he and Jarman tried to leave the Depository but were turned back by police officers . Norman: After the three men ran to the west window and saw police combing the railroad yards, Norman said .
 Jarman told the same story but said he didn’t hear the shells hit the floor or hear the sound of the rifle bolt . Jarman says he didn't hear the shots hit the ground or the bolt bolt .
 It has been established that the plywood floor in the Depository was thin and full of cracks, which could account for the plaster dust that fell on Williams’s head . The plywood was thin, full and with cracks .
 Norman’s hearing could also account for shell casings hitting the floor and even the working of the rifle bolt . But apparently none of the three men on the floor below heard anyone moving above them .
 Someone constructed a “sniper’s nest” of book cartons in the minutes before the shooting . Witnesses say someone constructed a "sniper's nest" in the moments before the attack .
 The 56-year-old janitor at the Depository, Eddie Piper, told authorities he saw Oswald on the first floor about noon . Piper was a janitor who worked at the Texas Texas Depository .
 Oswald reportedly never left the sixth floor . Oswald told police he had followed workers down to the first floor and had eaten lunch in the domino room . Oswald reportedly told police that he had been following the workers .
 Oswald told interrogators he recalled two black employees walking through the room while he was there . Oswald said he remembered them walking through . Oswald was in the room at the time of the assassination .
 There was no follow-up question as to who else might have been in the domino room . But, as happens so often in these interviews, there was no more than a question .
 Jarman told of helping Oswald correct a book order earlier that morning, then talking with him again on the first floor of the building . Jarman said he helped Oswald correct the book order .
 It was not helped by any clarifying questions from the Warren Commission attorney . It's not clear what happened in the first hearing . The Warren Commission is investigating the death penalty .
 In 1963 Dallas, black citizens were highly suspicious and defensive toward authorities . It must be understood that in 1963, Dallas was highly suspicious, defensive toward police .
 When confronted by police, police, federal officers, they were inclined to tell them whatever they wanted to hear . They were easily led in their testimony. When confronted, not to mention federal officers .
 This presents a significant question that could have been asked by any competent defense attorney if Oswald had ever gotten a fair trial . Oswald's defense attorney should have asked if Oswald ever got a free trial, he says .
 Bill Shelley, Oswald’s supervisor, told the Commission he saw Oswald near a telephone on the first floor about ten minutes till noon . Shelley, a witness to the Commission, said Oswald was on the phone at about 10 minutes to noon .
 Carolyn Arnold, secretary to the Depository’s vice president, was quoted in an FBI report saying “she thought she caught a fleeting glimpse of Lee Harvey Oswald standing in the hallway” as she left the building to watch the motorcade .
 In 1978, Arnold told the Dallas Morning News she saw and recognized Lee Oswald in the second-floor lunchroom as she was leaving the building to watch the motorcade at 12:25m. Arnold said she saw Oswald in her lunchroom .
 The Warren Commission claimed no Depository employee saw Oswald after 11:55m. Oswald was killed in Dallas, Texas, Texas . The Commission claimed Oswald was shot in the head at the time of the assassination .
 "I just recall that he was sitting there . . . in one of the booth seats on the right hand side of the room as you go in," she says .
 Arnold said she knew Oswald because he would come to her desk on the second floor occasionally and ask for change . Arnold said Oswald would often ask for money from her desk . Arnold: Oswald would come and ask her for change from her office .
 The FBI mangled her testimony, reporting only that after she left the depository and stood about thirty feet in front of the building to watch the motorcade, she “thought she caught a fleeting glimpse of Lee Harvey Oswald standing in the hallway”
 "That is completely foreign to me. would have forced me to have been turning back around to the building when, in fact, I was trying to watch the parade," he said . "That would have made me turn around to turn around and look at the parade. That is completely
 Carolyn Johnston, was surprised to learn the FBI had made no mention of her sighting Oswald in the lunchroom . Carolyn Johnston was shocked to learn that the FBI hadn't mentioned her sighting of Oswald . Johnston was a student at the school at the time .
 Newlyweds Arnold and Barbara Rowland saw two men in the sixth-floor window, one with a rifle, at 12:15 . Oswald could have raced upstairs in time to be in the “sniper’s” window by 12:30m .
 Arnold Rowland reported seeing the man with the gun just as a nearby police radio announced that the presidential motorcade was approaching Cedar Springs Road . This time can't be fixed with confidence because Rowland's report comes with confidence .
 Police dispatcher’s records showed the motorcade passed Cedar Springs between 12:15 and 12:16 m. m. Police dispatcher records show the motorcadence passed between 1215-12:16 a.m. ET .
 The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald stayed on the sixth floor after he was seen by the elevator racers about 11:55m. and remained there to commit the assassination . Oswald was the last person to be seen on the 6th floor .
 There is quite credible evidence that he was exactly where he said he was, in the first-floor break or domino room, at the time of the shooting .
 Altgens photographed the Oswald figure in the Depository's front door . The domino room was one short flight of steps to the front door, where the figure was photographed . The Depository’s front door was one of the steps to take the photograph .
 Oswald apparently walked to the Depository’s second-floor lunchroom to buy a soft drink . Oswald then apparently bought soft drink in the lunchroom . Oswald was shot in the head with a rifle in Dallas, Texas .
 Dallas policeman encountered Oswald less than ninety seconds after the final shot was fired in the assassination . Oswald was encountered by a Dallas police officer less than 90 seconds after he was shot dead . Oswald is believed to have been Oswald's killer .
 The presidential motorcade was running approximately five minutes behind schedule . It is unbelievable that an assassin would leisurely wait in the Depository domino room until 12:15 to move .
 One entered the building by walking up a flight of outside steps, then an additional flight of stairs at the rear of the building led to the second floor . One of the buildings is located in an apartment complex on the east side of the street .
 The lunchroom was reserved exclusively for white-collar employees of the Depository . It was located in an employees’ lunchroom .
 Warehouse personnel and order fillers were relegated to the first-floor domino room . Warehouse personnel were allowed to use the vending machines .
 Dallas motorcycle patrolman Marrion Baker rushed to the Depository after seeing pigeons fly off the building’s roof at the sound of the first shots . Baker says pigeons flew off the roof of the building at the start of the shooting .
 In a later reenactment for the Warren Commission, it took Baker only 15 seconds to park his cycle and race up the front steps of the Depository .
 "We immediately went out through the second set of doors, and we ran into the swinging door," she says . "We ran into a swinging door. So we immediately went immediately," she adds. "We went into swinging door"
 Depository superintendent Roy Truly had followed Baker into the building . Truly was the superintendent of the Depository . Truly followed Baker in and out of the building to meet him .
 Both men tried the elevators near the front entrance but found them inoperable . Perhaps due to the electrical outage mentioned by Geneva Hine of the Depository's credit desk .
 They quickly went to the building’s elevators on the northwest corner of the first floor but could not bring them down . Someone had left them locked in position on an upper floor of the building . The elevator was locked in place at the corner .
 Those elevators . . were both on the fifth floor, they were both even . Both elevators were on the same floor .
 "It would have been impossible for to have come down either one of those elevators after the assassination," he says . "I tried to get one of them . And I tried to . try to get . one of the elevators," he said .
 He had to use the stairway as his only way of getting down . We did see the elevators in those positions .
 Baker said he noticed a man walking away from him through a glass window in a door near the rear second-floor landing . Baker said the man was seen walking away through the glass window .
 Baker confronted the man with a drawn pistol and ordered him to come to him . Baker confronted him with a pistol and told him to get out of his car . Baker was arrested and charged with robbery .
 The words “drinking a Coke” were scratched out in this initial report and there was no reference to the Coke in his Warren Commission testimony . However, the words ‘drinking’ was scratched out .
 He told the Warren Commission he noticed nothing in Oswald’s hands, but this was months later, after many discussions with federal authorities . Oswald was killed in November, Oswald's widow says .
 Baker turned to Truly and asked if the man was an employee and Truly replied he was . Truly said he was a member of the staff at the hospital . Baker asked Truly if he was indeed an employee of the hospital, Truly replied .
 Oswald apparently simply sauntered down the steps and out the front door of the Depository . Oswald apparently walked out of the room and left the Texas school .
 Robert Reid, clerical supervisor at the Depository, was standing with Depository officials in front of the building at the time of the shooting . Reid: "I was standing in the front of a building when shots were fired" Reid was a clerk at the Texas school .
 I didn't pay any attention to what he said because I had no thoughts of anything of him having any connection with it at all because he was very calm . I didn’t pay attention to . what he . said because of his calmness, he said, "I had
 The only time I had seen him in the office was to come and get change and he already had a Coke in his hand so he didn’t come for change . The only other time I'd seen him was to get change .
 Reid reenacted her movements for the Warren Commission on March 20, 1964 . Reid's movements were re-enacted for the first time in March 1964 .
 She said it took approximately two minutes to move the distance from where she heard the final shot to the point she met Oswald . She said the distance was approximately 2 minutes from the location of the shooting to where Oswald met her .
 It strains one’s imagination to believe that anyone could fire on the president of the U.S. and then run to the opposite corner of the sixth floor . The rifle was discovered a short time later .
 This scenario becomes absurd if the purchase of a Coke from a vending machine with its attendant fumbling for pocket change is thrown into the time frame . This scenario is absurd if it happens to be true .
 Baker told the FBI the next day that Oswald was “drinking a Coke” when he saw him . Baker then deleted any reference to the drink in his Warren Commission testimony . Baker said he saw Oswald drinking a Coke but then deleted the reference from his testimony .
 Truly, months later, said he did not notice anything in Oswald’s hands . He said he didn’t think Oswald had anything .
 Oswald was holding a Coke when she saw him seconds after his encounter with Baker, Reid said . Reid said she saw Oswald seconds after Baker's arrest . But Reid said Oswald was still holding a drink at the time .
 Dallas homicide captain Will Fritz reported on his first interview with Oswald about an hour after his arrest at the Texas Theater . Oswald had been arrested at the theater in Dallas .
 Fritz quickly got to the point, asking Oswald where he was when the president was shot . Oswald had been in the White House at the time of the president's assassination .
 Oswald said he was having his lunch when he was stopped by the police . Oswald had been having lunch on the first floor of the building . Oswald was in the middle of his lunch at the time of the incident .
 He says he was on the second floor drinking a Coca-Cola when the officer came in . He said he was drinking at the time of the incident when he was shot .
 Oswald stated that he went to lunch at approximately noon and he claimed he ate his lunch on the first floor in the lunchroom . Oswald went to the second floor where the Coca-Cola machine was located and obtained a bottle of Coke for his lunch . Oswald claimed to have eaten his lunch
 Oswald indeed was holding a soft drink when confronted by Officer Baker, it seems clear . Oswald's run across the sixth floor to stash the rifle and a stampede down the wooden stairs in time to purchase a drink almost outside the realm of possibility .
 The Coke question may seem a small one, but it also indicates the loopholes riddling the official story of the assassination . The federal government took to obscure certain issues, including the issue of Coke .
 Oswald's presence in the Depository’s second-floor lunchroom, with or without a Coke, is compounded by accounts of someone seen on the sixth floor long after Oswald should have been gone . Oswald was seen in the lunchroom with a Coke .
 Clerk Lillian Mooneyham of the 95th District Court watched the motorcade move west on Main from windows in the Dallas Criminal Courts Building . She then ran with two others to the west side of the building .
 The man was not close up to the window but was standing slightly back from it, so that Mrs. Mooneyham was not looking out of the window .
 Mooneyham says he saw a man standing in the “sniper’s nest” window minutes after the shooting . Photos taken about that time by military intelligence agent James Powell and news photographer Tom Dillard .
 Dillard said he took a picture of the Depository facade seconds after the last shot was fired . Dillard, who was riding in the motorcade, said he was riding with the president .
 Powell estimated his picture was made about thirty seconds after the final shot . Powell estimated he took the picture about 30 seconds after his final shot was taken .
 Mooneyham was never called as a witness before the Warren Commission . He was never a witness .
 Her testimony remains buried in the Commission’s twenty-six volumes . Her credible testimony is buried in many of the Commission's twenty-volume volumes .
 Several Depository employees, including Billy Lovelady and William Shelley, were on or near the back stairway of the building just after the assassination . A further point .
 Oswald raced down the five flights of stairs for his encounter with Baker and Truly . No one heard footsteps or saw Oswald racing down the stairs for the encounter . Oswald's encounter happened in the early hours of the day .
 Victoria Adams and Sandra Styles, who worked for ScottForesman and Company in the Depository, told the FBI they ran from the building down the back stairway after viewing the assassination from their fourth-floor office window .
 Neither encountered Oswald on the stairway or remarked of hearing footsteps on the old wooden stairs moments after the shooting .
 Oswald would have had to descend the creaky stairs in time for his meeting with Baker . These were the same stairs he would have to descend to meet Officer Baker .
 Adams told the Warren Commission that upon arriving on the first floor she saw fellow Depository employees Bill Shelley and Billy Lovelady . Adams said she saw the Depository's first floor floor occupants . Adams says she was in the building at the time .
 In 2011, author Barry Ernest interviewed Garner, the office supervisor over Adams, Elsie Dorman, and Styles, in 1963 . Garner was an office supervisor for Adams, Dorman and Styles .
 Adams and Styles both left the fourth-floor window immediately following the shooting . She confirmed that Adams left the window as soon as the shooting occurred .
 Garner said she followed the women and stood at a vantage point where she could see the back stairs . Garner: "She followed them and stood in front of the stairs" Garner says she followed them to the scene of the incident .
 Garner said she did recall a policeman on the stairs, who could only have been Officer Baker . Garner said the incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Garner's recollection was supported by a letter accompanying Adams’s signed deposition to the Warren Commission sent by assistant U.S. attorney Martha Joe Stroud on June 2, 1964 .
 Also standing on the steps of the Depository was Joe R Molina, the company’s credit manager . Joe Molina is a credit manager for the company .
 Molina thought the shots came from west of the building . Like most everyone else, Molina said the shots were from west . Molina: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure it's not an accident"
 In 1964, Molina requested to testify to the Warren Commission because of what happened to him after the assassination . Molina specifically requested to do so because of the circumstances surrounding his assassination .
 Molina says Dallas police searched his home on Saturday following the assassination . Molina said he and his family were awakened by Dallas police at 1:30 a.m. on the Saturday following . He said he was awakened by police searching his home .
 Forum is a predominantly Hispanic group actively working to help veterans . Forum was told to report to Dallas police headquarters later that day . Forum is working with veterans in Dallas, Texas .
 Unable to get a retraction from the Dallas police, Molina asked to testify to the Warren Commission in an attempt to clear his name . Molina was unable to get the police retraction and instead asked to give testimony .
 On December 13, twenty-one days after the assassination, Molina was told that the Depository’s credit system was to be automated and that he was replaced . Molina says he will be replaced by the system's automated credit system .
 The company had been receiving hate mail and phone calls accusing it of hiring communists . The action came as no real surprise because of the company's hate mail, he said .
 Depository officials say Molina’s firing was not connected to the events of the assassination . Despite assurances, it appears obvious that Joe Molina, too, became one of its victims .
 Several, such as Bonnie Richey, Sharon Nelson, Stella Mae Jacob, and Gloria Jeanne Holt, were prevented from entering the Depository when police sealed the building . The Depository was closed when police closed it down .
 Oswald and the Depository became the center of the investigation . Authorities, news media, and public soon forgot the initial focus of attention in Dealey Plaza .
 On the west side of Dealey Plaza is a large railroad bridge that spans the three main downtown Dallas traffic arteries of Commerce, Main, and Elm Streets . The Triple Underpass is located near the intersection of Commerce and Main .
 Since all three streets converge under this concrete bridge, it quickly became known as the Triple Underpass . Since all the three roads converge under the bridge, the triple underpass became known .
 To the east of the underpass is Dealey Plaza and downtown Dallas, while on the west there are several roads leading to freeway systems and an industrial area .
 Atop the east side of the Triple Underpass is a panoramic view of Dealey Plaza from a position about fifteen feet in the air . The view is a view from the east of the triple underpass .
 About a dozen men stood along the eastern edge of the underpass to watch the presidential motorcade pass beneath them on November 22, 1963 . This was the first time the motorcade had passed beneath them .
 Foster was one of two police officers assigned as security guards atop the Triple Underpass . Foster is one of the two officers assigned to guard atop the triple underpass in New Jersey . Foster was assigned as a security guard to guard the underpass .
 His orders were to prevent any “unauthorized” personnel from standing on the railroad bridge under which Kennedy passed . His orders included preventing any unauthorized personnel standing under the bridge under Kennedy .
 Foster allowed some railroad workers, who had been repairing rails, to remain on the underpass . Foster had allowed some workers to remain there after checking their identities . Foster allowed the workers to stay in the area after checking identities .
 The bridge actually was railroad property and it was railway workers who walked over to the eastern banister to view the motorcade, he said . He did not believe they fell into the “unauthorized” category .
 AP photographer James Altgens was standing on the bridge . He told the Warren Commission he earlier had prevented some people from standing on bridge .
 Foster said he was standing just behind the line of railway workers when he heard what sounded like a large firecracker . Foster said as the motorcade approached he heard the sound of the explosion . Foster was standing behind the railway workers, about ten or eleven of them, when the explosion
 From his vantage point, this trained and experienced police officer may have been one of the best witnesses to what actually happened at the time of the shooting . The officer was standing directly in front of the car when the shooting occurred .
 Neither in his report of December 4, 1963, nor in his April 9, 1964, testimony to the Warren Commission was he asked to describe in detail what he saw .
 Foster said he ran from the underpass toward the Depository building . Foster says he watched the rear exits until a sergeant came and told him to check out railroad cars in the nearby switching yard . Foster said a sergeant told him he was looking at railroad cars .
 Foster said he found where a bullet had struck the earth just beside a manhole cover on Elm Street . Foster said the hole was hit by a bullet just beside the cover on the south side of Elm Street. Foster said a bullet hit the earth .
 Foster remained at this location for a time until the evidence was taken away by a man in a suit, later identified by the Dallas police chief as an FBI agent . Foster remained with the evidence until the FBI took it away .
 The spot where Foster found a tear in the grass was near where witness Jean Hill was standing at the time of the assassination . Foster found the tear in a tear near where Hill stood . Foster: "It's a good thing to find a tear," Foster said .
 Secret Service agents asked her if she saw a bullet land near her feet, she says . She was questioned by agents after the shooting . The Secret Service is investigating the incident .
 Officer Foster’s counterpart on the west side of the Triple Underpass was Officer J C White . Foster and White were on the opposite side . Foster's counterpart was Officer White .
 White said he was approximately in the middle of the underpass when the motorcade passed below . He said he didn't see or hear anything because a “big long freight train” was moving north between him and Dealey Plaza . White says he didn’t see or
 Close scrutiny of films and photographs taken that day show no such freight train moving .
 Two Dallas policemen were on top of the underpass, but not railroad workers . Railroad workers were standing over the motorcade, police say .
 Workers heard shots from their left, the direction of the infamous Grassy Knoll . They also saw smoke drift out from under the trees lining the knoll .
 About forty witnesses on or around the infamous Grassy Knoll said they heard shots or saw smoke in that area . Witnesses say they heard gunshots or smoke in the area . Witnesses say shots or smoke were heard or saw in the surrounding area .
 Sam M Holland, a track and signal supervisor for the Union Terminal Railroad Company, told the Warren Commission he went to the top of the Triple Underpass about 11:45m. that day . Holland said the incident occurred at the end of the day .
 He said there were two Dallas policemen and “a plain-othes detective, or FBI agent or something like that” there . He said he helped identify the railroad employees .
 Other people lined the Triple Underpass, but police were checking identification and sending them away, he says . He says by the time the motorcade arrived, other people were lining the triple underpass . The motorcade was stopped by the police, but the police sent them away .
 Holland was standing just in front of Officer Foster when the limousine approached the underpass . By the time the limo was approaching, Holland was just in sight of the presidential limo . Holland was stopped by the president's limo as it approached an underpass, Holland said
 "A puff of smoke came out about six or eight feet above the ground right out from under those trees," witness says . The smoke came from under the trees and came out of the ground .
 "I looked over to where I thought the shot came from and I saw a puff of smoke still lingering under the trees in front of the wooden fence," he said . "I'm not sure what happened to the shooting," he says .
 Warren Report: Holland was mistaken in believing shots came from behind picket fence . The clear implication by the Warren Report is that Holland was wrong to think shots came behind fence . Holland was shot at by a gunman in 1968 .
 The testimony of the other railroad workers on the Triple Underpass—Richard C Dodd, James L Simmons, and Thomas J Murphy—corroborated Holland’s version of the assassination . None of the workers were asked to testify to the Warren Commission .
 The only account of what they saw is in FBI reports made during March 1964 . FBI reports were made in 1964 .
 These reports are sketchy and seem very incomplete in view of the questions that these men should obviously have been asked . These reports seem to be very incomplete, and the questions should be asked .
 Simmons, a Union Terminal car inspector, was in the group on the Triple Underpass . Simmons was in a car inspector at Union Terminal .
 When the President’s car started down Elm Street he heard three shots ring out . The President's car was on Elm Street at the time of the shooting .
 It sounded like it came from the left and in front of us, towards the wooden fence . The incident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 There was no one there but there were footprints in the mud around the fence and footprints on the two-by-four railing on the fence .
 Railroad workers who also saw smoke off the left included Nolan H Potter, Richard C Dodd, and Clemon E Johnson .
 Simmons was quoted in his FBI report as seeing smoke near the Depository, yet he plainly stated later that it was in front of the Grassy Knoll fence . Simmons said he saw smoke in the area, but later said it was on the ground .
 In 1966 interviews in Dallas, both Walter L Winborn and Thomas J Murphy —who were among the railroad workers on the Triple Underpass — confirmed seeing smoke in the trees on the Grassy Knoll .
 It would be most interesting to talk to the other people who stood on the Triple Underpass that day . It would also be interesting to see how many other people stood there .
 Perhaps they, too, saw the smoke, but such sighting was left out of their reports . If any report was made, they would not have been able to report it .
 NBC photographer Dave Weigman was riding in the seventh car in the motorcade . He was riding with President Obama in a motorcade of cars .
 He jumped out of the convertible and ran up the Grassy Knoll with his camera still operating . He then jumped out the car and ran away with the camera still on the ground .
 The blurred and jerky film was overlooked as assassination evidence until recently . Because of all this motion, it was overlooked until recently until recently.
 In one clear frame, which depicts the presidential limousine just entering the Triple Underpass, a puff of smoke is clearly visible hanging in front of trees on the knoll .
 It has been well established that there was no other natural source of smoke in that area that day that day . It was well established there were no other sources of smoke that day.
 FBI reports attempted to show that it might have come from police motorcycles but none were on the knoll at the time of the shooting . FBI reports said that it may have been from a police motorcycle but no police officers were there at all .
 Warren Commission apologists for years have tried to argue that modern rifles do not smoke . Modern rifles smoke smoke, but modern rifles smoke, according to the commission .
 This is an error, since a recently oiled rifle or defective ammunition certainly can cause white smoke during firing . This is not the first time a rifle or ammunition can cause smoke .
 This was made clear to this author in the summer of 1978 when the House Select Committee on Assassinations fired rifles in Dealey Plaza in connection with their acoustical studies . The committee fired rifles at the site of the shooting .
 The idea that smoke drifted over Elm Street from the knoll is highly plausible . And considering the slightly gusting breeze from the north that day that day, it's highly likely .
 It is now obvious that many people that day saw this puff of smoke drifting down from the knoll . Witnesses said they smelled gunpowder in the lower end of Dealey Plaza .
 The authorities, particularly the FBI and the Warren Commission, did not want to hear about it . However, it is equally obvious that the authorities, including the Warren commission, did want it to be heard about .
 Dallas policeman Earle Brown also smelled gunpowder although he was far from the Depository . Dallas police officer Earle . Brown was not at the scene of the shooting .
 Brown was standing on the catwalk of a railroad bridge crossing over Stemmons Freeway located just north of the Triple Underpass . Brown was hit by the accident on the bridge crossing .
 Because of his location, Brown said he was unable to get a clear view of the motorcade . Brown says he was not able to see the president's motorcade because of the location .
 Brown said the first indication to him that something was wrong was when a large flock of pigeons suddenly flew up from a grassy low area between him and the underpass . Brown: "The first indication that something is wrong was that a large bird was flying over the area"
 Brown said the gunpowder smell seemed to come from the direction of the Depository . Brown said it was from a direction that seemed to be coming from the area . Brown: The smell of gunpowder came from the right side of the building .
 The Grassy Knoll was almost in a direct line between the officer and the Depository . However, the officer was not at the center of the incident .
 Sheriff Decker and others saw one of the first bullets strike the pavement near Kennedy’s car . Another railroad worker, Royce G Skelton, supported the statements of Sheriff Decker .
 I was standing on top of the train trestle where it crosses Elm Street with Austin Miller . Austin Miller: "It's a great place to go"
 We saw the motorcade come around the corner and I heard something which I thought was fireworks. We saw it come out of the park and I thought it was fireworks,’s father said .
 "I saw something hit the pavement at the left rear of the car," witness says . "Then the car got in the right-hand lane and I heard two more shots," he says .
 Austin Miller, standing next to Skelton on the Triple Underpass, also mentioned this errant bullet in his affidavit that day . Austin Miller also mentioned the incident in an affidavit filed by the officer .
 I saw something which I thought was smoke or steam coming from a group of trees north of Elm off the railroad tracks . I thought it was steam or smoke coming from the trees . I saw it coming out of the trees off the tracks .
 If a bullet hit the street pavement, it certainly could not have been the one that passed through Kennedy and Connally as described by the Warren Commission . It was not the bullet that struck the Main Street curb wounding a bystander . The bullet that hit the pavement could not be the one
 Jim Tague was the third man wounded in Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963 . He singlehandedly caused more concern than anyone else in the 1963-1964 federal investigation .
 The Third Wounded Man James Thomas Tague, like Jean Hill and Mary Moorman, was not planning to see Kennedy . Tague was not going to attend Kennedy's memorial service at the time .
 Shortly after noon that day, he had driven downtown to take a girlfriend to lunch . He had driven to take her out for a lunch .
 Tague was stopped in traffic that was halted at Houston Street due to arrival of the presidential motorcade . The motorcade was the first of its kind to arrive in Washington, DC .
 The hood of his car was just poking out of the east side of the Triple Underpass . The hood was poking out the east of the triple underpass .
 Tague stood by the underpass on a small concrete median separating Commerce and Main to watch the motorcade . Tague got out of his car and stood by a concrete median on the side of the road .
 He ducked behind the corner of the underpass after hearing more shots . However, he realized what was happening and ducked to the corner .
 Dallas motorcycle patrolman Clyde A Haygood had been riding back in the motorcade on Main Street approaching Main Street . Haygood heard a shot, then a pause followed by two shots close together . The Dallas officer was riding in a motorcade when he heard the shots .
 He gunned his motorcycle up on Houston and turned on Elm in time to see people pointing toward the Grassy Knoll and the railroad yards . The motorcycle rider says he saw people pointing to the Grassy Knoll in time .
 Haygood said he got off his cycle on Elm Street just below the Grassy Knoll and went up into the railroad yards but saw nothing suspicious despite quite a number of people in the area . Haygood: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure it's
 He said he returned to his motorcycle after speaking to a man he believed to be a railroad detective . He says he spoke to the man he thought was a detective . The man was arrested in connection with the incident .
 One man said he was hit by a piece of concrete or something, and he did have a slight cut on his right cheek, just to the right of his nose . The incident occurred in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Using the call number 142, Haygood radioed the police dispatcher and asked that the Depository be sealed off . Haygood used the number 142 to request that the depository be closed off .
 I immediately went to the Triple Underpass on Elm Street in an effort to locate possible marks left by stray bullets . I went there to look for possible bullet marks left on the underpass .
 The projectile struck so near the underpass, it was, in my opinion, probably the last shot that was fired and had apparently went high and above the President’s car . Due to the fact that the projectile struck . It was probably the first shot fired, according to the
 No one else wanted to hear about the extraneous bullet either . It's not the first time a bullet has been added to the U.S. Capitol Hill .
 There was no mention of the incident in the news accounts at the time nor was there any investigation of the bullet mark on the curb until the summer of 1964 . The bullet mark was found on a curb in 1964 .
 It was widely reported that the first shot struck Kennedy in the back, the second bullet hit Governor Connally, and the third was the fatal head shot . During late 1963 and early 1964, it was widely thought Kennedy was hit in back .
 Tague’s story of yet another bullet was totally inconsistent with the loneassassin/three-shot theory being formulated by the Warren Commission, which initially seemed prepared to ignore both Tague and the bullet mark on the curb .
 In late May 1964, about a month before the Warren Commission finally talked to Tague, the car salesman took a camera to Dealey Plaza to photograph the mark on the curb . Tague was a car salesman who sold the car .
 Warren Commission finally confronts the Tague wounding . Tague was shot by an assistant U.S. attorney in Dallas .
 Martha Joe Stroud mailed a letter to Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin on June 9, 1964 . Stroud: The letter was sent to Rankin's office on June 10, 1964.
 I am enclosing a photograph made by Tom Dillard of the Dallas Morning News. I am enclosed enclosed with a copy of the photograph .
 The curb was taken shortly after the assassination on November 22, 1963 . It is a shot of the curb which was taken just before the assassination .
 Mr Dillard indicated he did not know whether the photograph was material . When I talked to him yesterday he indicated he does not know if the photograph is material .
 He did say, however, that he examined the curb when the photo was taken and that it looked like a piece of lead had struck it .
 Faced with this notification of the curb shot by a government official, the Commission was stirred to action . Faced this notification, the commission took action to take action .
 On July 7, 1964, the Warren Commission asked the FBI to look into the matter . The FBI was asked to look at the case .
 FBI document attempted to explain the disappearance of a mark that had been clearly seen eight months earlier . FBI document attempts to explain disappearance of mark that was visible eight months ago .
 It should be noted that, since this mark was observed on November 22, 1963, there have been numerous rains, which could have possibly washed away such a mark . The area is cleaned by a street cleaning machine about once a week .
 A Dallas policeman and a sheriff’s deputy had mentioned Tague in their reports, although not by name . Assistant United States Attorney Stroud's letter said Tague's story could no longer be ignored .
 On July 23, 1964, Tague finally deposed in Dallas by Commission attorney Wesley Liebeler . Tague was deposed by Liebelers in Dallas .
 Following Tague’s testimony, the Commission again asked the bureau to investigate the matter .
 FBI found the mark, removed the piece of curb in question and took it to Washington for analysis . This time the FBI removed it from the curb and sent it to the U.S. for analysis.
 Small foreign metal smears were found adhering to the curbing section within the area of the mark . The incident occurred at the site of the incident .
 Metal smears were spectrographically determined to be essentially lead with a trace of antimony . These metal smears are essentially lead and antimony, and were found to contain antimony and lead .
 Damage to curbing would have been much more extensive if a rifle bullet had struck the curbing without first having struck some other object . Further, the damage to the curb was much more severe if a bullet had hit the curb without first striking another object .
 This mark could not have been made by the first impact of a high-velocity bullet . Therefore, it could not be made by a high velocity bullet .
 FBI now says mark had to have been made by a rifle bullet but not on first impact . FBI had initially said no bullet hit the curb, but now said it was made by rifle bullet . FBI says bullet had to hit curb but not first impact on impact .
 If the FBI is correct, the mark on the curb could only have been made by the lead fragment of a bullet . The FBI has a history of misinformation and omission by the bureau regarding assassination evidence .
 The only one that could have lost such an amount of lead is the final head shot and that was at a location more than two hundred feet away, a considerable distance for a small fragment to travel and still impact the curb as described .
 Another possibility was that the mark was made by a lead bullet without copper jacketing . Another possibility, never considered by the Warren Commission, was that a bullet without jacketing made the mark .
 Oswald allegedly used a different rifle from the one allegedly used by Oswald . But of course, this would indicate different ammunition and perhaps a different weapon .
 The curb was hit by a large fragment of bullet that had already struck the street . Or perhaps the fragment had already hit the street and had separated from the copper jacket . Witnesses saw one of the witnesses who saw one do just that .
 The Warren Commission was compelled to construct a scenario of the assassination that included the “single-bullet theory,” which postulates that one bullet caused seven wounds to Kennedy and Connally . Whatever the truth of the curb bullet and despite the attempt to ignore this evidence, the
 The Grassy Knoll is a small northern portion of Dealey Plaza known as the Grassy knoll . The area has been the subject of controversy for decades .
 There are two grassy knolls on both the north and south sides of the west end of the plaza . During the assassination of President John F Kennedy, it was the north knoll that drew public attention .
 Running along the top of the knoll was a wooden picket fence about five feet high . The knoll is a knoll with a five-foot-high fence .
 In front of this fence were shrubs and evergreen trees that, even in late November, provided a leafy canopy over the fence . The fence is surrounded by shrubs, trees and shrubbery .
 The fence ran east approximately seventy-five feet from the north edge of the Triple Underpass . It turned north for about fifty feet, ending in a parking area behind a concrete pergola located to the west of the Depository .
 Abraham Zapruder film was made from a vantage point atop a low concrete wall on the south end of this pergola . The most famous home movie of all time was made in this place . It was from the vantage point of the low-level concrete wall .
 The Zapruder Film is a 26.6-second, 8 mm film made on November 22, 1963 . It became the cornerstone of investigations, both public and private, in the years after the Kennedy assassination .
 It has been long regarded as the most objective, and thus most important, piece of evidence in the attempts to unravel what actually happened to President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 His secretary, Lillian Rogers, urged him to make use of his new camera . It was a Bell & Howell 8mm camera with a telephoto lens with a Bell and Howell 8 mm lens .
 Zapruder made a fourteen-mile round-trip drive to his home to pick up his camera . He had to drive 14 miles round trip to get his camera back to his father's home .
 By the time he returned, crowds were already gathering to watch the motorcade . The motorcade was already underway when he returned from the hospital .
 After trying several different locations, Zapruder climbed onto a four-foot-high concrete block at the end of two steps leading to the pergola on the north Grassy Knoll .
 He almost lost his balance while testing his camera on some nearby office workers . He asked one in the group, his receptionist Marilyn Sitzman, to join him and provide steady support . He nearly lost balance while trying to test his camera with a group of workers .
 From this excellent vantage point, Zapruder and Sitzman watched the motorcade approach Elm Street . From this vantage point they were able to watch the motorcadence . Zapruders and others watched the parade .
 Zapruder set the camera’s speed control on “run” and his lens on ‘telephoto’ He then proceeded to film the entire assassination sequence .
 The film must be seen run in its entirety for a viewer to receive its maximum impact . The film has been released in cinemas since 2008 .
 The motorcade curves onto Elm and begins moving slowly toward the camera . It is the first time the motorcade has left the scene of a car crash .
 President Kennedy and his wife are smiling and waving to opposite sides of the street . President Kennedy's wife and President Kennedy were waving to each other on the same side .
 Kennedy's limousine disappears for a brief second behind a freeway sign . When it emerges, Kennedy is already reacting to a shot . Kennedy was reacting to the shot .
 He does not appear to say anything, but only remains stiff and upright, sagging slightly to the left . He appears to be leaning slightly to his left .
 Connally turns to his right, apparently trying to see behind him, then begins to turn back to his left when he freezes . Connally freezes when he tries to look behind him .
 Kennedy meanwhile has placed her hand on her husband’s arm and is looking at him horrified as he continues to sag toward her . Kennedy meanwhile, meanwhile, is holding her husband's arm around her .
 After an almost imperceptible forward motion of his head, the entire right side of his skull explodes in a halo of blood and brain matter . Suddenly, after an almost . imperceptable forward motion, his head suddenly explodes .
 Kennedy is slammed violently backward to the left rear where he rebounds off the back of the seat and falls toward the car’s floor . Kennedy was slammed to the rear of the car and fell to the floor .
 Kennedy climbs onto the trunk of the limousine in an effort to grab something . Secret Service agent leaps onto the rear of the car, which finally begins to accelerate . Kennedy climbs on to the trunk, while Secret Service agents jump on the rear .
 The Commission placed the moment of the first shot at the point where Kennedy was out of Zapruder’s sight behind the sign . The Commission moved the shot closer to the visual effect of a strike on Connally, buttressing the “single bullet theory”
 The Commission abolished the problem of how an assassin in the sixth-floor window could have accurately fired through obscuring tree branches . By moving the time of the shot forward, the Commission also abolished the wotrisome problem .
 Zapruder stated on four separate occasions in his testimony that he thought shots came from behind him in the direction of the picket fence on the Grassy Knoll . In fact, he said four separate times in testimony he thought the shots came behind him . He also said he thought
 Some claim Zapruder did not know from which direction the shots came from . This response has been seized upon by some debunkers who claim he didn't know which direction .
 Zapruder noted that there was considerable reverberation in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination . Zapruders was very shaken by the assassination, which shook the nation .
 He said he did not remember jumping down from the cement block and crouching for cover inside the white pergola with Sitzman as determined by photographs taken at the time .
 Dallas Secret Service agent in charge Forrest Sorrels and Dallas Morning News reporter Harry McCormack came to take his film for processing . Dallas mayor's secretary called authorities and a Dallas reporter came to pick up his film .
 The day after the assassination, select frames from Zapruder’s film had been sold to Life magazine . Select frames from the film were sold to the magazine the next day .
 Jackson claimed he was so horrified by the film that he wanted to lock it away . Jackson later claimed he wanted the film to be locked away .
 Jackson was shown to have been closely associated with CIA officials and ranking globalists such as Allen Dulles, John J McCloy, and Joseph Alsop . The latter was instrumental in establishing the Warren Commission, the latter being instrumental in setting it up .
 Dulles was recruited as a British agent in 1940 . He represented pre-war Nazis and later served as CIA director .
 The sale of the Zapruder film to Life might be the only instance of a private company purchasing critical evidence in a major crime prior to any court trials . Life may be the first time private company has purchased critical evidence before trial .
 He finally said, “I received $25,000, as you know, and I have given that to the Firemen's and Policemen’s Benevolence with a suggestion, [to use the money] for Mrs. Robinson . Robinson: "I have given
 Zapruder told of giving his camera to Bell & Howell for its archives . Later in his testimony, he said he gave his camera back to the company for its archive .
 Zapruder received only $25,000 for his film and that the money was to have gone to the widow of the slain Officer Tippit . After the trauma of the assassination, the American public was gratified to learn from the media that the film had been given only $
 Zapruder’s statement was less than truthful . Like so much of the Warren Commission testimony, it was not quite truthful . Zapruders' statement was part of a series of misquoted statements by the FBI .
 A copy of his contract with Life made public much later revealed that his film brought him more than $150,000 . The film was later revealed to have brought in more than a million dollars .
 He also received 50 percent of Time-Life profits from rights to the film .
 Zapruder film ran as a movie while it was in the sole possession of Time-Life Corp. No member of the American public saw the film run as a film . Time Life Corp. owns the film .
 No one who has viewed the Zapruder film has been unaffected by the final, gory head shot followed instantaneously by Kennedy’s violent fall rearward .
 When published by the Warren Commission, the critical frames that depict the rearward motion of Kennedy’s head were transposed to indicate a forward motion . The Warren Commission published the images of Kennedy's head .
 Further twisting of what was depicted in the film came soon after the assassination . The film was released in 1989 .
 8mm film shows the President turning his body far around to the right as he waves to someone in the crowd . 8mm footage shows the president waving to a crowd . The President turned his body around and waved to the crowd in the 8mm format .
 His throat is exposed, just before he clutches it, to the sniper’s nest . He clutches his throat just before the sniper's nest .
 This account is patently wrong, as anyone who has seen the film can attest to it . This account was wrong, and anyone who's seen it can attest it's patently incorrect .
 Paul Mandel, the author of this statement, died shortly afterward . The reason for such wrongful information at such a critical time will probably never be known . Mandel died shortly after .
 Then a CBS newsman, he was the only reporter present at a private screening of the Zapruder film the day after the assassination .
 He described what was in the film over nationwide radio and was fairly accurate until he described the fatal head shot . He described the scene of the shooting .
 Rather stated Kennedy’s head “went forward with considerable violence,” the exact opposite of what is in the film . Rather said Kennedy's head went forward with “considerable violence” in the movie .
 In his 1987 book, The Camera Never Blinks, Rather ironically attempted to explain this misstatement by claiming he must have blinked at that moment in the film .
 Rather was promoted to White House correspondent for CBS . By the 1980s, he was chief news anchorman for the network .
 Rather made questionable statements about his location at the time of the assassination . Rather also said he was not at the scene of the shooting .
 In his book, Rather wrote how he was waiting to pick up news film from a CBS cameraman in the presidential motorcade . Rather wrote about the incident in his book .
 He wrote he was standing on the west side of the Triple Underpass and missed witnessing the assassination by only a few yards . He wrote: "I was standing in the west of the triple underpass. I missed witnessing it by only few yards"
 Recently discovered film footage of the west side of the underpass has now become public . Footage was taken from the west-side underpass .
 The Kennedy limousine sped through the underpass and onto Stemmons Freeway . Dan Rather was not in the limo, but there was no sign of him .
 The American public finally got the chance to view the Zapruder film only because of the Clay Shaw trial in New Orleans during 1967-1969 . The Clay Shaw case was the only reason for the public to see the film .
 During that turbulent trial, New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison tried to prove there was a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy . New Orleans Trade Mart director Clay Shaw was a member of that conspiracy .
 Garrison subpoenaed the Zapruder film from Time-Life Corp. He subpoenaed it as part of an attempt to prove the existence of a conspiracy . Garrison said the film would prove that the government was involved in conspiracy .
 Time-Life fought this subpoena all the way to the Supreme Court . The Supreme Court ruled that the corporation had to comply with the legal subpoena .
 Time-Life grudgingly turned over to Garrison a somewhat blurry copy of the film . Garrison was able to get a blurry copy, but that was enough for him .
 In March 1975, a copy of the film was aired nationally about midnight on ABC's Goodnight America thanks to guests Robert Groden and comedian Dick Gregory .
 At long last, the American public was able to see for themselves the assassination of the thirty-fifth president . The assassination of George W. Bush was finally revealed .
 Within a few years clearer copies of the Zapruder film became available to the public . The film was released in 1945 .
 In 1971, author David Lifton was permitted to view an exceptionally good-quality copy of the Zapruder film in Time-Life’s Los Angeles office .
 His suspicion that the film may have been tampered with by persons with access to sophisticated photographic equipment was heightened in 1976 with the release of CIA Item 450 . The film was released by the CIA in 1976 .
 Documents tell of the existence of either a negative or master positive of the film . One of the documents tells of the production of four prints, one “test print” and three duplicates .
 One original and three copies of the original prints were found in Dallas the day after the assassination . That number of prints is exactly what existed in Dallas that day after .
 Previously unreported CIA possession of the Zapruder film compromised the film’s value as evidence . The forward motion of Kennedy's head, for one frame preceding frame 313, might be the result of an altered film . If that was so, it made the theory of a forward
 The late Jack White, a photographic analyst and researcher, testified to the House Select Committee on Assassinations, concurred with Lifton . White said he detected evidence of photographic retouching in some Zapruder frames .
 Interception and alteration of the Z film prior to its delivery to Time-Life has now been confirmed by documents, witness testimony, and the scrutiny of Hollywood experts, as will be detailed later . The film will be shown in a special edition of this week's edition of The Daily Mail
 If the CIA indeed tampered with the Zapruder film after the assassination, it becomes problematic in evaluating what really happened in Dealey Plaza . Long considered one of the best pieces of evidence, if the film was tampered, it could be a problem .
 The suppression, alteration, and deception surrounding the Zapruder film may eventually reveal more than the film itself . And like so much else in the assassination case, the suppression and alteration surrounding the film may reveal more .
 In April 1975, for $1 Time-Life sold the Zapruder film back to the heirs of the film's creator . Time-life sold the film to Zapruders heirs in April 1975 . In March 1975, Time Life bought the film back from the heirs .
 The film was placed in cold storage within the National Archives for safekeeping . The film has been placed into cold storage in the National Archive .
 The government kept the film but compensated the Zapruder family with $16 million of taxpayer money . The film was kept in the hands of the government .
 In December 1999, the original film was donated to the Sixth Floor Museum in Dallas, Texas . The film is now housed in the museum in Dallas .
 Just down the slope of the Grassy Knoll from Zapruder was the Bill Newman family . Bill Newman's family was killed in the attack on the movie set .
 Bill and Gayle Newman, along with their two young sons, had gone to Love Field to see Kennedy . The couple had been in the theater at Love Field when Kennedy died .
 The Grassy Knoll's cupola is located on Elm Street just below the concrete cupola . When they didn’t get a good view, they rushed downtown and situated themselves .
 The President turned onto Elm Street. "We hadn't been there five minutes when the President turned on Elm Street," he said .
 "As he was coming straight toward us there was a boom, boom, real close together. As he came straight . As he was . coming straight . toward us, there was . a boom . "Boom" was the first boom, the second boom .
 'He got this bewildered look on his face and was sort of slowly moving back and forth,' she said . 'He looked bewildered. He got a bewildered face and started slowly moving forward and back,' she added . 'I'm not sure what happened to him,' she
 A shot took the right side of the head off of the player's head, according to police sources . The incident happened in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 He was knocked violently back against the seat, almost as if he had been hit by a baseball bat . The incident happened at the end of the day in New York City .
 At that time I was looking right at the president and I thought the shots were coming from directly behind us. "At that time, I looked right at him and thought that was the president," she says .
 The car momentarily stopped and the driver seemed to have a radio or phone up to his ear . He seemed to be waiting on some word from the driver .
 Some Secret Service men reached into their car and came out with some sort of machine gun . The incident happened in New York City, New Jersey .
 A man asked us what happened and we told him and he took us to Channel 8 studios . Very soon after this a man asked him what happened to him .
 Sheriff’s deputies were waiting for them after the TV interview and took them to the sheriff's office . Newman: They joined other Dealey Plaza witnesses who were held for about six hours . Newman says they were held in the office for six hours before being released .
 I was a little disappointed that I didn’t get called to testify to the Warren Commission. “I was a very happy to be able to talk about my life,” he says .
 I’ve already been corrected several times that I was wrong about several things and that there are experts who know more about it than I do . I've already been correct several times .
 "It's real hard for me to believe that it was the act of one lone individual," she says . "But it’s real hard . for me, I’m not sure what happened," she adds .
 "I’ve gotten the feeling over the years that people in Washington know what really happened but it’s never been divulged," he says .
 Near the Newmans was Cheryl McKinnon, who later became a reporter for the San Diego Star News .
 As we stood watching the motorcade turn onto Elm Street, I tried to grasp every tiny detail of both President Kennedy and Mrs. Kennedy's life .
 The sounds came from the back of the Grassy Knoll where it seemed the sounds had originated . Myself and dozens of others standing nearby turmed in horror .
 I have read the Warren Commission Report in its entirety and dozens of other books as well as dozens of others as well . I have also read dozens of books about the CIA .
 "I have never quite had the same faith and trust in those that lead us as I did before," she says . "I've never had the faith of the people I trust now," she adds .
 Emmett J Hudson was one of the groundskeepers of Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination . He was sitting on the steps leading to the top of the Grassy Knoll when the assassination occurred .
 With Hudson were two other men; neither apparently identified by federal investigations . Hudson was found dead at the scene of the shooting . Hudson is believed to be the only person to have been involved in the shootings .
 Well, there was a young fellow, oh, I would judge his age about in his late twenties . He was in the late twenties at the time .
 "He said he had been looking for a place to park. He said he finally just taken a place over there in one of them parking lots, and he came on down there and said he worked over there on Industrial and me and him both just sat down there on those steps .
 Hudson tried to tell the Commission attorney Liebeler that the shots came “from above and kind of behind” him . The location of the picket fence on the Grassy Knoll is where the shots were fired .
 In an affidavit signed the day of the assassination, Hudson was even more specific as to where shots came from . Hudson was the only person to sign the affidavit .
 A location “behind and above” would be the exact position of the easternmost leg of the wooden picket fence . Sitting near the midway point of the steps leading to the top of the Grassy Knoll is the exact location of the fence . A location "behind and
 Hudson said he did not know the young man who sat with him and, apparently, the federal authorities were never able to locate him . Hudson: "I'm not sure what happened to him, but I'm glad he was there"
 The third man appears behind Hudson in photographs taken in the seconds during the head shot occurs . The photo was taken during the photo shoot .
 He, too, has been unidentified but perhaps, perhaps, is the explanation for one of the enduring assassination mysteries . The man was killed by an unknown assassin in 1968 .
 In at least two photographs taken during the assassination by separate photographers, a human figure is visible behind a low retaining wall to the south of the Grassy Knoll pergola just behind Zapruder’s position .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations had photographs of the figure computer enhanced and concluded that it indeed was that of a person, who appeared to be holding a long object . This suspicion was heightened when the photographs were enhanced .
 The figure is most likely farther back from the retaining wall, according to photos . Closer examination of the photos indicates the figure is more likely to be farther back than back .
 In photos of the assassination, a third man can be seen joining Hudson and his companion on the steps of the Grassy Knoll just before the presidential limousine arrives opposite them .
 Within scant seconds of the fatal head shot, the third man lifts his left foot and within seconds has disappeared back up the steps . Within seconds, the man is gone back down the steps and disappears .
 A dark shape is seen in both pictures on the slope to the left of the Stemmons Freeway sign and half hidden by a concrete wall . The slope has become famous as the “Grassy Knoll”
 Previously published photographs, taken at the moment of the fatal head shot, show that by then he had joined two men seen in Willis' picture standing behind a lamppost at left .
 There is no evidence to indicate he was anything more than an onlooker . There is also no evidence that he was more than a spectator .
 It was the figure of a man seen from waist up as he stood or walked on the sidewalk behind the retaining wall approaching the top of the steps .
 The unidentified man joined Hudson and companion, who were apparently unaware of the man behind them, then turned and ran back up the steps . Seconds later, as determined in photographs, the unidentified man was joined by Hudson and his companion . The man then ran back down the steps immediately after the
 Almost immediately after the final shot was fired, many people rushed toward the Grassy Knoll . Many people, including policemen, sheriff’s deputies, and spectators, rushed to the scene .
 Dallas motorcycle officer Bobby Hargis thought the shots had come from the Triple Underpass . “I had got splattered with blood, with blood I was just a little back and left of Mrs. Mrs. J. Hargs,” he said .
 Hargis stopped his motorcycle on the south side of Elm and ran up the Grassy Knoll to where the concrete wall of the Triple Underpass connected with the wooden picket fence on the knoll . He ran from the south of Elm to the side of the road .
 Hargis looked at the crowd standing on the Underpass . Peering over the wall, he said, "It's a good day for the world"
 Asked if he saw anything out of the ordinary, Hargis told the Warren Commission, “No, I didn't. I didn’t,” he said. “I didn't see anything unusual," he said .
 Hargis returned to his still-running motorcycle and rode through the Triple Underpass . He rode his motorcycle through the underpasses .
 Seymour Weitzman was a deputy constable of Dallas County . He was a college graduate serving as a Dallas County sheriff's deputy . He died at the age of 92 .
 He had been standing with deputy constable Bill Hutton at the comer of Main and Houston at the time .
 "We still didn’t know the President was shot. We still didn't know the president was shot," he said . "Of course, it was speeding away and somebody said the shots or firecrackers . . . came from the wall," the president said .
 Behind Weitzman came Dallas policeman Joe M Smith, who had been handling traffic at the intersection of Elm and Houston in front of the Depository . Smith was handling traffic on the street at the time .
 Smith had helped at the scene of the seizure incident minutes before the motorcade arrived . Smith had returned to his position in the middle of Elm where barricades had been placed to halt traffic .
 Smith heard shots, but he couldn't tell from which direction they came . Smith heard the president's car pass him moments after the president’s car passed him .
 Smith says he immediately went up the short street that branches off of Elm in front of the Depository . Smith said he entered the parking lot behind the wooden picket fence behind the fence . Smith: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it's a
 There was some deputy sheriff with me, and I believe one Secret Service man when I got there . "There was some Deputy Sheriff's with me," he said . "I believe that Secret Service was with me when I arrived," he added .
 "I felt awfully silly, but after the shot and this woman, pulled my pistol from my holster, and I thought, this is silly, I don't know who I am looking for, and put it back," she said .
 He saw me coming with my pistol and right away he showed me who he was . He saw him coming with his pistol and he showed him who he really was .
 Smith said he saw “two other officers there,” but it is unclear if he was talking about behind the fence or the Triple Underpass . In his testimony, Smith said two other officers were also there .
 Smith says he returned to the front of the Depository, where he helped other officers seal the building . Smith said he returned after 15 or 20 minutes to help seal the Texas school .
 For some unexplained reason, at the end of his testimony Commission attorney Wesley Liebeler suddenly asked Smith if there was any reason why the motorcade could not have gone straight down Main Street and turned onto Stemmons Freeway on its way to the Trade Mart .
 A straight run down Main would have made the dogleg turns on Houston and Elm Streets unnecessary and might have prevented the assassination . Although not the normal flow of traffic, a straight run would have been unnecessary .
 One witness who was in a position to observe the area behind the picket fence was Lee Bowers, a railroad supervisor . Bowers was stationed in a tower just north of the Grassy Knoll .
 Bowers told a fascinating story of suspicious cars moving in the sealed-off railroad yards minutes before the motorcade arrived . Bowers said he saw strange men behind the picket fence .
 His testimony takes less than six pages of the Warren Commission volumes . Incredibly, his testimony takes just six pages .
 A block-long street breaks off from Elm and passes in front of the Depository . It ends in a parking lot bordered on the south by the wooden picket fence atop the Grassy Knoll .
 Traffic had been cut off into the area so that anyone moving around could actually be observed . Since approximately 10 o’clock in the morning , traffic was cut off . Traffic was also cut off in the area .
 There were three cars that came in during the time from around noon until the time of the shooting .
 The tower was at the extension of Elm Street... which there is no way out. They came into the vicinity of the tower, which was . The tower . There is . No way out of the area .
 A black 1957 Ford with Texas license plates came into the area at about 12:20 a.m. The car was driven by a woman with a Texas license plate .
 Bowers said this car left after three or four minutes, driving back in front of the Depository . Bowers says this car was driven by a man who was driving in the area .
 Minutes before the assassination, Bowers said a white 1961 or 1962 Chevrolet four-door Impala entered the area . Bowers says a third car, a white 1964 or 1961 Chevrolet Impala, also came in .
 It was muddy up to the windows, bore a similar out-of-state license to the first car I observed also occupied by one white male . The other car was also muddy and had a similar license out of state .
 Whether it continued on... or whether it pulled up only a short distance, I couldn’t tell. I couldn't tell.
 Bowers said about eight minutes later, he caught sight of the presidential limousine as it turned onto Elm Street . Bowers says he saw the limo turn on Elm Street eight minutes before it left .
 The sounds came either from up against the School Depository Building or near the mouth of the Triple Underpass . The sounds come from either up against or around the school Depository building .
 Bowers said he saw two men standing directly between his vantage point and the Triple Underpass . The men "gave no appearance of being together" although they were only ten or fifteen feet from each other . Bowers: Two men were only 10 or 15 feet apart .
 One man, middle-aged, or slightly older, fairly heavyset, in a white shirt, fairly dark trousers. One man in white shirt or dark trousers .
 They were facing and looking up toward Main and Houston and following the caravan as it came down . The caravan came down on the Main Street in downtown Houston .
 Bowers also saw the railroad employees and the two Dallas policemen standing on the Triple Underpass . Bowers saw the train workers and two Dallas police officers .
 Nothing that I could pinpoint as having happened that had happened that— Ball interrupted. Nothing that could pinpoint ... that was having happened," he said . Ball interrupted .
 At the time of the shooting, in the vicinity of where the two men I have described were, there was a flash of light or . . something I could not identify . Something which caused me to feel that something out of the ordinary had occurred .
 Gordon Arnold may have encountered one or more of the men Bowers saw behind the picket fence . Arnold never testified to either of the federal panels investigating the assassination . Arnold was never a witness in the case .
 On the day of the assassination, Arnold was a twenty-two-year-old soldier who had just arrived back in Dallas after Army training . Arnold was just 22 when he was killed .
 He went downtown to have lunch when he decided to take movies of the president . He decided to go to the White House for lunch and take movies .
 Arnold parked his car near Bowers’s railroad tower . Arnold took his movie camera and walked toward the Triple Underpass . Arnold: "It's a good day for people to see the triple underpasses"
 "I was walking along behind this picket fence when a man in a lightcolored suit came up to me and said I shouldn’t be up there. He said he was walking behind the fence when he was approached by a light-colored suit .
 He showed a badge and said he was with the Secret Service and that he didn’t want anyone up there . And he showed him a badge .
 "Just after the car turned onto Elm and started toward me, a shot went off from over my left shoulder," he says . "Just before the car started to turn onto Elm, it turned on Elm, and it was over his left shoulder. Just after that, the car went
 "I buried my head in the ground and I heard several other shots, but I couldn’t see anything because I had my face in the dirt," she says . "I heard several more shots but couldn't see anything"
 "Someone was kicking my butt and telling me to get up. The next thing I knew, someone was kicking me," she said . "The next thing is someone kicking me butt and saying I'm going to get out of bed"
 He opened it, pulled out the film, and then threw the camera back to him . He then threw it back to me. He opened the camera and pulled it out, pulling it back .
 Arnold ran straight back to his car and drove out of the parking area unchallenged . Arnold's car was parked in a parking lot in the middle of the confrontation . Arnold then drove off with his car . Arnold was the first person to challenge Arnold's actions .
 Arnold reported to duty at Fort Wainwright in Alaska two days later . Arnold did not return for several years . Arnold was killed by a mine explosion in Alaska .
 His position well under the overhanging trees on the knoll left him in deep shadow . His position under the trees left him under a deep shadow.
 He was seen, however, by at least one person in the presidential motorcade . The president was seen in the motorcade at the time .
 "I saw the man you interviewed throw himself on the ground. Immediately on the firing of the first shot I saw him," he said . "I'm not sure what happened to the man I was talking to."
 Arnold, later an investigator for the Dallas Department of Consumer Affairs, did not give his name to authorities . Arnold was never questioned by either the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Arnold’s story may have come in 1982 with discovery of a figure in the background of a snapshot made at the instant of the fatal head shot to Kennedy by a woman standing on the curb on Elm Street .
 The Badge Man took a now well-known Polaroid picture just as Kennedy was struck in the head . Mary Moorman took the photo of Kennedy moments before he died .
 She sold her rights to the photo that day to United Press International for $600 . The photo was taken in New York City, New Jersey .
 The photo was never examined or printed by the Warren Commission . It was published widely in newspapers and magazines after the assassination . The Warren Commission never examined the photo .
 No credible photo of a gunman has been found of the gunman . The picket fence is located near the top of the west leg of the fence in Washington .
 After obtaining a clear slide made from an original, good-quality copy of Moorman’s photo, they began studying the bushy area east from the corner of the fence . After obtaining the slide, they used it to make a slide of the area east .
 The figures appear in the same general area that the House committee’s acoustical tests indicated shots were fired from . The sound experts located a shot west of the corner of the fence, while the figures are north of that corner .
 The main figure has been dubbed “badge man” because he appears to be wearing a dark shirt with a semicircular patch on the left shoulder and a bright shiny object on his left chest . The exact configuration of a Dallas police uniform is the exact configuration .
 The “badge man’s” hairline, eyes, left ear, and jaw are visible, but his mouth and neck are obscured by a bright spot . The spot is apparently the smoke or muzzle flash from a rifle he is holding in the classic rifle-f
 After analyzing the photographic blowup, Mack and White felt the “badge man” and perhaps even a companion were standing behind the wooden picket fence about fifteen feet north from the corner of the corner .
 This places the figure just to the left of Gordon Arnold’s position and to the right and rear of Abraham Zapruder . The figure is placed in the position of the second-placed Gordon Arnold and Abraham Arnold .
 Mack and White tried unsuccessfully to interest a major news organization in financing a scientific analysis of the “badge man” photo . In the 1980s, Mack and . White unsuccessfully tried unsuccessfully .
 The photo was subjected to sophisticated computer enhancement at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . White and a representative from the newsmagazine flew to the MIT to test the photo .
 The photo showed a man firing a rifle, police say . The photo was taken at the scene of the shooting . Police say the photo was of a man with a rifle .
 The next day, however, the chairman of the MIT department involved suddenly gave all materials back to them and, with no explanation, told them the school would no longer participate in any study of the photo . MIT officials say they will no longer study the photo of the image .
 The “badge man’s blowup was included in The Men Who Killed Kennedy, a British television documentary by Nigel Turner produced in 1988 . The "Badge man" blowup is included in Nigel Turner's documentary .
 In this program, "badge man" identified as a professional Corsican assassin named Lucien Sarti . The Corsican is a professional assassin named L.Sarti.
 This documentary, which was nominated for awards in Britain and shown to millions of people around the world, was not aired in the U.S. until the early 1990s . It was purchased by the Arts & Entertainment Company and shown on its History Channel .
 "The Guilty Men" implicated Lyndon B Johnson in JFK assassination . His wife, Lady Bird Johnson, who died in 2007, was criticized by surviving Johnson associates, including his wife .
 Gerald R Ford is the last surviving member of the Warren Commission and the only appointed U.S. president . Ford was appointed by Warren Commission in 1973 . Ford is one of the last remaining members of Warren Commission .
 History Channel had three historians review the offending program . After this group threatened legal action, the History Channel decided to review the program .
 Establishment panel concludes offending program was not credible and should not have been aired . Establishment panel concluded the offending program is not credible . Some of the persons interviewed for the programs in question said they and their material had never been questioned .
 History Channel withdrew the History Channel program from distribution . History Channel offered a public apology for the episode .
 Two other programs, one on Corsican assassin Lucien Sarti and the other dealing with Judyth Vary Baker, were also withdrawn . The programs were withdrawn without any explanation .
 The “badge man” has been largely ignored in assassination literature and documentaries . The ‘badge’ man’s role in assassinations has been much ignored in literature, documentaries .
 Gary Mack stated there was no one behind the wooden picket fence, apparently forgetting that he was instrumental in making public the “badge man’s analysis . Mack said there were no one in the Target Car .
 He also misdirected the audience to the long stretch of fence rather than the shorter one, the location of the figure in the photograph .
 The photographic blowup of these figures on the knoll may be the most important evidence yet confirming the existence of assassins on the Grassy Knoll .
 In any other case, if there was a photograph of a shooter behind the fence, anyone arguing that no shots were fired would be considered an idiot . Two separate acoustical studies confirmed at least one shot from behind the . fence, a large number of witnesses who said a shot came
 Some still say the deed was committed only by Lee Oswald firing from the sixth floor of the Depository . But this is the Kennedy assassination and some continue to say that Lee Oswald committed only .
 No official government agency or major news organization has been willing to make a serious study of the Moorman photo .
 Little-known story of a crucial witness can be found in the little-known case of the assassination . Witness was a witness to the assassination of President Kennedy .
 A Grassy Knoll Witness was unable to tell anyone what he saw at the time of the Kennedy assassination . The one person who apparently witnessed men with guns behind the wooden picket fence on the Grassy .
 Ed Hoffman of Dallas was deaf since birth and, as a common with that disability, he cannot speak . Hoffman was born deaf and has a disability that prevents him from speaking . Hoffman is deaf and cannot speak.
 Authorities say they are investigating what they saw behind the fence . The man says he did not know what he saw behind that fence . However, he was able to alert authorities .
 Hoffman told his family and friends what he saw at the time and later reported it to the FBI . Hoffman's story remained unpublicized over the years . Hoffman told friends and family, but his story remained unpublicized .
 Virgil Edward Hoffman was twenty-six years old on November 22, 1963 . Hoffman was driving toward downtown Dallas on the Stemmons Freeway when he noticed numerous people lining the freeway . Hoffman died at age of 26 in Dallas .
 He suddenly realized that President Kennedy was to motorcade through the city that day . He stopped his car just north of a railroad bridge across Stemmons and joined the spectators .
 Only someone who was there that day could have known that many people were lining Stemmons to get a glimpse of the president's motorcade .
 After waiting for a time, Hoffman decided to walk along the shoulder of the freeway to a point where it crossed over Elm Street in hopes of getting a view into Dealey Plaza . Hoffman walked along the highway to get a view of the Plaza .
 Being unable to hear, he was not aware that Kennedy’s motorcade was passing through the plaza . The motorcade passes through the area .
 He said he was aware of movement on the north side of the picket fence . However, he said he did not know of movement in the area .
 He became aware of a man running west along the back side of the fence . The man was wearing a dark suit and a tie .
 The man reached a metal-pipe railing at the west end of the fence . He tossed the rifle to a second man standing on the west side of the pipe near the railroad tracks .
 The second man was wearing light coveralls and a railroad worker’s hat . Both men were wearing railroad coveralls .
 The man disassembled the rifle, placed it in a soft brown bag, then walked nonchalantly north into the rail yards in the general direction of the railroad tower containing Lee Bowers .
 The man in the suit, meanwhile, had turned and run back along the picket fence until midway, when he stopped and began walking calmly toward the corner of the fence .
 Hoffman could not see the corner due to cars and over-hanging tree branches . Hoffman said he was not sure if he would be able to get to the corner .
 Unable to hear, Hoffman was at a loss to understand what was happening as he watched these men . Hoffman was unable to hear what he was trying to understand .
 Kennedy’s car came into sight out of the west side of the Triple Underpass . However, moments later Kennedy's car came out of sight . Kennedy was killed in the shooting .
 Hoffman saw the president lying on the seat of the blood-splattered car and realized something terrible had occurred . Hoffman: "I'm not sure what happened to the president," he said .
 Hoffman tried to alert the Secret Service agents to what he had witnessed . The presidential limousine turned onto the Stemmons access ramp just below his position . Hoffman said he saw the presidential limo turn on a ramp and tried to warn Secret Service officers .
 He ran down the grassy incline waving his arms and trying to make them understand that he had seen something, when one of the agents in the president’s follow-up car produced a “machine gun,” which he leveled at him .
 Hoffman stopped and threw up his hands and could only watch helplessly as the motorcade rushed past him onto Stemmons in the mad rush to Parkland Hospital . Hoffman stopped throwing his hands as he watched helplessly .
 Hoffman was emphatic that it was an automatic weapon with a pistol grip, carrying handle, and clip . There was no mention at the time of any Secret Service man with a machine gun, yet Hoffman said it was a . automatic weapon . Hoffman was adamant that the weapon had a pistol
 It is now known that Secret Service agent George W Hickey Jr. in the follow-up car did display an AR-15, the civilian model of the M-16 automatic rifle .
 He saw a Dallas policeman standing on the railroad bridge crossing Stemmons and he walked toward him waving his arms in an attempt to communicate what he had seen . The officer waved his arms as he tried to communicate with the officer .
 Police officer Earle Brown filed a report stating that he was on the Stemmons railroad bridge at the time of the assassination . This part of Hoffman’s story also is partially corroborated .
 Brown said he has no recollection of seeing Hoffman . Brown has been questioned about the events .
 This indicates the total lack of security around the Depository in the chaotic minutes following the assassination . However, this indicates the lack of any security in the chaos following the shooting .
 Hoffman was able to drive around in the rail yards behind the Depository for some time and then leave without being stopped or questioned by authorities . Hoffman left without being questioned by police .
 He then drove to the Dallas FBI office but found no one there except a receptionist . The FBI office is located in Dallas .
 Hoffman had a relative at the Dallas police station, and he drove there next, hoping to find some help . At the time, Hoffman had no idea what was going on, but he drove to the police station .
 The station was sealed off and the officer on the door refused to allow him inside . However, the station is sealed off .
 Hoffman finally went home, where his parents, also deaf and mute, urged him not to become involved . Hoffman's parents were also mute and deaf, so he was unable to tell authorities .
 Hoffman said nothing until Thanksgiving 1963, when he met his policeman relative at a family function . Hoffman said he met the relative at Thanksgiving 1963 .
 Despite parents’ warnings, he told his story to Dallas policeman Robert Hoffman . Hoffman assured him that federal authorities were investigating the case and that, in fact, the assassin had already been caught . Hoffman told Hoffman that the assassin was already being caught .
 His father was very, very concerned that Eddie knew anything about the assassination at all . Eddie's father said he was very concerned about Eddie's knowledge of the assassination .
 It just wasn't a time for loose statements that couldn’t be proved or backed up with any evidence, it was said . It was a time not to be proved, it wasn't to be backed up, it said .
 Ed Hoffman said he didn't consider telling his story to anyone else . He said he had done his civic duty and that the case was closed . Hoffman: "I didn’t consider telling anyone else"
 Hoffman became more and more aware of the official version of the assassination and knew that the theory that one man had fired from the sixth floor of the Depository did not agree with what he had seen . Hoffman knew that he was not shooting at the scene of the shooting .
 Hoffman visited the Dallas FBI once again on June 28, 1967, at the urging of coworkers . Hoffman's visit was the first time he had visited the FBI in Dallas, Texas . Hoffman is credited with saving the lives of others .
 Hoffman lost sight of both of the men . The men were running north on the railroad, then turned east, Hoffman says . Hoffman says he was able to see the men running north .
 FBI agents talked to Hoffman's father and brother on July 5, 1967 . FBI agents were able to talk to Hoffman and his brother .
 Hoffman loved President Kennedy and had told his story to them just after the assassination . Hoffman loved the president and told them his story just after his death, they said .
 It was his father who had urged him not to become involved in the case, so there was motivation to downplay his son’s story .
 Hoffman's story was the end of any investigation into Hoffman’s story at that time . Officially, this was the case of Hoffman . Hoffman was the subject of an investigation into his story .
 Hoffman continued to tell his story to fellow workers at the Dallas electronics firm where he was employed since before the assassination . Despite this not-so-subtle attempt to silence Hoffman, he continued to talk about his story .
 On March 25, 1977, one of Hoffman’s supervisors who understood sign language contacted the Dallas FBI office . The FBI office in Dallas, Texas, received a tip-off from Hoffman's supervisor .
 He said he felt that the FBI did not fully understand what Hoffman was trying to tell them during the 1967 interview . He said Hoffman deserved to be heard and that he felt he deserved to hear .
 FBI agents again talked with Hoffman on March 28, 1977, and even accompanied him to the site on Stemmons Freeway . At this urging, FBI agents visited Hoffman again, and again, in March 1977 .
 Hoffman was able to give more details of the shooting . Hoffman's supervisor acted as a translator for his interview .
 He said he thought he saw a puff of smoke near where the men were standing . In 1985, he said he saw both men run north into the rail yards .
 Hoffman's testimony was part of an FBI investigation into the case . The FBI again showed little interest in pursuing Hoffman's story . Hoffman testified that he was killed by a car bomb in 1993 .
 In view of the above, the Dallas Office is conducting no additional investigation . The Dallas Office will not investigate further .
 The federal government concluded Oswald was the lone assassin, so Hoffman must have been mistaken . In other words, since the government concluded . Oswald was Oswald's killer, Hoffman was mistaken .
 Hoffman, despite his hearing disability, appears to be a most credible witness . Hoffman's story only reinforces those of others who told of gunmen on the knoll, it deserves serious consideration .
 As late as 2007, some were still sniping at Hoffman’s account . Hoffman's account was published in 2007, but some still mocked the account .
 M Duke Lane argued that surely the policemen on or near Stemmons Freeway would have reported Hoffman’s attempts to gain their attention . Lane argued the policemen should have reported the incident to the public .
 Officers were on the lookout for anything that might have seemed suspicious in any way, or even just out of the ordinary . After all, the President had just been “hit” and was on his way to the hospital .
 We're left with the inescapable conclusion that the Ed Hoffman tale is nothing more than a tale . Hoffman got caught up in a story possibly not of his own making, but which nevertheless created and sustained that “fifteen minutes of fame” all men are said to be
 Many of the details in Hoffman’s story have been independently corroborated, including the automatic rifle, the cop on the railroad bridge, and the testimony of Jesse Price, who saw a man running behind the picket fence from the roof of the Union Terminal Annex . Hoffman's ad
 His account may be the best version to date of what happened behind the picket fence . His account is the best account of the events in the U.S.
 Hoffman's experience also serves as a vivid commentary on the FBI's failure to follow serious leads . Hoffman’s experience is also an indictment of the bureau's attempts to intimidate witnesses into silence . Hoffman: The FBI's attacks on anyone who would dare challenge the official government version of assassination
 In reviewing the experiences of the people in Dealey Plaza the day Kennedy died, it is apparent that not one single person saw the assassination as it was described by the government’s investigations .
 In the motorcade, Governor Connally’s testimony—totally corroborated by the Zapruder film—indicated that both he and Kennedy could not have been struck by the same bullet . Connally testified in the film that he was struck by Kennedy's bullet .
 Many people, including Sheriff Decker, Royce Skelton, and Austin Miller, saw one bullet strike Elm Street . Many people saw the bullet hit Elm Street in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Others, like Policeman Foster, saw a bullet hit the grass on the south side of Elm Street . Others saw the bullet hit a bullet on the grass .
 Some heard shots coming from at least two separate locations . Those on the Triple Underpass even saw smoke drift out from under the trees on Grassy Knoll .
 Motorcade riders heard shots from separate locations, but majority believed shots came from the direction of the Triple Underpass . Motorcade rider: "Shots came from a different direction"
 Both Sheriff Decker and Police Chief Curry ordered their men to rush to the railroad yards behind the Grassy Knoll . Both the sheriff and police chief are on duty at the scene .
 Despite great efforts to establish the Depository as the source of all shots, public attention kept returning to the infamous Grassy Knoll .
 The assassination of president John F Kennedy was not an isolated event . The assassination was not a isolated event. It was an attempt to find a way to solve the problem .
 It occurred within a complex matrix of national and international events and issues . The incident occurred within an international matrix of issues .
 For any truthful understanding, the assassination must be placed within a context of the times. Therefore, for any truthful . The assassination must also be placed in a context, the author says .
 As president, Kennedy daily was juggling a wide variety of responsibilities on many fronts . Kennedy daily juggles a variety of tasks, including foreign policy, civil rights, agriculture, finance, politics, politics and defense considerations .
 Lee Harvey Oswald did not live isolated from the world of his time . He was identified by two government panels as Kennedy’s assassin . Oswald was not isolated from his time, but from his own time .
 Oswald came into contact with an incredible array of groups and individuals, all of whom had reason to wish for the elimination of Kennedy . During his brief twenty-four years of life, Oswald was in contact with many of the world's most famous people .
 Young Oswald moved through a shadowy world of people from both sides of the Cold War . His uncle connected to organized crime, he says, was a key figure in organized crime . He says he was fascinated by anti-Castro Cubans, Russians, Cubans .
 To place the events of November 22, 1963, in proper perspective, it is necessary to become familiar with these groups and with their relationships to Oswald and each other . The events took place in 1963, Oswald's widow says .
 Every good detective begins a murder investigation by determining who had the means, motive, and opportunity to commit the act . After all, every good detective must determine who has the means and motive to commit a crime .
 The obvious starting place is with the one man universally acknowledged as the person most closely connected to the assassination—Lee Harvey Oswald . Lee Harvey Oswald is one of the most closely associated with the assassination . Oswald is considered the most likely person to have been involved in the JFK assassination .
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s boyhood was little different from that of millions of other Americans . Prior to his enlistment in the Marines and with the possible exception of the early death of his father, his father was not involved in his father's assassination .
 Oswald was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, on October 18, 1939, two months after the death of his father . His father, Robert E Lee Oswald, was a collector of insurance premiums . Oswald's father was an insurance collector .
 Oswald's murder of JFK was an unfortunate event, but it was a fate endured by thousands of other young Americans . Oswald was not the only young American to commit the murder of national leaders . Oswald's killing of JFK JFK was not an isolated act of madness .
 Oswald’s mother married for a third time in 1945, but three years later the marriage ended in divorce . Oswald's mother was married for the third time, but the marriage was a divorce .
 From that point on, Oswald and his brother, Robert, were brought up by their mother, Marguerite . Oswald and Robert were raised together by their father, who died in 1918 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was the actual killer, according to the book . Another gunman escaped and remains unidentified, the book's authors say .
 This finding was a milestone to the many Americans who had come to disbelieve the Warren Commission theory of the lone-assassin theory . This finding is a milestone for many Americans, including those who had doubted the theory .
 Marguerite Oswald, the mother of the accused assassin, was not satisfied with the reversal of official American history . Oswald's mother says she is disappointed with the outcome of the assassination .
 I probably won’t be around, but the world will know that Lee Harvey Oswald was innocent of the charges against him, says author . "I probably won't be around," he says .
 This was the statement of a woman who was much more than merely a supportive mother . This is the statement from a mother who was not merely a mother, but a mother of herself .
 It came from a woman who faced more public hostility than most murderers . She faced the autumn of her years alone and in poverty in poverty . She was murdered in the 1970s and '80s .
 Marguerite Claverie was born in New Orleans in 1907 . She was born of French and German descent .
 Her mother died a few years after her birth, leaving Marguerite and her five siblings in the care of her father, a streetcar conductor . Her father was streetcar conductor and conductor .
 The couple divorced in 1931, several months after the birth of her first son, John Edward Pic. Pic. However, the marriage was not successful and the couple divorced .
 In 1933, she married Robert Edward Lee Oswald, himself recently divorced . She was married to Lee Oswald in 1933, who was recently widowed .
 She described her marriage to Oswald as the “only happy part of her life’s’ life . She described the marriage to him as ‘the only happy part’ of her career .
 Oswald's husband died of a sudden heart attack in October 1939 . Two months before the birth of Lee Harvey Oswald, Oswald's wife died from a heart attack . Oswald's mother was a member of the Oswald family .
 She saw an opportunity to establish a family once again by remarrying in 1945 . Making her way alone, she decided to make her way to the country alone .
 Lee Ekdahl was the first child to be taken to Benbrook, Texas, a small town south of Fort Worth . Lee's mother says she and her husband took him to Texas to live with her new husband . Lee was born to a healthy, healthy baby girl with a healthy
 Ekdahl was accused of infidelity and money laundering . Ekdah was acquitted of all charges against him . However, there were arguments over money and infidelity against him in court .
 A divorce was granted in 1948 and she was allowed to use her former name of Oswald . A divorce in 1948 was granted and she is allowed to continue using her name Oswald .
 Ekdahl’s divorce attorney was Fred Korth, who in the fall of 1963 was fired as secretary of the Navy by President Kennedy . Korth may have been involved along with Lyndon Johnson in a scandal over General Dynamics TFX airplane contracts .
 John Pic and Robert Oswald rejoined their mother, but both soon left home to join the military . Robert Oswald and John Pic both soon joined the military and went to war .
 Some accounts say Marguerite overly mothered Lee, while others claim she neglected the boy . Lee's mother is accused of neglecting the boy, who was born in 18th century .
 Former Texas representative Tom Vandergriff babysat the children of prominent Texans such as Amon Carter Jr. and former Texas representative Amon Carter . The former nurse also babysat children of Texas politicians .
 Despite much conjecture, there is little evidence that Lee’s childhood was any better or any worse than many others . Lee's childhood was no better or worse than others, despite conjecture .
 In 1959, he received a sudden discharge and returned to Fort Worth for a two-day visit with his mother . But in 1959 he was discharged and returned home to see his mother in Texas .
 Mr. Lee said he was off to New Orleans to work for an import-export firm, but several weeks later he was back in New Orleans . Mrs. Lee told him he was going to work at a New Orleans import-exchange firm . She said he said he would be
 Oswald read in the newspapers that her son had turned up in Russia, where he told U.S. officials he wanted to defect . Oswald's son was found in Russia .
 Instead of branding her son a traitor, she told reporters, “I feel very strongly that as an individual, he has the right to make his own decision.” She said she feels "very strongly" strongly about the decision .
 Lee seemed to make every effort to avoid Marguerite after his return from the Soviet Union in 1962 . Despite this motherly support, Lee tried to avoid her after he returned from Russia .
 At one point he moved his Russian bride and their infant daughter from Fort Worth to Dallas without leaving his mother a forwarding address . He moved the couple and their daughter without leaving their mother an address .
 The family was reunited only briefly during those dark days of November 1963 . It was the first time the family had been reunited .
 Oswald was on her way to work on November 22 when she heard over the car radio that Kennedy had been shot . Oswald was shot while riding in a motorcade in downtown Dallas, Texas .
 Young ex-Marine named Lee Harvey Oswald being held by police as suspected assassin . Ex-marine Lee Harvey Oswold was being held as the suspected assassin in Dallas .
 Oswald also told them that she had been persecuted since her son’s journey to Russia and knew the meaning of suffering . Oswald also said that she was persecuted for her son's journey .
 She had been acting as a day nurse for the Carters’ children until about two weeks prior to the Kennedy assassination . She said she had been working as a nurse for two weeks before the assassination .
 The Carters suddenly let her go after arriving back from a weekend trip to Las Vegas . She had been with the Carters for two weeks .
 She also noted this was the same weekend Jack Ruby was reported visiting in Las Vegas . Ruby was also reported to have visited Las Vegas this weekend .
 Oswald was unable to hear the confession she sought from her son—she was not allowed to talk with him . Oswald was able to hear her son's confession from her .
 He shouted to news reporters gathered in the police station hallway, “No, sir, I didn’t kill anybody.” The suspect shouted to reporters gathered gathered in a police station . He shouted: “I didn't kill anybody . No, sir. I didn
 Oswald's mother blamed the Dallas police and federal authorities for her son's death . Oswald was killed by Jack Ruby two days later in Dallas .
 She maintained until her death that the FBI had shown her a photo of Ruby the night before her son was slain . To compound her suspicions, she maintained until she death that she had been shown the FBI photo of her son .
 FBI agent and another man knocked on the door of the hotel where she and Lee’s wife were being kept by the authorities, she said . She said about 6:30m. on November 23, the night after the assassination, an FBI agent knocked on .
 After being told that her daughter-in-law was tired and couldn’t talk with the men, the FBI agent asked Marguerite a question . The FBI agent then asked her a question: "What do you think of the men?"
 He had a picture of a man inside his hand and asked me if I had ever seen that man before . He asked me to see him again, and I said yes, but I had seen him again .
 FBI officials speculated that she must have been confused as to the date she was shown the photograph . FBI officials speculate that she was confused about the date of her photograph .
 On July 10, 1964, FBI agent Bardwell D Odum signed an affidavit with the Warren Commission stating that he had shown the picture to Mrs. Odum . Odum said he showed the photo to her, but she died in the hospital .
 CIA was reportedly secretly photographing visitors to the Soviet embassy in Mexico City . It was reportedly supplied by the CIA .
 To the end of her life, she maintained that Lee had been working as some sort of agent for the U.S. government . She maintained that unnamed “high officials” were part of the plot to kill Kennedy and blame her son .
 Marguerite Oswald was forced to live through the next two decades on less than $500 a month in Social Security payments . With the exception of a couple of mysterious “benefactors” who kept her supplied with publications concerning the assassination, she was able to survive .
 In the bicentennial summer of 1976, she was without a refrigerator for almost two months because she could not afford repairs . She was without refrigerators for two months .
 The loneliness and poverty of her life, however, failed to crush her fighting spirit, she says . The lonely and impoverished woman was a survivor .
 She continued to assail the official version of the assassination and to strike out at media presentations of the event .
 "I have every right to be upset over that program as well as many other things because they are talking about my son and my family," she says . "They were talking about me and my son," she adds .
 "They sit there and tell the gullible American public that their program is the truth and based on documentation. They sit there . They sit . They tell the . gullible . public that they are the . truth and . based on . documentation .
 Her thoughts on the Warren Commission, whose conclusions were taken as gospel at the time but gradually lost the confidence of the majority of Americans, are summed up in a letter written by Mrs. Nancy Reagan .
 President Johnson selected Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United States, as its chairman . Earl Warren was the chairman of the board of the committee .
 "Men of integrity and who are the most esteemed, most respected and honored, would be most likely to do what the White House wanted and thought necessary," he says .
 Those we believe are above reproach, those who have reached the pinnacle or are near it, are found to have manipulated events to accomplish certain things they think were for the good of the country . Those who are guiding our nation’s destiny will be found to be manipulating events,
 The Watergate affair only strengthens my convictions and proves my theory that the suspect was my son . Seven respected men branded a dead man who was neither tried nor convicted, assassin, assassin. suspect was his son .
 Oswald, who always claimed to be a “mother in history,” was quick to point out that her defense of her son went beyond simple motherly love . Oswald, a mother-of-one, defended her son in the wake of his death .
 Oswald was virtually a recluse in her modest but wellkept brick home on the west side of Fort Worth, Texas . Oswald's husband was assassinated in 1968 .
 An occasional visitor—usually a journalist—and her small dog, Fritz, were her only company .
 Neither her sons nor Lee’s wife, Marina, ever spoke to her again after November 1963 . Neither her other sons nor her wife ever spoke again .
 When money problems pressed too hard, she would sell a book or a letter from her mammoth collection of assassination materials . She would sell them for money or for a book .
 She never hesitated to pick up her telephone and call the media when a particular news item rankled her . Fort Worth, Texas, mayor says she never hesitated .
 "Here I am without money, wondering where my next meal is coming from," she says . "These writers come to my house wanting an interview. Well, here I'm without money," she adds .
 "Some of them don't even talk to me more than fifteen minutes or so," he says . "They get all this money for their work. Then they go out and write some piece," he adds .
 She was buried next to Lee in east Fort Worth’s Rose Hill Memorial Burial Park . Lee was buried in Fort Worth .
 Oswald’s early life is shrouded in innuendo and misinformation, much of it stemming from the passionate attitudes following the assassination . Oswald's early life has been shrouded in misinformation, with much of the misinformation .
 Anyone who had had any contact with Oswald was hunted down and interviewed by news reporters . Many were deposed by the Warren Commission .
 No one, including some family members, had anything good to say about the man accused of killing one of this nation’s most popular presidents . And no one had any good things to say .
 Oswald placed Robert and Lee in the Bethlehem Children’s Home, operated by the Lutheran Church . Oswald explained to reporters years later that she placed them in the home .
 Admittedly it was also an orphanage, but more precisely, it was the forerunner of a daycare center . The orphanage was also a day care center . Admittedly, the orphanage is now a center for children .
 Marguerite saw the boys on weekends and holidays . Relatives looked in on the boys and Margueritte saw them on weekends . Marguerie saw them as well as other relatives .
 Lee’s oldest brother, John Pic, told the Warren Commission that Lee slept with his mother until almost 11 years old, thus supplying much fodder for later psychological speculation . Lee's oldest brother John Pic said that Lee's mother slept with him until almost eleven years old .
 After I divorced this man , all I got from this divorce was $1,500 and I paid for a home . After I divorce this man, only I got $2,500 . After divorce, I got only $500 from divorce . I paid $1.000 down on
 One of the boys slept on an army cot, and the other on a twin bed, and, because of the circumstances, Lee slept with me . It was a short time because then his brother joined the service and when he did, Lee took his bed .
 It just implies that all through his life he slept with his mother, which isn’t the case, you see. But it just implies . That’s not the case. It just implied that all . through his . life he . slept with . his . mother,
 Robert Oswald supported his mother’s version of this issue by writing, “If this had a bad effect on Lee, I’m sure mother didn’t realize it.” Robert Oswald said .
 There were reports of fights and divisions within the family . Lee and his mother had moved into their own apartment in the Bronx . Lee moved into his own apartment at the start of the school year .
 Lee continued his education on his own, frequenting the local library and the zoo . Lee was truant at the age of 13 . Lee is now a senior at the University of San Francisco .
 The youngster was handed over for psychiatric observation to a psychiatric institution called Youth House . He is now being held in a psychiatric ward at Youth House in London .
 Oswald said it was only after having both her gifts and her person searched for cigarettes and narcotics that she realized Youth House was one step short of jail . Oswald said she was shocked to discover Youth House had searched for drugs and cigarettes .
 A bright and inquisitive young man who was somewhat tense, withdrawn, and hesitant to talk about himself or his feelings . He was found to be somewhat tense and withdrawn, but not withdrawn .
 The psychiatric examination did not indicate that Lee Oswald was a potential assassin, potentially dangerous, that “his outlook on life had strongly paranoid overtones,” or that he should be institutionalized .
 Oswald case was used in a widely publicized 1993 book by Gerald Posner titled Case Closed . Case Closed was published by Posner in 1993 . Oswald was accused of shooting Oswald in 1963 .
 Hartogs told Posner he recommended Oswald be institutionalized . Contradicticticting the Warren Report, Hartogs said he recommended he did . Hartogs: Oswald was institutionalized.
 Lee had no further truancy problems with young Lee, according to the official history . Lee was sent to Youth House after his experience in Youth House . According to the history, Lee was not truant .
 Lee and his mother returned to New Orleans in January 1954 . Lee finished the ninth grade and began the tenth grade in New Orleans . Lee's mother moved him from New Orleans to New York in 1954 .
 Oswald’s sister and her husband, Lillian and Charles ‘Dutz’’ Murret, found an apartment of their own . The Murret family moved into the Murret's first apartment after Oswald's sister moved in .
 His interests were varied, including animals, astronomy, classic literature, and eventually, politics . His interests included animals, literature, astronomy and astronomy .
 Reading comic books and listening to radio and TV were also among his favorite pastimes . Reading comics, listening to TV and reading comic books was among his most favorite pastime .
 One of his favorite programs was “I Led Three Lives,” the story of Herbert Philbrick, the FBI informant who posed as a communist spy . The FBI informant was a member of the Communist Party in the 1950s .
 When I left home to join the Marines, he was still watching the reruns . When I joined the Marines he still watched reruns of the series, he still had to watch them .
 There can be little doubt that the well-read but lonely young Oswald spent much of his time daydreaming, fantasizing about being an important person someday . Oswald spent most of his life daydreams about being important people someday, says author .
 Oswald appears to have been drawn at an early age to the epic and intense ideological struggle between communism and democratic capitalism . Oswald was drawn to the struggle between capitalism and communism in his youth . Oswald is believed to be the son of a former Soviet spy .
 Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were convicted of passing atomic bomb secrets to the Russians in 1950, when Oswald was only twelve . Oswald was just 12 when the case began .
 This story of early interest in communism must be taken with a large grain of salt . However, this story of the Soviet Union's involvement in the USSR is not entirely clear .
 Oswald told a reporter at a time he was trying hard to prove he was a devout communist supporter so he would be accepted into Russia . Oswald was trying to prove himself to be a devout Communist supporter .
 It illustrates how an unsubstantiated fact can be impressed on the public, much like the many depictions of an Oswald character perched in the sixth-floor window with a rifle .
 If Lee was deeply interested in Marxism in the summer of 1955, he said nothing about it to me . Lee's interest in Marxism came to light in 1955, but he didn't mention it to him .
 I never saw any books on the subject in the apartment on Exchange Place in New Orleans .
 "Never, in my presence, did he read anything that I recognized as communist literature," he said . Never, in his presence, he said, "never, in any of his own words, was communist literature"
 I was surprised when the information about his interest in Marxism came out, at the time of his defection to Russia . I was totally surprised when he defected to Russia, he says . He says he was surprised by the information .
 Oswald’s study of communism intensified in New Orleans, according to the Warren Commission . Oswald studied communism in his New Orleans home, the commission says . Oswald's study of Communism intensified in the city, the report says .
 Lee arrived home in the company of a military officer who said Lee was a self-starter, an independent sort but bright . Lee was just the sort of young man the military was looking for, his mother says .
 Oswald made one of the most intriguing connections of his life . Oswald was in New Orleans when he was a young man . Oswald's connection to New Orleans was a pivotal moment in his career .
 It may have been in the Civil Air Patrol that his procommunism posturing was truly born .
 Oswald’s CAP leader was a mysterious character named David W Ferrie . It has been established that Oswald was the leader of the CAP . Oswald's Library Card was obtained from his library .
 Supporters of the lone-assassin theory argued fervently against any connection between Ferrie and Oswald . The House Select Committee on Assassinations interviewed the former recruit instructor for Oswald’s Lakefront CAP unit, Jerry Paradis .
 This argument ended when a PBS documentary broadcast a photograph of the pair together at a CAP function . This argument abruptly ended when the pair were photographed together at CAP functions .
 Considering Ferrie’s known homosexuality and intelligence connections, this speculation is not far-fetched .
 David Ferrie’s library card provided tantalizing evidence that the connection between the two continued up to the assassination . Ferrie's library card was a key piece of evidence in the case .
 Employee of former FBI agent Guy Banister contacted New Orleans authorities hours after Kennedy's assassination . Banister and Ferrie had been in touch with Oswald, an FBI agent says .
 Oswald used the same address,554 Camp Street, as Banister’s office on some of his Fair Play for Cuba material . The address was also used as an office for Banister .
 Banister also was a supporter of right-wing causes . He had been assisting anti-Castro Cubans through his New Orleans private detective agency . Banister was an antiCastro Cuban activist .
 Ferrie told New Orleans police he had driven to Texas the night of the assassination to go goose hunting . Sometime later, Ferrie said he had gone to Texas for goose hunting. Ferrie later told police he drove to Texas to go hunting .
 Ferrie spent two hours at a pay telephone making and receiving calls at a Houston skating rink . Investigation of Ferrie’s companions revealed that they had decided not to hunt geese .
 Ferrie's friend told New Orleans police that shortly after Kennedy’s assassination, an attorney named C Wray Gill had come to his home and mentioned that when Oswald was arrested in Dallas, he was carrying a library card with Ferrie’�s name on it . Gill
 Attorney for Carlos Marcello promised to act on Ferrie’s behalf upon his return to New Orleans . Gill, an attorney for the attorney for Carlos .
 Ferrie contacted Gill on the Sunday that Jack Ruby killed Oswald . Gill then accompanied Ferrie to the authorities the next day . Gill was Ferrie's partner .
 Ferrie denied knowing anything about Oswald or the assassination and was released . Ferrie was released from prison after his testimony .
 Oswald’s former neighbors in New Orleans, Doris Eames, and Ferrie Ferrie's former building manager, Mrs. Ferrie, are still alive . Doris and Mrs. Eames were neighbors of Ferrie and Oswald's former neighbors .
 Ferrie visited Jesse Garner and Jesse Garner after the assassination asking about a library card . Jesse Garner, later recalled Ferrie visiting them both after they were assassinated . Ferrie later visited the Garner and Garner to ask about a card .
 Oswald’s former landlady said Ferrie came to her asking about the library card just hours after the assassination and before the bizarre Texas trip . Ferrie's former Landlady says she asked about the card hours after Oswald's assassination .
 Oswald's library card was never found in Oswald’s possession, official records show . Oswald had a library card issued by the White House . Oswald was a member of the House of Representatives from Texas .
 Secret Service reportedly asked if he had loaned his library card to Oswald . Ferrie was questioned by the Secret Service when it came to Oswald's library .
 An incriminating photograph of Oswald was discovered after nearly fifteen years among the possessions of a retired Dallas policeman . Oswald's photograph was found in the possession of a former Dallas police officer . Oswald was a member of the Dallas Police Department .
 If such a card existed, it would have been strong evidence that a relationship between Oswald and Ferrie continued long after young Oswald moved away from New Orleans . Oswald's relationship with Ferrie was likely to have lasted long after he left the city .
 Oswald began the tenth grade at Warren Easton High School in New Orleans in the fall of 1955 . Oswald dropped out soon after his birthday in October of that year .
 He had his mother sign a false affidavit stating he was seventeen and he tried to join the Marine Corps. He had to tell his mother he was 17 and wanted to be in the Marines . The affidavit says he had to sign it because he wanted to join a Marine Corps .
 Lee's brother Robert had given Lee his training manual . Robert, who had joined the Marines three years earlier, gave Lee his manual .
 His desire to join the Marines was decidedly odd if we are supposed to believe, as the Warren Commission did, that he was a full-blown Marxist by this time . The Warren Commission was supposed to have found him a Marxist by the time he died .
 Oswald eagerly looked forward to serving in the military because he already knew that plans were being made for his service in intelligence . It makes more sense to believe that Oswald was looking forward to his military career . Oswald knew he wanted to serve in intelligence because he knew plans were made for him .
 Recruitment authorities failed to believe the affidavit . The affidavit was based on an affidavit filed by the father of one of the men .
 He continued to build an identity as a communist sympathizer . Yet, during that time, he continued to be an identity .
 During a meeting of the New Orleans Amateur Astronomy Association, he began expounding on the virtues of communism . He said he was looking for a communist cell to join but couldn’t find one .
 He was kicked out of the home of a friend after the friend’s father overheard him praising the communist system . Another time, he was thrown out of his friend's home because of his praise of communism .
 Some have interpreted this penchant for communism as sincere and as evidence of how deeply disturbed Oswald had become . Oswald had a strong anti-communist inclinations, including a desire for communism .
 Swaldald was already concocting a procommunist cover, says the author . However, there is the real possibility that he may have been trying to fool Captain Ferrie .
 Up until his meeting with Ferrie his interest in politics and ideology had been no different from that of any other bright kid . Up until he met Ferrie, he had been interested in politics .
 Oswald’s regard for communism intensified after he entered the Marine Corps. The questions over Oswald's regard for Communism intensified after entering the Marines . Oswald's interest in communism grew after he became a member of the Marines.
 Oswald arrived at the Marine Corps Recruit Depot in San Diego, California, on October 26, 1956 . Oswald was a member of the U.S. Marine Corps .
 His marksmanship on the rifle range was less than what was desired by his fellow Marines . He completed basic training with no apparent problems .
 Former Marine Sherman Cooley recalled that Oswald was given the name “Shitbird” because he couldn’t qualify on the M-1 rifle . Cooley: Oswald was nicknamed ‘Shitbirds’ because he was unable to qualify on his first test .
 More than fifty Marines who served with Oswald were interviewed by author Henry Hurt in the early 1980s . All said Oswald’s proficiency with a rifle was laughable .
 Oswald's Marine buddy, Nelson Delgado, also has publicly spoken of Oswald's ineptness with a rifle . Delgado has also spoken out of Oswald’s ineptness .
 Oswald was often “gigged” for having a dirty rifle during his initial Marine training . Delgado told investigators that when the unit went to the rifle range, Oswald got “Maggie’s drawers”—a red flag signifying that he
 Oswald managed to qualify as a “sharpshooter’s” by only two points in December . Oswald has been in testing for the past two months .
 He did not do nearly so well when he tested a third time for the record shortly before leaving the Marines . He tested the record for the first time in his career .
 On January 20, 1957, he completed basic training and went on to Camp Pendleton, California, where he completed advanced infantry training . He completed advanced training .
 Oswald reportedly continued to speak favorably of communism while learning combat skills . The Marines were in the Marines in the 1950s . Oswald reportedly spoke favorably of Communism .
 Oswald’s Marine superiors did not note for the record his displays of procommunist sentiment . Odder still is that at no time did any of his Marine superiors note . Oswald's Marine superiors never noted for record his pro-communist sentiments .
 Oswald reported to the Naval Air Technical Training Center in Jacksonville, Florida, in March 1957 . Other evidence indicated an Oswald remained at Camp Pendleton until May . Oswald is believed to have spent most of the time in Camp Pendleine .
 Oswald studied to be a radar air controller, a job given only to men with higher-than-average intelligence . The Oswald in Florida studied for the job in Florida . Oswald studied for a job only to be an air controller .
 Oswald obtained a security clearance of “Confidential” at the time he was promoted to private first class . This job required a clearance of "Confidential," which Oswald obtained . Oswald obtained the clearance of 'Confidential'
 Oswald used almost all his weekend passes to go to New Orleans, presumably to visit his mother . Daniel Patrick Powers, who was with the Oswald in Jacksonville, recalled that Oswald used most of his time passes to visit New Orleans . Powers: "Oswold used almost every weekend pass to
 Oswald was in Texas at the time and relatives in New Orleans could recall only one phone call from Oswald . Relatives say they remember only one call from the Oswald family .
 Oswald graduated May 3 and was sent to Keesler Air Force Base in Mississippi . According to military records, Oswald completed an Aircraft Control and Warning Operator Course . Oswald graduated from an ATCO course .
 Oswald was given a Military Occupational Specialty of Aviation Electronics Operator . Oswald was sent to the Marine Corps Air Station at El Toro, California . Oswald finished seventh in a class of fifty in his class .
 He was shipped to Japan aboard the USS Bexar on August 22 . He stayed there until August 22, where he was shipped back to Japan .
 Atsugi was one of two bases where U-2 spy plane flights were originating . The base was home to the First Marine Aircraft Wing . Oswald was sent to the base about 25 miles southwest of Tokyo .
 In reality, this was the CIA's main operational base in the Far East . Speculation has arisen that this was where the young Oswald entered the real world of spying .
 Oswald sat in a hot, crowded, semicircular radar control room known as the “bubble’s ‘bubble' He sat in the room to watch his radarscope for signs of Russian or Chinese aircraft crossing into Allied airspace . Oswald watched his rad
 Radar operators overhear Race Car asking for wind information at 90,000 feet . Radar operators would overhear race car ask for wind info at 90-000 feet.
 The world altitude record at that time was only slightly more than 65,000 . The radar height-finding antenna read only up to 45,000 at the time . They at first thought this was some sort of joke, since the world altitude .
 The U-2 was being used to penetrate Soviet and Chinese airspace to photograph military and industrial targets . The men didn't know this utility plane was being . used to . penetrate Soviet airspace .
 Oswald seemed to show particular interest in Race Car and other “secrets” of Atsugi . Oswald seemed particularly interested in the race car . Oswald also seemed to be interested in other "secrets"
 Oswald showed special interest during unit briefings on classified material . One Marine recalled seeing Oswald taking photographs of the base . Oswald also showed interest in taking photos of base and in briefings .
 Oswald began making visits to Tokyo in the early 1950s . Oswald was in Tokyo at the time of his first trip to the U.S. in the 1930s .
 Oswald reportedly confided that he made contact with a small group of Japanese communists in Tokyo while in the Marines . Years later, Oswald reportedly told reporters he had contact with the group .
 Even Warren Commission lawyers W David Slawson and William T Coleman Jr. Jr. were surprised by the findings of the Warren Commission .
 Oswald told a friend at the time that he was having an affair with a Japanese girl who worked as a hostess in a Tokyo nightclub called the Queen Bee . Oswald told the friend that the girl was working as a nightclub hostess . Oswald later admitted to the affair to a friend .
 The Queen Bee was one of the three most expensive nightspots in Tokyo . This was an intriguing connection indeed .
 It catered especially to officers and pilots, including U-2 pilots, according to author Edward Jay Epstein . The U.S. Air Force was the first Air Force to carry out the mission .
 Hostesses of the Queen Bee, one hundred of the most beautiful women in Tokyo, were believed to be using their charms to gain information from American servicemen . Hostesses believed to have been using their charm to gain access to information .
 Oswald was making less than $85 a month, with much of that being sent back to help support his mother . Oswald: "It was a decidedly odd meeting place for Oswald, who was making just $85 per month"
 Oswald’s former Marine pals from Atsugi, Japan, may have been a Marine . The answer to this question may have come when author/researcher Mark Lane interviewed one of Oswald's former Marines .
 David Bucknell, who was never interviewed by the Warren Commission, told of an incident in which he and Oswald went for beers at a bar near Santa Ana, California, in 1959 .
 Two Marines were approached by two women who engaged them in conversation . The two Marines were sitting in a restaurant at the center of the action .
 Oswald said this incident reminded him of a similar incident at Atsugi . Oswald said he had a similar experience at the Atsugugai .
 Oswald says he was sitting alone in a Japanese bar when an attractive woman joined him and began asking questions about his work at Atsugi . Oswald says the attractive woman asked him questions about the work of his company .
 Oswald reported this meeting to his superior officer . Since his work involved the highly secret U-2 plane, Oswald reported it to his superiors . Oswald reported the meeting .
 Oswald and a man in civilian clothes arranged a meeting between Oswald and an officer . Oswald and the officer arranged to meet Oswald in a secret meeting . Oswald was eventually shot dead by a police officer .
 Oswald told Bucknell the man explained that Oswald could do his country a great service by giving false information to the woman, a known KGB agent . Oswald said the man told him he would do a good service for the country if he gave her false information .
 Oswald said he had been encouraged to continue meeting the woman and was given money to spend at the Queen Bee . Oswald said the woman encouraged him to meet her .
 No U.S. intelligence agency has admitted it, but there is evidence that he was used as an agent . Further evidence suggests he was indeed used as a spy .
 Sergeant Gerry Patrick Hemming, who served in Japan with Oswald, said he was recruited into the CIA while in Japan . Hemming later joined anti-Castro Cubans . He said he believed the same thing happened to Oswald, who never said so .
 A former CIA finance officer testified to the House Select Committee on Assassinations that colleagues told him that Oswald was a secret operative for the spy agency in Japan . Oswald was an agent for the CIA in Japan, James Wilcott testified .
 Wilcott, who served in the CIA from 1957 through 1966, said after Kennedy’s assassination he had several conversations with CIA personnel involved in covert operations . Wilcott said he had a number of conversations with the CIA personnel .
 He said he became convinced Oswald was brought into the CIA while serving as a radar operator in Japan . Oswald was later sent to infiltrate Russia as a spy, he said .
 Wilcott claimed Oswald was recruited by the Soviet KGB while in Japan . CIA officials denied these charges and the committee decided not to believe Wilcott .
 Oswald's Marine Corps medical records show he was involved in intelligence work in Japan . Oswald was stationed in Japan during his time in the Marine Corps .
 For servicemen, a case of gonorrhea often results in disciplinary measures . The case is often a result of disciplinary measures for servicemen .
 Warren Commission held secret meetings in secret meetings of secret meetings . Warren Commission's secret meetings were held in secret during the 1960s .
 The Monterey School, now called the Defense Language Institute, is one of the government schools for giving sophisticated and rapid language courses . It is now known for its sophisticated language courses.
 Rankin's remark, made public only after a Freedom of Information Act suit, seems to imply that the Commission had knowledge of Oswald’s attending courses at Monterey .
 Oswald got a crash course in the Russian language in the military, as implied by the Warren Commission . And it is certainly easier to believe that Oswald learned one of the world’s most difficult languages by reading books and listening to records .
 Fellow Marines testified they could not recall Oswald listening to any language records . Fellow Marines said they did not hear Oswald listen to any recordings of Oswald .
 It is possible that undercover work was behind a strange shooting incident that took place just as his unit was scheduled to be transferred to the Philippines in late 1957 .
 Oswald was gathering gear from his locker when reportedly a .22-caliber derringer fell onto the floor and discharged, grazing his left elbow . Oswald was reportedly gathering gear when the incident occurred October 27 .
 Oswald had told a friend, George Wilkins, that he had bought the derringer from a mail-order firm in the U.S. Oswald had said he bought the gun from a friend before the incident .
 At least two of the Marines present, Thomas Bagshaw and Pete Connor, now claim the bullet missed Oswald altogether . The bullet hit Oswald in the head but missed Oswald .
 Others had the impression that Oswald shot himself in an attempt to prevent being transferred to the Philippines . Others at the time had thought Oswald had shot himself to stop being transferred .
 Although absent almost three weeks for medical treatment, he was returned to duty just in time to ship out with his unit on November 20 .
 The maneuvers of Oswald’s unit in the Philippines and South China Sea were largely uneventful . The maneuvers in the region were largely quiet .
 While the unit was on Corregididor Island, actor John Wayne stopped in briefly and a photograph was taken of him .
 Marine Oswald was serving his third straight month on mess duty . Oswald is serving a month of mess duty at a Marine base in Hawaii . Oswald was in the Marines' mess room for three months .
 His lengthy hospital stay following the derringer incident may indicate time away from his regular unit spent in intelligence training .
 Oswald spent nearly three weeks in a hospital after his elbow wound was very minor, witnesses say . Oswald spent the next three weeks recovering from the elbow wound . Witnesses say he suffered only minor injuries .
 Oswald was court-martialed for possessing an unregistered weapon, the derringer . Oswald was the only person to be convicted of possessing the weapon . Oswald died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 On April 11, 1958, he was found guilty and sentenced to twenty days at hard labor, forfeiture of $50 in pay, and reduced back to the rank of private . He was convicted of twenty days of hard labor .
 His confinement was suspended for six months on the condition that he stay out of trouble . He was sentenced to six months in prison on Friday .
 As this application is being processed, there apparently was a need for more time away from his unit for additional intelligence training . The application was being processed .
 This may have been accomplished by an incident that began in the Enlisted Men’s Club at Atsugi . This may be the first time this has happened in Japan .
 Oswald tried to pick a fight with Technical Sergeant Miguel Rodriguez, allegedly the man who had assigned him to so much KP duty . Oswald, who heretofore had not been known as violent, was not known to be violent .
 Oswald sought out Rodriguez at the Bluebird Club in Japan on June 20 . Oswald tried to fight with the sergeant at the club again in June .
 Oswald poured a drink on Rodriguez, military police intervened . The next day, Rodriguez signed a complaint against Oswald . Rodriguez signed the next day .
 Oswald acted as his own defense at the court-martial, claiming he was drunk and spilled the drink on Rodriguez accidentally . Oswald said he spilled it accidentally and was drunk .
 Rodriguez said then-and after the assassination, that Oswald had not been drunk and had poured the drink on him deliberately . Rodriguez: Oswald was not drunk when he was killed .
 Oswald was found guilty of using “provoking words” to a noncommissioned officer . Oswald was sentenced to twenty-eight days in the brig and forfeiture of $55 . The judge ruled that Oswald was guilty .
 Oswald supposedly went to the brig until August 13, a period of more than forty-five days . Oswald's previous suspension of sentence was revoked and his previous suspension was revoked . Oswald supposedly spent more than 40 days in jail .
 Only one Marine who was in the Atsugi brig during this time recalled seeing Oswald . Oswald was wearing civilian clothes during this brief encounter .
 Oswald seemed different after his release, Marines said he seemed different . Oswald was released from prison in August 1944 .
 Others say where "Ozzie Rabbit" had been extroverted and fun-filled, this new Oswald was cold and withdrawn . Others said that where ‘Ozzy Rabbit’s’ was extrovert, it was withdrawn .
 Oswald may be a new Oswald, an entirely different man, was substituted for the New Orleans-born Marine . It may well be right here that a . new Oswald— an entirely . different man — may well have been Oswald .
 Oswald's previously granted extension of overseas duty was canceled . Oswald would soon be on his way home from overseas duty . Oswald had been granted an extension to his overseas duty, but it was cancelled .
 In September 1958, the Chinese communists began making moves against the Nationalist Chinese islands of Quemoy and Matsu and there was a general mobilization . However, in September 1958 there were a general mobilization .
 Oswald was assigned guard duty on the island of Cuba . Oswald was one of the first Americans to arrive in the U.S. in the Philippines .
 The officer of the guard, Lieutenant Charles R Rhodes, heard several shots . About midnight, he heard several gunshots, Rhodes says .
 Rhodes found Oswald slumped against a tree holding his M-1 rifle in his lap . Rhodes says Oswald was found slumped against the tree holding the rifle . Rhodes: Oswald was a hero of the day .
 Oswald was shipped back to Atsugi, arriving on October 5, 1958, according to official reports . Almost immediately, Oswald was sent back to Japan .
 Years later, Rhodes said he still believed Oswald planned the shooting as a ploy to get himself transferred back to Japan . Rhodes still believed that Oswald planned to shoot himself in order to get back to his native Japan .
 Oswald officially left with his unit for Formosa on September 16, 1958, two days after he officially left . However, this record is dated September 16th, 1958 . Oswald's unit left Formosa two days before he left for Taiwan .
 Oswald had more time to prepare Oswald for upcoming intelligence missions . Perhaps more time was needed for Oswald to prepare himself for upcoming missions . Oswald was assassinated in September 1945 .
 Owen Dejanovich, a Marine who had attended radar school with him, is a former radar school classmate . He says he came into contact with Owen, a fellow Marine, with whom he met in radar school . Dejanovic: "It's a good day for him to be
 Oswald avoided the one man who had known him previously . Dejanovich tried to renew the acquaintanceship but was rebuffed by Oswald .
 Oswaldskovich the Marine on November 2, 1958, boarded the USS Barrett for the two-week trip to San Francisco . Oswald was the first Marine to die in the Marine Corps .
 On November 19, he took a thirty-day leave, traveling by bus to Fort Worth, Texas . He stayed with his mother, but he spent most of his time hunting squirrels and rabbits .
 Seven enlisted men and three officers formed a radar crew during the World War II . They were one of seven enlisted men, three officers and three enlisted men .
 Oswald’s public embracing of communism reached new heights . Oswald's public embrace of communism was at its highest level . Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 One of his fellow Marines, Kerry Thornley, wrote a novel using a character based on Oswald . Thornley was so impressed by the "eightball" that he later wrote a book about Oswald .
 What causes me to have second thoughts about his commitment to communism is his enthusiasm for a book unpopular with the few self-admitted communists I have known, for obvious reasons .
 I read 1984 and for a while decided Oswald was not truly in sympathy with Marxism . Oswald was 'not in sympathy' with Marxism, he says . He says .
 Oswald and Delgado talked at length about Cuba and Fidel Castro’s coming to power . Oswald, Delgado and Castro spoke at length . Oswald was in Cuba at the time of the Cuban Revolution .
 Oswald began asking Delgado how he could get in touch with some Cubans . Oswald asked Delgado if he could help him find Cubans in the U.S. After a while, Oswald began talking to Delgado .
 Oswald, who previously received few letters, began receiving mail several times a week . Delgado noticed that some of this mail came from the Cuban consulate . Oswald was receiving mail from the consulate in Cuba .
 If Oswald was a genuine Marine communist, it beggars the imagination to think that his officers took no notice . Oswald was not a Marine communist but a genuine communist .
 In fact, Thornley told of an incident in which a young lieutenant noticed Oswald was receiving a Russian newspaper in the mail .
 The lieutenant grew very excited over his discovery and possibly made an open issue of Oswald’s probable sympathy to the communist cause . Oswald was found to have sympathized with the Communist cause .
 Oswald spent hours in ideological and philosophical discussions with his friend Thornley . Thornley was one of Oswald’s friends, with whom he spent hours discussing .
 Thornley told the Warren Commission that one day while he and Oswald were preparing for a military parade and were remarking about the stupidity of the thing, Oswald said it made him angry . Thornley said the incident made Oswald angry .
 I never said anything to him again and he never said something to me again. He never said again, and I was never in touch with him again . He said: "I'm not sure what happened to him and I'm sure he's not going to do it again."
 This sounds more like a person deeply hurt that a good friend would seriously believe him to be a communist than like a communist sympathizer angered over an innocuous jibe . This sounds like someone deeply hurt by a friend's belief that he is a communist .
 James Botelho, today a California judge, was a roommate of Oswald’s during his stay at El Toro . Oswald's roommate was today a judge in California . Oswald lived in El Toro during his time there .
 Botelho: “I’m very conservative now and I was at least as conservative at that time.” In an interview with author/researcher Mark Lane he said he was at the time as a conservative .
 Oswald at this time knew bigger things were looming on his horizon . Whatever his true beliefs about communism, Oswald knew there were bigger things to come .
 In the spring of 1959, he had applied to study philosophy at the Albert Schweitzer College in Switzerland and had been accepted . He had applied for a position at the college and was accepted .
 A civilian tried to recruit those present for an intelligence operation against “communists” in Cuba . The operation was part of a Cuban intelligence operation .
 Oswald was selected to make several more trips to CID . Oswald later told Bucknell that the civilian was the same man who had been his intelligence contact at Atsugi . Oswald made several more visits to the CID after being selected by Bucknell .
 Oswald confided to Bucknell that he was to be discharged from the Marines and go to Russia . Sometime later, he confided that he would be discharged and be sent back to the U.S.
 Oswald said he was being sent there by American intelligence and that he would return to America in 1961 as a hero . Oswald said that he was sent to the U.S. in 1961 and would be a hero in 1961 .
 Oswald’s presence in the Soviet Union was made public, it was the talk of everyone who knew him at the base . Oswald's presence in Soviet Union made public in 1960s . Oswald was a major figure in the CIA, but was never in touch with the Soviets .
 Oswald knew all of the radio codes and other codes were not changed . Oswald was aware of the fact that the codes had not been changed and that Oswald knew them .
 Two civilians dropped in, asked a few questions, took no written statements, and recorded no interviews with witnesses . Two civilians also dropped in to ask questions, but took no statements .
 Oswald, it is said, was the only Marine ever to defect from his country to another country, a communist country, during peacetime . Oswald was said to have defected to the Soviet Union in 1950s and 1960s .
 Plans for a trip to Russia apparently had been made for Oswald and the Marines, a branch of the U.S. Navy Department, seemed oddly obliging . Plans for the visit to Russia were made by the Marines .
 On August 17, 1959, Oswald applied for a dependency discharge on the grounds that his mother needed his support . Oswald applied to be discharged from the Army in August 1959 . Oswald was awarded a posthumous discharge in August 1957 .
 This application was accompanied by affidavits from his mother, an attorney, a doctor, and two friends . His mother said she had been injured at work in December 1958 and was unable to support herself .
 Oswald’s request was approved within two weeks, to the surprise of his fellow Marines, and he was released from service on September 11 . Oswald was released by the Marines two weeks later .
 Oswald applied for a passport on September 4, stating that he might travel to various countries including Russia and Cuba . Oswald said he may travel to Russia or Cuba, but not Cuba .
 This, of course, was in opposition to his claim that he was going home to care for his injured mother . This, despite the fact that he said he would be going home, he was not going home .
 His passport was “routinely” issued six days later, just in time for his exit from the Marines . The passport was issued just six days after he left the Marine Corps .
 Oswald purchased a ticket for Le Havre, France, on the freighter Marion Lykes for $220.75 . Oswald spent a brief stopover in Texas with his mother . Oswald withdrew $203 from his only known bank account .
 Just remember above all else that my values are different from Robert’s or yours. Remember that I’m not the same person as Robert or anyone else. Just remember that I have values that differ from Robert or any other person's .
 "I did not tell you about my plans because you could hardly be expected to understand," he said . "I didn't tell you because I did not think you would understand it," he wrote .
 Oswald’s mother maintained her son was an agent of the U.S. government . Until the day she died, she maintained that Oswald was a government agent . Oswald's mother maintained that he was a spy for the government .
 Oswald left on September 20, 1959, on the first leg of a journey that would take him to his destiny . Oswald traveled to Russia via a series of visits to the Soviet Union .
 In the summer of 1959, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev visited the U.S. In 1959, the Soviet premier visited the United States .
 Khrushchev and his Western counterpart, Dwight Eisenhower, seemed sincere in wanting to ease tensions between their two countries . The two countries were at odds at the height of the Cold War in the 1950s .
 It might have produced a limited nuclear-test-ban treaty, already foreseen as the first major accord of the Cold War . The treaty would have been a limited treaty .
 CIA pilot Francis Gary Powers was captured alive after his U-2 spy plane crashed in the Soviet Union . May 1, traditionally celebrated in Russia as May Day, is May Day in Russia .
 Khrushchev was furious, yet he tried to give Eisenhower latitude in disclaiming any knowledge of the incident . The incident occurred in the early 1950s .
 Eisenhower finally admitted that the spy plane was acting on his orders and took responsibility for the fiasco . Just as John Kennedy would take responsibility for Bay of Pigs Invasion a year later, he would also take responsibility .
 Eisenhower actually had ordered the U-2 overflights halted but this order was thwarted within his own command structure . Eisenhower reportedly ordered this order to be stopped but it was thwarted .
 Questions still surround the U-2 incident, especially with students of history . And questions still remain about the incident .
 Francis Gary Powers and his ill-fated U-2 spy plane were brought down six months after a former Marine named Lee Harvey Oswald arrived in Moscow and told an American embassy official he planned to give the Soviets classified information .
 Oswald went so far as to state that he knew something that would be of “special interest” to Soviet intelligence, a CIA operative recalled . Oswald went even further in saying that he was aware of something that was of "special interest" to the Soviet intelligence .
 The Russians had known about the U-2 program for some time . Their antiaircraft missiles were capable of shooting down the high-flying craft . The Russians knew about the program and were able to shoot them down .
 The Soviets lacked detailed altitude information on the U-2 that would have allowed them to accurately control their missiles at great altitudes . What the Soviets lacked was detailed altitude data on the aircraft .
 Oswald served as radar operator at Atsugi, Japan, one of the staging bases for the U-2 . Oswald, who served as a radar operator, had that information . Oswald was a U.2 pilot .
 Powers returned to the U.S. after being swapped for a Soviet spy . Powers wrote a book about his ordeal titled Operation Overflight . Powers was swapped for Soviet spy, and wrote about the ordeal .
 Oswald's claim that he had information for the Soviets implied that if indeed Oswald gave information, the Russians may have learned enough to enable them to shoot down the U-2 . He pointed out Oswald’s claim to have information pertaining to U.2 operational altitudes .
 Powers also said his interrogators seemed to have special knowledge about the Atsugi base, although Powers maintained he had never been stationed there .
 For years the Warren Commission withheld from the American public files detailing Oswald’s connection with the U-2 flights . Oswald's connection to the U.2 flights was kept from the public for years .
 Some people familiar with the U-2 incident believe the plane may have been downed due to sabotage . Some people believe that the plane was downed because of sabotage . The plane was shot down by a jetliner carrying passengers .
 Powers was killed in 1977 when his helicopter, used to report news, ran out of gas and crashed . Powers was a news anchor for a Los Angeles television station . Powers is credited with saving his life .
 His death was ironic in that fuel consumption was of critical importance to U-2 pilots . Fuel consumption was critical for the U.2 .
 Oswald may have indeed had some connection with the U-2 incident . Oswald may indeed have been involved in the shooting of the U.2 . Oswald was killed in September 1945 .
 Oswald never returned to Moscow after being sent to Minsk in 1960 . There is no explanation of how or when Oswald might have seen Powers .
 Oswald told former Army security employee Dennis Ofstein that he had viewed Russian jets in Moscow on May Day . Oswald told Ofstein, a fellow worker at Jaggers-Childs-Stovall, the Dallas graphic arts firm where Oswald worked in the fall of 1962, that he viewed
 Oswald spent May 1, 1960 in Russia, the day the U-2 was captured . Oswald spent three May Days in Russia . Only one of Oswald’s three May days unaccounted for is May 1 .
 Because of the U-2 flights during this time, Soviet intelligence was extremely interested in American defectors, because of both knowledge they might have and the suspicion that most, if not all, were spies trying to infiltrate the country .
 U.S. intelligence was equally curious to learn about the Soviets, it seems .
 Only two U.S. enlisted men defected to Russia between 1945 and 1959 . Author Anthony Summers studied documents from the State Department and the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 In the eighteen months prior to January 1960, no fewer than nine defected, five of them from West Germany and two Navy men . Five of them were U.S. Army men from Germany .
 All the defectors had backgrounds in the military or in sensitive defense work . All these defectors, including at least three civilians, had backgrounds .
 At least four of these returned to the U.S. after a few years . It is known that, like Oswald, at least four others, returned to America .
 The case of Robert E Webster, an American who told officials he was defecting to Russia less than two weeks before Oswald, is worth considering . There appear to be similarities between the two .
 Webster was a plastics expert who simply failed to return home with colleagues after working at an American trade exhibition in Moscow . Webster, a former Navy man, was a young plastics expert and former Navy officer .
 Rand Development Corporation was one of the first U.S. companies to sell technical products to Russia . He had been an employee of the Rand Development Corp. He had worked at the Rand Corporation .
 While in Russia, Webster took a Soviet girl as common-law wife . Webster was already married to a woman in the U.S. and had a child with her . Webster married the girl in Russia .
 Webster claimed to have become disenchenchanted with Soviet life and returned to the U.S. about the same time as Oswald . Webster claimed he was disenchanted by Soviet life .
 Oswald’s wife, Marina, was married to Oswald's widow . Webster and Oswald's wife had connections to Marina, Marina . Webster was a prominent figure in World War II .
 Marina told an acquaintance that her husband had defected after working at an American exhibition in Moscow . Years later in America in America, Marina told a friend that she had found out about her husband .
 After the assassination, American intelligence discovered an address in her address book was that of Webster’s Leningrad apartment . Webster was killed by the Soviet dictator in 1989 . Webster died in the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 At the time, in 1959, the United States was having real difficulty in acquiring information from the Soviet Union . The technical systems had, of course, not developed to the point that they are at today, and we were resorting to all sorts of activities .
 This is particularly interesting because this Navy program sounds exactly like Oswald’s experience . Oswald's experience with the Navy is similar to that of Oswald's with the Army .
 While Oswald was in Russia, the State Department was engaged in studying United States defectors to Russia . The State Department is now studying defectors from the U.S.
 One of the study's goals was to determine which defectors were genuine and which may have been U.S. intelligence operatives . Otto Otepka, the official in charge of study, said one of its goals was the authenticity of defectors .
 In June 1963, five months prior to the Kennedy assassination, Otepka said he was ousted from his job and barred from access to his study material on defectors . Lee Harvey Oswald was one of the defectors, one of whom Oswald was a member of the Kennedy administration .
 This incident is especially troubling, for if the shutdown of the State Department investigation was because of Oswald . This is strong evidence that someone within the U.S. government had prior knowledge of Oswald’s role in the upcoming assassination .
 Oswald’s attempted defection to Russia was as fabricated as many other aspects of his life . Oswald's attempt to defect to Russia is a fabrication, as is many of his other life stories .
 Oswald arrived in Southampton, England, October 9, according to the Warren Commission . Oswald set off for Helsinki, Finland, arriving and checking into the Tori Hotel that same day . Oswald died in Helsinki, Helsinki, on October 9 .
 Oswald's only direct flight from London to Helsinki that day did not arrive in time for Oswald to have checked into the Torni Hotel at the hour shown in the hotel’s register . This presents a real problem, since the only direct London flight from Helsinki did not reach the hotel
 This possibility, of course, smacks of intelligence work and was not officially investigated . But this possibility, as well as a possible intelligence work, has been investigated .
 Throughout his life, Oswald was tight with money, usually staying in cheap rooming houses and apartments . Oswald often stayed in cheap rooms and apartments throughout his life .
 He registered in the Torni Hotel, then moved the next day into the Klaus Kurki Hotel, two of the city’s most expensive and luxurious lodgings . However, once in Helsinki, he registered in a Torni hotel and then moved next day . The Torni
 Oswald then visited the Soviet consulate in Helsinki and obtained a visa in two days, which must have been some sort of record, as the Commission determined that the shortest normal time for obtaining a visa was one week . The Warren Commission determined the shortest time for a visa for Oswald to obtain a
 Oswald’s visa was issued October 14 and the Commission said Oswald left by train the next day for Moscow, arriving on October 16 . The Commission says Oswald arrived in Moscow by train, arrived by October 16 and left by plane .
 Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheters reported Oswald failed to get his Soviet visa in Helsinki . The newspaper has since confirmed that since then, Swedish intelligence has confirmed the information .
 Oswald instead went to Stockholm, where he obtained a visa at the Russian embassy after two days . The paper said Oswald went to Sweden to obtain a visa . Oswald was not granted a visa in Sweden, but he obtained the visa in Moscow .
 Neither the Warren Commission nor the House Select Committee on Assassinations mentioned this side trip . Curiously, neither the panel nor the committee mentioned it .
 The speed and ease with which Oswald journeyed to Moscow gives the impression that more was motivating this young man than the simple desire to experience a communist state . Whatever the facts, the ease and speed of Oswald's journey to Moscow appears to have been behind him .
 Oswald was taken in tow by a representative of Intourist, the official state tourist agency, who placed him in the Hotel Berlin, where he registered as a student . Oswald is a student at the University of Berlin, Berlin .
 Oswald went sightseeing with his Intourist guide, a young woman named Rima Shirokova, and promptly informed her he wanted to defect . The next day Oswald told her he was going to defect, telling her he had left the country .
 Oswald was informed on October 21 that his visa had expired and he had two hours to leave Moscow . Despite his proclamation that he was a ‘communist’ wanting to live in Russia, after several contacts with Soviet authorities Oswald was told he had to leave Russia . Oswald's visa
 Faced with deportation, Oswald reportedly cut his left wrist in a suicide attempt . Oswald cut his wrist in an attempt to escape from deportation . Oswald was facing deportation from the United States .
 This was done just before a meeting with his Intourist guide . Conveniently, this was done before a trip to the Maldives . It was the first time he had been to Maldives in the region .
 Marine shooting victim was out of sight in the hospital for eleven days . This act accomplished the same end result of the Marine shooting incident . The Marine was shot in the head by a fellow Marine .
 He was released on October 28 and accompanied by Shirokova, checked out of the Hotel Berlin and into the Metropole .
 Oswald had been in touch with Soviet government officials from the Pass and Registration Office . Oswald had indeed been in contact with Soviet officials . Oswald was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 He remained in his hotel room three days, apparently awaiting orders from someone . He remained there, apparently waiting for orders .
 He was directed to Richard E Snyder, the second secretary and senior consular official, who tried to dissuade the young ex-Marine from his planned course of action .
 Oswald handed Snyder an undated, handwritten note that displayed a sophisticated knowledge of the legal subtleties concerning the revocation of citizenship . Oswald handed the undated note to Snyder that showed a sophisticated legal knowledge .
 Oswald made his journey to Moscow in a most unorthodox manner . It reflected the same type of knowledge that apparently had allowed Oswald to make his journey . Oswald's journey reflected the knowledge that had allowed him to travel to Moscow .
 "My request for the revoking of my American citizenship is made only after the longest and most serious considerations," she said . Her request for revoking her citizenship was made after the "longest, most serious consideration"
 "I affirm that my allegiance is to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. I affirm that I affirm my allegiance to the U.S. Republics," he said .
 Present with Snyder was John McVickar, another senior consular officer . Snyder was accompanied by Snyder, who is a former diplomat .
 In short, there was the possibility that he had been in contact with others before or during his Marine Corps tour who had guided him in his actions .
 Snyder himself came under suspicion of aiding Oswald in an intelligence mission when it was revealed that he had worked for the CIA . The CIA claimed it was only for a brief time in 1949 .
 According to the Warren Commission, Snyder did not permit Oswald to renounce his citizenship . The Warren Commission did not allow the president to do so . The president was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Oswald would have to return on a normal business day to fill out the necessary paperwork . Since it was a Saturday, Snyder explained that Oswald would need to go back to the office .
 Oswald never returned and, therefore, technically never renounced his citizenship . Oswald's return to the U.S. was a form of renouncing his citizenship, but he never returned .
 Oswald sent the embassy a letter protesting its refusal to accept his renunciation of citizenship . On November 3, Oswald sent a letter to the embassy protesting the decision .
 Oswald refused to see embassy personnel when they tried to contact him . He refused to be seen by embassy personnel . Oswald was the leader of the White House's White House .
 Oswald granted two newspaper interviews, one to Aline Mosby of UPI and the other to Johnson, who said she represented the North American Newspaper Alliance syndicate . Oswald also granted interviews with UPI's UPI, U.S. Reporters .
 Oswald harangued both reporters with his fervent support of Marxism and its ideals . Both dutifully reported his comments in newspaper articles that appeared back in the U.S. Both reporters reported Oswald's comments . Oswald was a fervent supporter of Marxism .
 McMillan once was an assistant to Senator John F Kennedy . He went on to become an acknowledged expert on Soviet affairs .
 It is McMillan who has been primarily responsible for much of the information conceming Oswald’s personal life shortly before the assassination . It is the author of a book about Oswald's life .
 There has been much speculation over the years that McMillan was operating on behalf of U.S. intelligence when she was in contact with Oswald . There has also been speculation that she was working for U.K. intelligence .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations reported that she had applied to work for the CIA in 1952 . She had been “debriefed” by that agency after a trip to Russia in 1962, the committee said .
 Suspicion about her increased with the release of an FBI memorandum dated November 23, 1963 . State Department security officer informed the FBI, “One Priscilla Johnston and Mrs. Johnston’s mother”
 Oswald dropped from sight in the Soviet Union in December 1959 . He was not heard from again for more than a year . Oswald was not seen again until December 1959, 1959 .
 Oswald’s “Historic Diary” is supposedly a day-to-day account of his life in Russia . During that time, most of what is known about Oswald's activities comes from his ‘Historic diary’ Oswald wrote .
 Life magazine obtained a copy of the so-called diary from Dallas Morning News reporter Hugh Aynesworth . Life magazine had obtained a . copy of a copy from a Dallas Morning .
 Some accused Aynesworth of pilfering the document from Oswald's belongings . Others thought someone passed it to the reporter to solidify Oswald's procommunist background . The document was found in Oswald's possessions .
 Aynesworth, who earlier had tried to join the CIA, has refused to reveal the diary’s origin .
 Diary appeared to have been written long after the events described . The diary appeared to date back to when the diary was written .
 Even the Warren Commission had trouble with Oswald's diary, noting, “It is not an accurate guide to the details of Oswald’s activities.” The Warren Commission noted that Oswald had a “difficult memory”
 Oswald was preparing to leave Russia at the time of the change . This change did not take place until two years after that date, at a time Oswald was leaving .
 In later years, experts concluded the ‘diary’ was written entirely on the same paper and was most probably written in one or two sittings . Experts say the diary was written in a single sitting session .
 Oswald, even while in the Soviet Union, was acting on orders from someone else . Oswald's actions further fuels the charge that he was acting under the influence of the Soviets . Oswald was in the United States at the time of his assassination .
 Aside from the “diary,” there is precious little documentation about Oswald’s stay in Russia .
 In early 1964, the Soviet government provided copies of Oswald’s passport, job application from a Minsk radio factory, some hospital records . The Warren Commission was given copies of the passport, a job application, and a supervisor's report from the factory .
 Much of Oswald's life in Russia is unknown, but several tantalizing pieces of information tell a decidedly different story of his sojourn there from the one previously told . Comrade Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 Oswald reportedly was sent to Minsk with 5,000 rubles . Oswald reportedly spent New Year's Day 1960 in Moscow . Oswald was reportedly in Minsk at the time of the incident .
 Oswald wrote that the money actually came from the Soviet MVD after he “denounced” the United States . The money supposedly came from Red Cross, although Oswald himself wrote that it actually came .
 The mayor of Minsk promised him a rent-free apartment, the mayor of the city said . He reported that he was greeted in Minsk on January 8 by no less than the mayor .
 The apartment was a spacious flat with a separate living room, tile floors, and tile floors . The flat was far beyond the means of the average Russian worker .
 Two private balconies overlook a picturesque bend in the Svisloch River . The two balconies were located on a private balcony .
 Oswald entertained his newfound Russian friends, such as Pavel Golovachev, during his visit to Moscow . Oswald entertained himself with his newfound friends, including Golovach, in the Kremlin . Oswald was in Moscow at the time of his visit .
 Golovachev, a hero of the Soviet Union, was pictured in some of the snapshots Oswald made in his Minsk home . He reportedly traveled in Minsk’s highest social circles .
 Oswald was assigned duties as a “metal worker’s” in the Byelorussian Radio and Television factory . Oswald worked as a "metal worker" in the factory .
 Oswald reportedly was making more money than the factory’s director . Between his wages and the continuing ‘Red Cross’ allowance, Oswald reportedly made more than $1,000 a year .
 Oswald wrote about affairs with at least five local girls, whom he would take to nearby movies, theaters, and opera . Oswald would take the girls to nearby theaters, theaters and opera theaters . Oswald was married at the time of his death .
 Minsk was the site of an espionage training school made known to the CIA as far back as 1947 . Minsk, along with being a somewhat cosmopolitan city by Russian standards, also was the city of Minsk . The CIA was made aware of the school's existence in 1947 .
 Oswald's connections to the CIA were a convenient red herring for those hoping to distract from Oswald’s homegrown intelligence connections . Oswald's links to Oswald's home-grown intelligence connections was a convenient diversion .
 Information came to me yesterday indicating that there is an espionage training school outside of Minsk . He was trained at that school to come back to this country to become what they call a “sleeper,” that is a man who will remain dormant for three or four years .
 Oswald was living a privileged life with his Soviet hosts, according to reports . Oswald's lavish apartment, money and lavish apartment are among the reasons for his lavish lifestyle .
 Oswald apparently traveled extensively in Russia . Although officially he never left Minsk, he never traveled far from his home . Oswald traveled extensively .
 Jeanne DeMohrenschildt befriended Oswald after his return to the U.S. She and her husband, George, befriended him . She said he was quite interested in photography .
 She said he had photographs of various locations in Russia that he showed her with great pride . She said the photos were taken in various locations across Russia .
 Among his possessions was a Soviet hunting license showing he had been a member of the Belorussian Society of Hunters and Fishermen . It carried with it the privilege of owning a 16-gauge shotgun, another feat impossible for the average Russian .
 Oswald lived well beyond the means of the ordinary Soviet citizen . Oswald's life in Russia is that he lived beyond Soviet citizens' means . Oswald lived beyond ordinary Soviet citizens, says historian .
 Oswald was not heard from in Russia between December 1959 and February 1961 . The wheels of the U.S. bureaucracy were turning when Oswald was killed .
 As early as November 10, 1959, the FBI placed a ‘flash’ notice on Oswald’s fingerprint card on his fingerprint card . The FBI, upon learning of his attempted defection, placed a flash notice on the card .
 Oswald’s fingerprints could turn up in any FBI investigation . This served to alert bureau officials to alert them to Oswald‘s fingerprints’ on any FBI probe . Oswald's fingerprints could be found in any investigation into Oswald's assassination .
 It also placed his name on a watch list used in monitoring overseas communications . The list includes a list used to monitor overseas communications.
 By the summer of 1960, the FBI was fully alert to Oswald and to the possibility that some sort of espionage game was being played out, even to the extent of someone posing as Oswald . The FBI was aware of the possibility of an espionage game .
 Oswald offered to tell military secrets to the Soviets, Marine Corps says . Marine Corps took action after being informed that Oswald had offered to give secrets to Soviets .
 Oswald’s “honorable discharge” was officially changed to “dishonorable” on September 13, 1960 . Oswald was awarded an honorable discharge from the Marine Corps in 1960 .
 Oswald's mother seemed to get the swiftest reaction from queries about her son . Oswald’s mother was the woman who seemed to receive the most attention . Oswald was the son of Oswald, who was killed by the Nazis in September 1944 .
 After phone calls to the FBI and letters to her congressmen failed to turn up information about her son, Mrs. Smith called the FBI to find him .
 She called the White House on January 28, 1961, wanting to speak to President Kennedy . President Kennedy had been inaugurated only eight days before .
 Failing to reach the president, she asked to speak to Secretary of State Dean Rusk . She asked to talk to the secretary of state, but failed to reach him .
 She was granted an immediate interview with Eugene Boster, White House Soviet affairs officer . Boster was the White House's top Soviet affairs official .
 She had not heard from her son in more than a year and his trip to Russia allegedly was made entirely on his own . The trip was allegedly made on her own .
 She charged that her son was working for the U.S. government and demanded that the government locate him in Russia . As before, she charged that she and her son worked for the United States government .
 Oswald’s Washington visit, the State Department sent a “Welfare-Whereabouts” memo to Moscow . Oswald's Washington visit was the first time the U.S. State Department issued a ‘Welfare’ memo to Russia .
 Secretary Snyder was astonished that Oswald should write to him just after he had been asked to locate the ex-Marine . Snyder was understandably astonished by Oswald's letter .
 Oswald saw the rapidity of the response from her son as an indication the U.S. government was in contact with her son while in Russia . Oswald said the rapid response was an indication that the United States government had been in contact .
 The Warren Commission attributed Oswald’s sudden reappearance to mere coincidence, in light of the fact that routine queries about Oswald had not yet been initiated by the U.S. embassy . Oswald's reappearance was attributed to coincidence .
 Oswald again showed unusual knowledge of the legalities of citizenship . Oswald showed unusual legal knowledge of citizenship in his letter . Oswald's letter shows unusual knowledge about citizenship .
 State Department informed Snyder that Oswald’s passport was to be delivered in person . State Department told Snyder it was to deliver the passport in person, perhaps recalling Hoover memo .
 "I would not leave here without my wife so arrangements would have to be made for her to leave at the same time I do," he says of his wife . "She would not be able to leave here with me," he adds .
 Oswald was ready to return to the United States, but only with his new bride . Oswald returned to the U.S. with the help of his bride .
 Oswald met the Russian woman who would become his wife and a chief witness against him after the assassination . Oswald met her a month after telling the American embassy that he wished to return home .
 Swaldald attended a trade union dance at the Palace of Culture in Minsk, Belarus, in 1961 .
 Marina said they spoke Russian and she believed “Alik’s” to be a Soviet citizen, but from the Baltic area, based on his accent . Marina said she believed Alik to be from Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, or Lithuania .
 She was greatly surprised to learn this man was really an American named Lee Harvey Oswald . She said she was shocked to learn he was actually a real-life assassin .
 In later years, Marina exhibited a strange memory loss about many aspects of their meeting, whirlwind romance, and wedding . Marina exhibited memory loss in later years .
 She told varying stories as to who first introduced her to Oswald, and then finally stated she just couldn’t remember . She said she was introduced to Oswald by someone she thought was a friend .
 Oswald proposed to her “a month and a half” before their wedding, she said . She also told the House Select Committee on Assassinations that Oswald had proposed a month before the wedding .
 Marina’s recollections were not the only inconsistency in her recollections . Marina was a member of the cast and crew at the time of her death . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September 2015 .
 Marina claimed to be born on July 17, 1941, in the northern seaside town of Molotovsk . Marina claimed that she was born in the same town in 1941 . Marina is believed to have been born in July 1941 .
 A war baby, she never knew who her father was and took her mother’s name . She was a war baby and never knew her mother's name .
 In the book Marina and Lee, she suddenly revealed that she had found out that her father was a Soviet traitor named Nikolai Didenko . She then revealed she had discovered her father's identity .
 This may be a small matter, but it was never revealed to the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission never revealed this to the public, but never did .
 Her mother left her as an infant with elderly relatives in Arkhangelsk, Russia . She grew up until rejoining her mother at age seven . Her mother was left to raise her as a child with relatives .
 By then her mother had married an electrical worker named Alexander Medvedev . By 1952, the family was living in Leningrad, Russia .
 Upon graduation in June 1959, she was assigned a job in a pharmaceutical warehouse, but quit after only one day and spent the rest of the summer on vacation . She quit after one day .
 It was at her uncle’s urging that she attended the dance where she met Oswald . Oswald met her at the dance at the time .
 Marina’s uncle apparently never protested her marriage . His position could have allowed him to study Oswald's KGB file, which must have shown that Oswald had written to the American embassy about returning to the U.S. Marina's uncle never protested the marriage .
 Oswald told Marina he wanted to return to the U.S. within a matter of days after their marriage . Oswald and Marina's marriage was the first time they had been married in the United States .
 Marina began to apply for the documents necessary to leave the Soviet Union . Soon she began applying for the papers necessary to escape the country .
 Her exit visas appear to have been expedited even though there were several problems with her background information . Her exit visa was also expedited despite several problems in her background .
 She stated her name as “Marina Nikolaevna,” which indicated her father’s name was Nikolai . She said her name was ‘Marina Nikolai,’ which indicated she was born in Russia . Her father's name is Nikolai;
 Oswald had flown to Moscow to retrieve his passport at the U.S. embassy . Oswald had traveled to Moscow in 1961 to retrieve the passport from the American embassy .
 Accounts of Oswald’s time during this period are filled with inconsistencies . Accounts of his time in the 1930s and '60s are riddled with inconsistencies, says Oswald .
 In his diary he claims to have returned to Minsk from Moscow on July 14 . For example, in his diary, he said he had returned from Minsk to Moscow in July .
 Rita Naman and two other tourists reported meeting a young American in Moscow and snapping his picture . Naman says she and two others met the young American on August 1 .
 House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded the young American was Oswald . Two photos made by these tourists were displayed by the committee . The young American is Oswald .
 With all their applications made, the Oswalds settled down to wait for approval to leave Russia . The Oswalds are now waiting for approval from Russia to leave the country .
 June Lee Oswald was born to Marina Oswald on February 15, 1962 . She was a baby girl with Marina's husband .
 Oswalds heard from the American embassy that everything was in order and that they should come to Moscow to sign the final papers . On May 10, the Oswalds were told by the U.S. Embassy that everything had been in order . The Oswalds are now in Moscow .
 Marina noted a cooling in Oswald’s attitude toward her . Oswald had cooled his attitude towards her during the time of the First Lady's assassination . Oswald was assassinated in November 1918 .
 It was almost as if he had made up the story of his love and instead was simply following some sort of orders in his courtship . The pair were engaged in a relationship for the first time .
 Afterward, with his assignment completed, he didn't bother to act like his love was real . He didn't even bother to pretend he was in love .
 On May 24, 1962, the Oswalds were in Moscow to attend to the final details of their departure from Russia . The Oswalds again attended the last details of the departure from Moscow .
 Oswald signed a promissory note at the American embassy for a repatriation loan of $435.71, the money needed for his return . Oswald and his wife boarded a train that same evening .
 The Warren Commission said the couple crossed out of communist territory at Brest . Warren Commission: The couple crossed into Brest at the time .
 Marina’s passport was stamped at Helmstedt, one of the major checkpoints on the East German border . Marina's passport stamped on the border at the border .
 Oswald’s passport shows no Helmstedt stamp at all, raising the possibility that he somehow traveled a different route from Marina . Intriguingly, Oswald's passport shows . Oswald was traveling with Marina Marina, but his passport has never been stampeded .
 Oswalds stayed in a private establishment recommended by someone in the U.S. embassy in Moscow, Marina Oswald says . The Oswalds were not staying in a hotel, but in an Amsterdam hotel recommended by an embassy official .
 After the assassination Marina recalled a three-day stay, she reacted with confusion when questioned about this by the House Select Committee on Assassinations . The official record shows they stayed here only one night, after the assassination .
 She did note that advance arrangements had been made at this place and that their hosts spoke English . She said advance arrangements were made and that they spoke English.
 Marina gave a version of their trip from Russia that was totally different from that given in the Warren Report . Furthermore, in a statement to the Secret Service just after the assassination, she gave a different version of the trip to Russia .
 The Warren Commission said that the couple arrived in Hoboken, New Jersey, on June 13, 1962, aboard the ship SS Maasdam . Marina’s later testimony said that she and her husband arrived in New Jersey aboard the boat in June 1962 . Marina's testimony was later
 Oswalds were met by Spas T Raikin, a representative of the Traveler’s Aid Society . The State Department had notified the Oswalds’ arrival by the State Department .
 Lee’s brother, Robert, sent the couple $200 for plane fare to Fort Worth, Texas . He later arranged contact with the couple's brother, who sent them $200 . Lee and Robert were reunited in Fort Worth .
 Oswald received financial aid from the State Department . The Department of Health, Education and Welfare had approved the financial aid to Oswald upon urging from the state .
 In Dallas HEW records, it states that Oswald went to Russia “with State Department approval,” an allegation later repeated by Oswald himself . Oswald himself later repeated the allegation on a New Orleans radio program .
 Oswald stated he had sent them ahead by rail . Asked about the dwindling number, Oswald said he sent them . Oswald said they had been sent ahead by train .
 Robert stated they had only two suitcases when they arrived in Fort Worth, Texas . However, when the couple arrived in the Fort Worth area, Robert said he had only 2 suitcases .
 The lost baggage may have something to do with their flight to Texas, which, although many direct flights, went by way of Atlanta . Many direct flights were available, but many of them went to Atlanta, Georgia .
 Natasha Davison was the mother of Captain Davison, the U.S. attaché with intelligence connections who had met with the Oswalds in Moscow . Atlanta was the home of the United States attaché, who met with Oswalds .
 Some believe Marina lied many times during her testimony to the Warren Commission . Some believe that Marina lied in many instances of her testimony .
 Oswald’s wife would not have been admissible if Oswald had come to trial . Oswald's testimony would not be admissible in the trial of Oswald .
 Marina’s testimony proved very damaging to Oswald . Despite all this, some of Marina's testimony proved to be very damaging . Oswald's testimony was very important to the CIA .
 Marina Marina was quoted as saying, “Lee good man. Lee good man” In the hours after the assassination, Marina said she was “magnificent”
 She was held for weeks by the federal authorities . Her statements began to change after she was held by authorities .
 Instead of describing what a good husband Oswald had been, she began saying he was violent to her . She began describing him as a violent husband .
 She also began to tell stories of other attempts at assassination by Oswald . Oswald tried to kill Richard Nixon and General Edwin Walker . Oswald also attempted to kill General Walker and General Nixon .
 Marina joined efforts to have Oswald’s body exhumed due to serious questions concerning its identity . By 1979, Marina had begun to doubt the official explanation of the assassination .
 Lee and Marina Oswald were not interrogated by U.S. intelligence after their return to Russia . It seems inconceivable that they were not not interrogated after they returned to the United States . Oswald spent most of his time in Russia during the war .
 Official story is that no U.S. intelligence agency had any interest in this ex-Marine . Yet the official story says no United States intelligence agency was interested in the case .
 Oswald worked as a radar operator for the U.S. Air Force in the 1960s and '60s . The Soviets did not interrogate Oswald at great length, especially if they found out about his connections with U-2 flights from Atsugi .
 This is one of the most bizarre aspects of the Kennedy assassination, an aspect kept from the American public by the Warren Commission . Yet, this is precisely what the Soviets claimed in what has to be one of their most bizarre statements .
 Yuri Nosenko's story began on January 20, 1964, just two months after the events in Dallas . The strange story of the defector began two months before the Dallas massacre .
 Nosenko, an officer in the American Division of the KGB, contacted the CIA on June 3, 1962, just two days after Oswald left Russia for the U.S. The KGB officer had contacted the agency two days before Oswald's departure .
 United States analysts were highly suspicious of his offer . However, nothing further had been heard from him and U.S. analysts were suspicious of him .
 On January 20, 1964, Nosenko landed in Geneva as part of a Soviet disarmament delegation . He was part of the Soviet delegation to discuss disarmament .
 He soon made his way to a telephone and renewed his offer to American intelligence, but with a difference—this time he wanted to defect . He then made a call to the U.S. and said he would defect .
 His defection set in motion a chain of events that would lead to bitter divisions between the CIA and FBI as well as within the CIA itself . He defected to the FBI and CIA, and led to bitter division within the agency .
 CIA officials shocked to learn that Nosenko claimed to have been the KGB official who personally handled the case of Lee Harvey Oswald during his stay in Russia . Oswald was taken to the U.S. by the CIA in the early 1950s .
 Nosenko said the KGB found Oswald not very bright and even “mentally unstable” and that the KGB had never debriefed Oswald about his military background or ever considered recruiting him as an agent . Oswald was found to be not bright and not very intelligent .
 Many people in the CIA and on the Warren Commission wanted to hear the truth . That was exactly what many people in CIA wanted to say . The Warren Commission is investigating the CIA's involvement in the Vietnam War .
 Nosenko had forever left a ranking position and his family to assure the U.S. government that the man accused of killing the president was not a Soviet agent . After all, it appeared he had left a position and family simply to . assure the United States government he was not
 CIA counterintelligence chief James Jesus Angleton was particularly wary of Nosenko . Angleton's CIA counter-intelligence chief was especially wary of the CIA . CIA counter intelligence chief was wary of his efforts to find out what was true .
 Most of the information Nosenko provided was already known to the CIA prior to his defection . He observed that most of the info he provided had already been known by the CIA .
 CIA interrogators began to find errors and gaps in Nosenko's testimony shortly after bringing him to the U.S. CIA interrogator found gaps in his testimony .
 Nosenko's story was corroborated by one of the FBI’s deepest secrets, the KGB defector known as Fedora . Fedora was the FBI's own defector . Fedora, a Soviet defector referred to only by his code name, was the source of the story .
 In a remarkable attempt to resolve the issue, Nosenko underwent “hostile interrogation,” nothing new since 9/11 but shocking back then . In a shocking attempt, he underwent ‘hostile interrogations’ in an attempt to solve the issue .
 He was kept in solitary confinement for 1,277 days under intense physical and psychological pressure . He spent the time in isolation under intense psychological pressure.
 He was put on a diet of weak tea, macaroni, and porridge, he was given nothing to read, a light was left burning in his unheated cell twenty-four hours a day . Guards were forbidden to speak with him or even smile .
 The believers of Nosenko, headed by the CIA’s Richard Helms and J Edgar Hoover, took his intransigence to mean that he was telling the truth about the KGB's having no interest in Oswald . The believers were led to the CIA and J. Edgar
 At CIA’s request, the Warren Commission obligingly made no reference to Nosenko . The Warren Commission obliged to make no mention of the CIA's involvement .
 Through the 1980s, Nosenko continued to be an adviser on Soviet intelligence to the CIA and the FBI at a salary of more than $35,000 a year . Through the 1990s, he was an adviser to the FBI and CIA .
 He has been given a new identity as well as more than $150,000 as payment for his ordeal . The man has been reunited with his family and is now living with them .
 Oswald kept in touch with Soviet officials almost up until the time of Kennedy’s assassination . There appears to be evidence that Oswald continued to keep in touch . Oswald was involved in the assassination of Kennedy in 1963 .
 Oswald visited the Soviet embassy in Mexico City on September 23, 1963, and met with Valery Vladimirovich Kostikov, who was described as a consul in the embassy . According to CIA documents, Oswald met with the consul .
 Oswald’s contact with this man, who was operating as a normal member of the Soviet embassy, may have been coincidental . Oswald's contact with the man may be coincidental, but it may not be a coincidence .
 The Warren Commission failed to pursue the contact with Oswald, though this contact subsequently was used to paint Oswald as a would-be Soviet assassin . However, it is significant that the Warren Commission, aware of the implication of this contact, failed to include this information in its report .
 FBI agent James Hosty was unhappy with the revelation about Kostikov's KGB ties . Hosty said he would have placed Oswald’s name on the bureau's “Security Index’ of individuals to monitor . Oswald was connected to Oswald prior to the assassination .
 Oswald was recruited by the KGB while serving in Japan . He was encouraged to defect to Russia, then sent back to the U.S. to kill President Kennedy . Oswald was also recruited to defect in Russia and sent to kill JFK .
 This theory is rejected by most students of the subject, including author Edward Jay Epstein . Epstein's book Legend studied the OswaldSoviet connections in detail .
 Oswald, whether genuine or substitute, was recruited into U.S. intelligence as a spy and sent to Russia . Second, Oswald, or a substitute, may have been recruited into United States intelligence . Oswald was recruited to Russia and sent back to the United States .
 The KGB attempted to turn him into their agent and sent him back to the U.S. unaware that he would be blamed for Kennedy’s death .
 This would explain the extraordinary lengths by the Soviets to disavow any connection with Oswald . It would explain why they went to extraordinary lengths to deny any connection to Oswald .
 Oswald obviously was mixed up in some sort of intelligence work . Oswald was involved in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln in 1964 .
 It is unlikely the Soviets would try to recruit this lowly Marine and would-be defector . And it is unlikely they would consider using him in something so dangerous as assassinating the U.S. president .
 World War III would be the likely result if a Soviet assassination plot was uncovered . World War I would be likely to be the result if an assassination plot is uncovered .
 Johnson had far stronger anticommunist credentials than Kennedy . Kennedy had much closer ties to the militaryindustrial complex most feared by the Soviets . Johnson had much stronger anti-communist ties than JFK .
 Nikolai T Fedorenko of the Soviet Union Mission to the United Nations met with all Russian diplomatic personnel on the day after the assassination .
 Fedorenko stated that Kennedy’s death had caused considerable shock in Soviet government circles and was very much regretted by the Soviet Union . The death of Kennedy was a major shock to government circles .
 He ordered all operatives to obtain all the information available on Johnson, his background and associates . Johnson is accused of killing himself in 2008 .
 The memoirs of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect to the West are published in Russia . They include memoirs from the highest ranking Soviet official to defect from the West .
 Moscow firmly believed that Kennedy’s assassination was a scheme by ‘reactionary forces” within the U.S. within the United States . Moscow firmly . believed that “reactionsary forces . within the . United States seeking to damage the new trend in relations
 The Kremlin ridiculed the Warren Commission’s conclusion that Oswald had acted on his own as the sole assassin . The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald acted alone .
 There was widespread speculation among Soviet diplomats that Lyndon Johnson, along with the CIA and the Mafia, had masterminded the plot . There was in fact widespread speculation that Lyndon .
 Khrushchev wanted to kill Kennedy because Johnson was anathema to him . The U.S.R. wished Kennedy well, but Khruschev wanted him dead . Khruschchev wanted Kennedy to be assassinated .
 Because he was a southerner, Moscow considered him a racist (the stereotype of any American politician from below the Mason-Dixon line), an anti-Soviet and anticommunist to the core . He was considered a racist by Moscow because of his Southern heritage .
 Johnson was associated with the big-time capitalism of the oil industry, also known to be anti-Soviet . Further, he was from Texas, a center of the most reactionary forces in the United States, according to the Soviets .
 A final argument against Soviet involvement is that while it is conceivable that the Russians somehow contrived Kennedy’s death and that high-level U.S. government officials were forced to cover this up to prevent a devastating world war, it makes no sense that these facts would not have
 The fact that Russian assassination plans didn’t surface goes far to prove that hard evidence of Soviet involvement in Kennedy’s death is nonexistent . It goes far further to say that hard proof of Russian involvement in the death of Kennedy is nonexistent.
 In a 1952 military coup, former Cuban army sergeant Fulgencio Batista seized control of Cuba . Cuba had been under U.S. trusteeship since 1898 .
 A dictator and a despot, Batista nevertheless was supported by the United States . Batista worked closely with many American groups, especially organized criminals .
 By the late 1950s, Cuba was a mecca for American gamblers, tourists, investors, and offshore banking speculators . Cuba was the center of Cuba's gambling and tourists .
 Only one man seemed determined to overthrow Batista— a young attorney named Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was a young lawyer who was determined to topple Batista . Castro was one of the few men in Cuba to take over the Batista government .
 Fidel Castro born the son of a Spanish-born plantation owner on August 13, 1926 . Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz had an active boyhood in rural eastern Cuba . Fidel Castro was born in 1926 .
 He once threatened to burn the house down if his parents didn’t send him to school, he said . He also threatened to set fire to the house if he wasn't sent to school .
 In 1952, he ran for Parliament but was stymied when the dictator Batista canceled the elections . He ran for a seat in Parliament in 1952, but was canceled by Batista .
 Castro made his first assault on Batista on July 26, 1953, attacking the dictator’s Moncada Barracks . Castro made the assault on the dictator in 1953 .
 Castro was released after twenty-two months in prison . Castro was sentenced to fifteen years in prison for his role in Castro's murder . Castro served two years of a 15-year prison sentence .
 He fled to Mexico, where he began reorganizing his guerrilla fighters . He then fled to the country to join guerrilla fighters in Mexico .
 He used the brutality displayed by Batista at the Moncada Barracks as a rallying point . He named his revolution the “26th of July Movement” after the disastrous attack .
 In 1956, Castro swam the Rio Grande and entered the United States to arrange the purchase of a dilapidated yacht named the Granma . Castro was in the U.S. to arrange to buy the yacht .
 The Mexican revolutionary returned to Mexico and began planning the invasion of his homeland . He planned to invade Mexico's homeland .
 Castro even made his invasion plans public . Confident that he would rapidly gain followers, Castro made it public . Castro made the invasion public .
 On December 2, 1956, when he and eighty-two guerrillas waded ashore on the swampy coast of his native Oriente Province, Batista’s soldiers were waiting in ambush .
 Only twelve guerrillas, including Castro, survived and escaped into the Sierra Maestra mountains . Castro was the only survivor of the guerillas .
 Castro grew his now-famous beard during the years he spent in the mountains . Castro and his followers began to take the initiative after several years of basic survival . Castro's followers took the initiative .
 Ernesto “Che” Guevara captured the provincial capital of Santa Clara in central Cuba in 1958 . By the summer of 1958, his guerrilla band had grown to more than eight hundred . Later that year a detachment led by Ernesto "Che" captured the province of
 Batista panicked and decided to quit the island of Cuba . Although backed by an army of some 30,000, he was backed by a large army . Batista was forced to leave the island in 1953 .
 Batista fled to the Dominican Republic in the first few hours of 1959 . Batista took bags of cash and fled the country in the early hours of Tuesday morning .
 Castro closed down gambling casinos and houses of prostitution that had been the source of an estimated $100 million a year for organized crime in the U.S. The casinos were source of $100million a year .
 By 1960 he had seized more than $700 million in U.S. property, including banks that had been accused of laundering money for American interests . He had nationalized Cuba's sugar industry in 1960 .
 Within a few years, illiteracy had been reduced from 24 percent to 4 percent . The country's illiteracy rate was reduced to 24 percent in a decade .
 Castro also proclaimed that he was the leader of the socialist revolution in South America . But he strongly maintained that he wasn't a communist .
 The U.S. government abruptly restricted sugar imports and began encouraging its allies not to trade with Castro . The United States also encouraged its allies to not trade with Cuba .
 Castro turned to the Soviet Union for support after hearing rumors that the U.S. might invade the island at any time . Castro's trade was restricted and rumors of an invasion were rumors . Castro was forced to turn to Russia for support .
 Soviet technicians and advisers began to arrive on the island in 1960 . He began selling sugar to Russia in 1960 and soon Soviet technicians arrived .
 This confirmed suspicions of American interests, who began to brand Castro a communist who subverted the status quo in Central and South America . This confirmed U.S. suspicions of Castro .
 As Castro’s social, economic, and agricultural reforms continued, often with brutal effectiveness, Cubans began to split into two factions . The Fidelistas and the anti-Castroites, many of whom fled Cuba . Many of those who fled Cuba fled the country .
 By the end of the first year of Castro’s takeover, more than 100,000 Cubans were living in the U.S. More than a million Cubans now live in the United States .
 As the U.S. stepped up its program of isolating Cuba, Fidel Castro grew more and more fearful of an armed invasion by the United States . Castro's government cut off the island’s sugar markets and oil supplies, then introduced arms and saboteurs into Cuba .
 On January 3, 1961, the United States ended diplomatic relations with Cuba . Castro demanded the U.S. embassy staff be cut to only eleven persons . The United States cut diplomatic ties with Cuba in 1961 after Castro demanded that only 11 persons be employed .
 In 1961 most Americans had never heard of the CIA, a then little-known and supersecret organization, much like the National Security Agency today . In 1961, the CIA was a little known and super secret organization, like today's NSA .
 The United States forbade its citizens to travel to Cuba . Two weeks later, the U.S. banned its citizens from traveling to the island .
 In the same month that John F Kennedy took office as president, Castro placed his militia on twenty-four-hour alert, proclaiming that the “Yankee invasion” was imminent . Castro placed the militia on a twenty-eight hour alert .
 Soviet deputy prime minister Andrei Gromyko arrived in Cuba in February to arrange large-scale economic and military assistance to Castro . In February, Soviet deputy Prime Minister Andrei Gorbowski visited Cuba .
 On April 17, 1961, less than three months after Kennedy became president, Castro’s fears were realized . Castro was assassinated by the White House in 1961 .
 A force of anti-Castro Cubans backed by the U.S. landed at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . The United States was behind the attack on Castro Castro .
 Plans to destroy Castro and regain control of Cuba began while Eisenhower was in office, more than a year before Kennedy became president . The plans for the Bay of Pigs were made during the Eisenhower administration .
 Cuban refugees in the U.S. formed small groups dedicated to regaining their homeland . Each claimed to be the one true voice of the exiles, each claiming to be a voice .
 CIA helped create a Cuban coalition that came to be known as the Cuban Revolutionary Council . The coalition was formed in May 1960 . The Cuban coalition came to terms with the CIA .
 CIA officer E Howard Hunt was later involved in the Watergate affair and to be accused of being in Dallas the day Kennedy was killed . Hunt was the CIA officer responsible for the assassination of Kennedy .
 He had simply turned the whole project over to a deputy director, Richard M Bissell Jr. He had just turned the project into a project .
 Bissell, in turn, handed the project to the former CIA station chief in Caracas, who recruited various CIA personnel . Hunt, Tracy Barnes, and David Atlee Phillips were among the CIA personnel recruited for the project .
 Many of the CIA officers involved in the Bay of Pigs had participated in the 1954 overthrow of the popularly elected government of Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala . The intent was to stage a similar low-key coup in Cuba .
 Bissell was working on a concurrent project—the assassination of Fidel Castro . Unknown to these CIA officers, the CIA officers began to create a Cuban-refugee fighting force .
 Bissell's idea began to work its way through the CIA bureaucracy with unintended humorous results . Bissell’s idea was eventually passed through the bureaucracy . The idea was an attempt to get the CIA to work with the agency .
 Plans were conceived to poison Castro’s cigar, to slip him a depilatory so his beard would fall out, or administer an LSDtype chemical so that the Cuban leader would hallucinate . Plans were also conceived to give Castro a depillatory so that his famous beard would
 These schemes took on a more sinister aspect, with the suggestion that American gangsters be hired to do the job . These schemes were suggested by the British government .
 "paramilitary force" was to evolve into Brigade 2506, a Cuban-exile expeditionary force supported by U.S. air and sea power . The force was to be supported by United States air, sea power, according to U.N. reports .
 Richard M Nixon was Eisenhower’s vice president, White House action officer, and head of the 5412 Committee . Richard M. Nixon understood what all this might mean, and did not understand what was happening .
 Nixon was one of the congressmen who passed the legislation creating the CIA . Nixon undoubtedly wanted to support the men who had passed along information politically helpful to him . Nixon was a congressman who passed legislation creating CIA .
 Nixon was eager to have the Republican administration get the credit for ending Castro’s reign . Then, too, the November election was approaching and Nixon wanted to get credit for stopping Castro .
 Nixon kept exhorting his executive assistant General Robert E Cushman Jr. to press the CIA officers for action . Whatever his reasons, Nixon kept pressing the CIA for action, he kept pushing .
 Hunt and an associate, Bernard L Barker, were wheeling and dealing in the Miami Cuban exile community, sometimes carrying as much as $115,000 in a briefcase to secure agents . Meanwhile, Hunt and Barker later participated in the Watergate break-in under Hunt's guidance .
 The plan was advancing into broader and grander stages and still the lower-level operators were in charge of the plan . The plan would advance into broader stages, but still the plan was still in place .
 On July 23, 1960, presidential candidate John F Kennedy was first briefed by Dulles about the Cuban operation . Kennedy was the candidate for president in 1960 .
 At that time only guerrilla infiltration and air drops were contemplated . Kennedy did not learn of the full invasion plan until after his election, a key point to remember .
 Dulles and Bissell briefed Kennedy on the Cuban plan shortly after the election .
 This briefing, too, was long on vague generalities and short on details . This briefing was long and vague on generalities, short of details .
 It was not until near the end of 1960 that anyone outside of the CIA officers in charge were told that the plan had been expanded to include an invasion with air support .
 Even military brass, who were being asked for material assistance, were sworn to secrecy . "Even military brass" who were asked to provide material assistance were sworn in secrecy .
 The invasion was predicated on a massive revolt against Castro by the Cuban people, a concept that was doubted by most others involved . The invasion would be impractical, because first, the CIA analysts said, because of the Cuban revolt .
 Both Eisenhower and Kennedy had opposed the invasion . The invasion had to have the support of U.S. naval and air power, both had opposed .
 By mid-March 1961, with the invasion only a month away, Kennedy was having second thoughts . The invasion was scheduled for a month before the invasion .
 The Trinidad Plan, an invasion proposal hastily put together by the Pentagon, was rejected by the new president as “too spectacular” with its amphibious assault, air strikes, and the landing of a provisional government .
 Kennedy wanted something quiet, something that would not reveal U.S. involvement . Kennedy wanted to keep it quiet, not reveal United States involvement in the assassination .
 A week before the invasion, Kennedy left no doubt as to his position on using U.S. military forces to help the Cuban exiles . A week later, Kennedy said he wanted to use the United States military forces in Cuba .
 The Cuban exiles were aghast, but their CIA officers quietly assured them that no one would stand by and watch them die . The CIA told them they would not stand by, but they would do so .
 Kennedy, advised that the invasion had been approved by the previous administration, was faced with a fait accompli . Kennedy was told that the previous government had approved the invasion .
 Six B-26 bombers left a secret airfield in Nicaragua for Cuba on April 15, 1961 . Kennedy gave his approval .
 Kennedy ordered a reduction to ‘minimum’ scale. It was to have been 16, but Kennedy ordered it to be 16 . Kennedy ordered the reduction to "minimum" scale.
 Only three T-33 jets, two B-26 bombers and a few decrepit British Sea Furies escaped the bombing raid . Only three of the planes survived the raid .
 On Monday, April 17, the Cuban Brigade landed at Bahia de Cochinos or Bay of Pigs . It was named after the wild boars that inhabited this desolate area of Cuba . The Cubans landed under the code name Zapata .
 Castro knew the area intimately since it was his favorite hunting spot . Castro was known for hunting in the area .
 It was a good location for landing, with only two main road arteries leading past swamps and dense undergrowth .
 Castro’s forces arrive quickly and in force. But this same attribute also made it a formidable trap for Castro‘s forces . Castro's forces would arrive quickly, in force .
 A second air strike had been planned and, by most accounts, would have completed the destruction of Castro’s air force . A second strike was planned and would have been completed, according to reports .
 Kennedy hesitated, growing more and more concerned that the entire world was realizing that the U.S. was supporting this invasion of another country . Kennedy: "I was growing more . Concerned" that the United States was supporting the invasion .
 Failure to order in the second strike actually came from Air Force General Charles Cabell, who as deputy director of the CIA helped organize the invasion . Today, it is known that failure to order a second strike came from Cabell himself .
 It has been suggested that cancellation of the second air strike was part of a plan to discredit Kennedy and force him into more conciliation with the military intelligence communities .
 United Nations ambassador Adlai Stevenson was discredited after telling the General Assembly that the U.S. had nothing to do with the invasion . Stevenson had been lied to by the CIA .
 Cuban Brigade already was running into trouble on the beaches . One of their ships, the Houston, was set afire by Castro’s planes . Another ship, the Barbara, was fired upon by its own side for failing to pick up Houston survivors .
 Bush accused of using his Houston oil firm as a front for anti-Castro Cubans prior to the Bay of Pigs Invasion . Bush, married to a Barbara, has been married for more than 30 years . Zapata Petroleum Corp. is accused of being used as an oil firm for
 Secretary of state Dean Rusk was concerned that the ‘international noise level’ had risen to an intolerable degree . Rusk said that the international noise level had risen in the past .
 Rusk argued that no further air strikes be attempted until it could be made to look like the planes came from captured Cuban airfields . Rusk said that no more air strikes should be carried out until the planes were captured .
 Castro’s surviving planes were able to disrupt the landing, allowing his troops to bottle up the beaches . Castro's surviving planes disrupted the landing of the landing .
 Kennedy authorized U.S. Navy ships sitting offshore to help evacuate the Brigade . Cuban commanders didn’t want evacuation .
 They wanted the ammunition, naval support, and “umbrella” of air cover that had been promised to them . They wanted to use the ammunition and naval support they had promised to use . They also wanted the "umbrella" of air support .
 As the remnants of the Brigade called for help from the beaches, United States military men could only stand silent by their weapons and watch as the gallant Cuban Brigade was torn to bits . United States .
 He believed he had been led down a primrose path by overly optimistic CIA officials . He said he believed he was led down the path by over-optimistic officials .
 CIA planners felt betrayed in that the actual invasion had been scaled down on Kennedy’s orders . The CIA planners were disappointed that the invasion was scaled down . The invasion was a scaled-down on Kennedy's orders .
 The military felt betrayed because they had not been allowed to help plan the invasion . The military said they felt betrayed by the decision .
 Cuban exiles felt betrayed most of all because they had been led to believe they had the full support of the U.S. government . They had been told they could be trusted by the United States .
 Many believed Kennedy was totally responsible for the failure of the invasion . Many still believe he was responsible for it .
 In Guatemala City, staging area for the Brigade, the CIA officers were devastated . CIA officers are devastated by the loss .
 The captured Brigade was finally freed on December 23, 1962, after the United States agreed to exchange them for $53 million worth of food and drugs . The U.S. agreed to swap the captured Brigade for food and other supplies .
 Infuriated by this disastrous defeat, Kennedy nevertheless took the burden of blame . Kennedy still took the blame for the disastrous defeat .
 He told reporters, “There’s an old saying that victory has a hundred fathers and defeat is an orphan.” President Obama said victory has “a hundred fathers”
 No one would forget this acceptance of responsibility . No one, especially in the CIA, military, organized crime, or in the Cuban exile community, would forget it .
 Following a shake-up in U.S. intelligence over the Bay of Pigs disaster, Attorney General Robert Kennedy took over responsibility for Cuban affairs . Kennedy fired Dulles and Cabell and took over control of Cuban affairs in Cuba .
 He advocated action in the social, economic, and political aspects of a country as well as aggressive military operations . He advocated social, political, and economic aspects of the country .
 A 1958 book titled The Ugly American was a thinly disguised account of the experiences of Lansdale and others in Southeast Asia . Lansdale's account was published in 1958 .
 There are nearly a quarter million Cuban refugees living in the United States . Cuban refugees are returning home to their homeland .
 The operation out of the JM/WAVE station was inconsistent from the start . The operation was inconsistent, the station's operator was inconsistent throughout the course .
 The near-nightly raids on Cuba actually achieved little except to confirm Castro’s accusations that the U.S. was guilty of aggression . The raids were aimed at landing saboteurs and dropping propaganda leaflets .
 There is no supporting documentation, and in fact the only documentation available indicates quite the opposite . However, there is no support for supporting documentation .
 Robert Kennedy was trying to prosecute a top Mafia boss named Sam Giancana when he found the CIA interceding on his behalf . The CIA intervened in favor of the Mafia boss in 1962 .
 Kennedy finally told about the earlier deals between the CIA and Mafia to kill Castro . Kennedy was finally told of the deals . The deals were made in the 1960s .
 CIA attorney Lawrence Houston: Attorney general ordered halt to dealings with the Mafia . CIA attorney Houston: The attorney general ordered a halt to deals with the mafia .
 CIA continued to operate out of control even after the CIA shake-up following the Bay of Pigs disaster . However, the lethal partnership between the agency and the crime syndicate didn’t stop until after President Kennedy was assassinated .
 Whatever the Kennedys’ role in Castro assassination plots, they got nowhere . Whatever the Kennedy’s role in the assassination plots got nowhere. The Kennedy assassination plotters got nowhere, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Castro outlived both Kennedys and there is now some evidence to suggest that the CIA-Mafia plots may have been nothing more than a “scam” on the part of organized crime to gain leverage over the government .
 Kennedy announced that U.S. reconnaissance aircraft had photographed offensive missile sites with nuclear capability being constructed in Cuba in October 1962 . U-2 spy plane that had ended Eisenhower’s hopes for the 1960 summit meeting .
 President Kennedy called for emergency meetings of the U.N. Security Council and Organization of American States . Kennedy called on the United Nations Security Council to discuss the situation .
 President Obama ordered a “quarantine” of Cuba and vowed full retaliation against Russia if a nuclear warhead was launched from Cuba . He also ordered a "quarantine" of Cuba .
 As Soviet ships carrying missiles approached the U.S. naval blockade of Cuba, the world watched and trembled . The world watched as Soviet ships carried missiles into Cuba .
 Kennedy accepted a proposal from Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev that included a pledge from the U.S. to remove its missiles from Turkey and never to invade or support any invasion of Cuba . Only much later did the American people learn that Kennedy had accepted the proposal . The U.
 Kennedy’s diplomacy in ending the missile crisis, perhaps unknown to the lower ranks, earned him further rebuke by military and CIA officers . Some believed presence of missiles justified a United States invasion of Cuba and the elimination of the Castro regime .
 In March 1962, General Lyman Lemnitzer, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, recommended, and approved, a plan to turn public opinion against Castro called Operation Northwoods . The plan was based on a plan that turned public opinion around Castro in favor of him .
 These plans called for conducting ‘false-flag’ operations in the United States . They included hijacking airliners and ships, setting off bombs in American cities, and assassinations .
 President Kennedy rejected Operation Northwoods and demoted Lemnitzer . Senior military officers ordered the documents destroyed . The documents were later destroyed .
 Beginning in 1963, the Cubans found U.S. government support for their continuing efforts against Castro to be nonexistent . Beginning in the 1960s, the Cuban government found it was virtually nonexistent .
 Kennedy used Jean Daniel, a journalist with the French newspaper L’Express, as an unofficial contact with Castro . Kennedy used Daniel as an informal contact with the Castro .
 Kennedy urged Daniel to pass along his good intentions to the Cuban premier during a scheduled interview in Havana . On October 24, 1963, Kennedy met with Daniel and urged him to . Daniel was the Cuban prime minister .
 Daniel was with Castro on November 22, when the Cuban leader received word of Kennedy’s assassination . Daniel was also with Castro when he learned of the assassination .
 Kennedy was an enemy to whom we had become accustomed. I’ll tell you one thing; at least Kennedy was the enemy . He was the president of the U.S. Senate in 1968 .
 "From the day of the assassination, there was an effort to lay the blame on him," says President Obama . "There was an attempt to blame him. But he was not," he says .
 The attempt to reconcile relations with Castro had not been strictly unofficial . But the attempt to reconcilate relations with the Castro family was not strictly unofficial.
 Castro wanted to reach some sort of understanding with the Kennedy administration, a former U.S. ambassador to Guinea says . The Castro administration was trying to reach an understanding with Kennedy administration in 1963 .
 Castro was unhappy at being forced to align closely with the Soviet Union . According to Diallo, Castro wanted to normalize relations with the United States . Diallo: Castro wanted normalization of U.S.-Russian relations .
 Attwood reported Diallo’s conversation to his superior, UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson, who telephoned President Kennedy . Attwood then reported the conversation to Stevenson . President Kennedy then called the UN ambassador .
 Kennedy directed Stevenson to have Attwood meet with Cuban UN delegate Carlos Lechuga . Attwood met with Cuban delegates at the end of the trip . Kennedy ordered Stevenson to meet with the Cuban delegate .
 Attwood would travel to Cuba for direct meetings with Castro . This led to discreet meetings between Attwood and Lechuga, where they decided to meet .
 People within U.S. intelligence were aware of the rapprochement, it is almost certain . The approaches to Cuba were strictly secret .
 Three days after Kennedy’s assassination, Attwood was formally notified that Havana was ready to proceed with a meeting . Attwood had been in Havana since the assassination of Kennedy .
 President Lyndon Johnson was briefed on the situation, but he turned a cold shoulder . President Johnson turned the cold shoulder as he was briefed .
 New Orleans was the next largest operational area for militant anti-Castro Cubans . Lee Harvey Oswald’s birthplace, New Orleans, was the city of New Orleans .
 Numerous leads have been developed linking the CIA, the FBI, anti-Castro Cubans, and military intelligence with Oswald . Oswald was shot in the head by Oswald in August 1945 .
 Oswald’s interest in Cuba went back to his Marine days, when he and Marine buddy Nelson Delgado toyed with the idea of traveling to Cuba and assisting Castro in his war against Batista . Oswald's interest in the island nation went back when he was a member of the
 That same idea had crossed the minds of thousands of U.S. schoolboys . That same daydreaming American schoolboys had .
 Oswald began receiving letters stamped with the seal of the Cuban consulate in Los Angeles . Delgado says Oswald received the letters from the consulate in the U.S.
 Gerry Patrick Hemming, a Marine with Oswald who was recruited into the CIA, has told of meeting Oswald in the Cuban consulate . Hemming was recruited by the CIA after he was recruited to work for the CIA .
 Oswald packed a bag and bought a bus ticket for New Orleans, telling Marina and friends that he couldn't find a job in Texas . On April 24, 1963, less than a year after arriving back in Fort Worth from Russia, Oswald packed his suitcase and headed to New Orleans . Oswald
 Oswald praised Castro and asked for FPCC pamphlets, membership applications, and advice on tactics . Oswald asked for membership applications and advice from the FPCC .
 Oswald managed to get a job at the William B Reily Co., a coffee manufacturer . Oswald was staying with relatives in New Orleans with relatives . Oswald worked for the company .
 The company’s owner, William Reily, was a financial backer of the Crusade to Free Cuba Committee . The group was one of the many front groups raising money for the Cuban Revolutionary Council .
 His job apparently was to distinguish which of the Cuban exiles at both the firm and in New Orleans were genuine anti-Castroites .
 Oswald checked out twenty-seven books from the New Orleans Library in the spring and summer of 1963 . Oswald, an avid reader, checked out nearly 20 books at the library in New Orleans .
 His reading ran from Ian Fleming’s James Bond novels to Aldous Huxley and science fiction . He was also a keen admirer of Aldous . His reading included Ian Fleming's Bond novels and Aldous Huxley's science fiction.
 Library records show Oswald also read two books about John F Kennedy, Profiles in Courage and Portrait of a President . Library records also show Oswald read two other books about the Kennedy .
 Oswald’s sincerity as a communist sympathizer is questioned . Oswald was involved in a strange incident that throws further doubt on his sincerity . Oswald is accused of being a Communist sympathizer in the early 1940s .
 Oswald accompanied his uncle, Charles "Dutz" Murret, to a Jesuit seminary in Mobile, Alabama, in July 1963 . Oswald's cousin was enrolled in the seminary, where a cousin was also enrolled . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 Oswald made what audience members thought was a well-constructed speech . Oswald made the speech against Soviet-style communism . Oswald was assassinated in June 1944 .
 Oswald took the opposite position from his procommunist public posturing over the previous few months in New Orleans . Oswald was living some sort of dual life, according to historian John Avlon . Oswald's actions suggest he was living a dual life .
 Oswald's New Orleans chapter was a complete fraud . Oswald handed out leaflets for the FPCC and continued to write to the national organization . Oswald was a member of the New Orleans branch .
 Oswald was in touch with anti-Castro Cubans during his time in Cuba . Oswald's letters to the FPCC show he was in contact with Cuban dissidents . There is no documented evidence that Oswald was pro-Orlandoist .
 Oswald told Bringuier and friends he was a Marine veteran with experience in guerrilla warfare and offered to train Cuban exiles . Oswald told friends that he was an ex-Marine veteran who trained Cuban ex-Cubans . Oswald said he would train exiles and said he had experience
 Oswald returned with a Marine training manual, which he left with Bringuier . Oswald returned the next day with the manual, and returned with the book .
 In his Warren Commission testimony, he said some time earlier he had been interviewed by FBI agent Warren De Brueys, who had told him the bureau might try to infiltrate his anti-Castro organization . He said he was interviewed by the FBI agent who told him that the FBI might
 Bringuier was shocked when a friend rushed into his store and said that the same man who had wanted to train exiles was on the New Orleans streets passing out pro-Castro literature . Three days later, he was shocked to find out that he had been training exiles .
 A crowd gathered as Bringuier railed against this ‘communist’ who had tried to infiltrate the exiles . The crowd gathered to hear his rants against the man .
 Losing his temper, Bringuier cursed Oswald, threw his leaflets into the air, then drew back his fist as if to strike . The incident occurred during the Second World War II .
 Oswald, Bringuier, and two others were taken into custody . Oswald was arrested after the incident . Police arrived at the scene and arrested Oswald and two other men .
 His uncle’s daughter contacted a family friend, Emile Bruneau, who put up the money . Bruneau is a New Orleans gambler who put the money on his uncle's house .
 Oswald asked to speak to an FBI agent before leaving the New Orleans police station . Oswald asked the FBI agent to speak with him before leaving .
 Agent John Quigley spent more than an hour with Oswald . Despite being outside normal business hours, he was able to speak to Oswald . Oswald was later found dead in his home .
 Oswald's report appeared more like a debriefing to the bureau by Oswald than the ramblings of an anti-American . His report gave every detail of Oswald’s travels and stay in New Orleans . Oswald was not a member of the FBI, but a friend of the
 Oswald impression of Oswald by New Orleans police is interesting to note . Oswald was killed in November 1963 in New Orleans .
 Oswald’s pro-Castro stance became even more public after this brush with the law . Oswald was arrested in 1961 and charged with treason in the death of Josefina Castro .
 He was soon on New Orleans radio and television telling his pro-Castro story to a wider audience . He soon became a radio and TV personality .
 Oswald expound on Cuba and South America in radio interview with William Stuckey . Tipped off to Oswald by Bringuier by reporter, he expound his thoughts on Cuba .
 This radio interview was widely used after the assassination to “prove’t his procommunist credentials . This interview was significant in that it was used after his assassination to "prove" his credentials . The interview was used in the aftermath of his assassination .
 Stuckey and right-wing broadcaster Ed Butler verbally ambushed Oswald in another radio interview . A few days later, armed with information obtained from the FBI and the House Un-American Activities Committee, they attacked Oswald in a radio interview.
 This interview may have provided an accidental peek at Oswald’s real allegiance . Oswald may have been trying to hide his allegiance from the CIA .
 The pro-Castro Oswald, self-proclaimed secretary of the New Orleans chapter of the FPCC, was suddenly revealed to have been a communist sympathizer . Oswald had tried to renounce his American citizenship . Oswald was a Cuban sympathizer who had been a member of the Communist Party
 CIA and FBI were making efforts to penetrate the FPCC, discredit the proCastro organization . The FPCC was a pro-Castro pro- Castro organization in the 1970s .
 Until a few months prior to Oswald’s arrival in New Orleans, the building housed the offices of the Cuban Revolutionary Council . The organization was the umbrella anti-Castro organization created by CIA officer E Howard Hunt .
 Prio had paid for the yacht Granma Castro used to land his revolutionaries on Cuba . Prio turned on Castro and became a leading anti-Castroite .
 It is alleged that Prio was to have become the new president of Cuba following the ill-fated Bay of Pigs Invasion . Prio is alleged to have been to become the president following the invasion .
 Prio once was arrested in a gunrunning conspiracy along with a man named Robert McKeown . Prio was arrested along with another man in the same conspiracy . He was arrested on suspicion of gunrunning .
 McKeown had been involved in a deal “running jeeps to Cuba” and other smuggling operations with Jack Ruby, the man who killed Oswald . Evidence developed by the Warren Commission, evidence developed by Warren Commission .
 In April 1977, Prio was found shot in the chest in his Miami Beach garage . He was scheduled to testify before a House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Banister was a former FBI man with connections reaching into the FBI, the CIA, and organized crime as well as the Cuban exiles . The New Orleans States- Item paper in 1967 claimed Banister helped supply munitions to the Bay of Pigs invaders .
 Oswald worked for Banister as "an undercover agent" in the summer of 1963, his secretary said in 1978 . In 1978 his secretary, Delphine Roberts, told the Dallas Morning News that Oswald had worked as an undercover agent . Banister's secretary told the paper in 1978 that
 Oswald’s former Civil Air Patrol leader, David Ferrie, worked for both the CIA and the New Orleans mob . During that same time, another of Banister's employees was another of his employees . Ferrie worked for the FBI, the CIA, and the mob .
 Oswald’s Fair Play for Cuba Committee leaflets were among the leaflets Oswald used to promote Cuba in Cuba . Oswald's Fair Play For Cuba Committee leafletlets were found in the Warren Commission exhibits .
 Oswald wrote the Fair Play for Cuba Committee stating he was going to get a small office . Recall that in the summer of 1963 Oswald wrote that he wanted to get the office in Cuba .
 Authorities talked with Rodriguez shortly after the assassination and acting on a tip, authorities talked with him . Rodriguez did teach Spanish and his father was in the electrical business, authorities say .
 Rodriguez admitted he met Oswald, who apparently wanted to learn Spanish . Rodriguez admitted that he had met Oswald . He said he met the man who wanted to study Spanish . Oswald wanted to be able to speak Spanish .
 Rodriguez said Oswald had offered to train anti-Castro exiles . It was Rodriguez who sent Oswald to meet Carlos Bringuier, he said .
 The building was located close to the New Orleans offices of both the FBI and the CIA . It was also near the Crescent City Garage where Oswald was seen in the company of FBI agents .
 Oswald’s pro-Castro activities included an attempt to secure a visa to visit Cuba during a trip to Mexico City in late September 1963 . The CIA reported to the Warren Commission that Oswald tried to get a visa for a visit to Cuba . Oswald was killed in the September 1963
 The agency apparently went to great lengths to prove Oswald was in Mexico City at this time . But the effort was not entirely successful . Oswald was not found to be alive in Mexico .
 Photographs of a man entering the Soviet embassy and a tape recording made at the time were shown to be of someone other than Oswald .
 The CIA relied on the testimony of a Mexican who worked at the Cuban embassy, Silvia Tirado de Duran . The CIA used the testimony to document Oswald’s visit to the embassy .
 Duran, however, is a dubious witness at best since it is now known that the twenty-six-year-old woman was arrested twice following the assassination on orders from the CIA . She may have been coerced into giving false testimony . Duran is now a suspect in the assassination
 The connections between the assassination and anti-Castro groups have always turned up the most intriguing evidence . Evidence has largely been ignored by U.S. authorities, particularly the Warren Commission .
 According to Veciana, he met with Bishop more than a hundred times . Veciana says he helped guide the activities of Alpha 66, including plans to assassinate Castro .
 Veciana said his relationship with the agency did not end until 1973, when Bishop paid him $253,000 as back pay for his services . Veciana says he was paid back in 1973 for his work .
 Veciana saw his CIA case officer in conversation with a man he later recognized as Lee Harvey Oswald . Veciana's most astounding claim is that during a visit to Dallas in late August or early September 1963, he saw Oswald in conversation .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations failed to “credit” Veciana’s story of the Oswald-Bishop meeting . It nevertheless went to great lengths to try to locate the mysterious Bishop, including sending an artist's sketch of Bishop to United States newspapers .
 Unsurprisingly, the agency denied ever assigning a case officer to Veciana . Veciana's case officer was never assigned by the case officer .
 Veciana says Bishop told him he had a relative working for Cuban intelligence living in Mexico . Bishop also told Veciana that he has a relative who worked for the Cuban government . Veciana told the committee that Bishop contacted him after the assassination .
 Bishop wanted Veciana to offer his relative a “large sum of money” to say that the relative and his wife met Oswald during his Mexico City trip . According to Veciana, Bishop wanted to offer Veciana a ‘large sum’ of money .
 Veciana said he agreed to this scheme but was unable to contact his relative . Veciana agreed to the scheme but said he had no contact with the relative of the victim .
 President Obama used precisely the plan we had devised against Castro . But I do know he used exactly the plan he had devised to defeat Castro .
 The CIA did not anticipate the president’s assassination, but it was responsible for it . Thus the CIA was not only responsible for the president's assassination but also for its own .
 A prime example of the interference with investigations into links between anti-Castro Cubans and the assassination came just days after Kennedy was killed .
 The FBI wanted the Secret Service to terminate its investigation of the Echevarria report . President Johnson designated to control the assassination investigation in November 1963 .
 Cuban exile Silvia Odio was an outspoken critic of the Castro regime . Odio's story is not easy to brush off, but it's important to remember .
 She and her sister Annie came from a distinguished and wealthy Cuban family .
 The sisters had been forced to flee Cuba after their parents were imprisoned by the Castro government . The sisters were forced to leave Cuba in order to escape their parents' imprisonment .
 Their father, who initially had supported Castro’s revolution, had turned against the bearded leader . He was arrested for concealing a man named Reinaldo Gonzalez, who was involved in a plot to kill Castro . Their father had initially supported Castro's revolution .
 Gonzalez’s co-conspirator was Antonio Veciana, the leader of Alpha 66 . Veciana operated under the instructions of Maurice Bishop, who operated under Bishop .
 Three men came to Odio’s Dallas apartment in late September 1963 . Odio: "They believe it was the 26th or 27th" Odio says the three men were involved in the shooting .
 There were two Hispanics and one Caucasian, described as weary, unkempt, and unshaved . Police say they are looking for a suspect in the area .
 They knew her father’s underground name and many details of anti-Castro activities in Cuba . They knew about recent plots to kill Castro, including recent plots against him .
 Silvia Odio was asked to translate solicitation letters for anti-Castro operations . They wanted her help in translating solicitation letters to American businessmen . They told her they were trying to raise funds to support anti-Cuban operations .
 Something about the men, however, made Odio uneasy and she sent them away . She warned them that she did not want to be involved in a campaign of violence .
 During their brief stay, her sister Annie also got a good look at the trio . Her sister Annie was also in the house .
 “Leopoldo” called Silvia Odio and asked for her thoughts on their American companion . Within forty-eight hours, ‘Leopoldso’ had asked for his thoughts on the American .
 "Leopoldo" quickly hung up and Odio never heard from him again . Odio says he never heard him talk again .
 The Odio sisters wrote of the incident to their father and told friends well before Kennedy’s assassination . They did not tell authorities of the strange visitors .
 After the assassination, word of the Odio visit reached the FBI . The FBI investigated the matter for the Warren Commission .
 The Commission accepted FBI and CIA evidence that Oswald was on his way to or in Mexico City at the time of the Odio visit . The Commission concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald was not at Mrs. Odio .
 No one seemed to even consider whether someone might have been posing as Oswald . No one even considered considering whether Oswald posed as Oswald. Oswald was actually Oswald .
 The Odio story caused great problems with the Warren Commission Report . Odio's Odio scandal caused many problems with Warren Commission report .
 If Oswald was in Dallas, he couldn’t have been traveling by bus to Mexico at the same time . Oswald was traveling to Mexico by bus at the time of the attack .
 If the Oswald in Odio’s apartment was not the real Oswald, then it is clear that someone was impersonating him with an eye toward implicating Oswald in the assassination . Odio: If someone impersonated Oswald, it would be clear someone was trying to implicate him
 Oswald’s Girlfriend may go a long way in untangling the morass of characters and agendas involving Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans during the summer of 1963 .
 Baker, who in 2013 was living outside the United States after claiming death threats, told her life story in the 2010 book Me & Lee . Baker was living in 2013 outside the U.S. after claiming threats .
 Baker's story is internally consistent and well supported by known facts and documentation . Baker’s story has suffered attacks from all sides, but her story is still internally consistent .
 Baker vowed to find a cure for cancer after losing her grandmother to that disease . Baker's grandmother lost her life to cancer and she vowed to fight it .
 Still in high school, she came to the attention of military and medical authorities for her work in cancer research as well as a project on how to acquire magnesium from sea water .
 The project brought the attention of Florida leaders, including the powerful senator George Smathers, a staunch supporter of the anti-Castro Cubans . President Kennedy was a personal friend of President Kennedy’s .
 Harold Diehl and Alton Ochsner are both high-ranking officers of the American Cancer Society . Diehl was a cancer survivor in the 1980s and '90s . He was awarded the highest honor in cancer research by the cancer society .
 Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin were desperately looking for a cure for cancer in the 1950s . They knew that the polio vaccines had been made from monkey glands, which also carried a cancer-causing DNA virus called Simian Virus 40 .
 The contamination brought on an epidemic of cancer, some not becoming apparent for many years . While the vaccines may have checked the spread of polio, they also brought on a cancer epidemic .
 Baker said that in late April 1963 she arrived in New Orleans to continue her cancer research . Baker said she arrived to New Orleans in April 1963 to continue research into cancer .
 Mary Sherman is director of the bone pathology laboratory at the Ochsner Clinic in New York . Mary Sherman: "It's a life-changing moment"
 David Ferrie told her he was running a clandestine but government-backed cancer lab trying to find a cure . Ferrie was put in touch with David Frie, who told her of the lab he was working on a cancer cure . The lab is run by a government-funded cancer
 Ferrie’s apartment was filled with cages for white mice and an assistant knowledgeable in cancer research was needed . Ferrie: “I’m going to be very happy to be able to do this. I’ll be very proud of my work,”
 Baker came across a young man in the post office who spoke to her in Russian . Ochsner, Baker said, "I'm not afraid to be afraid" Baker was speaking to the young man at the time .
 Baker was instantly drawn to this new friend—Lee Harvey Oswald . Baker studied some Russian, Baker was intrigued by Oswald's new friend .
 Baker claimed to have developed a love for Lee, despite the fact that both were already married . During the ensuing weeks, Baker claimed that he and Lee had developed a relationship .
 This, of course, made their rendezvous secretive and not likely to have been documented . This made them unlikely to have documented their meeting .
 Oswald's wife was in Texas and Baker's husband was only home infrequently, as he worked on oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico . It was also convenient to the romance that Oswald’s wife was living in Texas .
 David Lewis was in the thick of the New Orleans scene in the summer of 1963 . He was in New Orleans at the height of the 1960s .
 He was an acquaintance of Ferrie's and Oswald's as well as an employee of Guy Banister's . He was also a friend of Banister and Ferrie’s and was a former employee of the company .
 Anna Lewis was aSked to describe their relationship in a taped interview with Anna .
 Anna Lewis apparently did not care for Baker . She apparently was not lying to support Judyth’s story .
 Lee Oswald and Judyth Baker went to work at the Reily Coffee Company on May 10, 1963 . Oswald and Baker worked at the coffee shop on the same date .
 Ochsner obviously had known Oswald previously, Baker says . Baker then knew their meeting in the post office had not been an accident . Baker: "I'm not going to believe it was an accident"
 Baker soon realized that both she and Lee were working for clandestine yet powerful backers . Baker soon understood that both they were working to protect the country from a powerful enemy . Baker was eventually convinced that Lee was working for a powerful organization .
 She knew Oswald had connections to Carlos Marcello, a Dallas nightclub owner named Jack Rubenstein, and local businessman Clay Shaw . But she also suspected ties to the CIA as well .
 Oswald said he couldn't tell the source of his money . He said he didn't know where he was going to get it .
 She covered for Oswald at the coffee company by clocking him out each day while he was at Ferrie’s apartment, running errands, and meeting with Guy Banister . She also clocked him out while he visited Ferrie's apartment, meeting with Banister.
 After work she would go to Ferrie’s apartment to do research and write reports on their progress . Ferrie would write reports about their progress at Ferrie's apartment .
 She said she and Lee also were tasked with trying to ferret out any Castro supporters from among the many Cubans employed at the Reily Coffee Company .
 She explained that Oswald’s distributing of pro-Castro literature was part of this same agenda . She said Oswald was distributing pro- Castro literature . Oswald was also distributing a piece of Cuban literature .
 Oswald would stop frequently at the nearby Crescent City Garage, where he was seen in the company of federal agents . Oswald would often stop at the garage to buy coffee from a coffee shop .
 Oswald was fired from his job at the Reily Coffee Company on July 19, 1963 . Baker’s story is supported by the fact that Oswald had been fired from the company .
 Oswald was arrested for the street incident with Carlos Bringuier and his name appeared in the newspaper . Three weeks later, Oswald's name was on the front page of the New York Times . Oswald was later arrested for his involvement in the incident .
 Baker, who had accompanied Oswald to the meeting with Bringuier, also was fired from Reily . That same day, Baker was also fired from the company .
 The Cuban spy-hunt phase had come to an end but the cancer project continued . The cancer project was a success in Cuba .
 In Ferrie's informal lab, Oswald would clean the mice cages while Baker would accept new mice from Cuban couriers . Baker would test for the most virulent tumors in the mice, and then grind up the tumors in a blender to produce what they called the “product .
 Baker began to realize their work was carrying them into the realm of cancer-causing agents as biological weapons more than attempting to find a cure .
 COINTELPRO was a ruthless long-term bureau program Hoover used to disrupt and discredit political groups he opposed . Hoover was the leader of the FBI in the 1950s and '60s . Hoover used the program to discredit and discredit opponents of his opponents .
 Oswald group parked near the courthouse in Clinton to await a phone call notifying them that the prisoner was on the way . So as not to draw attention to themselves in the small town of Jackson, the group parked nearby to await the call .
 Clinton was a small community of about 1,500 people in 1963 . Clinton was located about ninety miles northwest of New Orleans and twelve miles east of Jackson, Louisiana .
 The town of Jackson, Mississippi, was larger than Jackson, but it was still difficult to keep the townspeople from knowing just about everything .
 In 1963, the civil rights program was gaining strength throughout the South . The civil rights movement began in 1963 .
 Clinton was one of the communities targeted for a black voter registration drive by the Congress of Racial Equality . That summer would become known as “civil rights summer’s ‘Civil Rights Summer’
 Earlier in the summer, several blacks were arrested there simply for writing appeals to the mayor and district attorney . Earlier, several black people were arrested at the same time for writing letters to police .
 Oswald’s whereabouts remain officially unaccounted for . A long line of blacks waited to undergo the then-tedious process of registering to vote . Oswald's whereabouts have not been found .
 The incident that morning began with the arrival of a large, black Cadillac carrying three men, police say . Witnesses say the men were in a large black Cadillac .
 A slightly built white man got out of a car and joined the line of blacks . The car parked near the registrar’s office, one of the men got out .
 Witnesses were unanimous in identifying the man as Lee Harvey Oswald . Witnesses later identified him as Oswald . Oswald was a prominent figure in the Second World War .
 Oswald told Palmer he wanted to get a job at a Louisiana state hospital and thought he would have a better chance if he was a registered voter . Palmer said Oswald told him he thought he could get a better job at East Louisiana State Hospital . Oswald said he wanted a job, Palmer said
 Oswald was told he had not lived in the area long enough to qualify as a voter . Oswald returned to the Cadillac after being told he was not eligible to vote again .
 Oswald made a bet that he could register to vote without the problems some of the blacks faced . Baker explained that Oswald, becoming bored and very interested in the civil rights movement, made the bet .
 New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison tried to prove that Clay Shaw was Clay Shaw, the defendant in Garrison’s JFK assassination-plot trial in 1967 . Garrison's JFK assassination trial was in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Baker’s assertion that it was Shaw was given weight by Registrar Palmer, who in later years told this author that he had known Guy Banister in the Army and that the man driving the Cadillac in Clinton was definitely not Banister, thus providing strong support .
 The prisoner eventually arrived at the hospital, was injected with the cancer agent, and died soon after . The tragic outcome of this visit was that the prisoner eventually died .
 Baker said the man she thought had volunteered to help find a cancer cure because he already was dying from the disease actually was a perfectly healthy Cuban prisoner chosen because he was approximately the same size and weight as Castro . It was only then that Baker said she learned that he was actually a perfectly
 She finally saw the ultimate goal of the cancer-cure project: developing a cancer-causing agent for use on Cuba’s leader . She said she was working on the project's ultimate goal: developing a cancer causing agent .
 Baker moved out of New Orleans and returned to Florida to live with her husband, Robert Baker . Realizing the gravity of her situation, Baker moved back to Florida .
 Oswald was to have passed the cancer-causing “product” to a contact in Mexico City for transmittal to Cuba . According to Baker, Oswald was supposed to pass the ‘product’ to a . contact in . Mexico City . Baker: Oswald passed the
 Oswald was told the scheme fell apart because of Hurricane Flora in late September 1963 . Oswald told what he was told was that the scheme failed because of the hurricane . The scheme was supposed to have been successful, Oswald says .
 It was among the deadliest hurricanes in history, causing more than 7,000 deaths . Hurricane Katrina was the deadliest hurricane in history .
 In its path across Cuba, it destroyed safe houses, disrupted communications, and caused Oswald’s contact to miss the rendezvous in Mexico . The Cuban government was forced to withdraw from Cuba after the attack .
 Baker and Oswald were still in touch with Ferrie, who had access to untraceable sports betting lines . Baker said she and Oswald realized that the attempt on Castro might have masked a bigger, darker agenda .
 On Wednesday night, November 20, only two days before the assassination, Baker had her last phone conversation with Oswald . Baker had a last phone call with Oswald just two days earlier .
 Oswald also repeated the name David Atlee Phillips, saying this was the man he believed was organizing the assassination . Oswald said Phillips was responsible for the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Phillips, aka Maurice Bishop, was seen meeting with Oswald by the CIA-backed anti-Castroite Antonio Veciana . Phillips was seen in the meeting by Veciana, who was seen with Oswald .
 Morales was named by E Howard Hunt in a 2007 deathbed statement as a major link between Cord Meyer and William Harvey, head of the ZR/RIFLE CIA-Mafia assassination team, and the real shooters in the assassination conspiracy . Morales was a CIA Covert Action Officer
 Baker was shocked to witness the televised murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby . Ruby was a man she had met in New Orleans through Lee Oswald . Baker met Ruby through her association with Lee Oswald, who was killed by Ruby .
 She soon received a phone call from David Ferrie advising her to become a “vanilla girl” Ferrie advised her to lay low, blend in, and forget about her career in science .
 Sherman had been murdered in July 1964 . Jack Ruby, David Ferrie, and one of Ferrie’s associates had all died in early 1967 under questionable circumstances at the beginning of the Garrison investigation .
 With her children grown and her husband now deceased, she decided to go public with her story . She decided to share her story with the world .
 Baker came to realize that her lover Lee Oswald was involved in intelligence work for the U.S. government . He had infiltrated a group bent on assassinating the president but was set up as a patsy and murdered in public to protect the real assassins .
 Baker’s staunchest supporter has been Florida advertising executive Edward T Haslam . Haslam is a native of New Orleans and author of the 2007 book Dr. Dr. Baker's book .
 St. Mary’s Monkey documents polio vaccine adulteration, cancer lab, and the cancer lab . Drs. Mary's Monkey documents the polio vaccine . The vaccine was contaminated with polio vaccine, but it was never contaminated .
 In his first edition, Haslam wrote it would be vital to the story if a living witness could be found . Haslam: "It would be a good thing to know what happened to a man who died in a car crash"
 This Baker got Haslam off into the kitchen and began to question him about his interest in the Kennedy assassination . Haslam was interviewed by Baker at the hospital .
 Haslam had spoken out about the many questions surrounding the assassination . Haslam felt uncomfortable about this questioning by Baker and, making excuses, he soon left .
 In 2000 he met Judyth Vary Baker in Florida and quickly realized this was not the same woman he had met in 1972 New Orleans . He was introduced to Baker in the year 2000 and realized she wasn't the same .
 The real Judyth Baker fled New Orleans in the fall of 1963 and never returned . Adding to the mystery was the fact that the real Baker fled the city in 1963 . Baker never returned to New Orleans .
 This incident lends strong support to the idea that a very dangerous secret was being preserved through cover-up and misdirection . This is the first time the U.S. government has been accused of covering up its crimes .
 Some people believe the adulteration of the polio vaccine and the subsequent rise in cancer deaths may even be a bigger secret than who was responsible for JFK’s death .
 Former senator Robert Morgan, a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee that in 1976 looked into CIA-Mafia plots, maintains that Kennedy brought about his own death .
 One anti-Castro leader, John Martino, spelled out the assassination plan to a Texas business friend in 1975 . Martino said the plan to kill Castro was a secret to a business friend .
 Author Anthony Summers: Martino admitted to serving as a CIA contract agent . Martino said he served as a contract agent for the CIA in the 1980s .
 Oswald didn't know who he was working for—he was just ignorant of who was really putting him together . Oswald didn’t know who else was behind the creation of Oswald, he says .
 They were to meet Oswald in the theater, and get him out of the country, then eliminate him . The plan was to eliminate Oswald, then meet him and kill him .
 Oswald was asked if his beliefs regarding Cuba played a role in the assassination . Oswald was killed by Jack Ruby during interrogation on the Sunday morning he was killed . Oswald had been asked about his beliefs about Cuba during interrogation .
 Castro eventually did learn of the plots against him, but there is no firm evidence that he knew of these schemes in time to have launched a retaliatory strike by November 1963 . Also, while Castro did learn about the plots, there is not firm evidence he knew about these plots in time
 There seems no serious motive for Castro to have Kennedy killed outside of simple revenge . Every motive against the idea seems to be against it .
 "It would be to run the risk that our country would have been destroyed by the United States. Needless to say, it would have ... been to run a risk," says President Obama .
 The day after the assassination CIA director received a memo from his Mexico City station stating that Oswald had been in contact with Valery Kostikov, a KGB officer there thought to be an expert on assassination . The memo was sent to the CIA director John McCone the next day .
 President Johnson probably knew better than to subscribe to a foreign plot . This information was passed to President Johnson, who knew better .
 The FBI was under pressure to crack down on any potentially dangerous investigations . However, here was the excuse to proclaim fear of a Soviet plot and World War III .
 Johnson ordered all intelligence agents in Mexico to stop investigating any leads involving conspiracy . Johnson had his aide Cliff Carter notify Dallas County district attorney Henry Wade to not mention any conspiracy .
 This was the initial step that blocked the plans to blame Castro for the assassination . The initial step was the first step to block the plans .
 If the evidence of Castro’s involvement in the assassination is meager, it is more than made up for by the abundance of evidence of anti-Castro Cuban involvement, as we have seen in this chapter . In this chapter, we discuss the assassination of Fidel Castro .
 Behind the anti-Castro Cubans always lurked the shadowy hands of U.S. intelligence and the even darker specter of organized crime . Behind the opposition to the Castro regime always lurk the dark shadow of the CIA .
 Immigrants to the United States in the late 1800s and early 1900s found themselves crammed into inner-city ghettos spawning a multitude of street gangs . Immigrants found themselves trapped by their inability to speak English, lack of education, and class and cultural differences .
 They carried names like the Whyos, the Dead Rabbits, the Bowery Boys, the Tenth Avenue Gang, the Gas House Gang, and the Midnight Terrors . They were known as the Bowersy Boys and the Tenth Ave Gang .
 Young toughs would rob and beat their victims in broad daylight, with little to fear from the police . As long as they confined their illegal activities to the ghetto and its cowed population, the police would not be able to stop them .
 In the various ethnic communities some people had belonged to the Mafia of Sicily, the Camorra of Italy, and the Tongs of China . In the other countries some people belonged to secret societies such as the Mafia .
 They brought the learned terror and intimidation of these societies to their new home, where it found fertile soil . The learned terror was brought to these societies, and they brought it to their home .
 City gangs were becoming more adept at their profession and expanding operations to include gambling, prostitution, and lotteries . As America entered the twentieth century, the city gangs were expanding operations .
 They also were the bankers for the poor, charging exorbitant interest rates from those who could borrow money nowhere else . They also charged exorbitantly interest rates for those who were able to borrow money .
 Irish gangs gained advantage by allying themselves with political figures . Unhampered by a language barrier and experienced in politics in their homeland, the gangs gained advantages by allaying themselves with politicians .
 As gang leaders grew more wealthy, politicians came seeking favors, politicians sought favors . But as the gang leaders became more powerful, politicians began seeking favors from them .
 American groups such as the Women’s Christian Temperance Union and the Anti-Saloon League lobbied Congress and state legislatures to prohibit the manufacture and sale of distilled spirits .
 With many male voters off serving in the military and with the emotional exhaustion and moral primness following World War I, their dream became reality . Finally, with many men off serving, the idea was realized .
 In December 1917, Congress passed the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution, prohibiting the sale of intoxicating beverages . By January 1919, the necessary thirty-six of the forty-eight states had ratified the amendment .
 In October 1919, Congress passed the Volstead Act, which created the government bureaucracy needed to enforce the Eighteenth Amendment . President Woodrow Wilson vetoed the act overriding the veto of President Wilson's veto of the act .
 Bootleggers bought a quart of quality Scotch at sea for $4, then diluted it into three quarts selling for as much as $40 a bottle . Three quarts sold for up to $40 per bottle .
 That was just the beginning of an era that witnessed rapid decay of public morality, disrespect for law, and the rise of a gigantic criminal empire that remains with us today . The rise of the criminal empire is still a problem that remains today .
 Americans saw law-enforcement powers slowly shift from local officials to the national government . Americans saw the growing power of this criminal empire, the author says .
 Illegal booze was smuggled into the United States in every conceivable manner and from every conceivable point . It was offloaded from ships to small powerboats that moved out of remote bays almost at will . The U.S. has been hit hard by a steady stream of illegal booze since the
 Joseph P Kennedy, patriarch of the Kennedy clan, may have turned to bootlegging . Joseph Kennedy was an honest businessman who turned to alcohol . He was known for his involvement in bootleggies .
 It has been widely rumored that the elder Kennedy got started on the road to riches by importing illegal booze . His business papers are still kept locked away in Boston’s John F Kennedy Library .
 As soon as Prohibition ended, Kennedy immediately was in the Scotch, gin, and rum business . This allegation is supported by the fact that he founded a firm called Somerset Importers .
 Prohibition’s most ardent supporters were forced to concede that it simply didn’t work . Even Prohibition supporters admit that Prohibition simply didn't work .
 If enough people want a commodity, others will find a way to get it to them . It's not just a commodity: It's a commodity that can be traded for a price .
 The price of alcohol prohibition was too steep . The price was too high for the political and legal system, the power wielded by criminal gangs, the gangs .
 Each state created its own liquor authority, opening up new avenues for bribery and payoffs . After national Prohibition ended, each state created own liquor authorities, opening new avenues .
 As America’s fortunes soared between 1910 and 1929, so did those of the gangs, particularly those with farsight leadership . The gangs were responsible for the rise of America's fortunes .
 Rothstein grew from a small-time gambler to one of the most powerful men in the city . Nicknamed “The Brain,” Rothstein became a powerful New York City businessman .
 Rothstein eventually became the largest supplier of illegal booze in the East . Rothstein initially refrained from bootlegging, but eventually became known for bootlegging .
 He began to move in respectable circles, rubbing elbows with city and state officials . He is now a successful businessman and businessman .
 Charles "Lucky" Luciano arranged a "peace" by having Masseria murdered on April 15, 1931, in a Coney Island restaurant . Luciano had Masseria killed in 1931 .
 He created a commission of bosses and organized the old Mafia families into a national crime syndicate . He finally realized the dream of merging the criminal gangs . Instead of merging gangs, he organized a national syndicate of criminals .
 Luciano began to move control of crime away from the traditional Italian and Sicilian families . Luciano moved crime control away from traditional Italian or Sicilian family .
 Meyer Lansky, Legs Diamond, Dutch Schultz, and Benjamin “Bugsy” Siegel were among those slowly being admitted to policy meetings .
 One of the most far-reaching events in the history of organized crime came during World War II when Lucky Luciano became partners with the U.S. government . Lucky Goes to War Next to Prohibition .
 Luciano never gave up his original means of making money and it proved his undoing . Luciano was known for his role in prostitution, but it was his downfall .
 The friendly bootleggers of yesterday became the friendly black marketers of today, supplying nylons, new cars, gasoline coupons, tires, food ration stamps, and even military commissions and discharges .
 Gangsters simply obtained real ones from corrupt officials within the Office of Price Administration . The semi-volunteer organization counted among its young lawyers an aspiring politician from California, Richard M Nixon .
 Charles G “Bebe” Rebozo became rich in the automobile-tire business during the war . Bebe was close friends with Nixon through the years .
 The first year of war for the U.S. Navy was 1942 . The Navy was in the middle of the war in the early years of World War II .
 The former French liner Normandie caught fire and rolled over in its North River moorings on November 9, 1942 . In March of that year alone, twenty-four American ships had been sunk by German U-boats .
 Vito Genovese later attributed to mobster who returned to Italy during the war and supported dictator Benito Mussolini . It was plainly an act of sabotage .
 Naval intelligence was convinced that information about ship convoys was being transmitted to the Axis by longshoremen of German and Italian extraction .
 U.S. military officers decided to contact the mob for help after years of neglect in the intelligence field . The mob responded to the request for help .
 Lieutenant Commander Charles Radcliffe Haffenden opened an unobtrusive office in Manhattan’s Astor Hotel, where he met with mob figures . He quickly opened an office in the Astor hotel, where mob figures were met .
 The Navy appealed to Manhattan district attorney Thomas E Dewey to put them in touch with Mafia leaders . The Navy has appealed to the district attorney to get them in contact .
 Dewey investigator, Murray Gurfein, contacted Mafia boss Joseph "Socks" Lanza as a first step .
 Lanza immediately went to gangster Meyer Lansky, who had helped guide Luciano in organizing the national crime syndicate . Lanza went to work with Lansky after Luciano's death .
 Lansky, sensing an opportunity to increase his prestige with the syndicate, met with Commander Haffenden and promised to get Luciano’s support . Lansky was able to get the support of Luciano .
 When U.S. forces landed in Sicily, Mafia men were waiting to show them the location of German positions and safe routes through minefields . The Mafia men showed them how to get through the minefields in Sicily .
 He began to bring his formidable organizational abilities to worldwide crime . He was known for his formidable organization abilities .
 Later that year, he turned up in Havana, Cuba, where Lansky was busy consolidating his gambling and prostitution business . Lansky turned up later that year in Havana .
 American authorities warned the Cubans that medical supplies would be shut off if Luciano was allowed to remain . However, American authorities have warned the Cuban government that supplies will be turned off if he stays .
 Luciano organized an international narcotics syndicate that remains in operation today . Luciano returned to Italy, where he began organizing a drug syndicate .
 Official awareness of organized crime dates back to a conference of law enforcement officials called together by United States attorney general J Howard McGrath in 1950 .
 Officials from New Orleans, Dallas, and other cities testified to the brutal takeover of crime in their areas . New Orleans and Dallas officials testified in court .
 Kerner was convicted in 1973 of accepting $150,000 in bribes from horse-racing interests . In 1973, Kerner accepted $150K from horse racing interests .
 One of the results of the 1950 conference was the creation of a Select Senate Committee to probe organized crime . The committee was sponsored by Tennessee senator Estes Kefauver .
 The Kefauver Committee hearings provided much more public knowledge about the national crime syndicate . The hearings lasted well into 1951 and provided much public knowledge of the syndicate.
 Kerner and McGrath had maintained that no crime syndicate existed . Kefauver and his committee provided the evidence that it did . FBI director J Edgar Hoover had maintained there was no syndicate .
 The committee found that organized, professional gambling and book-making was widespread throughout the nation . It also found that the narcotics industry was a “highly organized crime” and that the mob had infiltrated legitimate businesses .
 It also showed the amount of official corruption the syndicate needed to flourish . The syndicate is believed to be the largest in the country's history .
 Beverly Club was found to be owned by Phil Kastel, Frank Costello, Jake Lansky and Jake Marcello . The Beverly Club is owned by a local Mafia leader, Carlos Marcella .
 Carlos Marcello was born in 1910, the child of Sicilian parents living in Tunisia . He was born to a Sicilian mother living in Tunis .
 At that time, the leader of the Mafia in New Orleans was Charles Montranga . The Mafia was active in the city during the 1960s .
 In 1922, Montranga was succeeded by one of his lieutenants, Sam Carolla .
 Carolla became a bootlegger during Prohibition and consolidated the mob’s control of New Orleans . Carolla was a member of the mob's New Orleans Mafia .
 In 1932, Carolla was convicted of shooting a federal agent and was sent to prison, where he continued to run his crime organization . He was convicted in 1932 of shooting federal agent .
 Carolla supplied a young associate to run the new gambling operation—Carlos Marcello . Carolla even supplied the young associate who runs the gambling operation .
 By 1947, Carolla and Marcello had expanded their gambling operations to include a racetrack, wire service, and several casinos . Costello and Lansky helped expand their gambling operation .
 That year, Carolla was deported to Sicily and despite two illegal trips back, his control over New Orleans passed to Marcello . Carolla's control of New Orleans was transferred to Sicily that year .
 Marcello claimed he made only about $1,600 a month as a tomato salesman . By 1963, the New Orleans Metropolitan Crime Commission estimated his empire to range into the hundreds of millions of dollars .
 Much of Marcello’s earnings had been put under the names of close relatives, hiding his true worth . Much of his earnings were hidden under the name of close family .
 Marcello’s national crime contacts included Costello, Joe Civello of Dallas, Sam Yaras of Chicago, Mickey Cohen of Los Angeles . Santos Trafficante Sr. identified by the Kefauver Committee as Tampa's leading mobster . Marcella’
 Marcello held only a Guatemalan passport obtained allegedly by bribes . The U.S. government had unsuccessfully tried unsuccessfully to deport him . Since the Kefauver Committee hearings, the United States government had previously tried to deport the man .
 In the spring of 1961, Marcello found he was facing a new, and much tougher, government opponent than in the past . In 1961, he found himself facing a much tougher government .
 Marcello was handcuffed and driven to Moisant International Airport on direct orders from the new U.S. attorney general, Robert F Kennedy . He was arrested at the New Orleans airport on orders from Kennedy .
 He was flown 1,200 miles to Guatemala City, where he was dumped without luggage and with little cash . He was dumped with little luggage and little cash, leaving him without luggage .
 Marcello was forced to leave Guatemala because of the ensuing political uproar . He somehow found his way back to Miami after being forced to flee .
 House Select Committee on Assassinations chief counsel G Robert Blakey claimed wiretaps showed Marcello was flown back to the United States by a Dominican Republic Air Force plane . However, others claim he was flown home by pilot David Ferrie .
 Marcello managed to stay in the United States. Although still fighting deportation, he managed to remain in the U.S.
 Sicilian pride must have been greatly injured at Kennedy’s unceremonious actions . Kennedy was the first person to carry out the assassination .
 Marcello reportedly made threats against the attorney general . It was not long after that he reportedly threatened to kill the AG .
 Edward Becker, a Las Vegas promoter and corporate “corporate “investigator,” was present at a meeting in September 1962, at Marcello’s New Orleans, New Orleans .
 Becker said at the mention of Kennedy’s name, Marcello became angry and stated, “Don’t worry about that little Bobby son-of-a-bitch.” Becker said . Becker said when the mention was made of Kennedy's name,
 Marcello described President Kennedy as a dog and Bobby Kennedy as the tail of a tail . He described the Kennedys as dogs and tail . Marcella described the Kennedy family as dogs .
 The dog will keep biting you if you only cut off its tail, but cut off the head and the dog will die, tail and all . Cut off the dog's head and it will die if you cut it off the tail, not the head .
 The analogy was clear—with John Kennedy out of the way, his brother and attorney general Bobby Kennedy’s war on crime would come to an end . Bobby Kennedy's brother Bobby Kennedy was the attorney general who was responsible for the Kennedy administration .
 Marcello said he would use a “nut” for the job, someone who could be manipulated so that the killing could not be traced back to him . The killing could be a murder of a "nut," he said .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations determined that there were many connections between Marcello and the JFK assassination . The committee also determined that Marcella’s associate in Dallas, Joe Civello, was close with Jack Ruby, Jack Ruby and Jack Oswald .
 Lee Harvey Oswald arrived in New Orleans a few months after Marcello’s reported threat . Oswald was just months after the incident, Oswald was killed in the city of New Orleans .
 In the early 1980s, Marcello was convicted in a sting known as Operation Brilab . He was convicted of murder in the 1980s in a case that led to his conviction .
 While operating under cover, one of the FBI agents involved, Michael F Wacks, had grown close to Marcello . Wacks was a former FBI agent who worked under cover .
 Wacks said despite the distance in time, Marcello could not hide his hatred for the Kennedys . Wacks: Despite the distance from time, he still hated the family of the late president .
 Marcello died in March 1993 after being debilitated by strokes as well as advancing Alzheimer’s . He died in 1993 .
 Earlier that year, Frank Costello, Luciano’s successor, was shot while entering his Manhattan apartment . Luciano was shot in the head at the time of his death .
 He lived but was charged with tax evasion after a note was found on him listing receipts from the Tropicana Hotel in developing Las Vegas . The note listed receipts from a recently built hotel in the city of Las Vegas, Nevada .
 On hand was a collection of almost every leader of the crime syndicate . On hand, almost every member of the syndicate was in attendance .
 The purpose of the meeting was to demand that Genovese be named “boss of all bosses” after he justified the attacks on Costello and Anastasia . The meeting, according to later testimony of some of those present, was later called a meeting .
 One argument presented was that Anastasia had tried to move in on the gambling operations of Santos Trafficante Jr. of Florida . One argument was that she tried to try to move into the Cuban gambling operations .
 Police roadblocks and searches of surrounding woods netted fifty-nine of the crime leaders . Most of them claimed they had come to visit a sick friend, most of them said they were visiting a sick .
 Carlos Marcello had wisely sent a surrogate while others, such as Sam Giancana of Chicago, escaped . Carlos Marcelo sent his surrogate, while others such a surrogate escaped .
 It was the first public look at organized crime since the Kefauver Committee hearings in the early 1950s . The hearings were held in New York City .
 Robert Kennedy became most concerned with the mob’s takeover of labor unions . Kennedy was aware of the serious threat posed by the mob's syndicate .
 On January 30, 1957, the United States Senate unanimously created the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field . The committee became known as the McClellan Committee after its chairman, senator John L McClellllan of Arkansas .
 One member of the McClellan Committee was a young senator from Boston, John F Kennedy . One of the members of the committee is a young Senator from Boston .
 Kennedy later said his brother wanted him on the committee to keep it from being overloaded with conservative, ant-abor people . Kennedy said he wanted him to keep the committee from becoming overloaded with conservatives .
 Both Kennedys were highly active in the committee’s work . The committee first took on the corrupt leader of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Dave Beck .
 Beck was convicted in a state court of larceny and then convicted of tax evasion in federal court . Beck was also convicted in state and federal courts . Beck has been convicted in federal and state courts in both cases .
 With Beck gone, the presidency of the Teamsters Union went to Jimmy Hoffa . Hoffa was the president of the union's largest union .
 Hoffa was indicted for attempting to bribe commission attorney John Cye Cheasty . Even before he could be brought before the McClellan Committee, he was charged with bribery .
 At his trial, the FBI showed a film of the men conversing and Hoffa being arrested right after the money was exchanged . Hoffa was arrested after the film was shown at his trial .
 Hoffa said he had a faulty memory when it came to most questions concerning his association with underworld characters, such as Paul Dorfman . Hoffa: 'I'm not sure why I was involved in the underworld'
 Dorfman also was connected to Jack Ruby, the man who silenced Lee Harvey Oswald . Dorfman was also connected to a young Jack Ruby in the days before Ruby silenced Oswald .
 Dorfman’s stepson, Allen Dorfman, was to play a major role in Hoffa loans to the underworld using the Teamsters’ Central States Health and Welfare Fund as well as the Pension Fund . Dorfman's stepson played a major part in the loans to
 In 1951, Hoffa persuaded the welfare fund’s two trustees to place the fund with a newly formed branch of Union Casualty Agency . Hoffa's successor, Frank Fitzsimmons, was one of the trustees of the fund .
 Union Casualty was owned by Paul Dorfman’s stepson, Allen, and the elder Dorfman's wife, Rose . Allen and Rose Dorfman were married to Paul, Paul's stepson and Rose's stepdaughter, Allen .
 Hoffa also sent the Central States Pension Fund to the Dorfmancontrolled agency . Later Hoffa sent the funds to the agency .
 Two funds made up 90 percent of the company’s contracts, according to author Dan Moldea . The funds were used to fund the company's operations .
 Veteran mob observers have established the close ties between Hoffa and two other underworld chieftains—Carlos Marcello and Santos Trafficante Jr. The mobster is said to be one of the most powerful men in the underworld .
 As early as 1933, Meyer Lansky had obtained gambling concessions in Cuba, located just ninety miles off the Florida coast . Lansky was the mob’s financial wizard, Lansky .
 Lansky had originally visited Cuba seeking molasses to make rum . Lansky discovered a suitable political climate for gambling operations there .
 Lansky opened several casinos in Cuba during the Batista era . Lansky was a friend of the dictator of Cuba, Fulgencio Batista .
 World War II brought a halt to his plans for turning the island into a haven for gamblers . But the island was never taken over by the war .
 There simply weren’t enough planes and boats available to make the project profitable . There simply wasn't enough planes to make it profitable .
 In 1944, the Cuban economy was sagging and Batista was forced to make concessions to his political opponents, which included procommunists . Batista made concessions to the pro-communist Cuban government .
 The Office of Naval Intelligence asked Lansky to pressure Batista into stepping down, according to an investigative reporter . Lansky was already in contact with Lucky Luciano through Lansky, the reporter says .
 On Lansky’s urging, Batista called an election, was defeated, and left Cuba for an eight-year exile in Florida . Batista was defeated in the election, and later exiled to Florida .
 On March 10, 1952, Batista returned to Cuba and seized power in a bloodless military coup . Batista's government was overthrown in a bloody coup in 1952 .
 Reportedly, it was large amounts of money Lansky placed in numbered Swiss bank accounts that convinced Cuban President Carlos Prio Socarras not to resist Batista’s comeback .
 Batista’s government agreed to match investments in Cuba dollar for dollar plus grant a gambling license to any establishment worth more than $1 million . Under Lansky, Cuba was given gambling licenses worth over $1million .
 Soon the island’s economy was booming as hotels and casinos were quickly built . The island was quickly built as a tourist destination .
 He and other associates had interest in Sevilla Biltmore and the Havana Hilton . He and others had interests in the Sevilla and Havana Hilton properties .
 Lansky himself built the $14 million Hotel Havana Riviera . The hotel was run by Dino and Eddie Cellini, organized-crime figures from Ohio .
 Lansky, a Jew, still was not considered an official member of the Italian Mafia—dominated American crime syndicate . Lansky was considered a Jew but not considered a member of an official Italian Mafia .
 Trafficante Sr. died in 1954, his family crime business went to his namesake . Trafficante's crime business was mostly narcotics trafficking and gambling . He died in 1953 .
 Trafficante Jr. was well situated in Cuba, owning substantial interest in Sans Souci, a renowned nightspot . John Roselli, later a central figure in the CIA-Mafia plots against Castro, was a key figure .
 Trafficante and Lansky also were part owners of the Tropicana Casino in Havana . The casino was managed by former Dallas gambler Lewis McWillie, the ‘idol’ of Jack Ruby .
 Meyer Lansky and Bugsy Siegel used the same tactics they had used successfully in 1945 when they turned a dusty parcel of Nevada desert into the Las Vegas strip . They flew in high rollers to stay at their hotelcasinos .
 Other men who had gambling interests in Cuba during this time were connected to Teamster boss Jimmy Hoffa . Other men involved in Cuba gambling interests were also connected to Hoffa's Teamster .
 Moldea wrote that Granello and Plumeri were splitting kickbacks with Hoffa on loans made through the Central States Pension Fund . Moldea also wrote that at the time Granello . Granello, Plumeris and Hoffa split kickbacks on loans .
 Congressman Richard Nixon made frequent trips to the island, visiting President Batista and the casinos . Nixon was a high-placed guest in Cuba at the time .
 Havana's glamorous nightlife came to an abrupt end on New Year’s Day 1959 . Fidel Castro entered the city and proclaimed a new Cuban revolution .
 Lansky later lamented that he caught one of the last planes leaving Havana and was forced to leave behind $17 million in cash that had been earmarked for his partners via Swiss bank accounts . Lansky had earmarked the cash for his various partners via Switzerland bank accounts.
 Jake Lansky, left behind to hold together his brother’s gambling and narcotics operations, was jailed by Castro along with Santos Trafficante . Lansky was jailed along with Trafficante along with Lansky's brother .
 Castro loudly proclaimed, “I’m going to run all these fascist mobsters, all these American gangsters, out of Cuba’s Cuba.” Castro said he was going to “run all the fascist mobster, all the American gangster out of
 He had deported all syndicate members, closed the whorehouses and casinos, and shut down the drug labs, he says .
 Both the crime syndicate and some American government officials were appalled at this turn of events . Both crime syndicates and the government were appalled by the events .
 The CIA had used the underworld’s Havana casinos to hide payments to crime figures it sometimes employed . The CIA particularly wanted something done since, according to sources quoted by journalist Howard Kohn .
 A murky alliance developed between the CIA, the crime syndicate, the U.S. military, and anti-Castro Cuban exiles . This alliance produced the ill-fated Bay of Pigs Invasion .
 Four ex-casino bosses supplied the CIA with intelligence reports gathered from trusted Cuban contacts, including Hoffa associates Salvatore Granello and James Plumeri .
 There were concurrent schemes to assassinate Castro . Plans to invade Cuba and assassinate Castro were also discussed .
 Trafficante, Frank Sturgis, Robert Maheu, John Roselli and Sam “Momo” Giancana were involved in the plots . Trafficante was Trafficante and two Mafia chiefs, Sam "Momo" Giancano .
 With the failure of the invasion, the mob joined with the CIA, the military, and the Cuban exiles in placing the blame squarely on President Kennedy .
 Trafficante was in touch with a wealthy Cuban exile living in Miami named Jose Aleman, according to evidence gathered by the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Trafficante and Aleman were involved in the Cuban exile in Miami .
 Aleman said he met Trafficante at Miami’s ScottBryant Hotel in September 1962 . Aleman: "The talk turned to Hoffa" Aleman says Trafficante met with Trafficante in Miami in 1962 .
 Trafficante: "You don't understand me. You don’t understand me" Aleman said when he disagreed, saying Kennedy was doing a good job and probably would be reelected . Trafficante replied, “I don't think you understand me”
 Trafficante says Aleman was an informant for the FBI at the time of this alleged conversation . Trafficante: Aleman is an FBI informant . Aleman, who Trafficante alleged to have been an informant, was an FBI agent .
 He promptly reported what he had heard to the FBI but said FBI officials would not listen or take him seriously . He said he reported the incident to the bureau but said it was not taken seriously .
 Aleman testified before the House Select Committee on Assassinations in 1978 . In 1978, long after JFK’s successful assassination, Aleman's story became vague .
 Trafficante meant Kennedy was going to be “hit” by a lot of Republican votes in 1964, he said . Trafficante said Kennedy would be ‘hit’ by Republican votes . He said perhaps Trafficante’s comments were a good sign for Kennedy’
 Bobby Kennedy and the Teamster leader were at the center of a personal war between the two men . Bobby Kennedy was the leader of the union, but the union leader was the most powerful man in the union .
 James Riddle Hoffa was born on February 14, 1913, in Brazil, Indiana . The War on Hoffa is based on the work of Hoffa . Hoffa died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 After the death of his father when he was seven, young Hoffa moved to Detroit with his mother, brother, and two sisters . Hoffa's father died at the age of seven and he was raised by his mother .
 Angered over low pay and working conditions at Kroger Food Company, Hoffa helped organize a work stoppage . Hoffa was angry at low pay, working conditions and low conditions .
 After several days of negotiation, the company signed a one-page contract . The contract was signed by the company after several days .
 It was the start of a one-company union . The union was affiliated with the American Federation of Labor .
 Hoffa’s fledgling union was absorbed by bigger organizations . By the mid-1930s, Hoffa's fledgling union had been absorbed by larger organizations .
 After being fired by Kroger, he joined Detroit Teamsters Joint Council 43 as an organizer and negotiator . He joined the union after being fired from Kroger .
 In the early 1930s, Hoffa had a love affair with Sylvia Pigano, a woman with family connections to organized-crime figures . Hoffa was married to a woman who had ties to organized crime figures .
 This was Hoffa’s introduction to the underworld, which over the years became an invaluable source of support . Hoffa: “Over the years, the underworld became an integral part of my life. This was my introduction to my life," he said .
 Hoffa's rise to the presidency of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters continued unabated . From that point on Hoffa’s rise to become a union president, his rise to power continued .
 He walked a thin line, maintaining contacts with mobsters on one hand and presenting the image of a respectable labor leader on the other . He was a labor leader in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In 1957, Robert Kennedy exposed Teamster president Dave Beck’s embezzlement of union money . Kennedy turned his sights on Jimmy Hoffa, the successor of Dave Beck .
 After the committee hearings, Hoffa was acquitted on charges of wiretapping and perjury . He was acquitted of the charges .
 He was living a charmed life, but his hatred for Kennedy was increasing . His hatred for the president was increasing, he said .
 If the mob so desired, it could have pressured Hoffa into calling a nationwide Teamsters strike that could have disrupted the entire country . The mob could have pushed Hoffa to call a nationwide strike .
 When the election year of 1960 arrived, Hoffa knew which side he had to be on . Hoffa was a member of the Democratic Party, not the Republican Party .
 In 1958, U.S. attorney general William P Rogers had formed a special group on organized crime to investigate Vito Genevese’s Appalachian meeting of mob bosses . The group was formed to investigate the meeting .
 Attorney General Kennedy organized a special unit within the Organized Crime and Racketeering Section to investigate the Teamsters Union . Following that precedent, the Department of Justice organized a team of investigators .
 On May 18, 1962, Hoffa was indicted for receiving $1 million in illegal payments through the Test Fleet Corporation . The company was set up under his wife’s name . Hoffa received the money through his wife's company .
 Hoffa was indicted along with five others for jury tampering on May 9, 1963 . His trial ended in a hung jury, but he was indicted . Hoffa's trial in 1963 ended in hung jury .
 On June 4, 1963, Hoffa was indicted for fraudulently obtaining $20 million in loans from the Teamsters’ Central States Pension Fund . Hoffa is accused of defrauding the fund from the union .
 The second involved shooting Kennedy with a rifle while he rode in an open car . Kennedy was shot in the head while he was riding in a car . The second incident involved a car crash .
 It was in the middle of Hoffa’s jury-tampering case that President Kennedy was shot in Dallas . President Kennedy died in Dallas, Texas .
 In the jury-tampering and the fraudulent-loan cases Hoffa was convicted, fined, and imprisoned . In the fraudulent loan cases, he was convicted and fined . He was imprisoned .
 He received executive clemency from President Richard Nixon on December 23, 1971, without the customary consultation with the sentencing judge . President Nixon made the move in 1971 without the usual consultation of the judge .
 Clemency contained a provision prohibiting Hoffa from seeking office in the union . However, clemency included a provision that prohibited him from running for office in union .
 Hoffa filed suit to have the restriction nullified and began making overtures to Teamster rank and file . Hoffa then filed suit against the restriction to have it nullified .
 He pledged to purge Teamster union of all mob influence in 1976 . Ironically, he pledged that if elected Teamster president in 1976, he would purge union .
 On July 30, 1975, Hoffa was to meet Anthony "Tony Pro” Provenzano, a New Jersey Teamster official and reputed member of the crime syndicate . Hoffa: "I’m going to meet him. He’s going to
 Hoffa disappeared from a Detroit restaurant parking lot and was finally declared dead in 1982 . Hoffa was found dead in a parking lot in Detroit, Michigan . He was declared dead by authorities in 1982 after a car crash .
 An underworld tough serving a prison term in Atlanta for narcotics murdered a fellow inmate with an iron pipe . Robert Kennedy’s anticrime campaign was one of the biggest boosts to his anti-war efforts .
 The convict’s name was Joseph Valachi and he killed the man, believing him to be an assassin sent by his longtime boss and cellmate, Vito Genovese . Valachi believed the man to be a killer sent to him by his long-time cellmate .
 Genovese slipped back into the U.S. after World War II to resume his narcotics operations . He slipped into the United States after WWII to resume operations .
 Valachi believed a man in the prison courtyard was a Genovese killer, Valachi beat him to death . Valachi killed the man in a prison courtyard, believing the man was a killer .
 With both the government and the mob seeking his life, Valachi decided he had nothing to lose by cooperating with authorities . Valachi said he was killed by the mob .
 Over the next year, he provided federal agents with information on the national crime organization known variously as the Mafia, La Cosa Nostra, the Outfit, the Arm, the Syndicate, and so on .
 On September 25, 1963, Valachi took his story to the public, testifying before McClellan’s Senate committee . Valachi testified before the Senate committee on September 26, 1963 .
 He presented a wealth of detail about the organization of the mob, its codes, rules, and regulations, and its most important members, including those who sat on the “Commissione” the board of directors .
 Valachi’s testimony was a great embarrassment to FBI director J Edgar Hoover, who it was later learned was meeting with mob bosses at the time . Valachi's testimony was later revealed to have been an embarrassment to Hoover .
 Hoover grudgingly admitted that such a thing as a crime syndicate must exist . Hoover: "These revelations forced Hoover to admit that such an organization must exist"
 Kennedy made use of the Treasury Department’s Internal Revenue Service to go after mob members . Kennedy also used the IRS to investigate organized crime members .
 Crime bosses wanted something done about the Kennedys, especially since they felt double-crossed by the two brothers . Crime bosses felt they felt they had been double-betrayed .
 The connections between crime and crime and the Kennedys reportedly went back a long way . After all, the connections between the two families reportedly went long way. In the past, it has been hard to find out what happened .
 In 1927, a shipment of bootleg whiskey on its way from Ireland to Boston was hijacked in southern New England . The shipment was headed to Boston from Ireland and was hijacked .
 The hijackers were part of the Luciano-Lansky mob, and it was rumored that Joseph P Kennedy was involved in the shipment . Kennedy was rumored to be involved .
 Kennedy reputedly lost a fortune on the deal and was besieged by widows of the guards seeking financial assistance . Kennedy is said to have been besieged by widow's widows seeking financial help .
 Lansky later told biographers he was convinced that Kennedy held a grudge against him personally from that time on . Lansky said Kennedy had passed the hostility on to his sons . He said he believed Kennedy held the grudge on him personally .
 Crime author Ovid Damaris says Kennedy would likely have lost the state of Illinois . The state's overlarge voting in Cook County, home of Chicago mayor Richard Daley, was crucial to the 1960 election .
 Daley’s political machine blocked demands for an official recount . However, demands for a recount were blocked by Daley's political machine . Daley was elected mayor of Chicago in 2008 .
 Sam Giancana was the real power in Chicago at that time . He was a machine of power behind the Chicago machine . He says it was a "machine of power" behind the machine . The machine is now being used in Chicago .
 Sam Giancana was born May 24, 1908, to poor Sicilian immigrants living in Chicago . He was born in 1908 . He is one of the most famous actors in the world .
 Giancana was a member of a gang called the 42s . He was first convicted of car theft in 1925 . The gangster was convicted of stealing cars from 1925 .
 Before he was twenty, he was arrested in connection with three murders, including the slaying of Octavious Granady, a black man who sought election .
 Giancana became the personal driver for Ricca, who took over the Chicago syndicate after Frank Nitti's suicide in 1943 . Ricca took control of the syndicate in Chicago after the suicide of Frank NITTi in 1943, according to reports .
 Anthony Accardo took over as Chicago's syndicate boss in 1944 . Ricca went to prison for extortion in 1944, Accardo went on to take over as boss .
 Giancana helped Accardo consolidate the rackets and gambling operations in Chicago . Accardo's gambling operations helped him consolidate his gambling empire in Chicago, Illinois . Giancanella helped consolidate the gambling operations .
 In 1957, Giancana was one of those who escaped from Vito Genevese’s ill-fated Appalachian meeting . He was part of the group that escaped from the meeting in which he was killed .
 In 1960, when Accardo retired after an income tax—evasion indictment, Giancana took over the syndicate . Accardo took over in 1960 after he retired after income tax evasion indictment . In 1960 he took over Accardo's syndicate after his retirement .
 By 1963, Giancana had been arrested sixty times and had served time for burglary, auto theft, and moonshining . He was arrested 60 times, including for burglary and auto theft .
 He was one of the wealthiest and most powerful men in Chicago and in the syndicate . He was also one of Chicago's wealthiest men and in a powerful syndicate.
 After the death of his wife, Angeline, in 1954, Giancana became well-known as a ladies’ man . After his wife's death, he became well known for his ladies' man .
 Giancana met Phyllis McGuire, the youngest of the McGuire Sisters singing group, in Las Vegas in 1960 . The McGuire sisters sang together in the 1960s and '60s together . Giancanas was married to the late Gene Seymour, who later died in
 McGuire ran up gambling debts of more than $100,000 . McGuire had run up gambling debt of $100K, according to committee chief .
 Giancana secretly owned interest in Desert Inn and Stardust casinos in Las Vegas . Both were nominally owned by Morris ‘Moe’ Dalitz, who was nominally in charge of the casinos . The casinos were owned by McGuire, who also owned the Desert Inn
 Giancana made his Las Vegas headquarters at the nearby Green Gables Ranch . The ranch was leased by McGuire, who owns it .
 Giancana and other mob leaders thought they had bought some relief from growing government awareness and prosecution of the syndicate . FBI director Hoover, who continued to deny the existence of the Mafia, and mob figures such as Roy Cohn and Frank Costello .
 In addition to meeting mob leader Joseph Bonanno, Kennedy reportedly received campaign contributions from the syndicate channeled to his father by singer Frank Sinatra . Kennedy reportedly got campaign contributions by Sinatra in the winter 1959 .
 Yet another conduit for these funds may have been a woman with connections to both Kennedy and Giancana . She may have used her connections with both Kennedy .
 Evidence of contributions to Kennedy were picked up by FBI phone taps that were part of an electronic surveillance program initiated by Attorney General Robert Kennedy's war on crime .
 Giancana believed he had a strong hold on Kennedy in the form of a beautiful dark-eyed brunette named Judith Exner . Exner was a beautiful, dark-haired brunette .
 Exner said she was introduced to John F Kennedy on February 7, 1960, by Frank Sinatra, whom she had been dating . Exner was then known as Judy Campbell, going then as Judy .
 In her 1977 book, My Story, she wrote that both John Kennedy and his brother Edward were sitting with Sinatra in the lounge of the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas .
 The bureau had been monitoring Exner’s activities because of the other man in her life—Chicago mob boss Giancana . Exner had been monitored by the FBI because of her relationship with Giancano .
 Exner claimed she was introduced to Giancana, again by Sinatra, a month after she had become Kennedy’s lover . Exner said Sinatra introduced her to the singer a month before Kennedy's death .
 When Giancana discovered she was seeing the Democratic presidential candidate, he took an immediate and continuing interest in her . The couple has been dating for two years .
 In later years, Exner said, “I feel like I was set up to be the courier.” Exner says he feels like he is set up as a courier . Exner: "I feel . like I'm going to be a good guy"
 In 1988, Exner revealed that she had acted as a courier carrying sealed envelopes for the two men on at least ten occasions . What passed between Kennedy and Giancana in this extraordinary triangle is not known, but in 1988 she revealed she had carried envelopes .
 She said she did not tell about the envelopes during 1975 testimony to the Senate Intelligence Committee because she feared for her life . The envelopes were enveloped in envelopes, she said .
 She also claimed that she never opened the envelopes or knew their contents . She also said she never knew the contents .
 Most of her courier activities took place during the tough 1960 campaign . Exner speculated that her actions may have been connected with attempts to influence the critical West Virginia Democratic primary .
 Exner complained to Kennedy after being questioned by FBI agents . Kennedy was president at the time of the incident .
 Kennedy continued to see Exner until a meeting with J Edgar Hoover on March 22, 1962 . Kennedy met with Hoover in March 1962 .
 Hoover revealed to the president the extent of Exner’s ties with organized crime . Hoover also revealed the obvious fact that he knew about Kennedy's liaison with her .
 Judith Exner called Hoover after he left the White House . Exner had a final White House call with Hoover shortly after his departure .
 Kennedy also broke off his friendship with Sinatra, perhaps suspecting that the singer had set him up . Kennedy broke off friendship with the singer, perhaps because he suspected he was set up .
 Giancana became suspicious that Phyllis McGuire was seeing comedian Dan Rowan . Although still seeing Exner, she became suspicious of McGuire's relationship with Rowan.
 Giancana asked his contact with the CIA, Robert Maheu, to place a wiretap on Rowan’s telephone, but a maid discovered the tap and told Rowan . Rowan brought it to the attention of the federal government .
 Justice Department initiated proceedings against Maheu for illegal wiretapping . Justice Department says it was illegal to wiretap the man .
 CIA officials asked Robert Kennedy not to prosecute Maheu for fear that Giancana's role in the incident would become known . In May 1962, a month after the Kennedy-Hoover meeting, the president’s relationship with Exner .
 They reminded Kennedy that Giancana had played a role in the clandestine effort against Castro’s government . They reminded him of his role in clandestine effort .
 Thinking the plots against Castro had been stopped back in 1961, Robert Kennedy was adamant about pressing charges . Robert Kennedy pressed charges against Castro .
 CIA had contracted with Giancana and John Roselli to murder Fidel Castro . CIA general counsel Lawrence Houston finally told Kennedy the truth on May 7 .
 Both Kennedys feared what Sam Giancana might reveal if he chose . From that moment on, both feared what he might reveal was the CIA-Mafia murder plots and the president's girl in bed with the president .
 The younger Kennedy was the target of Giancana's Mafia big shots . However, this fear did not stop the younger Kennedy from prosecuting his war against the Mafia .
 The FBI haunted Giancana day and night, watching his home and trailing his car . The FBI said it was watching him day after he was killed . The man was found guilty of killing himself and his family .
 Crime associates wouldn't come near and Giancana couldn't go where he pleased . Crime associates would’t come near . Giancanella was a hitman in the 1980s .
 In June 1963, Giancana became the first mobster ever to go to court seeking an injunction against FBI surveillance . Giancrani was the first to ask for an injunction on FBI surveillance in 1963 . The mobster is credited with bringing down the FBI .
 Gaining the injunction required Giancana to swear in court that he was an honest businessman, which in tum would expose him to government cross-examination . It was unprecedented hazard for a crime boss to face cross examination .
 Giancana must have felt confident that the government would not question him too closely . The government will not question the Italian government too closely, he said . He said he was confident that he would not be questioned by the government .
 The government waived the right to cross-examination in the case . To a stunned courtroom, the U.S. attorney announced that the decision .
 The decision not to question Giancana had come straight from the attorney general . The decision was made from the Attorney General's office, he says .
 Following Kennedy’s assassination, Giancana was deposed as a Mafia boss and went into exile in Mexico . He was later deposed and went to live in exile in the country .
 Mexican authorities deported Giancana back to the U.S. in mid1974 . However, the Mexican authorities arrested and deported him back to Mexico in 1974 .
 On June 19, 1975, just before he was to testify to a Senate committee about CIA and Mafia assassination plots, his police protection was suddenly called away . Someone slipped into his home and shot him in the back, rolled the body over, and then shot him six times in the face
 Even when the opportunity to get Giancana was dropped, the Kennedy Justice Department’s all-out war against the underworld continued .
 On November 22, 1963, Attorney General Kennedy met with about forty of his Organized Crime and Racketeering Section staff . The meeting took place in New York City .
 One of the young crime busters was G Robert Blakey, who years later would become chief counsel of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, created to investigate the murders of John and Robert Kennedy . Blakey would go on to be the chief counsel for the committee .
 The last topic of discussion was Sam Giancana and political corruption in Chicago . Just before they broke for lunch, the last topic was the last time they had lunch .
 Hoover went on to give a fairly full account of Lee Harvey Oswald and his background at a time when the Dallas authorities were not even certain of their suspect’s identity . Hoover gave the full account at the time of the Dallas shooting .
 Kennedy never met with the Organized Crime and Racketeering Section again . Kennedy was never charged with any crime related crimes .
 Organized crime was ecstatic, but on FBI wiretaps, older and wiser mob leaders urged caution in speaking about the assassination . Older mob leaders wanted caution in discussing the assassination of Sen. Robert Kennedy III .
 In the years since the assassination, more and more attention has been drawn to the mob as one of the most likely suspects . The mob has been a major suspect in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Crime figures keep cropping up throughout the assassination case . Jack Ruby, David Ferrie, Jim Braden and David Braden all involved in case .
 There is no question that organized crime had the means, motive, and the opportunity to murder the president . Organized crime had a motive and means for the murder of the president, CNN's John Sutter says .
 It now appears that the wishes of the crime bosses to eliminate the Kennedys were echoed by certain powerful men in government, finance, and corporate business .
 One reason no one realized organized crime’s involvement [for many years] was that people never saw before . . what was going on in Cuba, he says . "People never saw [organized crime] involvement in Cuba," he adds .
 Jack Ruby's "mentor" to Jack Ruby failed to see the significance of men like Lewis McWillie and Russell Matthews, a Dallas gambler friend of Ruby’s who was best man at the wedding of “babushka lady” Beverly Oliver and gang
 Following his brother’s death, Robert Kennedy appeared to lose interest in prosecuting the mob . The Justice Department staff followed suit, following suit .
 The attorney general’s passion for fighting the mob likely was due more to the potential revelations of CIA-Mafia assassination plots . While there must have been motivation to protect his brother's loving-husband image .
 Since the first conflicts of man, there has been a need for intelligence, or information on the activities and purposes of a perceived enemy . Agents have been involved in the creation of the U.S. since the first wars .
 In modern America the growth of myriad intelligence organizations over the years has spawned an intelligence industry . The growth of the intelligence industry has spawned a huge intelligence industry.
 Under acronyms such as CIA, DIA, NSA, ONI, NRO, AFOSI, DEA, and NGA, these intelligence power bases have grown far beyond their original charters .
 Many are concerned that these disparate agencies, with the exception of the military, are now bundled together within the Department of Homeland Security . The military is the only exception .
 The Central Intelligence Agency is a government organization that does much more than merely collect and interpret intelligence . The agency's history reveals that it does more than just collect intelligence . It's a government agency that does not only collect intelligence but also interpret it .
 In less than ten years after its creation in 1947, this coordinating agency grew to oversee military operations, destabilization efforts in foreign countries, and assassination of national leaders . The agency was aided by an unholy alliance with organized crime .
 At the end of World War II, information on a wide variety of issues and activities was being handled by as many as a dozen intelligence organizations, including those within the military .
 President Harry S Truman and others perceived a need for a coordinating intelligence unit . Truman saw the need for an intelligence unit in order to protect the nation's interests .
 Congressional Joint Committee on the Pearl Harbor Attack concluded that the fragmentation of U.S. intelligence prior to 1941 resulted in the Japanese taking this nation by surprise . This need was further reinforced by the need for intelligence in the United States .
 None of the existing intelligence units wanted to relinquish power or authority . None of these intelligence units would relinquish their authority, officials say .
 During World War II, the Office of Strategic Services proved most effective against the Axis powers . It was headed by General William “Wild Bill” Donovan . Donovan was one of the most colorful in the war .
 The OSS gathered a remarkable amount of information on the enemy, but also engaged in various covert activities . OSS was a major intelligence agency in the U.S.
 The operation provided the factual background for many a fictional spy novel and movie . It was a rough-and-tumble wartime operation that provided the historical background .
 The OSS was closed down at the end of the war, and on January 22, 1946, President Truman signed a directive creating the National Intelligence Authority .
 The operating arm of the NIA was the Central Intelligence Group, made up of veteran intelligence officers from the participating departments .
 Truman specifically prohibited any clandestine or paramilitary activities . To limit the CIG, Truman specifically banned any clandestine activities .
 The men of action soon wanted more elbow room in their restricted world of intelligence gathering . And they soon wanted it more .
 By 1947, the CIG’s staff had grown to nearly 2,000, with about one-third operating overseas . About a third of CIG's staff was overseas .
 Truman signed the National Security Act on September 15, 1947, creating the Air Force as a separate branch of the services . The War Department was renamed the Department of Defense in 1947 .
 With little notice, this act created the Central Intelligence Agency . It was the U.S. first full-blown peacetime intelligence service .
 I never had any thought . . . when I set up the CIA, that it would be injected into peacetime cloak-and-dagger operations, he says . "I never had . any thought when I . set up CIA, I never thought . that when . I set
 Some of the complications and embarrassment that I think we have experienced are in a part attributable to the fact that this quiet intelligence arm of the President has been so removed from its intended role . President Barack Obama's administration has been accused of being too secretive to engage in intelligence operations .
 The CIA was responsible only to the National Security Council, headed by the president . The act effectively gave the president absolute control over the new agency . The National Security Act was passed in the heat of the growing anti-communist hysteria .
 The CIA had its own budget, much of this off the books and handled through the little-known Exchange Stabilization Fund of the Treasury Department . The CIA was authorized to hire and train its own personnel .
 No clandestine or paramilitary operations and no internal spying are allowed in the old CIG . Yet the same restrictions remain, including no clandestine operations and internal spying .
 The CIA in 1948 became active in suppressing communist influence in the national elections in Italy . The National Security Council approved the use of the phrase .
 This marked the beginning of the agency’s career of meddling in the affairs of other nations . The agency has been known to meddle in the world's affairs .
 In 1949, the Central Intelligence Act was passed, exempting the CIA from all laws requiring the disclosure of “functions, names, official titles, salaries and number of personnel employed by the Agency” and allowing the director to spend money from its secret budget simply by signing vouchers
 The CIA began to flex its muscles after being given secret funds . Now operating with secret funds and with the vague authority of “other such functions and duties related to intelligence,” the CIA .
 CIA has been able, over the years, to develop a secret charter based on NSC directives and presidential executive orders . The charter is almost completely at variance with the apparent intent of the law which established the law . The CIA has developed a charter that is based on the president's executive
 This vague phrase has provided the CIA with freedom to engage in covert action, the right to intervene secretly in the internal affairs of other nations, the CIA says . The CIA has since been able to engage covert action in secret .
 It has done so usually with the express approval of the White House, but almost always without the consent of Congress, and virtually never with the knowledge of the American people . The White House has often done so without the approval of Congress and without the permission of the public .
 In 1948, the Office of Policy Coordination was created by the National Security Council as a covert psychological and paramilitary operations unit under Frank Wisner . The Office was created as part of the CIA's covert operations operations .
 By 1951, the OPC had run afoul of so many U.S. laws and policies it was merged into the CIA . The OPC was known thereafter as the CIA’s Department of Plans .
 Allen Dulles was appointed as the new director of the CIA . Dulles' appointment was thwarted by the appointment of Dulles as the director .
 By 1955, the CIA contained more than 15,000 employees, not including thousands of foreign assets and contract agents . The CIA was the largest intelligence agency in the world at the time .
 The CIA created a number of wholly or partly owned properties, or “fronts,” to provide cover for clandestine operations . The CIA's secret budget is often disguised as portions of other United States government budgets .
 These fronts included airlines, import-export companies, “high-tech” firms, advertising agencies, foundations, and many others .
 "In most ways they operated normally, generating additional money to fund agency operations," agency says . Agency: "Most of the agency's operations operate normally"
 The CIA channeled money to academic, labor, youth, and cultural organizations . The CIA used these fronts to funnel money to various organizations .
 Many foreign leaders have been named recipients of CIA funds over the years . King Hussein of Jordan, Archbishop Makarios of Cypress, Luis Echeverria of Mexico, and Willy Brandt of West Germany have also been named .
 CIA has been charged that it has been merely a security force for big business . CIA leaders have been drawn from the highest circles of business and wealth in the U.S.
 The CIA man in charge of that operation was Kermit Roosevelt, who later became vice president of Gulf Oil . Roosevelt was the CIA man behind the operation .
 On June 18, 1954, a CIA-financed right-wing coup in Guatemala overthrew the popularly elected government of Jacobo Arbenz . The government had nationalized the property of United Fruit Company, which had been nationalized .
 Secretary of state John Foster Dulles’s law firm had written the United Fruit contracts with Guatemala in the 1930s . Dulles's law firm wrote the contracts .
 John Moors Cabot, assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, was a major United Fruit stockholder . Cabot was also a major stockholder of United Fruit .
 CIA director Allen Dulles had been president of United Fruit, while his predecessor as CIA director, General Walter Bedell Smith, soon would become a United Fruit vice president . Dulles was CIA director in the 1950s .
 CIA succeeded in becoming a world-class force thanks to Allen Dulles' relationship with John Foster Dulles . The CIA was founded by Dulles and his brother, the secretary of state, in 1961 .
 Foster Dulles reflected the American ethic; the world as we would like it to be . Foster Dulls reflected the U.S. ethic; he reflected the world . Dulls reflects the American values; he reflects the world he would like to see .
 While he took this position, his brother was free to deal with nastier realities, to overturn governments and engage in backstage political maneuvers with the CIA’s almost unlimited funds .
 The CIA enjoyed its greatest expansion under Allen Dulles’s stewardship . Dulles oversaw the CIA in the field of government-shaking secret operations .
 Few Americans had ever heard of the organization before . The agency was expanding and initiating its activities across the globe .
 Some CIA activities clearly violated both the agency’s charter and U.S. laws . CIA activities were clearly violated by the agency's charter and United States laws . Some of the activities were not authorized by the CIA .
 The search for effective brainwashing and behavior-modification methods is especially chilling . One agency endeavor is particularly chilling: brainwashing .
 Not so well known is how German experimentation with mind control also was continued in America after the war . The experiments continued in the U.S. after World War II .
 U.S. judges at the Nuremberg war crimes trials sentenced seven German scientists to death for their part in human experimentation in the concentration camps . Their research material was forwarded to the OSS and their work was continued .
 The ARTICHOKE program was part of the CIA’s Technical Services Staff . It provided the agency with weaponry, disguises, gadgets, forged documents, and codes .
 Teams consisted of a psychiatrist, a drug expert, a technician, and a hypnotist, who sometimes posed as a polygraph operator . Teams usually consisted of psychiatrists, drug experts, technicians and hypnotists .
 Such programs to alter minds formed the basis of a 1959 book by Richard Condon titled The Manchurian Candidate . Such programs were used in a book by Condon . Condon's book The ManChurian Candidates was published in 1959 .
 Later a movie that was one of John F Kennedy’s favorites concerns an American soldier captured in Korea who is brainwashed into becoming a remote-controlled killer for the purpose of assassinating a United States presidential candidate .
 On April 13, 1953, the CIA mind-control program was launched by Dr. Richard Helms . Dr. Helms proposed “covert use of biological and chemical materials” proposed by Richard . Helms managed the program .
 Under MK-ULTRA, the CIA went beyond mind-control experimentation to develop deadly toxins capable of killing without leaving a trace . The CIA developed deadly toxins that could kill without leaving any trace .
 One such toxin was later used in pills given to a mobster in the CIA-Mafia plots to assassinate Fidel Castro . Agency officials gave the toxin to mobster involved in the plot to kill Castro .
 One of the two CIA field stations that were involved in MKUL-TRA was at Atsugi in Japan, the same station where Lee Harvey Oswald served as a Marine radar operator and apparently was involved in undercover operations .
 CIA admitted that its most convenient source of mind-control guinea pigs were “individuals of dubious loyalty, suspected agents or plants, subjects having known reason for deception, etc.,” one must wonder whether Oswald may have been part of a mind-altering program .
 Rolling Stone claims to have contacted a Marine from Oswald’s unit who said he participated in some of the LSD experiments . The article claims that the Marine said he took part in the experiments .
 Oswald entered the office of New Orleans assistant district attorney Edward Gillin in the summer of 1963 . Oswald was charged with attempted murder in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 He was asked to take a seat but instead chose to stand in front of Gillin’s desk . Gillin: ‘I'm not going to sit down. I'm not sitting down. It's not a seat. I want to be in the middle of the table
 Gillin suggested Oswald visit the police chemist with his query but advised he take nothing without consulting a doctor first . Oswald's visit to the chemist was thought to be a bit crazy .
 Gillin never saw Oswald again until recognizing him on TV accused of killing the president . Gillin says he never saw him again until he recognized Oswald on TV .
 Oswald's relation to any CIA mind-control program likely will never be known . The exact nature of Oswald’s relation to the CIA mind control program likely won’t ever be known.
 Oswald may have taken a mind-altering drug . Jack Ruby's killer, Jack Ruby, told Dallas police he had no recollection of shooting Oswald . Sirhan Sirhan, presumed assassin of Robert Kennedy, still claims he can’t remember what happened in the Ambassador Hotel .
 Eduard Simson, proclaimed that Sirhan had been “programmed” by drugs, hypnosis, or both, the possibility of mind control in the JFK assassination cannot be ruled out .
 The techniques of using someone under mind control by drugs and hypnosis as an assassin or decoy had not yet been perfected in 1963 .
 It is more likely that conspirators at that time would have resorted to a less sophisticated method . They would simply have hired professional assassins from the mob, the CIA, or the military and thrown a scapegoat .
 For all the myths that have arisen about CIA prowess, the actual history of the agency reveals as many glaring errors as victories as victories . The agency has a long history of mistakes, errors, errors and mistakes .
 Agency analysts failed to foresee the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the 1968 Tet Offensive in South Vietnam, the collapse of communism, or the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 . Agency analysts also failed to see the Arab Spring, the Tet Offensive and the fall of communism in Vietnam .
 In September 1963, CIA officers tried to hatch an assassination plot against Castro using a Cuban government official named Dr. Dr. Castro . The plot was the second attempt to kill Castro in September 1963 .
 Cubela had contacted the CIA some two years earlier and offered to defect . Cubela was an unofficial Cuban minister, and had contacted CIA two years ago .
 The agency had persuaded him to remain in place as a valuable conduit of inside information . The agency said he was a valuable source of information .
 Cubela offered to assassinate Castro if he had the support of the U.S. government . Cubela startled his CIA contacts by offering to kill Castro in a Sao Paulo, Brazil, safe house .
 This offer was sent to Desmond FitzGerald, a personal friend of Robert Kennedy and one of the CIA officials in charge of Operation Mongoose, that covert operation to bring down Cuba’s communist government .
 The Secret World of Lee Harvey Oswald by Edward Jay Epstein and The Kennedys by John H Davis . The Secret . World of Oswald by . Edward Jay . Epstein by Edward .
 He wanted personal assurance that the Kennedy administration actively supported his plan to kill Castro . The Kennedy administration was supportive of Castro's killing .
 FitzGerald personally met with Cubela and assured him that once Castro was gone, the Kennedy administration would support a new Cuban government . On October 29, again against the advice of counterintelligence, he met with Cuban leader .
 Cubela asked for rifle with telescopic sights and means to deliver poison . FitzGerald declined to discuss such specifics . He said Cubela wanted to use a sniper rifle to deliver lethal poison .
 CIA case officer supplied Cubela with a poison ballpoint pen . Another meeting with Cubela was set and on that day, the CIA gave her a poison pen .
 Cubela was told the rifle and some explosives would be delivered to him soon . Cubela says he was told he could get a rifle and explosives from the police .
 Cubela received his assassination tools from the CIA on November 22, 1963 . Cubela was assassinated by the CIA in 1963 .
 Some senior CIA officials now claim that the plot did have the support of both Robert Kennedy and his brother . No documentation of the AM/LASH plot has survived, but some now believe it was a success .
 There's no real way to know, but animosity of certain CIA officers toward the Kennedys should be kept in mind . Since both are now dead, there’s no way of knowing .
 The knowledge of AM/LASH caused consternation among CIA officials when Castro made public statements conceming assassination plots . It was the knowledge that Castro made certain public statements about the assassination plot .
 This warning has for years been used to support the theory that somehow Castro had learned of the CIA plots against him and, in retaliation, sent assassins after Kennedy . This theory has been used for years to back the theory .
 Since Castro didn’t catch Cubela until 1966, it is unlikely that AM/LASH was the impetus of his 1963 remarks . Castro caught Cubela in 1966 .
 While the CIA’s Mongoose program continued in Florida, similar operations were being conducted in New Orleans, long a hotbed of Cuban exile—CIA activity . The Mongoose operation was being conducted there .
 David Ferrie denied any knowledge of Kennedy's assassination . Ferrie was questioned by the FBI in New Orleans days after JFK's assassination in 1963 .
 The FBI agents let him go, apparently unaware of Ferrie’s connection to Lee Harvey Oswald or to New Orleans crime boss Carlos Marcello .
 Ferrie had been working for Detective Guy Banister in the summer of 1963 . Neither apparently did the agents know that Ferrie worked for Banister .
 Whatever information Ferrie gave the FBI will never be known, since the interview was Classified and locked away on orders of J Edgar Hoover . The National Archives reported that Ferrie’s original statement was missing from its collection of assassination documents .
 Both Ferrie and Banister were well connected with the Cuban exiles living in New Orleans . Ferrie, Banister are both prominent figures in Cuban exile .
 As a contract agent for the CIA, Ferrie claimed to have flown on hazardous missions into Cuba . Ferrie landed in Cuba on the night of the illfated Bay of Pigs Invasion .
 Ferrie's role as CIA agent was confirmed in 1975 when Victor Marchetti, former executive assistant to the CIA’s deputy director, stated that during highlevel CIA meetings in 1969, CIA director Richard Helms disclosed that Ferrie and other figures in the Garrison investigation had indeed
 Banister investigator Jack Martin and others have told investigators through the years of contact between CIA contract agent Ferrie and Oswald during 1963 . Ferrie was a contract agent for the CIA during the time .
 According to Beverly Oliver, the “babushka lady,” Oswald and Ferrie were even seen together in Jack Ruby’s Carousel Club shortly before the assassination . Beverly Oliver says Ferrie and Oswald were seen together at Ruby's club .
 She saw Oswald handing out pro-Castro literature on a New Orleans street . She says she saw him doing it on a street in New Orleans, New Orleans .
 Roberts later said, “I knew there were such things as counterspies, spies, and the importance of such things. I knew there was such things ... and such things,” Roberts said .
 William Robert Plumlee worked for U.S. intelligence and the military for decades . His travels included the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Kennedy assassination and the Iran-Contra scandal of the Reagan administration .
 After nearly becoming a juvenile delinquent, he joined the U.S. Army in April 1954 . He was assigned to the Texas 49th Armored Division .
 Later he was transferred to Dallas, Texas, where he joined the 4th Army Reserve Military Intelligence Unit . He was transferred from Dallas to Dallas where he was stationed .
 Tosh flew arms to Castro just prior to his 1959 revolution . Tosh worked under such CIA officials as William Harvey, Tracy Barnes, and Rip Robertson .
 Tosh flew a reconnaissance mission over Cuba but crashed just before the Bay of Pigs Invasion . Tosh crashed in Cuba during a mission to find out what the U.S. was doing .
 Tosh continued his work for the agency in the U.S. Tosh escaped back to the United States and continued to work there .
 As a pilot operating out of the JM/WAVE station in Miami, he ferried agents and materials all around the Gulf of Mexico .
 Colonel Rawlston was actually the Mafia chieftain John Roselli . He was shocked in later years to learn that one of his passengers was actually a Mafia leader .
 His shock deepened when he recalled a secret flight he made on November 21, 1963 . He said he was shocked to discover he had taken part in the secret flight .
 Our mission, we were told, was to abort a pending attempt on the president’s life which was to take place in Dallas, Texas . We were told of the mission to abort an attempt to kill the president, which was going on in Dallas .
 We were contracted as “cut-outs,” a system used to shield a secret operation from public exposure . We were contracted as ‘cut-out’s’ to protect the operation from the public .
 The first leg of the flight would be from Lantana, Florida (about five miles south of West Palm Beach), to Tampa, Florida .
 The aircraft used for the first phase of this trip was a D-18 Twin Beech aircraft . The aircraft was the first part of the trip .
 "We took off before daybreak on November 21, 1963, expecting to arrive in Tampa about sunup. We took off from Tampa, Florida, about 6:30 a.m. ET . We were going to Florida, but we didn't expect to arrive at sunup,
 I had flown Roselli and others to places like Cuba, Bimini, Galveston, Las Vegas, and California . Roselli had flown them all over the world .
 We changed aircraft at Tampa to a waiting DC-3 that was registered to “Atlantic Richfield” and continued our trip to New Orleans, where a couple of people, who I did not know, got off .
 We spent the night at the Shamrock Hilton, not far from the airport .
 The weather briefing was not favorable for a VFR flight into Dallas’s Red Bird airport . The next morning, November 22, 1963, between 4:30—5m., between 4,30-5m. weather briefing .
 We selected Garland as an alternate in case the weather had not improved by the time we arrived near Dallas air space . Garland was selected as an alternative to Dallas .
 We continued to Garland, in northeast Dallas, instead of Redbird Airport in Oak Cliff, a suburb of Dallas . The airport is a Dallas suburb .
 Possible bad weather southwest of Dallas that had not cleared as yet is not clear as yet . We made this decision because of possible bad weather that still hasn't cleared .
 There had been so many threats against the president’s life that we didn’t have a great sense of urgency about this particular one, he says .
 About thirty minutes after landing three passengers were picked up by car, including Roselli . The passengers were waiting out the bad weather in Garland, Texas . Roselli was the last person to be picked up .
 There are three documented corroborations of my presence at Garland airport that morning . There are 3 documented corroborated photos of me at the airport that day .
 The weather cleared sufficiently for the plane to continue via VFR flight rules to Redbird Airport in Dallas . The plane left Garland for a ten-minute flight to Dallas .
 "Everybody got off and went their own way. We landed at Redbird around 9:30 or 10:30m., perhaps as late as 11m., where everybody got off . Everybody got off the plane and went to Redbird .
 "I only began to learn the full scope of the operation from my pilot Rojas and a field operative friend of mine named Sergio," he says . The pilot pilot says he learned more from his pilot and Sergio Rojas .
 Most of the details of the operation were told to me only after we had become airborne . Most of this operation was told to be carried out after we became airborne . The operation was carried out in a 'highly classified' mission .
 It had been discussed by the abort team where to go, how to abort, and what to look for . It was discussed by abort team, where to abort and how to find out what to expect .
 I had not at first paid much attention to any of these details as bits and pieces unfolded . "I had not been paying attention to all these details," she says. "I'm not sure what happened."
 I was told that the abort team, for whom I was only the pilot at that time, would probably be looking for a minimum of 19 or 20 people that would be in the plaza . The abort team would probably need to look for 19 to 20 people, he says .
 Most of the team members felt that this was another false alarm, there had been many during the past few weeks . The team members believed this was a false alarm . There had been several false alarms in recent weeks .
 President Obama asked Sergio Cruz to meet him at Redbird Airport . Cruz was a pilot at the time . Cruz says the president asked him to come along and see him .
 I could also act as a spotter for him and his team, which he said were assigned to the south side of the plaza . He said he could be spotting for him or his team . I could act as spotter .
 I was told other members of the team would be patrolling the north side and the overpass . The team will also be patrolling north side of the bridge .
 We were driven from Redbird Airport to a place not far from the Oak Cliff Country Club . We checked various areas and attempted to spot potential members of an attack team from the position on the South Knoll .
 While on the South Knoll, Sergio and Sergio were attempting to evaluate the most logical places where shooters might be located, but everything was confused . Everything was confused, the timing was off; team members were late getting into position, and the timing wasn't right .
 They were not where they were supposed to be and the limited radio contacts that we had with them were not working or spotty at best . The limited radio contact with them was 'spotty' and 'not working or working' at best.
 When the shots rang out, I had the impression of 4 or 5 shots, with one being fired from behind and to my left on the South Knoll, near the underpass and south parking lot . The shots were heard from behind, to the left, on the south Knoll
 While leaving via the south side of the underpass near the train tracks, Sergio and I smelled gunpowder . Sergio and Sergio left via a south side side underpass .
 We were picked up on the back side of the underpass, southwest side, by a person who had previously been at the country club . We were then picked up by someone who was previously at the club .
 Sergio changed out of the clothes he had muddied when he fell down the slippery west side of the railroad tracks . After driving away we stopped in the parking lot of Ed McLemore’s Sportatorium, where Sergio changed his clothes .
 We stopped by the house in Oak Cliff, then returned to Redbird Airport . We visited the house and the airport .
 We waited for a few of the operatives who had been on our flight into Dallas to return to Dallas . They waited for the operatives to return .
 We waited as long as we could before leaving without Roselli and some of the others . We waited until we could leave the party .
 "At approximately 2 o’clock in the afternoon, we took off from Redbird without filing a flight plan," the pilot says .
 Our original flight out of Dallas called for us to fly to Sheppard Air Force Base in Wichita Falls, Texas . This is the first time we've flown to Wichita Falls .
 The routing was changed at the last minute by Rojas, Rojas says . But because of the assassination that routing had to be changed, it was changed . Rojas: "I'm not going to go to jail. I'm going to jail"
 On the plane, besides myself, were Rojas, Sergio, a person who I knew as Gator from the Loxahatchee camp, and two other individuals that I didn’t know . "Gator" was Gator .
 Gator had identifying characteristics of an unusually large Adam’s apple and a missing finger, which had supposedly been bitten off at an alligator farm . Gator's missing finger was supposedly bitten off by alligator .
 I interpreted their silence as dejection at the mission’s failure to abort the assassination of the president . I interpreted them as dejected at the failed mission, I interpreted it as a dejection .
 I believed that if these men had been the shooters or assassins themselves, they would have been very excited because they had carried it off . If these men were the shooters, they'd have been the assassins themselves . They would have carried off the attack, he said .
 President George W. Bush was assassinated by the CIA, Mafia, or military intelligence, he says . He says he takes issue with the idea that the attack on the president was in behalf of the CIA or Mafia .
 Tosh was arrested and extradited to Colorado, where he was prosecuted for passing bad checks . Tosh was charged with a check check violation .
 Only one check in the amount of $51.25 was produced and Tosh tried to explain that the CIA had failed to deposit his pay for January 1962 . Tosh was the only person to produce the check and said it had been deposited in January .
 He was jailed, which kept him out of the public eye during the time of the Warren Commission . He was released from prison after the commission was launched .
 Tosh got married and tried to forget his life as a “black ops” pilot . Tosh was released in 1964 and released in 1966 .
 Tosh was a pilot in the Iran-Contra scandal, in which illegal arms were shipped to Iran in hopes of freeing U.S. hostages . Tosh was also a pilot for the Reagan administration in the 1980s .
 Profits from arms sales were used to fund anticommunists, or Contras, in Nicaragua . Profits were then used by the Contras to fund the government .
 Tosh said arms were flown to the Contras and their cocaine was flown back to the United States . Tosh: Arms and cocaine were flown back from Contras to the U.S.
 Plumlee testified before Frank Church’s Select Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, better known as the Church Committee, in 1977 . Plumlee's testimony was behind closed doors .
 He testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 1990 and 1991 concerning his knowledge of the Iran-Contra missions .
 In 1991, this author accompanied Tosh on a driving trip to Florida where he pointed out various anti-Castro safe houses and aircraft still sitting on runways . This author was warmly greeted in Alpha 66 headquarters, one of the Cuban exile organizations .
 In 1991, the old prison was still there, as was the adjacent landing strip . Yet, in 1991, there was still an old prison still there .
 In the 1960s, the county had a contract with the federal government to house some federal prisoners . Alton Chaney, the retired warden of the prison, confirmed that in the 60s, it was a contract .
 He said he was never told anything about the inmates but they seemed to have been involved in some sort of witness protection program . He knew the names he was given for them were false and he knew they were false .
 One could claim he had never been at the scene of the crime, as he was in jail at the time of the murder . One could also claim he was never at the crime .
 Reynolds, who took over the prison in the early 1970s, said he was surprised to find no records were available for past years . Reynolds, said when he took over in the 1970s he found no records of past years available .
 Both men, apparently unknown to each other, were told the people who went into Dealey Plaza that day were “abort” teams sent to stop an assassination attempt . Both men were told they were told people were "abort" teams sent out to stop a possible assassination
 Oswald’s bizarre military record and his trip to Russia may have been linked to intelligence . Considering the accounts of Plumlee, Ferrie, Martin, and Roberts, one must seriously consider that the ex-Marine was working in intelligence .
 After reviewing all available evidence, the answer to the above question seems to be an unequivocal yes, says CNN .
 Oswald's small Minox camera was found among his effects by Dallas police . The camera is the strongest piece of evidence proving Oswald’s spy work . Dallas police found the camera in Oswald's effects .
 Information developed by the Dallas Morning News in 1978 revealed the camera was not available to the public in 1963 .
 FBI tried to get Dallas detectives to change their reports regarding the camera . For nearly fifteen years, the FBI kept hidden photos taken by Oswald . This evidence was so explosive that the FBI had to keep the photos hidden .
 Stovall reported finding the Minox camera loaded with film in Oswald’s Marine sea bag in Irving home of Michael and Ruth Paine hours after the assassination .
 An inventory of Oswald’s property taken from the Paine home was made on November 26, 1963 . Oswald's property was taken from his home in November 1963 .
 This inventory list was witnessed by agent Warren De Brueys, the FBI man in New Orleans who had been assigned to monitor Oswald during the spring and summer of 1963 . The inventory list of Oswald's belongings was witnessed .
 Detective Rose told the Dallas Morning News, “ were calling it a light meter, I know that.” Detective Rose said he was calling it "a light meter"
 They tried to get me to change the records because it wasn’t a light meter, he says . ‘I’m not going to change my record,’ he says. ‘They’re trying to get him to change it. They’
 The motive may have been that the existence of the camera pointed to Oswald’s intelligence connections . Oswald's connections may have led to his intelligence connections, according to a report .
 The serial number of the camera found in Oswald’s belongings didn’t exist among any Minox cameras distributed for commercial sale in the U.S. According to Lohn, the serial number did not exist . Lohn: "The serial number is 27259" and
 Minox cameras distributed in the United States carry six-digit serial numbers beginning with 135000 . Lohn: Minox camera serial numbers start at 135000 and start with 13500 .
 Number 27259 was “not a registered number. . . . not a valid number,” said Lohn . Lohn said number 27259 is “a registered number” Lohn called it “non-registered number.”
 Minox did not sell a light meter in the United States in 1963, Golz says . Golz also determined Minox didn't sell light meters in the U.S. in 1963 .
 A Minox III camera was obtained on January 31, 1964, from Ruth Paine and that it belonged to her husband, who worked for Bell Helicopter . A later FBI report stated that the camera belonged to Paine's husband .
 Paine told Golz she did not remember being asked to turn over such a camera . Paine said she was not aware of the request .
 In 1979, acting on a Freedom of Information Act request by an assassination researcher, the FBI released about twenty-five photographs taken with a Minox camera belonging to Oswald . The FBI had denied the existence of any Minox cameras before .
 Michael Paine was unable to recall taking any pictures such as the ones released by the FBI . Paine says he was not sure if he took any of the pictures he took .
 Minox camera equipment, including a binocular-type telephoto lens, is available for purchase . Minox is a Minox brand of Minox cameras, which can be used to take pictures .
 In 1976, a CIA document was released that showed that the agency indeed had considered Oswald for recruitment . Oswald was considered for recruitment by the CIA in 1976 .
 CIA official Richard Helms said the agency had never had “or even contemplated” any contact with Oswald . This contradicted the sworn Warren Commission testimony of Helms . Helms testified that the CIA had never contemplated any contact .
 Harry J Dean claimed Oswald shot no one in Dallas, but was set up to take the blame for the assassination by a conspiracy headed by U.S. congressman John Rousselot and General Edwin Walker . Dean said he participated in undercover operations against Castro as well as infiltration of groups
 An internal CIA cable dated October 16, 1963, indicated that more than a month prior to the assassination at least six senior CIA officials were apprised by a “usually reliable and extremely sensitive source” that Lee Oswald had visited the Soviet embassy in Mexico City in September .
 Oswald was “probably identical” to a “Lee Henry Oswald,” a Marine radar operator who had renounced his U.S. citizenship in Russia . The memo stated this Oswald was probably identical to a . “Marine radar operator’s”
 A later CIA message on October 22 corrected the name to Lee Harvey Oswald . The name was changed to Oswald in a CIA message .
 Morley: CIA negligence led directly to the president’s death . Morley added, “We can’t do much about the JFK tragedy at this late date, but we can acknowledge that CIA negligence . ‘CIA negligence’ led to the death of JFK
 Officers who obscured information about Oswald should be stripped of any medals or commendations they received for their job performance in 1963 . The officers who obscured the information should have their medals stripped .
 Others saw much more than negligence involved in this obfuscation of Oswald’s records prior to the assassination . Others saw this as a cover-up of Oswald's records .
 One CIA memo indicated as many as thirty-seven documents were missing from the Oswald file . Agency officials later claimed they were missing only at the time of the memo was written .
 Oswald’s role with the CIA was cemented in 1995 with the publication of Oswald and the CIA by the respected military historian John M Newman . Newman discovered by analyzing internal CIA messages that Oswald, knowingly or unknowingly, was being used operationally by the agency prior to the JFK
 This shocking information was not considered newsworthy by the corporate mass media, which failed to widely report on this development . Oswald was being used by the CIA prior to the assassination, the author says .
 Intelligence agents have been known to carry such innocuous but unusual items, called bona fides, to identify themselves to others .
 Oswald’s connection to U.S. intelligence is so full of claims and counterclaims, deceit and misinformation, it is unlikely the whole truth of the matter will ever be resolved . However, the whole question of Oswald's connection to United States intelligence is likely to never be
 Oswald was in some way connected with U.S. intelligence work, his mother always claimed . What is known is that the weight of the evidence proves Oswald was involved in intelligence work . Oswald's mother always said he worked for the CIA, as well as his mother .
 The official story was that no U.S. government agency had been interested in Oswald or knew of his whereabouts . Now it is now known that both the CIA and FBI were keeping a close watch on the ex-Marine’s activities .
 Oswald’s alleged trip to Mexico City between September 26 and October 3, 1963, is a case in point . Oswald is alleged to have visited Mexico City on September 26 to October 3 .
 Oswald was in Mexico City to visit the Soviet and Cuban embassies, according to the Warren Commission . Oswald visited the embassies of Cuba and the Soviet Union, the commission says . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 Proof of these visits came from statements of Cuban embassy employee, Silvia Duran, and from CIA operatives monitoring the Soviet embassy .
 Oswald may be identical to Lee Harvey Oswald, born on 18 October 1939 in New Orleans, Louisiana . Oswald is believed to have been born in the same place as Oswald .
 Oswald's description did not match that of the twenty-three-year-old, five-foot-nine, slender Oswald in Dallas . Oswald was found dead in Dallas, Texas, in November .
 Warren Commission asked the CIA for documentation of Oswald’s activities . The Warren Commission was seriously concerned about the ties between Oswald and the Soviets and Cubans .
 After months of foot-dragging, the agency could provide only the unsupported statement of Duran as proof that Oswald had been at the Cuban embassy . The agency could only provide the statement as proof .
 Not shown to the Warren Commission was a cable the director of the CIA sent to its station in Mexico City urging the secret arrest of Silvia Duran on the day after the assassination . The cable was sent to the CIA's Mexico City station urging the arrest of Duran .
 Mexican national was employed at the Cuban embassy only one month before Oswald allegedly arrived in Mexico . Duran, a twenty-six-year-old Mexican national, had been employed only a month before the incident .
 With full regard for Mexican interests, request you ensure that her arrest is kept absolutely secret . No information from her is published or leaked, that no information is published .
 A cable reveals the extent of CIA control over Mexican police officials . Many of whom had been trained by the CIA, many of whom were engaged in the CIA while they ostensibly worked for the Mexican government .
 The CIA's willingness to order Mexican police officials to make false statements to their own superiors and to mislead the “circles in the Mexican government” provides an insight into the CIA’s desperation to secure some evidence to prove that Oswald had gone to the Cuban Embassy .
 Duran's statements to Mexican authorities were not to their liking . The singer's statements were reportedly not to the liking of Mexican authorities .
 She was not released for several days and only then after she had identified Oswald as the man who visited the embassy . She was released after identifying Oswald as a man she had met Oswald .
 This prompted yet another CIA cable, which ordered to have Duran rearrested, but to conceal who was behind the action . This prompted another cable to order Duran to be re-arrested . The cable was sent by the CIA to have him back in custody .
 A portion of this cable stated, “To be certain that there is no misunderstanding between us, we want to insure that Silvia Duran gets no impression that Americans are behind her rearrest. We want to ensure that there are no misunderstandings,” the cable said .
 She was never interviewed or called as a witness by the Warren Commission, which never learned of her two arrests . The Warren Commission never learned about her arrests .
 Oswald in the Cuban embassy apparently made quite a scene when told he could not get a visa to Cuba in three days . He shouted and called the embassy personnel “bureaucrats”—he should have been well remembered by Duran and others there .
 In 1978, Cuban consul Eusebio Azcue told the House Select Committee on Assassinations that he was convinced the man who visited the embassy in 1963 was not the Oswald arrested in Dallas . But in 1978, he told the committee that he believed the man was not Oswald .
 Silvia Duran has maintained over the years that the man was Oswald . She has maintained that he was Oswald in the 1960s .
 In 1979, author Anthony Summers arranged for her to watch films of Lee Harvey Oswald . However, in 1979, she was forced to watch Oswald's films .
 Duran recalled the man who visited the consulate was short, no more than five feet six inches in height . The man was shorter than the five-foot-nine Lee Oswald .
 Oswald visited both the Cuban and Soviet embassies during his visits . The CIA stated that both the embassies were under photographic surveillance . However, they could offer no proof .
 CIA officials explained to the Warren Commission that the camera at the Soviet embassy was turned off on Saturdays (the day Oswald supposedly visited) Lamely, CIA officials said the camera just happened to break down the day Oswald was there . The camera was at the Cuban embassy on the same day
 The day of the assassination, CIA officials sent photos taken outside the Soviet embassy in Mexico City to the FBI, claiming they were Oswald . However, the photos were not of Oswald . Oswald was killed by a single bullet shot in the head .
 This someone appears to be about thirty-five years old, six feet tall, with an athletic build . This is someone who appears to have a large athletic build and six-foot tall .
 The absence of any valid photos of Oswald at the embassies raises suspicion that an impostor was posing as Oswald during these embassy visits . Oswald is believed to have been posing as a man posing as the assassin .
 In 1976, a CIA officer stationed in Mexico City at the time of Oswald’s alleged visit said the CIA had tape-recorded conversations between Oswald and the Soviet embassy . The CIA had not told the Warren Commission .
 The tapes, clear proof of Oswald's Mexican visits, had not been given to the Commission . Phillips said they had been routinely destroyed about a week after Oswald’s visit . He said prior to the assassination Oswald was not considered important .
 The House committee concluded that the CIA station there did not report all information on Oswald to CIA headquarters . It should be noted that in its report on Oswald’s Mexico City visit, the House committee said .
 Phillips’s testimony was thrown into doubt when, long after his 1976 testimony, a five-page FBI document dated November 23, 1963, became public . Phillips testified in 1976 that he was killed in the Vietnam War .
 Oswald contacted the Soviet embassy in Mexico City, according to a CIA document . The document was not seen by the Warren Commission . Oswald had contacted the embassy, the document says .
 Special agents have spoken with Oswald in Dallas, Texas, according to the FBI report . The report says they have observed photographs of Oswald and listened to a recording of his voice .
 If this is correct, the CIA wiretap tape of Oswald was not destroyed in October but was available to bureau agents the day after the assassination . The FBI report says the tape was made available to agents the next day .
 The CIA notified other agencies in October that Oswald was in Mexico City, not knowing the man was an impostor, then failed to follow up on their mistake later . The CIA may not have followed up on the mistake, which is disturbing .
 Or, more ominously, the agency knowingly participated in a scheme to place Oswald in Mexico City at that time—nearly two months before the assassination . The agency knew Oswald was Oswald's location, or participated in the scheme .
 At the end of last year I gave Mr Kelly, the director of the FBI, a letter from Lee Oswald . Mr Kelly said: "I gave him a letter of support for Lee Oswald"
 To my understanding it could have brought out the circumstances to the assassination of President Kennedy, says Mr Kennedy's widow . "To my understanding, the circumstances could have been different," she says .
 "I’ve got the right to believe something bad might happen to me, and that is why I see myself obligated to keep myself away for a short time," she said .
 I'm sending you a copy of the same letter. Convinced of the importance of that letter mentioned and knowing that you have been doing some investigation independently of the assassination, I’m sending it to the White House. It's not the first time I've sent a copy
 Lee Harvey Oswald Oswald Jones, too, sent this information to the FBI and he received no reply . Jones, who also sent the information, also received no response from FBI .
 Oswald note obtained by reporter for Dallas Morning News . Oswald note was a copy of the Oswald note from a reporter for the paper . Oswald was killed in 1963 .
 Three handwriting experts in Dallas compare the note to known examples of Oswald’s handwriting . Oswald's handwriting is known to be consistent with other examples of his handwriting .
 The FBI and the House Select Committee on Assassinations were suspicious of the letter’s legitimacy . However, handwriting experts for both the FBI and a House committee on Assassination were suspicious .
 In 1983, it was learned that the FBI studied the note with the idea it may have been intended for Hunt’s son, Nelson Bunker Hunt . Hunt's son was also a member of the family .
 Jones pointed out that the note came from Mexico City and that allegedly CIA officer E Howard Hunt, who was in charge of anti-Castro Cubans at the time, was stationed there along with David Atlee Phillips during Oswald's reported visit .
 Neither FBI nor official government investigations appears to have taken an interest in the note . But since neither the FBI nor the two official government agencies appears to be interested in it .
 George Gaudet obtained the Mexican travel permit number just before Oswald’s . The number was the same as the number used by Oswald to obtain the permit .
 Oswald did not try to hide his past or intentions when applying for a new passport in June 1963 . Oswald's passport was issued in 1963, and he died in August 1963 .
 He acknowledged he might travel to Russia and other European countries later that year . On the application, he acknowledged that he might .
 The State Department loaned him money to return from the Soviet Union, but knew of his attempted defection and threat to give military secrets to the Soviets . Despite these admissions, he received a new passport within twenty-four hours .
 Oswald visited the Mexican consulate in New Orleans and applied for a tourist card . On September 17, a week after the alleged meeting between Oswald and CIA case officer “Maurice Bishop,” Oswald went to the consulate .
 FBI identified every person who applied for Mexican entry papers on September 17 . FBI worked with Mexican authorities to identify all but one of the people who applied .
 Gaudet claimed that sheer coincidence placed his name just ahead of Oswald’s on the Mexican tourist card application sheet . Oswald's name was on the same sheet as his on the application sheet, which was placed on the tourist card .
 Gaudet, who worked in the area of Latin America for the agency, operated the Latin American Newsletter for a number of years . He worked at the agency for more than a decade .
 Gaudet says he was interviewed by FBI agents shortly after the assassination, but only after obtaining approval of his CIA boss in New Orleans . He says he got the approval of the FBI, who interviewed him shortly after .
 In a 1978 interview with author Anthony Summers, Gaudet admitted he had known Oswald in New Orleans, but then qualified this by saying he had only observed Oswald handing out leaflets . In a later interview, he admitted he knew Oswald but said he only observed him handing out leaflets .
 Gaudet did firmly state that while in New Orleans, Oswald was in contact with known CIA and FBI agents . Oswald was known to have contact with FBI and CIA agents .
 Gaudet said he did not accompany Oswald on a bus to Mexico, but went by air . He said he was not accompanied by Oswald on the bus, but flew by air to Mexico by plane .
 He now claims he cannot remember whether his 1963 Mexican trip involved intelligence activity . He now says he can't remember whether it involved intelligence .
 If Gaudet did not actually accompany Oswald to Mexico, one very suspicious man did—Albert Osborne . Osborne did . Osborne was a member of the British House of Representatives in Mexico . Osborne died in 1953 in a plane crash .
 These girls told the FBI that the man also had sat next to and talked at length with an older man . The FBI says the girls told them that the FBI had been contacted by the suspect .
 FBI agents tried to locate a man named John Howard Bowen who had been on Oswald’s bus . Bowen was on the bus at the time of Oswald's assassination . Bowen is believed to be the only person who was on Oswald's bus at that time .
 Albert Osborne seemed to know a lot about Bowen, but Osborne knew a lot more . Bowen was found dead at the hands of Albert Osborne . Osborne was the only person to know Bowen .
 After three visits from the FBI, Osborne finally admitted that he was the man they were seeking, having used the alias “John Bowen” for many years . Osborne admitted to the FBI that he had been using the alias "John Bowen"
 Osborne claimed to be a missionary who traveled extensively all over the world, although he never said how these travels were financed . Osborne never revealed how he spent the money he spent on his travels . Osborne claimed he was a missionary and traveled extensively .
 No confirmation of his story could be found by checking border records in the countries he claimed to have visited . Border records in those countries could not be found . No confirmation was found by the border records .
 Osborne lied to the FBI regarding his name . Despite his lies, no charges were ever brought against Osborne . Osborne was never charged with any wrongdoing .
 George DeMohrenschildt and his wife, Jeanne, were identified by the Warren Commission as the people closest to Lee Harvey Oswald just before the assassination . They were identified as the couple closest to Oswald before his assassination .
 DeMohrenschildt undoubtedly is one of the most colorful and suspicious of all the persons connected to Oswald . Oswald's widow is a prominent figure in the Oswald family .
 He even wrote to Lyndon Johnson in April 1963, at a time he was in contact with Lee Oswald . He was told by LBJ aide Walter Jenkins a meeting with the vice president might be arranged .
 DeMohrenschildt had a relationship with the CIA dating back to OSS days . CIA memos now available, thanks to Freedom of Information Act suits, are now available .
 After a trip to Yugoslavia with his wife in 1957, DeMohrenschildt provided “foreign intelligence which was disseminated to other federal agencies in 10 separate reports,” according to a CIA memo .
 DeMohrenschildt also furnished lengthy reports on travels he made through Mexico and Panama at the time of the Bay of Pigs Invasion .
 At the time DeMohrenschildt was befriending Lee Harvey Oswald, one of his close friends in Dallas was J Walton Moore with the CIA’s Domestic Contacts Division .
 DeMohrenschildt publicly stated that before becoming involved with Oswald, he had checked with Moore . Moore had been involved with the Oswald family .
 Moore, according to DeMohrenschildt, said unhesitatingly, “Yes, he’s okay.” Moore, who was in the hospital, said he was fine . Moore said, "Yes, yes, he's okay"
 CIA was to use George DeMohrenschildt to further ‘debrief’ Oswald . CIA was using the genial George DeMarnschildt as a deMarnacht . CIA used him to "debrief" Oswald .
 Author Edward Epstein interviewed DeMohrenschildt on the morning of March 29, 1977 .
 House Select Committee on Assassinations had attempted to contact DeMohrenschildt . That same morning, an investigator from the committee had also tried to contact him .
 Three hours later DeMohrenschildt was dead from a shotgun blast to the head . Three hours after the shooting, he was shot dead in the head with a shotgun .
 His death was ruled a suicide although the detective in charge of his investigation expressed some reservations about this verdict . The detective who investigated the death of the suspect expressed some doubts about the verdict .
 Epstein: DeMohrenschildt said Moore encouraged him to see Oswald . He said he was to question Oswald about his stay in Russia . Epstein says he was told he was not to question him .
 Oswald gave DeMohrenschildt a lengthy memo covering his activities in Russia . Oswald gave him a memo about his Russian activities . Oswald is a former Marine who served in the Soviet Union .
 DeMohrenschildt, petroleum engineer, and Moore had offices in the same Dallas bank building . They often ate lunch together, according to Jeanne DeMohranschildt .
 CIA memos, Moore’s closeness, and DeMohrenschildt's own testimony all confirm that a certain relationship existed between the CIA and the man closest to Oswald in 1963 .
 This does not necessarily involve the agency in a plot to kill Kennedy . It raises questions about what agency officials might have known regarding such a plot .
 It is now known that the agency was opening Oswald’s mail while he was in Russia . Oswald's mail was opened by the CIA while in Russia, according to a new report .
 In 1976, former CIA legislative counsel George L Cary admitted that the agency had opened mail from his mother to her son while he was in Russia . Oswald's mother, Marguerite Oswald, wrote to him in 1976 .
 Cary said the admission was a result of an investigation into the CIA’s mail intercept program . The program is known as HT-Lingual .
 Robert Morrow is a former CIA operative named Robert D. Morrow . Morrow was a CIA operative who worked for the CIA in the 1960s . Morrow is believed to have been involved in the JFK assassination .
 In his book Betrayal, Morrow tells how he purchased four 6. mm Carcano rifles on orders from a CIA superior . Morrow says he purchased the rifles from orders from his superior in the CIA .
 Morrow remains convinced that at least one of these rifles ended up in the hands of Dallas police on November 22, 1963 . Morrow says he believes one of the rifles may have been found in Dallas .
 Oswald was an FBI informant by the summer of 1963 . He was brought into an assassination plot led by CIA consultant Clay Shaw . The plot involved right-wing CIA operatives and anti-Castro Cubans headed by Jack Ruby in Dallas .
 This group, operating outside Agency control, manipulated events to insure Oswald being named as the assassin . Oswald was named as Oswald by a group that manipulated events .
 Tippit was killed by this Oswald substitute when he failed to go along with the group’s scheme to kill the real Oswald in the Texas Theater . The real Oswald was killed when he tried to kill him in the theater in Texas .
 With the capture of Oswald, Ruby was compelled to stalk and finally kill the accused assassin . Ruby stalked and killed Oswald in the aftermath of his capture .
 The Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition also raised questions about CIA involvement . The Mannicher-carcano ammunition was also used by the CIA .
 In the mid-1950s, the Marine Corps purchased four million rounds of ammunition . The ammunition does not fit and cannot be fired in any Marine Corps weapons, an FBI document says .
 The CIA had used ‘sanitized’ weapons in various missions around the world . Weapons that cannot be traced directly back to the agency or the U.S. are banned .
 Most of the information available suggesting links between the assassination and the CIA is circumstantial . This is hardly surprising, but it's hardly surprising .
 Agency officials could hardly be expected to reveal information possibly connecting them to the president’s death . After all, agency officials could not reveal information .
 There can be little doubt that many persons connected to Oswald were also connected to the CIA . Some knowledgeable persons, such as former CIA operative Morrow, claim they were operating outside of agency control .
 Gary Underhill was considered one of the top U.S. experts on unconventional warfare . Underhill had served in World War II and was considered a top expert in unconventional warfare. Underhill died in a mysterious incident .
 At the time of the assassination, Underhill performed “special assignments” for the CIA . Underhill was on close terms with officials of both the agency and the Pentagon .
 Several days after the assassination, Underhill visited friends in New Jersey . He visited friends days after his assassination .
 He said that President Kennedy had been killed by a small group within the CIA . He said he believed his life was in danger . President Kennedy believed that a small CIA group had killed him .
 A short time later, Underhill was found fatally shot in his Washington, D.C. apartment .
 Underhill's death was ruled a suicide although he was shot in the left side of his head and a pistol was found in his left hand . Underhill was well-known that he was right-handed and had a pistol in his hand .
 There is also the very real possibility that the assassins who killed Kennedy may have had no direct link with Oswald and his Cuban contacts . Oswald's Cuban contacts may have led to his assassination .
 Oswald's acquaintances in New Orleans seem to connect firmly with the shooting in Dealey Plaza . This intriguing possibility became apparent several years ago with the revelation of a French connection to the assassination . This could go far in explaining why none of the trails leading backward from Oswald’s acquaintances in
 In 1979 the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that many Dealey Plaza witnesses were correct in stating that at least one gunman fired on Kennedy from the Grassy Knoll . The French Connection to the Assassination: The French connection .
 Committee: Second gunman may have been premier French assassin with close contacts to CIA, organized crime, and even an oblique connection with Jack Ruby . Committee said it could not identify the Grassy Knoll gunman .
 Evidence revealed in the late 1970s that more than one French assassin may have been operating in Dealey Plaza . Evidence was found in the 1970s .
 He was in Fort Worth on the morning of 22 November and in Dallas in the afternoon . He was visiting Fort Worth, Dallas, Fort Worth and Dallas .
 The government did check with the dentist, who was still practicing in Houston, Texas, in the 1980s . The dentist died of a heart attack in 1996 .
 "They felt that Jean knew who, or he himself had assassinated Kennedy," Alderson said . Alderson: “They felt he knew who . or he . himself had been assassinated Kennedy .
 D.C. officials wanted to know who in Washington had flown him out of Dallas . They wanted to find out who had him flown out of the country .
 I believe he was in the Fourth French Air Force Headquarters in France . He was a member of the French air force . He died at the age of 92 .
 Alderson said Soutre in the early 1950s was about twenty-five years old and spoke English, Spanish, and German without a trace of an accent . Alderson provided a snapshot of his French friend, who he said was about 25 years old .
 FBI report says three persons named John Mertz, Irma Rio and Sara flew from Houston to Mexico City on November 23, 1963 . The FBI report stated that three people named John and Irma flew to Mexico from Houston .
 Soutre could have flown out of the country by private or even military aircraft . It is interesting to note the coincidental departure of the Mertzes at a time corresponding to that in the CIA document .
 Soutre also was known as Michel Roux and Michael Mertz, according to FBI report . FBI report noted that he was also known in the U.S. as Michael Roux, Michel MERTz and Michel Rouz .
 Roux and Mertz are the names of two real individuals, both of whom were connected to the shadowy world of intelligence work . Today it is known that Roux is the name of a real individual .
 The name “Mertz’s” crops up in the 1974 Pulitzer Prize-winning investigative book The Heroin Trail .
 Michael Victor Mertz was a World War II French Resistance hero and a captain in the French secret service after the war . According to this book, he was a hero in the Resistance and was a captain . He was also a French Resistance captain .
 Mertz operated in Germany, Turkey, Morocco, and Morocco under the cover of his military title . He operated in Turkey, Germany, Morocco and Turkey .
 In April 1961, Mertz was ordered to penetrate the terrorist group Organisation de |’armée secrete . The secret group was fighting to keep Algeria a French possession . MERTz was a member of the Organisation de . | |'armée Secrete .
 Mertz posed as an OAS sympathizer and was arrested later in 1961 for distributing pro-OAS leaflets . Reflecting the methods of Lee Oswald, he posed as a sympathizer in 1961 .
 There he worked his way into the highest levels of the OAS . He was able to break up a bomb plot against Charles de Gaulle . He also broke up a plot to bomb Charles de Gallle .
 Mertz became involved in security work at the beginning of his career . He has also been involved in a number of other activities in the past .
 Even before saving de Gaulle, Mertz had become one of France’s biggest heroin smugglers, Newsday reports . Newsday cites numerous French police and court records .
 David David was one of the men involved in the 1965 murder of Moroccan opposition leader Mehdi Ben Barka . Newsday and other knowledgeable sources say he was involved in killing .
 David was arrested in Brazil and charged with being a member of a smuggling ring that imported more than 1,000 pounds of heroin into the U.S. over a three-year period . Barka’s murder, which is still officially unsolved, was brought up when David was
 David was extradited to the United States and sentenced to twenty years in prison for heroin smuggling . David was arrested in Brazil after his arrest in Brazil . He was sentenced to 20 years in jail .
 In 1975, the Senate Intelligence Committee began looking into the CIA’s ‘Executive Action’ program . David was ordered extradited back to France and was taken out of the country . He was taken into custody in 1975 .
 The committee was especially concerned with the agency’s Executive Action program because it was established to commit assassinations . The committee also was concerned about the program's Executive Action .
 Former CIA director Richard Helms spoke at length about ZR/RIFLE to the committee . Helms was CIA director until he was forced to resign .
 WI/ROGUE was a French Corsican, a stateless soldier of fortune and a criminal, committee says . WI/OGUE is believed to have been a Corsican and stateless member of a criminal . Committee says evidence gathered gathered by committee gathered by the committee .
 This man approached QJ/WIN and attempted to recruit him into the CIA’s assassination program . The man approached him and tried to convince him to join the CIA's assassination program.
 Although it was never learned whether this recruitment effort was successful, there is evidence that it was . It was never known whether it was successful .
 QJ/WIN was contacted in conjunction with an illegal narcotics operation into the United States . QJ was first contacted in . in . conjunction with . illegal narcotics operations into the U.S. The operation was part of a drug operation .
 CIS Lucien Conein was contacted sporadically by the DEA on behalf of the Bureau of Narcotics . He later became chief of foreign intelligence for the Drug Enforcement Agency . He was later contacted by the Bureau's chief of Foreign Intelligence for a year and a half .
 Until the Senate hearings, the ZR/RIFLE program and its agents, WI/ROGUE and QJ/WIN, were among the CIA’s most closely guarded secrets .
 WI/ROGUE and Christian David are one and the same, sources say . Sources say they are linked to both intelligence operations and drug smuggling .
 David's own admission of intelligence associations and by his convenient extradition to France in 1985 . This claim is further supported by his own admission to intelligence associations .
 The association of David and Mertz, coupled with their descriptions and backgrounds, which match those of the CIA agents, suggests that QJ/WIN was Michael Victor Merttz .
 Ruby's first attorney asked if there were anyone the prosecution might produce who could damage his client's defense of momentary insanity . Tom Howard, Ruby’s first attorney, asked his client if anyone could harm his client . Howard: "There are no names that could damage Ruby's
 Ruby said Davis first approached him about using strippers in pomographic movies, but later the two had become involved in gunrunning activities . Ruby said he and Davis became involved with gunrunning in the 1980s .
 The FBI told the Warren Commission they could not locate such a person . The FBI said it could not find such an individual . The Warren Commission said the FBI had no such person .
 In June 1958, Davis entered a Detroit bank and handed a teller a note that threatened her life if she didn’t give him money . Davis threatened to kill her if she did not give him any money .
 Due to his family's good reputation and his lack of a criminal record, Davis received five years of probation . Davis received no criminal record .
 D236764 was issued by the State Department on January 31, 1963, in New Orleans, New Orleans . It was almost impossible for a convicted felon without highly placed and powerful help .
 Davis’s ensuing activities took him into the murky world of anti-Castro gunrunning, and it was here he met Ruby . Davis's ensuing activities led him to the murky underworld of gunrunning .
 Ruby told his attorney that Davis had come to one of his nightclubs . Ruby said he intended to go into the gunrunning business with Davis on a regular basis . Ruby told the court that Davis came to a nightclubs and that he planned to run gunrunning .
 Davis’s activities were not limited to dealing with Cuban gunrunners . However, apparently Davis's activities included dealing with gun runners .
 Less than a month later, he was jailed in Tangiers in connection with the assassination . He was jailed for a month after his arrest .
 His wife told authorities that her husband was a soldier of fortune who had operated in such diverse countries as Indonesia, Algeria, and Cuba .
 Through early 1963, Davis had contact with the anti-Castro Cubans, as confirmed by his wife and family . Davis' family says he had contact through early 1963 with anti- Castro Cubans .
 He was in New Orleans at the same time as Oswald in the summer of 1963 . He admitted to reporter George Carter that he had used the name Oswald in North Africa .
 Neither the Warren Commission nor the House Select Committee on Assassinations chose to investigate the Davis story . Davis was assassinated in 1968 .
 Davis was attempting to steal copper wire from a construction site when he cut into a 7,000-volt power line . Davis was electrocuted in September 1973 in Wise County, Texas .
 Davis certainly was in the right circles to be involved in assassination attempts . Through his connection to QJ/WIN, Davis was involved in an assassination attempt . Davis was in right circles for assassination attempts.
 QJ/WIN’s boss on the ZR/RIFLE team was William Harvey, a CIA official . According to testimony given to the Senate Intelligence Committee, Harvey worked for the CIA . Harvey was the CIA's chief of the QR/WIN team .
 Harvey’s specialty was anti-Castro activities in general and the attempts to assassinate Castro in particular . Harvey was a prominent critic of Castro's assassination attempts .
 Harvey was in contact with John Roselli and Florida Mafia chief Santos Trafficante Jr. Harvey, of course, was also in touch with Roselli, Trafficante and Trafficante .
 A reporter from Dallas once queried the FBI about Jean Soutre and his presence in Dallas in 1963 . The FBI told the reporter that man was a Frenchman named Michel Roux, whose name just happened to coincide with one of his aliases . The man in Dallas was not Sout
 The bureau could find nothing concerning Soutre/Mertz/Roux in 1964 . However, the bureau could not offer any substantiating documents to support its story . The bureau was unable to find anything concerning the family .
 At the heart of this labyrinth of intelligence and mob intrigue is QJ/WIN, who appears to have been Michael Victor Mertz . At the center of this is the identity of the man who is believed to be Michael Victor .
 Soutre today has been located, working as the public-relations director for a French casino .
 Soutre did suggest that Mertz, an old enemy, may have been in Dallas using his name . He did not say why he was behind the attack .
 Bailey described the Frenchman to researcher Gary Shaw as a man about forty-five years old with thin, graying hair . Bailey describes the Frenchman as a 'fifty-five-year-old' with thin hair .
 In 1963, Soutre was about thirty-five years old and Roux was about twenty-five . Roux died in a car crash at the age of about 25 years old .
 Mertz, the agent connected to both intelligence and worldwide organized crime, was about forty-five years old . He was about 40 years old when he died .
 The answers to the questions raised by the French connection to the Kennedy assassination lie in locked files in Washington, D.C.
 Los Angeles author Steve J Rivele claimed that after several years of investigative work he had learned the names of three French gangsters .
 David claimed to have been offered a contract to kill JFK by the chief of the Marseilles Mafia, Meme Guerini . Rivele said David claimed he was offered the contract by Guerini, the boss of Guerini's family .
 The three alleged hit men were Sauveur Pironti, Lucien Sarti, who was killed in Mexico in 1972, and Sauveurs Pironta, who in 1988 was living in Marseilles and denied any connection with the assassination . The three men are believed
 Sources say Sarti wore a police uniform and fired from behind a picket fence . Rivele’s sources say he was behind the fence on the Grassy Knoll .
 Pironti was questioned by European news reporters after Rivele’s book The Murderers of John F Kennedy was published in France in 1988 . He denied any involvement in the murder of Kennedy .
 Pironti was serving at a sea post at the time of the assassination . His denial was supported by French military authorities who said he was at sea post . French military officials said he had been serving at sea posts at time of assassination .
 According to Rivele, David David and Michel Nicoli claimed that Lee Harvey Oswald played no part in the assassination . David and Nicoli also claimed to have been involved in the killing of Oswald .
 Allegedly the three assassins were hired to kill Kennedy by the French Union Corse, the European branch of the international crime syndicate, on orders from organized-crime figures in the U.S. Allegedly they were hired by organized crime figures in Europe .
 The trio of hit men flew to Mexico, where they were met at the Texas border . Chicago mobsters drove them to Dallas, Texas, and met them at the border .
 The trio remained in a safe house for more than a week and then were flown out of the country . After the assassination, the trio remained safe for a week .
 Conein, known in Vietnam as “Black Luigi,” often bragged about his connections with the Union Corse . He was also known as ‘Black Luigi’ in Vietnam .
 Conein claimed he was made an honorary member of this branch of the Sicilian Mafia after serving with Corsican partisans as an officer in the OSS and the French Foreign Legion . He claimed to have served with Corsicans partisans .
 Conein implicated President Kennedy in the assassination of Vietnam’s Diem . Kennedy knew in advance of the plot to overthrow the Vietnamese president, he said . Nixon aide Charles Colson told reporters Kennedy knew of Diem plot .
 U.S. media has paid little attention to Christian David’s admissions, and Rivele reportedly went into hiding after receiving death threats . Today it appears that no such an investigation has been forthcoming .
 Marvin Watson of President Johnson’s White House staff in 1967 confided to an FBI official who wrote that “ was now convinced there was a plot in connection with the assassination . Watson confided that he was convinced of a plot by the FBI .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that while the agency was “deficient in its collection and sharing of information both prior to and subsequent to the assassination,” the CIA was not involved . Naturally, the CIA maintains innocence in the assassination .
 Anyone making a serious study of the JFK assassination must take a long, hard look at the FBI and the Secret Service .
 The former--as we now know, monopolized the investigation of the tragedy while the latter failed to prevent it. The former—as we . now know— monopolized . investigation . The former — as we now . know — monopolized investigation of tragedy .
 The contacts between accused assassin Lee Harvey Oswald and the FBI are many and troubling . Oswald's contacts with the FBI have been troubling, according to reports .
 No fewer than seven FBI agents were associated with Oswald during the year and a half between his return from Russia and the assassination . Oswald was just 24 years old when he was killed .
 While the bureau has been especially sensitive about the JFK assassination, it also has been unintentionally helpful . The bureau has a history of being sensitive to the assassination, including the assassination .
 During the past five decades, more than 5 million pages of documents regarding the assassination have been released by the government . The government has been forced by Freedom of Information Act suits .
 The occasional nuggets of information buried in the raw ore of these documents have helped piece together aspects of the case . Most of the documents have been from the FBI .
 Increasingly the bureau has been called to task for its handling of the JFK assassination . Increasingly it has been accused of mishandling the assassination .
 At least two government panels have chided the bureau for inadequacies in its assassination investigation . The bureau has been accused of bungling the assassination probe .
 The Senate Intelligence Committee chastised the bureau for shoddy work in the assassination investigation .
 The Commission's whole investigation was based on J Edgar Hoover’s initial findings . This was not surprising since the . Commission's . investigation was . based on the . initial findings of the Hoover . Hoover .
 Ironically, it was government corruption that prompted the creation of the FBI in the first place .
 Just after the turn of the twentieth century, there was a growing demand in Washington to combat the “public-be-damned” attitude of the giant trusts and corruption within a number of federal agencies .
 Such abuses were the province of the Department of Justice, which Congress had never seen fit to equip with investigators . Congress never saw fit to arm the Justice Department to investigate abuses .
 Treasury agents were called in when investigations were required . Treasury agents are called in on a temporary basis .
 Bonaparte issued an order dated July 26, 1908, creating an investigative agency within the Justice Department . With the approval of president Theodore Roosevelt, the order was approved .
 Less than one year later, Attorney General George W. Wickersham gave the new agency a permanent position and a name .
 The new bureau could enforce only federal crimes . Outside of counterfeiting, there were hardly any federal crimes at that time . But the new bureau was created in 1903 .
 In 1910 Congress unanimously passed the White Slave Traffic Act . Congress was pressured by a public that was shocked and outraged by press accounts of worldwide prostitution .
 This law became known as the Mann Act after its sponsor, representative James Robert Mann of Illinois . The Mann Act became known after it was sponsored by Representative Mann in Illinois .
 The law gave federal agents authority in any case in which a woman was taken across state or national boundaries for immoral purposes . The law also gave agents authority to take a woman across national or state boundaries .
 It gave the fledgling bureau an excuse to intervene in any case in which a woman involved in criminal activity crossed state lines . In effect, it gave the agency an excuse for intervention .
 During 1914 and 1915 explosions, fires, and other acts of sabotage occurred at several war plants . Several war plants were bombed during World War One .
 U.S. public opinion slowly shifted from neutrality to animosity toward Germany . American public opinion began to shift from neutral to animosity towards Germany . Public opinion slowly began shifting from neutralism to animosity .
 The pace of this shift quickened in January 1917, when Germany resumed unrestricted submarine warfare on American shipping . U.S. ships were attacked by German submarines .
 Congress declared war against the Central Powers, led by Germany, on April 6 . President Woodrow Wilson ordered the bureau to address wartime issues .
 Wilson required more than one million “enemy aliens” to register . All Americans of German descent could not be interned for the duration of the war .
 The bureau, which had only three hundred agents by then, was expected to enforce this edict . The bureau had only 3,000 agents by that time .
 The nation suddenly became aware of the danger of spies, and a full-blown spy scare swept across the land . Much of the suspicion was directed at labor unions and anarchists .
 Aided by a group of private vigilantes called the American Protective League, which numbered more than a quarter million members . The league was accused of overzealous activities and intimidating labor unions .
 The next year a bomb exploded at the home of the new attorney general, A Mitchell Palmer, killing the two bombers . A bomb exploded next year at Palmer's home, killing him and his wife .
 He replaced bureau director Alexander Bielaski with William J Flynn, a former chief of the Secret Service . Flynn replaced Bielaskai with Flynn, who is a former Secret Service chief .
 No one man has held so much power for so long in the history of the U.S. as John Edgar Hoover . The Top G-man is the most powerful man in the world .
 In the 1950s, Hoover was hailed as the foremost defender of American freedom and democracy . Hoover was an honors-encrusted hero, hailed as a hero of the U.S. in the world .
 By the 1970s, he was being likened to Heinrich Himmler, Hitler’s dreaded SS commander . He was being compared to Himml, the Nazi leader's SS commander, in the 1960s .
 By the 1980s, knowledge of FBI abuses under Hoover’s leadership had become widespread, although the major news media seemed reluctant to spotlight his darker activities .
 The truth of Hoover's place in the still-untold history of modern-day America lies in the man's background and motivations . Hoover's motivation for Hoover is in the background of his background and motivation .
 For so long everything printed about Hoover was either a product of FBI public relations or, at least, was approved by Hoover or a subordinate . Hoover was the FBI's top administrator in the early 1950s and early '60s . Hoover's career spanned four decades .
 To get cooperation from the Bureau, reporters were forced to stay on Hoover's good side . To get any cooperation from any federal investigation, reporters had to be on the good side of Hoover .
 Any story criticizing the director was an excuse to place the writer on the bureau’s list of people to be ignored . The director was the subject of a story criticizing him, the writer said .
 Hoover was born on January 1, 1895, five years before the beginning of the twentieth century began . Hoover was the first president of the United States .
 Hoover was born in Washington, DC, and rarely left the city in his entire life . Hoover rarely left Washington, D.C. in his life. Hoover was a national hero .
 FBI's associate director, Clyde Tolson, continued living there with his constant companion and the FBI’s associate director . Afterward, he continued to live there with him and his companion . He was a constant companion for the FBI for more than 30 years .
 His father, Dickerson N Hoover, was a minor bureaucrat who served as chief of the Coast and Geodetic Survey’s printing division . Hoover's father was a major bureaucrat .
 His mother, Annie M Scheitlin Hoover, instilled American middle-class virtues and Lutheran Christianity in her children . Hoover's mother was a plump housewife who faithfully instill American middle class virtues and . Lutheran Christianity .
 As a schoolboy delivering groceries, young Hoover discovered the quicker he delivered, the more trips he could make, which meant more money . Hoover discovered he could earn more money delivering groceries . Hoover: "The quicker you deliver, the better trips you can make, and the more money you
 Hoover was once hit in the nose by a baseball, the basis of his bulldog-like appearance . Hoover was a member of the Hoover family .
 Hoover got a job as a clerk in the Library of Congress . Hoover graduated from Washington’s Central High School . Hoover was a clerk at the Library .
 With the world at war, there was frantic activity in the Department of Justice . With the war at its start, the department was at the center of the world .
 On July 26, 1917, Hoover joined the department and was placed in the enemy alien registration section . Hoover served in the Army during the Great Depression .
 Hoover soon became an assistant to the attorney general, who placed him in charge of the General Intelligence Division . Earning a reputation as a diligent and efficient worker, Hoover became a top intelligence official .
 Hoover was instructed by Attorney General A Mitchell Palmer to study subversive groups within the U.S. Soon after taking charge of the division, Hoover was told to study subverted groups in the United States . Hoover was tasked with studying subversive groups in order to find out what to do .
 This marked the beginning of the infamous ‘Palmer raids,’ in which Hoover prepared the legal cases . Hoover prepared legal cases against the government in the early 1950s .
 Raids on communist meeting places in thirty-three cities rounded up more than 2,500 aliens . Raids were carried out in response to orders of Attorney General Palmer .
 Hoover used the communist threat to great personal advantage, even putting his name on the popular book Masters of Deceit . Hoover helped fan the fires of the 1950s communist scare . Hoover's name was on the title of the popular masters of deceit, a book that helped fan
 Hoover never let the facts stand in the way of his campaign to eradicate communism . Even if it meant neglecting one of the true menaces to America, organized crime was a real threat .
 Hoover served eight presidents and outlived more than a dozen attorneys general . Hoover was a national police leader for more than 40 years . Hoover is the only national police chief in the United States .
 Hoover was close to leaders of the Nazidominated International Criminal Police Organization prior to World War II . Hoover also was named vice president of Interpol in 1946 . Hoover was vice president in 1946 and was named Interpol vice president .
 About 4 hundred agents were on the streets of the city searching out communists . Yet about four hundred agents searched out communists in the city .
 Sullivan prepared a monograph on the Mafia that was sent to the top twenty-five government officials concerned with law enforcement . Sullivan and other top FBI officials prepared the monograph in 1957 .
 Learning of this, an angry Hoover recalled all twenty-five copies and had them destroyed .
 He denounced the monograph as “baloney,” and this report was never heard of again . He denounced it as ‘baloney’
 Joe Valachi was brought to Washington by attorney general Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department for testimony before a Senate committee . Hoover was forced to grudgingly admit to the existence of an organized-crime structure in the United States .
 Investigating the Mafia promised to be more difficult than rounding up juvenile auto thieves . Investigation into the Mafia promises to be difficult, but it's a good start .
 Mafioso are rich and can afford the best lawyers, while we have to use government lawyers . Some of whom are excellent, some of whom aren’t worth a damn . Mafioo are wealthy and have better lawyers than us, while government lawyers are useless .
 The Mafia is powerful, so powerful that entire police forces and even a mayor’s office can be under Mafia control . And the Mafia is so powerful, it can be so powerful even police forces can be in control of the mayor's office .
 Most people now accept that Hoover’s lack of interest in organized crime was a result of the blackmail threat due to his homosexuality . Hoover was the subject of blackmail threats from organized crime .
 This referred to persistent rumors that the mob had photographs of Hoover in compromising situations with Tolson as well as wearing a pink ballerina’s tutu . Hoover was the subject of persistent rumors about the mob having photographs of Tolson with Hoover .
 Hoover was well-known for his ingratiating attitude toward Washington politicians . Hoover was known for his friendly attitude toward the White House . Hoover died in 1945 at age 92 .
 The more powerful the politician, the more Hoover tried to befriend him, thanks to the voluminous files Hoover had accumulated through the years . Hoover's files include the files he collected on politicians, politicians and politicians .
 Hoover's death was suggested by President's funeral oration and Congress's decision that his body should lie in state, where Lincoln and Kennedy had lain . Hoover’s public was ‘gulled, it is true, but until recent years loved it all,’
 There was little or no outcry when the Director, guardian of liberty, spoke up for Joe McCarthy, called Martin Luther King a liar and held up passage of a consular treaty with the Soviet Union .
 There was always a radio audience for “The FBI in Peace and War” and the G-man movies to which the Director invariably lent “technical assistance” to which he invariably lent his seal of approval . As long as they pictured his men on the side of the
 For decades, his turgid and moralistic articles appeared with the regularity of the seasons in "Reader's Digest" and "American" magazines . Publishers took turns presenting his self-aggrandizing books to the waiting public .
 If J Edgar Hoover passed beyond the normal restraints of office, the U.S. public seemed to view this process happily, and with a sense of gratitude . Hoover was eventually forced to step aside from the normal constraints of office .
 Public criticism grew over the raids of communist meeting places . Palmer raids were the first of its kind .
 Federal agents charged with unconstitutional searches and seizures, individual rights violations, and even using agents provocateur . Federal agents were charged with violating individual rights . The agents were accused of unconstitutional searches, seizures, and using agents .
 Later a Senate committee looked into the raids, but divided on its views of the operation and failed to reach a consensus . A Senate committee also looked at the raids but failed to find consensus on the raid .
 Justice Department morale goes from bad to worse after Palmer raids . Justice Department's morale has been hit hard by the raids . The raids were the result of complaints from the public .
 Hoover was named acting director of the bureau after Stone took over the bureau . Hoover has been in charge of the Department of Easy Virtue .
 Hoover moved rapidly to restore respect for the bureau, which was in real danger of being disbanded due to the years of problems and criticism . Hoover moved quickly to restore the bureau's reputation after years of criticism and problems .
 Hoover moved the bureau from a few hundred unarmed investigators to a full-fledged national police agency . Hoover made the bureau a national police force 15 years later . Hoover: "It's a job that's never been a job job"
 He kept an eye open for favorable public relations opportunities . And all the while, he kept a close eye on the media .
 By the early 1930s, Prohibition had propelled crime into the national spotlight . Hoover was there to share the glory. Hoover was in the middle of Prohibition .
 During the heyday of Bonnie and Clyde and the Ma Barker Gang, hardly a day passed that Hoover wasn’t being quoted in the nation’s press . Hoover was a hero of the day during the heydays of the gangsters .
 In the early 1930s, Hoover was very cautious about his moves within Franklin Roosevelt’s Democratic administration . Hoover, a staunch Republican, was cautious of his moves in the 1930s .
 By 1933, kidnapping was added to the list of crimes under the jurisdiction of the FBI due to the public clamor over the abduction of aviation pioneer Charles Lindbergh’s infant son . The FBI added kidnapping to its jurisdiction in 1933 due to a public outcry .
 This list grew longer in the next year, with the addition of killing or assaulting a federal officer, fleeing across state lines, and extortion involving interstate commerce . This year, the list of people killed or assaulted federal officers was also added .
 They were allowed to serve warrants and subpoenas, to make seizures and arrests, and to carry arms . They were also allowed to carry out searches and arrest arrests .
 The bureau had become the very thing that Hoover had often spoken against—a national police force . Hoover often spoke against the bureau . Hoover had spoken against the idea of national police forces . The bureau became a national force .
 The initials FBI were well-known all over the world . Also that year, the word ‘federal’ was added to the bureau’s name, and soon the initials FBI .
 By the beginning of World War II, the FBI boasted an Identification Division with thousands of fingerprint records . The FBI also had a National Police Academy for training state and local law-enforcement officers .
 Even today it is considered the peak of a lawman’s career to be selected for training at the FBI Academy at Quantico, Virginia .
 Hoover felt that the alumni of the FBI training course were his men, Sullivan says . Hoover felt they were his 'men' according to Sullivan, a former FBI director .
 FBI agent told Dallas police lieutenant Jack Revill that Lee Harvey Oswald was a communist known to the FBI . FBI agent James Hosty said the bureau had information that Oswald was capable of committing assassination .
 All government agencies were saying they had no knowledge of Oswald, this story was a bombshell . Since all government agencies had said they were unaware of Oswald's assassination, this was a major revelation .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry told reporters that the FBI was aware of Oswald but had not informed the Dallas police . Curry said the FBI knew Oswald but didn't inform Dallas police of Oswald's whereabouts .
 Curry qualified his statement by saying he had no personal knowledge of the issue . When challenged to prove his charge by the head of the Dallas FBI office, Curry said he didn't know anything about the case .
 Until Curry’s retirement in 1966, Hoover conducted a vendetta against the Dallas police, according to FBI documents . FBI documents released in 1980, they say the FBI was involved in the Dallas case .
 Documents show that under orders from Hoover, FBI officials were prohibited from conducting training courses for Dallas police . Police from that city were not invited to attend the FBI Academy, claiming lack of manpower .
 Dallas mayor Erik Jonsson visited Hoover in Washington DC in January 1966 . Dallas mayor visited Hoover at the White House in 1966 .
 Jonsson told Hoover he would “immediately instruct the city manager to have a stern talk” with the police chief . Hoover’s complaints against Curry were met with no response .
 Dallas police were again receiving FBI training within weeks . Curry resigned less than a month after the Jonsson-Hoover meeting .
 After turning his bureau into an anticrime force, he began to look into other areas . He began to turn the bureau into a national security force .
 The bureau began moving quietly into intelligence gathering in the summer of 1936 . President Roosevelt and Hoover met in secret meetings in summer of that year .
 In 1939, on the eve of World War II, the bureau was directed to investigate espionage, sabotage, and violations of neutrality regulations . The bureau investigated espionage and sabotage in the run-up to the outbreak of WWII .
 Hoover opposed relocation of Japanese Americans as a violation of their civil rights . Hoover was one of the few government officials who opposed the relocation and incarceration of the Japanese Americans .
 This new authority marked the beginning of this nation’s multiagency intelligence establishment and marked a period of extraordinary growth for the bureau . The bureau was created in 1973 .
 During the war, the FBI was called upon to gather intelligence on activities detrimental to U.S. interests in South America . The FBI was involved in the war in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The FBI even today retains large offices in Mexico City, Brasilia, Ottawa, Vienna, Berlin, Tokyo, and Bangkok, among many other cities .
 Hoover’s path crossed that of a young naval intelligence officer with unexpected and long-term repercussions . Hoover's path crossed during the war with an intelligence officer . Hoover was a young intelligence officer during the Second World War .
 The FBI had been snooping after a suspected Nazi agent . Inga Arvad attended the wedding of Germany’s Field Marshal Hermann Goering and met with Adolf Hitler . The FBI snooped on her .
 A former Miss Denmark, she had no trouble attracting young men in wartime Washington . She was a former Danish Miss Denmark .
 Hoover’s FBI wiretapped an apartment shared by Kennedy and “Inga binga,” as he called his paramour, and picked up the sounds of sexual play . Hoover wiretapped the apartment where Kennedy lived and called "Inga"
 Kennedy made a few remarks about sensitive security matters . They also picked up a few of his remarks concerning sensitive security issues . Kennedy also made remarks about the CIA .
 Kennedy was transferred to the South Pacific after his involvement with a suspected agent . The Navy and his father had been alerted to the danger presented by Kennedy’s involvement .
 Kennedy led the survivors of PT-109 back to safety, thus becoming a war hero and helping to launch his political career . It was all thanks to the diligent J Edgar Hoover, the diligent FBI agent .
 It could be argued that Hoover set young Kennedy on the course that ended in Dallas . Hoover set Kennedy on course that led to Kennedy's assassination .
 After World War II, FBI intelligence activities increased, thanks to the anticommunist hysteria of the Cold War years . FBI intelligence operations increased after the war . FBI was founded in 1945 after the Second World War .
 FBI launched McCarthy on his ill-fated anti-communist crusade . McCarthy was the FBI that launched senator Joseph McCarthy's anti-Communism crusade . The FBI was the source of McCarthy's crusade .
 In 1950, a one-hundred-page FBI document alleging communist infiltration of the U.S. government was leaked to a military intelligence officer with instructions to pass it along to the Jewish American League Against Communism . The document was passed along to a Jewish group .
 Hoover always claimed that information the bureau collected was never to be released to unauthorized persons . It was a rule that he bent for friends . Hoover bent the rule for friends.
 In 1954, vice president Richard Nixon was able to obtain information in FBI files to use in his attack on representative Robert L Condon of California .
 Hoover deliberately leaked derogatory material on Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King . Hoover leaked the material to Hoover's office, Hoover leaked it to the media .
 Martin Luther King Jr. was part of COINTELPRO, Hoover’s secret counterintelligence program . King was a civil rights activist during the 1960s as a result of the program .
 Hoover's ability to gather information and control it gave him extraordinary power . Hoover's extraordinary power was his ability to control information and gather it first .
 Hoover was always gathering damaging material on Jack Kennedy . Hoover was more than willing to provide the President with his active social life . Hoover's social life was a prime cause for Hoover to gather damaging material .
 We never put any technical surveillance on JFK, but whatever came up was automatically funneled directly to Hoover . Whatever came up from JFK was automatically sent to Hoover, the author says .
 I was sure he was saving everything he had on Kennedy, and on Martin Luther King, Jr., too, until he could unload it all and destroy them both . "I thought he was trying to save everything he could on Kennedy and MLK, too," she said .
 He kept this kind of explosive material in his personal files, which filled four rooms on the fifth floor of headquarters . He kept the material in four rooms filled with explosives .
 JFK reappointing Hoover was one of JFK’s first actions after becoming president . Hoover's files still held information on Kennedy and Inga Arvad .
 It has been reported that Hoover’s personal and confidential files were destroyed soon after his death by Tolson and his faithful secretary, Helen Gandy .
 Hoover’s reappointment by Kennedy certainly wasn’t due to his politics . Hoover was reappointed by Kennedy . Hoover's reappointment wasn't due to politics, Kennedy said .
 Hoover had quietly helped Nixon as much as possible during the 1960 campaign . Hoover was a Republican who liked to boast that he had never voted, but he had helped Nixon .
 Hoover did his best to keep the news media supplied with antiKennedy stories, Sullivan says . Sullivan: Hoover tried to get the media to focus on the Kennedy scandal .
 Hoover’s methods of ingratiating himself both to presidents and attorneys general he served have been well documented . Hoover's methods are well documented, but his methods have been criticized for his lack of political savvy .
 He would send them letters marked “Top Secret, Eyes Only” filled with juicy tidbits of gossip about congressmen and political enemies . The letters would be sent to the recipients of the letters .
 Most presidents disdained this practice, but two—Lyndon B Johnson and Richard Nixon—seemed to enjoy the unusual channel of information . Nixon and Johnson used the channel to communicate with each other .
 Nixon and Hoover were GOP allies from the days when Nixon was a representative from California . Hoover was Nixon's representative in California during the Nixon administration . Hoover and Nixon have been allies for decades .
 Hoover was a regular dinner guest at the Nixon White House in later years . Hoover was invited to the White House by the President of California .
 Following the assassination, Lyndon Johnson had a strong right-hand man in Hoover . Hoover was a strong ally in the White House . Hoover is Hoover's successor to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
 Johnson asked Hoover for a special security team of FBI men headed by Cartha D DeLoach . The team was created in response to fears that Robert Kennedy might run for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1964 .
 Sullivan wrote, “Ostensibly, the agents would be there to guard against threats to the President, but this security force was actually a surveillance team, a continuation of the FBI’s surveillance on Martin Luther King in Atlantic City, he said . Sullivan wrote that the agents
 Johnson and Hoover had their mutual fear and hatred of the Kennedys in common, he wrote . He wrote, “Johnson and Hoover . had mutual fear, hatred and more. He wrote .
 Johnson cemented his friendship with Hoover in January 1964, less than two months after Kennedy’s assassination . Hoover was the president of the White House .
 Edgar, the law says that you must retire next January when you reach your 70th birthday, and I know you wouldn’t want to break the law . Edgar, Edgar, says, "I know you’d like to retire" Edgar .
 I have today signed an Executive Order exempting you from compulsory retirement for an indefinite period of time . Therefore, by virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in the President, I have . signed an executive order exempting . from compulsory . retirement .
 The order was renewed each year, but it would have required a subsequent executive order to rescind this action . Hoover would have been installed as FBI director for life if he had not been removed .
 Kennedy ended rumors in DC that he would use the mandatory retirement limit to remove Hoover after the 1964 election . Such action put an end to pre-assassination rumors in Washington DC that Kennedy would remove Hoover .
 Shortly after this event, Hoover replaced Courtney Evans as the bureau’s White House liaison with Cartha DeLoach, who had been quite intimate with Johnson since his early days in the Senate .
 Sullivan: Johnson's relationship with Hoover began to change once he became president . Sullivan: "Once Johnson assumed the powers of the presidency, his relationship with the trusty Hoover started to change"
 The Director was over 65 by that time, past retirement age for federal employees . He stayed in office only because of a special waiver which required the President’s signature each year . The President signed the waiver to keep him in office .
 Johnson began to take advantage of Hoover, using the Bureau as his personal investigative arm . With that leverage, Johnson used his leverage, he began to use his leverage to gain leverage .
 Hoover "hot-footed it to Johnson’s demands . He found himself very much in the back seat, almost a captive of the President" Hoover found himself "almost a captive" of Johnson .
 Hoover had an abiding and intense hatred for both John and Robert Kennedy . Hoover hated both of the Kennedy brothers because of their politics, their associates, their personal lives, and their style . Hoover's hatred for the Kennedy family was intense .
 Sullivan recalled hearing hearing Clyde Tolson, Hoover’s associate director, confidant, and roommate, once say, “Goddamn the Kennedys.” Sullivan said . Sullivan said he heard Tolson say, "Goddam the Kennedy's"
 This hatred for the Kennedys makes the bureau’s contacts with Lee Harvey Oswald all the more suspicious . The bureau's numerous contacts with Oswald are suspicious .
 The FBI attempted to keep tabs on Oswald after his attempted defection to Russia . The FBI was aware of Oswald and even suspecting that someone may have been posing as Oswald .
 On April 27, 1960, John W Fain, a resident FBI agent in Fort Worth, interviewed Robert Oswald concerning his brother’s activities in the Soviet Union . Robert Oswald was interviewed by FBI agent John W. Fain . Fain was an FBI agent from Fort Worth .
 Lee Oswald's older brother says his family was shocked at his brother's behavior . Lee Oswald had never had any sympathy for or connection with communism before his trip to Russia .
 Fain also interviewed Marguerite Oswald the next day concerning a $25 money order she had tried to send to her son . Fain interviewed Oswald about the money order . Oswald also interviewed Fain about the order she tried to make sure her son received the money .
 The FBI was not the only U.S. agency with an active interest in Oswald . Oswald was found to be a major source of interest in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 On July 3, 1961, more than a year before Oswald arrived back home from Russia, Fain prepared another report on Oswald . Fain's report was published a year after Oswald returned home .
 This report is rich in detail of Oswald’s life history as well as his activities in the Soviet Union . This report includes details of Oswald's life history and his activities .
 According to this document, much of the information on Oswald came from the district office of naval intelligence in New Orleans . According to the document, the information came from a New Orleans district office .
 Fain and FBI special agent Tom Carter requested a meeting with Oswald at the Fort Worth FBI office on June 25, 1962 . Less than two weeks after the Oswalds arrived back in Fort Worth from Russia, they met with Oswald . Fain, Carter and Carter requested the meeting less than
 Oswald told of flying home with Marina and their child, but he failed to mention the stopover in Atlanta . Oswald said he had a stopover at the airport in Atlanta, Georgia . Oswald is believed to be the father of one of the victims .
 He declined to talk about why he went to Russia, saying only that he didn’t want to relive the past . He also told of borrowing $435 to get home, but declined to say why he was there .
 Oswald “exhibited an impatient and arrogant attitude” during the interview, agents say . Oswald was interviewed by agents at the time of his death . Oswald had an “insulting and impatient” attitude, the agents said .
 He denied that he had attempted to renounce his American citizenship . He also denied he had offered the Russians any military information .
 Oswald’s next recorded contact with the bureau was on August 16, 1962, when Fain and Special Agent Arnold Brown approached him near his home at 2703 Mercedes Street in Fort Worth . Oswald and Marina had lived in the home for about a month .
 Oswald had been “evasive” during his first interview, Fain decided to contact him again . The agents sat with Oswald in a parked car near his home . Fain had decided to interview Oswald again, only this time the agents sat in a car .
 Fain explained that they didn’t want to embarrass Oswald in front of his wife . They declined his offer to come into the house . Fain said they declined .
 Oswald agreed to contact the FBI if anyone connected with Soviet intelligence tried to meet with him . Oswald agreed that he would contact him again if he met with anyone connected to the Soviet Union .
 Oswald was not to be the last contact between Oswald and the bureau . However, that was not the first contact . Oswald and Oswald were able to find each other again .
 Oswald was arrested for disturbing the peace on August 10, 1963, the day after his arrest . Oswald was handing out Fair Play for Cuba Committee leaflets on a New Orleans street comer . Oswald and the bureau met in New Orleans, New York, in 1963 .
 Oswald, styled as a malcontent loner who tried to defect to Russia, should ask to meet with an FBI agent rather than a lawyer . Oswald's arrest in New Orleans is telling to note that following his arrest, Oswald should ask for a lawyer instead of a prosecutor .
 Oswald’s arrest in New Orleans for disturbing the peace was a Saturday . Oswald was arrested the day after his arrest . Oswald's arrest was the first day he was arrested . Oswald had been charged with disturbing peace .
 The weekend is hardly a time for a quick FBI response to the request of a police prisoner . The prisoner was jailed for creating a disturbance, a minor infraction . He was released without charge .
 Oswald met with Oswald for an hour and a half at the New Orleans police station . Special agent John Quigley soon arrived at the police station and met Oswald . Oswald had been in New Orleans for more than an hour .
 The five-page report of that meeting written by Quigley reads like a comprehensive report on the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . The report was published by the committee .
 Oswald gave the agent background information on himself, then detailed his activities since coming to New Orleans . Oswald also detailed his attempt to form a Fair Play for Cuba Committee chapter and the squabble between anti-Castro Cubans .
 Quigley, who told the Warren Commission he had never heard of Oswald until that Saturday, had a faulty memory . He said he never heard Oswald until Oswald's death that Saturday . Quigly said he was never aware of Oswald .
 Quigley could give the Commission no reason why Oswald had wanted to see an FBI agent in 1963 . But an FBI document released in 1977 may give a clue to the motive for Oswald's visit .
 Oswald gave detailed description of his activities, seems to indicate that Oswald was trying to make some sort of report . Oswald's statement, along with the detailed description, seemed to indicate he wanted to report .
 He said he had talked with Hidell several times by telephone but had never met him . Hidell said he spoke to him several times but had not met him before .
 In all, at least ten FBI agents filed affidavits with the Warren Commission stating unequivocally that Lee Harvey Oswald was never an informant for the bureau . At least ten of the affidavits were made in affidavits to the commission .
 Quigley referred to Oswald as “Harvey Lee Oswald’s” until corrected by assistant counsel Samuel Stern . During his Warren Commission testimony, he made an odd slip of the tongue, referring to Oswald .
 It is well-known that FBI informants, and even agents themselves, often use code, or cover names . FBI informants often use cover names, or code, to communicate .
 FBI supervisors in the Dallas office said no payment was made to Oswald for information in affidavits . It is interesting to note that J. Gordon Shanklin and Kyle G Clark, the FBI supervisors, said only that no payment made .
 They did not specifically deny knowledge of Oswald as an informant, as had the other agents in their affidavits . The affidavits did not mention Oswald as a informant .
 In 1975, a New Orleans bar owner claimed to have seen Oswald in his Habana Bar in the company of both Cubans and FBI agent Warren De Brueys . Orest Pena said he saw Oswald in the bar in 1975 in New Orleans .
 Oswald came into his bar with a Cuban and ordered a lemonade, then vomited it up, he said . Pena, himself an FBI informant and a Cuban exile, said he remembered Oswald as a man who came in with a man . He said Oswald came in for a lemon
 He said he saw Oswald together with De Brueys and other “government agents” on several occasions . He said they were seen together with government agents, including Oswald, in the case .
 Pena said staff counsel did not let him speak freely so he decided to keep his mouth shut . Pena added that staff counsel Wesley J Liebeler did not speak freely .
 Agent De Brueys denied both allegations and the House Select Committee on Assassinations chose to believe him . The House selected the agent to investigate both allegations .
 William S Walter served as a security clerk for the New Orleans FBI office in 1963 . Walter worked for the FBI in New Orleans, New Orleans . Walter was a member of the FBI's New Orleans office .
 Walter was a minor functionary who claimed to have seen the wrong things . Like CIA paymaster James Wilcott, he claimed to see the wrong thing . Walter was the son of a CIA operative .
 When he tried to tell what he knew, he found himself facing an official stone wall . "I'm not sure what I know," he says .
 Walter said he was on duty the day Quigley interviewed Oswald in the New Orleans police station . Walter testified to the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Walter was on the day of the interview .
 Walter’s story apparently was echoed by Dallas FBI agent Will Hayden Griffin . Griffin is an FBI agent in Dallas, Texas . Griffin says Walter's story was echoed .
 Griffin reportedly told people that Oswald was definitely an FBI informant . Griffin reportedly said files in Washington would prove it, according to a 1964 FBI memorandum .
 The New Orleans FBI office received a teletype warning from FBI headquarters warning against a possible assassination attempt on Kennedy during the coming trip to Dallas on November 22 . Kennedy was killed in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Walter said he was alone in the New Orleans FBI office in the early morning hours when the teletype came through . Walter was alone at the time of the incident . Walter says he was in the office alone when teletype was sent .
 The thrust of the teletype was that the bureau had received information that a “militant revolutionary group” might attempt to assassinate Kennedy on his proposed trip to Dallas, Texas .
 All receiving offices should “immediately contact all CI’s , PCI’'s , local racial and hate-group informants and determine if any basis for threat . It went on to say that all receiving offices must contact all . CI's, PCI's and local . racial
 Walter said he telephoned the special agent in charge, Harry Maynard, who ordered Walter to call special agents with CIs and PCIs . Walter said Maynard told him to call the special agents in charge .
 Walter said he did this, writing the names of five agents contacted on the face of the teletype . Walter: "I did this. I did this ... I wrote five agents on the name of the agents contacted"
 Walter said he was in a barber shop when he heard about Kennedy's assassination . Five days later, on November 22, 1963, Walter said, he was still in the shop . Walter says he was shocked to hear about the Kennedy assassination .
 Walter said he typed a copy of the teletype and wrote the agents’ names on the copy, which he took home . Later that day, Walter said, he typed the five agents' names . Walter: "It's a good thing that you can do this. It's
 Hoover ordered all agents in the New Orleans office who had written reports dealing with the case to review those reports . Walter Walter said soon after the assassination, Director Hoover ordered the review . Walter said all agents who wrote the reports were reviewed by Hoover .
 In 1975, Walter told his story and showed his copy of the teletype to senator Richard Schweiker of Pennsylvania . Walter's teletype was used in the early days of his life .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations looked into the matter . Later the House of Representatives held a hearing on the issue .
 Unfounded or not, there are other stories in New Orleans that are hard to dismiss . Adrian Thomas Alba, operator of the Crescent City Garage, was accused of being a sex offender . Alba was arrested last month for allegedly assaulting a woman in a car crash .
 The Crescent City Garage was located next door to the William Reily Coffee Company, Oswald’s employer while in New Orleans . Oswald was the owner of the coffee shop .
 Alba, a quiet man who has not sought publicity, was both operator and part owner of the garage . Alba was both owner and operator of both the garage and operator .
 The garage maintains cars for the Secret Service and FBI offices . Alba said the garage had a contract to maintain a number of cars .
 Alba said Oswald made frequent visits to his garage during the summer of 1963 . Alba got to know the ex-Marine quite well . Oswald visited Alba's garage several times .
 Alba would loan Oswald his gun magazines, Alba said . Oswald would loan Alba's gun magazines . Alba and Oswald would talk about firearms, Oswald would say .
 He said a man he believed to be an “FBI agent visiting New Orleans from Washington” came to his garage and took a green Studebaker from the car pool . He said the man showed his credentials and took the car .
 The next day Alba said he saw the same car parked by Oswald’s workplace about thirty yards away . Alba saw the next day the car was parked in Oswald's workplace .
 He bent down as if to look in the window and was handed what appeared to be a good-sized white envelope .
 He bent and bent as if to hold the envelope to his abdomen, and I think he put it under his shirt . He turned and bent to bend as if he held the envelope under his abdomen .
 Years later, Alba said he saw the same thing happen the next day, but was farther away and could not see what was passed to Oswald . Alba: "I was not able to see what happened to Oswald"
 He did not tell the Warren Commission about these incidents because he did not recall them until 1970 when he was reminded of them by a TV commercial depicting a man running to and from a taxi .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations checked garage records and found that two Studebakers had been signed out during that time in 1963 . Secret Service agents signed out the cars, but not the drivers, but Secret Service .
 Alba recalled seeing Oswald after he was fired from the coffee company, allegedly for malingering . Alba said Oswald was fired after he had been fired for 'malingering' Oswald .
 Oswald said he expected to soon be working at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration plant near New Orleans . Alba said Oswald seemed pleased with the tum of events and said he expects to soon work at the plant .
 Five Reily Coffee employees, all of whom were in contact with Oswald, did join the NASA facility shortly after Oswald’s departure .
 Former New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison came across these intriguing employment shifts during his ill-fated JFK assassination probe . Garrison: "I'm not surprised that these employment shifts occurred during the JFK assassination investigation"
 Oswald left coffee company on July 19, 1963, just a few weeks before he began his public show of handing out FPCC material . Oswald left the coffee company just weeks before his first public act of public service .
 Oswald went on to work for Chrysler Aerospace Division at NASA’s New Orleans facility . According to Garrison, Alfred Claude, the man who hired Oswald at Reily, went to work at NASA's New Orleans plant .
 Emmett Barbee, Oswald’s immediate superior at Reily, followed Claude to the NASA center in a few days . Claude Oswald was Oswald's immediate superior .
 John D Branyon and Dante Marachini were among the first to join Oswald's team . They were joined by John Branyon, who worked with Oswald, in the 1960s .
 Branyon and Marachini also began aerospace careers at the New Orleans NASA center . Branyon also began a career at the center .
 Marachini was a friend of CIA-Mafia agent David Ferrie . He also worked for Reily the same day as Oswald, who was killed .
 Garrison found that two of Ferrie’s friends also went to work for the NASA center about this same time . Garrison: Ferrie's friends also worked for NASA at this time .
 James Lewallen, a friend of Ferrie’s who lived in the same apartment house as Marachini, went to work for Boeing, located in the NASA complex . Ferrie's friend, who lived at the time, now works for Boeing .
 Melvin Coffee, who had accompanied Ferrie on his strange Texas odyssey the night of the assassination, was hired by NASA at Cape Kennedy in Florida . Coffee was hired to work at the site of the Kennedy assassination . Coffee worked for NASA at the Cape Kennedy site .
 Garrison claimed these men were lured into government-connected jobs so as to make them unavailable during the subsequent assassination investigation . Garrison claimed they were lured to government jobs to make sure they were unavailable in the subsequent investigation .
 None of these men were called to testify before the Warren Commission . And in fact, none of them did . None of the men were invited to testify .
 Oswald was never an FBI informant, other Dallas FBI agents swore under oath . Oswald was a Dallas FBI agent who worked for the FBI in the 1960s and '60s .
 Dallas FBI agent James P Hosty Jr. Jr. was assigned to check on Oswald prior to the assassination . Hosty's statements have come under severe question in light of the saga of the FBI agent .
 Oswald's name, address, telephone number, and car license number appeared in Oswald’s personal notebook . Hosty claims to never have met Oswald in person, but his name and number were found in Oswald's notebook . Oswald's personal notebook was omitted from a December 23, 1963
 Director Hoover explained that the omission was due to the fact that the report was not originally intended for the Commission . Hoover: The omission is due to fact that it was not intended to be a Commission .
 Oswald’s notebook was presented to the Commission in a February 11, 1964, report . He said that the information on Hosty was presented in February 1964, 1964 .
 The Commission was already very much aware of the connection between Hosty and Oswald . Of course, by that time, by . time, the Commission was . already aware of . the connection . Hosty .
 Hoover explained that agents often leave their name, address, and telephone number for persons they are attempting to contact . Hoover also explained that it is not unusual for agents to leave their names, addresses and telephone numbers for those they are contacting .
 Oswald's wife, Marina, probably jotted down Hosty’s license number for her husband, he says . Hosty's license number is believed to have been written by Marina Oswald's husband . Oswald's widow Marina probably wrote the license number on Oswald's license .
 Hosty claimed he parked his car some distance from the house where Marina was staying to avoid drawing attention to his visit . Hosty, however, claimed he had parked his vehicle some distance away from Marina's house .
 Texas attorney general Waggoner Carr called Warren Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin to report he had information that Oswald had been recruited as an informant for the FBI in September 1962 .
 Oswald was being paid $200 a month and assigned Informant Number S-179 or S-172 . Oswald was assigned with Informant Numbers S-180 or S172 . He was paid $100 a month .
 The number designation was not in accordance with normal FBI informant identification but because of the uncertainty of the numbers, it obviously was mistranslated . The letter “S” was used to signify “security” matters, which would have fitted with Oswald’s background .
 Hamblen got into a brief conversation with Bob Fenley, a reporter for the Dallas Times Herald, just a few days after the assassination . He says he spoke with Fenley just a day after the shooting .
 Hamblin told Fenley he recalled Oswald, or a man who looked just like him, causing trouble in the Western Union office while trying to cash money orders in small amounts . Oswald once sent a telegram to the secretary of the Navy, Hamblins said .
 Hamblen said he was certain it was Oswald who on more than once was disagreeable to the office girls to the point that he himself would serve him . Oswald was said to have been disagreeable enough to serve him, he said .
 Fenley had the newspaper’s police reporter, George Carter, talk to Hamblen to verify his account . Fenley also had the paper's police reporter George Carter talk to him .
 Carter did and then wrote a story for the paper that subsequently brought the matter to the attention of the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission is now investigating the allegations .
 Federal authorities ordered Western Union officials to search for records confirming transactions . Federal authorities found no records confirming the transactions but none were found .
 By the time the Commission questioned Hamblen, he had become less certain of the disagreeable man’s identity . The Commission became less certain when it asked him to identify him .
 The Warren Commission reported that Hamblen’s superiors at Western Union had concluded that the whole thing was a figment of his imagination . Western Union's superiors at the time had concluded the entire incident was a hoax .
 Oswald had attempted to cash checks or money orders, according to reports . Oswald's actions were not easy to dismiss . Oswald had been reported to have tried to cash check checks and money orders .
 A man who looked like Oswald stopped in to buy milk and cinnamon rolls from a Texas market shortly before the assassination . The man who looks like Oswald would stop in to purchase milk and rolls .
 One time this man was accompanied by an elderly woman and a younger woman who spoke a foreign language . One time he was with the elderly woman, he was also accompanied by a woman speaking a different language .
 The Oswald character left without a word when Hutchinson refused to cash a two-party check for $189 . The store policy limited check cashing to less than $25 .
 Oswald was usually at the Irving home of Ruth Paine only on weekends and in “the absence of any other sign that Oswald ever possessed a personal check for $189,” Commission decided he had never had such a check .
 Anyone who has worked for the government knows that officials are very diligent about withdrawing taxes . Anyone who worked for government knows this is very hard to do .
 Oswald's take-home pay would have been about $189 if he was paid $200 a month as an FBI informant . Oswald was an informant for the FBI, but his salary would have likely been $189 .
 The specter of Oswald as an FBI informant prompted a special executive session of the Warren Commission the same day as Carr’s call . Carr called for a special inquiry into Oswald's role in the assassination .
 The minutes of that meeting were classified “top secret” until March 1975 . The minutes were classified "top secret" in 1975 .
 On January 27, the commissioners met again to consider this information . The commissioners will meet again on January 27 .
 It is obvious from the transcripts that they feared approaching Hoover with the matter . The transcripts show that they fear approaching Hoover . Hoover is the subject of a federal investigation .
 Boggs asked how the FBI could disprove that Oswald was an informant . Dulles was the CIA director at the time of the JFK assassination .
 Rankin revealed that he had received the same information from the Secret Service . Rankin said he received the information from yet another source . The Secret Service also had the information .
 He said the Secret Service named a Dallas deputy sheriff, Allan Sweatt, as its source . Sweatt is a Dallas police officer .
 The commissioners decided to just drop the entire matter . It was here that the commissioners dropped the matter .
 The FBI was informing them that Oswald was never an informant, and they could never prove or disprove it . The FBI said they could not prove the existence of Oswald was an informant . Oswald was not an FBI informant .
 Several weeks before the Commission began hearing witnesses and taking testimony, it now appears the verdict already was in . Furthermore, although it would be several weeks before hearing witnesses, the verdict was in.
 It could explain his associations in New Orleans, where he tried to join both pro- and anti-Castro groups . It could also explain his mysterious associations in the city .
 His light sentence could explain his light sentence after being found guilty of disturbing the peace .
 It could explain the remarks made by Agent Hosty in Dallas that the FBI knew about Oswald . It could also explain the comments made by Hosty .
 The FBI destroyed evidence after the assassination of George Kennedy . It also might explain a well-documented instance of the FBI destroying evidence .
 Oswald delivered a note to the Dallas FBI office two weeks before the JFK assassination . The note had been destroyed after the assassination . Oswald delivered the letter to the FBI office .
 This story prompted an investigation by the Justice Department . It also became the center of hearings before a subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee . The investigation led to hearings before the subcommittee .
 Oswald came to the Dallas FBI office two to three weeks prior to the assassination . Oswald asked a receptionist to see Agent Hosty. Hosty . Hosty was an FBI agent in Dallas, Texas .
 Years later Fenner recalled the note as some type of warning, something like, “Let this be a warning,” he said . Fenner recalls the note from the note years later .
 Hosty says he was told not to mention the note at the time of the assassination . Hosty said the note was not violent in tone and that it said something more like, “If you have anything you want to learn about me, come talk to me directly.”
 Hosty said Fenner's note was folded and expressed doubts that Fenner had read it properly . Hosty also said he doubts Fenner read the note properly and that it was folded .
 He said that within hours after the assassination, he was called into the office of the special agent in charge, J Gordon Shanklin . Mr Shanklin said he was shocked to be called to the office hours after his assassination .
 Hosty said Shanklin was visibly “agitated and upset” and wanted to know about the Oswald note . Hosty: Shanklin asked about Oswald note, was visibly upset and wanted more information .
 Shanklin produced the Oswald note from his desk drawer and said, “Oswald’s dead now.” Hosty said . Hosty: Shanklin said, "Owald's dead now" Shanklin then produced the note from the desk drawer .
 Another Dallas agent, Kenneth Howe, also testified he showed Shanklin the Oswald note the weekend of the assassination . Howe testified he also showed the note to Shanklin .
 Existence of the note also was talked about among some members of the Dallas Police Department . The note was found in a Dallas home .
 Shanklin denied knowledge of the Oswald note to a House committee . Shanklin denies knowledge of any knowledge of Oswald note .
 FBI director Shanklin had discussed an ‘internal problem’ with him . Shanklin said the presence of the note was common knowledge at FBI headquarters . But Shanklin added perjury to the crime of perjury to destruction of evidence .
 It seems unbelievable that the FBI would knowingly destroy evidence, especially if it would have proven Oswald prone to violence . The FBI destroyed evidence in the case of Oswald, the author says .
 This could explain the receptionist’s insistence that the note contained threatening words . The receptionist said the note was threatening .
 FBI ordered the FBI to destroy the note after it was ordered destroyed . It could explain why the FBI was so concerned and fearful of the note that it was destroyed . The FBI was ordered to remove the note from the FBI .
 Such a warning would corroborate Judyth Vary Baker’s claim that Oswald tried to stop the assassination . The warning is corroborated by Baker, who says Oswald was trying to stop JFK's assassination .
 Hosty was one of 17 FBI agents reprimanded for the way they handled the assassination case . Hosty is one of the FBI agents who was reprimanded by the FBI for handling the case .
 He was suspended for thirty days without pay and transferred to Kansas City, Kansas .
 The Oswald-note matter was investigated by the House Select Committee on Assassinations and despite the contradictions between Hosty’s testimony and that of his superior, Shanklin, Hosty was given more than $1,000 in repayment .
 FBI denials Oswald had ever been paid as an FBI informant . It should be noted that not all informants work for money . Not all informants are paid for money, according to the FBI .
 It is common practice for the FBI to gain information from people who have something to fear from the bureau, perhaps the possibility of being charged with a past crime or even possible deportation .
 Oswald's wife had never become a United States citizen and therefore was subject to deportation at the government’s pleasure . Oswald had never been a U.S. citizen . He was deported from the United States at the end of his life .
 Oswald became angry when Agent Hosty confronted him, Dallas police captain Will Fritz says . Oswald was angry when he was confronted by Hosty, according to Fritz . Oswald died at the scene of the shooting .
 Oswald “beat on the desk and went into a kind of tantrum,” Fritz Fritz says . Oswald told Hosty, “I know you.” Hosty. Oswald later said, ‘I know You.’ Hosty’
 Oswald recruited not with the promise of money, but with the threat of Marina’s deportation . Perhaps Oswald was recruited with the help of Marina, who was threatened with deportation . Marina was deported from the UK in 1994, but was never deported .
 Dallas police received a letter about two weeks before the assassination warning that an attack on Kennedy would take place in their city . This author learned years ago that the Dallas police had received the letter . The letter may never be proven .
 With nothing else to support this warning, the letter was merely filed away . The letter was simply filed away.
 In the days following that fateful Friday, federal agents combed through the police department . They searched the saddlebags on police motorcycles, searching everything that might be related to the assassination .
 Oswald was working for the FBI, but it is now known that his killer definitely was . Oswald's killer was Oswald, and his killer was the FBI . Oswald was killed in the September 4, 1917, assassination .
 Jack Ruby contacted the FBI in 1959 to say he wanted to provide information to the FBI . Ruby may have been involved in smuggling activities with Cubans, he said . Ruby was a member of the FBI, but was never charged with any crimes .
 The relationship between Ruby and the bureau was mentioned in a letter from Hoover to the Warren Commission dated June 9, 1964 . Ruby's relationship with the bureau is mentioned in the letter to Hoover .
 Records show that agents met with Ruby on at least eight occasions between April and October 1959 . Ruby was the subject of numerous FBI investigations .
 Since Ruby was an FBI informant, the possibility of Lee Harvey Oswald’s having worked for the bureau appears to be probable . The possibility of Oswald working for the FBI is also probable .
 Previously housed here was the CIA-backed Cuban Revolutionary Council, which counted Carlos Bringuier as a member .
 Also in the same building was the private detective firm of Guy Banister . The firm was also located in a similar building .
 Banister's employees included Jack Martin and David Ferrie, Oswald’s former Civil Air Patrol leader, and reportedly Oswald himself . In the summer of 1963, 1963, Jack Martin was reportedly among the employees .
 During the 1940s Banister was the special agent in charge of the FBI office in Chicago, Jack Ruby’s hometown . He was the FBI's top FBI agent in Chicago .
 One of his FBI associates at that time was Robert Maheu, who left the bureau in the 1950s . He later became the chief gobetween in the CIA-Mafia assassination plots against Castro .
 Banister was involved in naval intelligence during the war and maintained contacts with that group throughout his life . According to his family, he was also involved with naval intelligence .
 Banister came to New Orleans in the 1950s at the request of the mayor to become chief of police . Banister left the bureau and became a New Orleans police chief in the 1960s .
 Banister allegedly threatened a waiter with a gun in the Old Absinthe House . Banister was forced to retire in 1957 after an incident in the hotel .
 This office was within walking distance of the New Orleans FBI office, the Office of Naval Intelligence, and other government agencies . This office is within walking . distance from the FBI and other agencies .
 Banister also was a member of the Minutemen and the Louisiana Committee on Un-American Activities . He was the publisher of a racist publication titled Louisiana Intelligence Digest .
 Banister was later described as “a tragic case” by a member of the New Orleans Crime Commission . Reportedly an alcoholic, Banister reportedly was reportedly an alcoholic .
 Banister threw himself into anti-Castro Cuban activity in New Orleans . With the rise of Fidel Castro, Banister became involved in anti-Fidel Castro activity .
 He helped organize such anti-Castro groups as the Cuban Revolutionary Democratic Front and Friends of a Democratic Cuba . He also helped organize groups such as Cuba's Revolutionary Party Front .
 Banister even served as a munitions supplier during the planning stages of the Bay of Pigs Invasion . According to an April 25, 1967, story in the New Orleans States- Item, Banister served as munitions supplier .
 Banister employees have said that as late as 1963, guns of every type littered Banister’s office . In fact, Banister's office was filled with guns of all types .
 Former Minuteman who worked for Banister said he would regularly take his updated files to the New Orleans FBI . They were integrated into the bureau’s files .
 Banister’s files were scattered after his sudden death in June 1964 . He reportedly died of a heart attack before authorities could question him about his contacts with Oswald .
 Banister’s operation was in the thick of New Orleans intelligence activities, located near government offices and around the Reily Coffee Company . Banister was a supporter of anti-Castro Cuban exiles .
 She later told author Anthony Summers, “Oswald came back a number of times.” She later said she didn't recall the events .
 "I knew he had his pamphlets and books and everything in a room along from where we were with our photographic equipment," she says . "He had everything in the room along with his photographic equipment"
 "He was quiet and mostly kept to himself, didn't associate with too many people," he said . He was quiet, not associated with many people, he added .
 "I never saw him talking to Guy Banister, but I knew he worked in his office," he says . "He was always in the office, but he was always there," he adds .
 I got the impression Oswald was doing something to make people believe he was something he wasn’t . Oswald was trying to fool people into thinking he was Oswald, the author says . Oswald’s actions were a mistake, he says .
 Oswald was in touch with both anti-Castro Cubans and organized-crime figures . Oswald was caught up in a mixture of CIA-and FBI-related agents who were involved in the Cuban assassination .
 Despite the contacts between Oswald and current and former FBI agents, the Dallas tragedy still occurred . Despite the evidence of advance warnings of the assassination to the bureau, the assassination still occurred.
 No unquestionable case for FBI involvement in the assassination itself can be made, but there is now no doubt that the bureau manipulated the subsequent investigation . The FBI manipulated the investigation into the assassination .
 Top FBI officials took total control of all evidence the very day of the assassination and held it, with no chain of evidence, for three full days before the bureau was officially called into the case . For starters, top FBI officials held all evidence for three days before they were officially called to
 Police chief Jesse Curry announced to reporters that it had been decided to call in the FBI for assistance with the assassination case . About noon on Tuesday, November 26, following several moming conferences with top aides and the district attorney, police chief said .
 The transfer of evidence from city police to federal control was completed four hours later . The transfer was complete four hours after the transfer .
 The FBI is now officially in charge of the case . The FBI was officially on the case and officially in control of evidence .
 Fabrication, substitution, elimination, alteration —with no effective chain of responsibility, anything could have happened . Fabrication of substitution, . elimination, . alteration — with no effective chains of responsibility . anything could happen .
 FBI has been accused of poor management of evidence at best and downright falsification of evidence . Today the FBI is accused of under-performing evidence management at best .
 An FBI spokesman said the document was a phony . When asked about this discrepancy, an FBI spokesman simply said the latter document was phony .
 Such discrepancies should prove to any objective researcher that severe questions remain concerning the validity of the government’s evidence in the assassination . Such discrepancies are proof that the government's evidence should be considered legitimate .
 Under Hoover’s iron control, it would have been easy for ranking bureau officials to do with the evidence whatever they pleased . Hoover's iron control would have allowed him to do whatever he wanted . Hoover would have done whatever he pleased .
 The fact that federal authorities had all the assassination evidence under covert control for two days could go far in explaining the contradictions and questionable conclusions of the official investigation .
 There was an attempt to obscure the issue in the Warren Commission materials . Apparently at least one person understood the gravity of this issue, as there was a reference to it .
 In 1992, the “confidential’s deposition of FBI fingerprint expert James C Cadigan was made public by the National Archives . In 1992 the ‘confidential' deposition of the fingerprint expert made public .
 The deposition was clearly altered with edits in pencil intended to obscure statements regarding the early unofficial handling of the assassination evidence . The deposition is clearly altered in pencil .
 The handling of the evidence clearly points to manipulation and obstruction at the highest levels of federal authority . While the assassination evidence is often ambiguous and contradictory, it will certainly be in controversy for years .
 In fact, FBI activities after the assassination fall well within the realm of criminal behavior . The FBI was involved in the assassination of Sen. Robert Kennedy .
 Beverly Oliver’s assassination film, which she claimed was taken by an FBI agent, was lost . Beverly Oliver's assassination film was also lost; the disappearance of an assassination bullet taken from under the noses of a police guard . Ed Hoffman's testimony, such as Ed Hoffman’
 Examples include destruction of an Oswald note by FBI Agent Hosty . The destruction of a license-plate number on a photograph of General Edwin Walker’s home found intact among Oswald's possessions . The immediate cleaning of the presidential limousine effectively destroyed vital ballistic evidence .
 In any normal criminal case, such behavior would constitute a jailable offense . But this was not an ordinary case, and the culprits were not ordinary citizens but FBI agents . The FBI agents are accused of the crime .
 If a local police agency proves to be corrupt, the FBI can be brought in to investigate . The FBI can also investigate if the local police are found to have been corrupt .
 The FBI was personified by J Edgar Hoover, the FBI was the FBI's personified . The questions of means, motive, and opportunity must fall on Hoover's shoulders, he says .
 Hoover surrounded by countless informers, agents, and former employees . Many of whom were in contact with Lee Harvey Oswald . Hoover's means were limitless .
 He was afraid that upon reelection John Kennedy would not allow him to continue as FBI director . "He was afraid of the Kennedys. First, his hatred of the Kennedy was notorious, and second, he was afraid he would not be allowed to continue .
 Rumors in Washington were plentiful that Hoover would be forced to retire as FBI director after Kennedy’s reelection in 1964 . Hoover would have been forced to step down as FBI chief in 1964, according to reports .
 William Hundley, former head of the Justice Department’s organized-crime section, is quoted in The Director as saying that what finally destroyed the fragile relationship between Hoover and attorney general Robert Kennedy was “that Bobby mentioned to too many people who complained to him about Hoover that
 Hoover built his immense power base by currying favor with men more powerful than himself . Hoover's power base was curried by powerful men in Washington, D.C., New York, New York and New York .
 It is extremely unlikely that Hoover, a consummate bureaucrat, would have assumed the responsibility for initiating the assassination . Hoover was extremely unlikely to have assumed responsibility for the assassination. Hoover would have been the only person to take responsibility .
 Hoover discovered the assassination plot through his network of agents and informers . It's certainly plausible that Hoover didn't prevent it simply by not preventing it . Hoover's network of informers and agents may have prevented it .
 Of course this is tantamount to criminal complicity and would have required substantial manipulation of testimony and evidence to prevent discovery of the bureau’s role . The bureau's role in this case would have been criminal, he says .
 Former neighbor and dinner friend Lyndon B Johnson was about to lose his job thanks to the Kennedys . He had help he had, in the form of the new president, his former neighbor .
 On the day of his inauguration, Thomas Jefferson walked from the boardinghouse where he was staying to the Capitol without benefit of any protection . Jefferson was the first president to be inaugurated without protection .
 It was symptomatic of the young Republic that presidents had not yet acquired the mantle of royalty and thus did not require protection . President George W. Bush was assassinated at the age of 16 in 1877 .
 This naiveté began to change after the assassination attempt on president Andrew Jackson on January 10, 1835 . Andrew Jackson's assassination attempt was an assassination attempt in 1835.
 In August 1842, a drunken painter threw rocks at President John Tyler, who was walking on the White House grounds . The incident occurred during a drunken incident involving a drunken painting .
 Congress soon passed an act creating an auxiliary watch of the Washington Metropolitan Police for the protection of public and private property . The captain and fifteen men were part of the auxiliary watch .
 The act was aimed primarily at protecting property, particularly the White House . It was the crude beginning of presidential protection .
 Abraham Lincoln was fatally shot by actor John Wilkes Booth in Ford’s Theater on April 14, 1865 . There was no clamor to create official protection for the president . Even after the president was shot, no official protection was created .
 The Secret Service was organized as a division of the Treasury Department the year Lincoln was killed . It originally was meant only to pursue counterfeiters . Lincoln was assassinated in 1862 .
 It was not until after the assassination of president James A Garfield in 1881 that a serious attempt was made to protect presidents . It was only until after Garfield's assassination that serious attempts were made .
 The number of White House policemen grew to twenty-seven after mail threats increased against Grover Cleveland . It was not until 1894 that Secret Service agents were informally assigned to the president .
 Throughout the Spanish-American War, a small detail of Secret Service men were stationed at the White House . The Secret Service was a small part of the Secret Service .
 President McKinley was assassinated on September 6, 1901 . Secret Service protection of president William McKinley did not prevent his assassination .
 The McKinley assassination provoked a response from Congress . Congress ordered the Secret Service to assume full-time protection of the president . McKinley's assassination prompted a response to Congress .
 By World War II, the White House detail of the Secret Service had grown to thirty-seven men . The Secret Service was once at the center of the world's largest Secret Service .
 Legislation was passed permanently authorizing the Secret Service to protect not only the president, but also his immediate family, the president-elect, and the vice president . The legislation was passed in 1951 .
 By 1963, the Secret Service remained a small and specialized group restricted by law . The Secret Service was still a small, specialized group .
 The Secret Service had an average strength of more than five hundred and ran sixty-five field offices throughout the country . Nevertheless, the Secret Service was at the peak of its peak of five hundred .
 John F Kennedy was quite active in both his public and personal life .
 Kennedy assistant Kenneth O’Donnell was in charge of the White House staff and, as such, had control over the Secret Service . Kennedy assistant was in control of Secret Service and had control of the agency . O'Donnell was responsible for Secret Service operations .
 O’Donnell left security measures up to the special agent-in-charge of the White House detail, Gerald Behn . Behn is the president's special agent in charge of the detail .
 During his fateful trip to Texas, Kennedy was assigned no fewer than seventy Secret Service agents plus eight clerks . During that trip, he was assigned a total of 70 Secret Service officers .
 At least three assassination attempts were planned against Kennedy in the fall of 1963 . Information was not forwarded to either the agent in charge of Kennedy’s protection or the special agent-in-charge of the Dallas Secret Service .
 In Chicago the Secret Service arrested an ex-Marine named Thomas Arthur Vallee . Vallee was a member of the right-wing John Birch Society . He was a vocal Kennedy critic .
 Vallee was discovered to have an M-I rifle, a handgun, and 3,000 rounds of ammunition in his car . Vallee also had a handgun and a handgun in his vehicle .
 Vallee asked for time off from his job on November 2, the date Kennedy was to visit Chicago . It was also learned that Vallee had asked to take time off .
 Despite the weapons found, Vallee was released from custody on the evening of November 2 and was still considered a threat . Vallee is still considered to be a threat despite the weapons being found .
 The first black man to serve on the Secret Service's White House detail . The Secret Service has a history of black service members .
 Abraham Bolden was personally selected by Kennedy, apparently in an attempt to integrate the previously all-white Secret Service detail . Bolden, a black man, was chosen by Kennedy to work with the Secret Service .
 Bolden had been a police officer with an outstanding record before joining the Service . Born in poverty, Bolden was born in poverty .
 Bolden criticized the White House detail for laxity and was transferred to the Chicago office . Bolden was transferred from the detail to a Chicago office after he criticized the detail's laxity .
 The Chicago Secret Service office received a teletype from the FBI warning that an assassination attempt would be carried out in that city by a four-man Cuban hit squad armed with high-powered rifles . The assassination attempt was planned for November 2, 1963 .
 Bolden said the entire office was involved in this matter but that it was kept top secret . Bolden: The entire office is involved in the matter but kept it top secret.
 Kennedy’s Chicago trip was canceled, although the House Select Committee on Assassinations could not determine why . Kennedy's Chicago trip canceled, but the committee could not say why .
 Three weeks after Kennedy’s death, Bolden discovered that information on the Chicago threat was to be kept from the Warren Commission . Bolden made a trip to Washington to tell what he knew .
 He was charged with discussing a bribe with two known counterfeiters . However, he was quickly taken back to Chicago, where he was later taken back .
 Bolden was convicted of accepting a bribe, even after one of the counterfeiters admitted to perjury . Bolden's motion for a retrial was denied, and he was sentenced to a lengthy prison term .
 Secret Service has admitted the Chicago threat occurred . It has repeatedly refused to clarify the matter . The Secret Service says the threat occurred in Chicago .
 He claimed he was framed and convicted to silence him regarding the Kennedy threat . He said he was convicted of trying to silence Kennedy . He was convicted in connection with the Kennedy assassination .
 Bolden learned that the information on the incident in Chicago came from an informant named “Lee,” naturally leading to speculation that it may have been informant Lee Oswald . Bolden has since learned that an informant called ‘Lee’ may have led him to the information .
 Whatever the Chicago threat may have been, the information again was not passed along to Dallas . Dallas was not aware of the threat .
 The Service failed to follow up on another threat, this time from the volatile Miami area .
 Joseph A Milteer accurately predicted what was to happen to Kennedy in Dallas almost three weeks before the event . The wealthy right-wing extremist predicted Kennedy's death in Dallas three weeks earlier .
 While this information was forwarded to the Service’s Protective Research Section in Washington, it was never relayed to Winston G Lawson, the advance agent in Dallas, or to Forrest V Sorrels, the special agent in charge in Dallas .
 The journey through Dealey Plaza was made necessary because of the selection of the Dallas Trade Mart as the site of the noon luncheon for the Kennedy entourage .
 White House aide and advance man Jerry Bruno says Gov. John Connally made the decision after some questionable manipulations . Bruno: Connally's decision was made by Texas Governor after some manipulations.
 Secret Service and White House advance men settled on two locations . Dallas Trade Mart and the Women’s Building in Fair Park, home of the Texas State Fair, located south of downtown area .
 The Secret Service and the Kennedy people decided the Women’s Building would be a preferable location . It presented fewer security problems and could accommodate more people, the Secret Service said .
 Democrats headed by Lyndon Johnson and John Connally wanted the Trade Mart because it was more modern and would be more acceptable to Dallas’s wealthy elite . The Trade Mart was built in Dallas, Texas, in 1960s and 1970s .
 Bruno wrote, “There was another point about the Women’s Building site that didn’t seem important to anyone at the time” Bruno wrote .
 The struggle over the luncheon site continued until November 18, when Bruno got a call from White House aide Kenneth O’Donnell . Bruno got the call from O'Donnell on November 18 .
 Bruno quoted O’Donnell as saying, “We’re going to let Dallas go, Jerry. Jerry. We’ve got Dallas, Jerry, Jerry’s job,” Bruno quoted him as saying .
 Despite the recommendations of the Secret Service, the Kennedy White House, and himself, Connally had managed to swing the decision to the Trade Mart .
 The Johnson-Connally people held up selling tickets to the fund-raising luncheon in an effort to force the site-location selection their way . Bruno said he later learned that the Johnson-connally people had held up the ticket sales .
 The Secret Service had no control over the luncheon site, but they certainly were in control of the motorcade . The motorcade was escorted by the Secret Service .
 Police Chief Curry originally asked that the presidential limousine be flanked by eight motorcycle policemen, four on each side of the car . Police chief Curry originally had asked for eight motorcycle police officers to be on the presidential car .
 Curry told the Warren Commission that Secret Service Agent Lawson ordered the number of cycles reduced to four, two on each side, and that the cycles were told to stay by the rear fender of the limousine . However, Curry said that the cycle was ordered to stay at the rear
 The purpose of motorcycle outriders is to form a screen for the limousine rider in the event of trouble . This order seems unusual to those familiar with motorcade security, since the purpose of motorcycles is to protect the rider .
 Curry was puzzled, too, over the apparent lack of concern for security as well as the fact that Dallas authorities were kept in the dark about Oswald . Curry was also puzzled by the lack of Dallas authorities being aware of Oswald's whereabouts .
 Dallas Police Force for the Secret Service were carried out exactly as they had requested . In retrospect, the physical security arrangements provided by the Dallas Police force for the . Secret Service was carried out as well as requested .
 In my opinion all police officers involved gave their complete and wholehearted cooperation . The incident took place in the early hours of Saturday morning . Police were involved in the incident and the incident was captured on camera .
 Dallas Police Department was never given any information or asked to cooperate with the FBI or Secret Service in any attempt to locate possible conspirators . Yet the Dallas police department was never told any information about the plot .
 Curry also had planned to have a car containing police captain Will Fritz and other Dallas detectives immediately following the presidential limousine . It was a traditional practice in the past .
 Dallas detectives could not have moved any slower than Kennedy’s Secret Service protectors when the shots were fired in Dealey Plaza .
 Photos taken several seconds after the first shots show almost a total lack of response by the agents riding in a backup car behind the presidential limousine .
 While Kennedy clutches at his throat, two of his guards begin looking toward the rear while the others are looking directly at the president . The president is seen clutching his throat and clutching his hands .
 The only agent to react with speed was Clint Hill, who was not even supposed to be on the Dallas trip . Hill was the only agent who reacted quickly to the situation .
 Hill was assigned to protect Jackie Kennedy . Hill was brought along at the last minute due to a specific request by the First Lady . Hill had been assigned with Jackie Kennedy to protect her .
 William Greer is the driver of a limousine carrying the president . Greer's actions raise the possibility of complicity with the Secret Service .
 At age fifty-four, Greer was one of the oldest members of the White House detail . Greer is now one of President Barack Obama's oldest aides .
 He had driven both Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower . He had also driven both President Eisenhower and President Truman .
 Greer drove Kennedy’s body from Air Force One to Bethesda Naval Hospital for autopsy . On the evening of November 22, 1963, Greer took Kennedy's body to the hospital for autopsy. Greer is credited with driving the body away from the scene .
 Greer testified to the Warren Commission that as the limousine cruised down the incline of Elm Street through Dealey Plaza, he heard a noise that he thought was a motorcycle backfire . Greer said he thought the noise was a backfire from a motorcycle motorcycle .
 Governor Connally begins to slump to his left . Shortly after he heard a second similar noise, he heard another similar noise .
 He said the limousine was moving at between twelve and fifteen miles per hour the entire time . He said it was moving between 12 and 15 mph per hour .
 Based on films made during the assassination, it is now known that immediately after the first shot, the brake lights on the limousine came on and the big Lincoln slowed to almost a complete standstill, causing the Secret Service follow-up car to move up and almost touch the rear
 films show Greer looking over his right shoulder in Kennedy’s direction for several seconds, until after the fatal head shot is delivered . Greer's testimony is contrary to his testimony, films show him looking at Kennedy's direction .
 Zapruder film shows that Greer braked the limousine to almost a complete stop when shots were first fired at the president . Only after the fatal head shot do the brake lights go off and the car accelerates, the film shows .
 All this violates Secret Service regulations, which state at the first sign of trouble, accelerate and drive out of danger . Secret Service: At first, speed up and drive away if you're in danger .
 If Greer had shot JFK, someone in the crowd, some less than ten feet away, would have said something . Someone less than 10 feet away would say something .
 Other Secret Service agents and others in the know would have whispered about this for years . The Secret Service has been involved in the investigation into the death of a Secret Service agent .
 Rumors would have floated around Washington and Nellie Connally would have talked, at least as gossip . Connally's life in Washington would have been more interesting if she had died .
 This issue didn’t come up until the mid-1980s, when conspiracy author William Cooper latched onto a hypothesis of researcher Lars Hanson of California . Hanson speculated that the driver turned and shot Kennedy .
 Cooper also claimed that all the nearest witnesses to the JFK head shot were dead within a few years of the assassination . In addition to his claim that Greer shot JFK, Cooper also said that all of the witnesses were dead in years of JFK's assassination .
 Greer turns to his right and looks back at JFK at the time of the head shot, a somewhat suspicious circumstance . Greer claimed he never looked back. It is true that Greer looks back .
 In those days it was customary for men to wear hair grease and Kellerman’s hair was especially slicked down . Kellerman's hair was particularly slicked .
 In viewing the Zapruder film in slow motion, one notices that the “pistol” moves simultaneously with Kellerman’s head . In the film, Kellerman's head appears to move simultaneously with the gun .
 A few frames earlier when the sunlight gleams off the tops of both Kellerman and Greer’s heads, the brightness of the highlight is the same . Also, a few frames later when the sun shines off the top of each of the heads, it's the same brightness
 As Greer turns to his right, Kellerman bends forward slightly and the sun fully catches the top of his head, resulting in a bright highlight . The highlight is a horizontal “L” shape and could be misidentified as a gun .
 The brief flash is simply the sunlight reflecting off the metal rim of the frame for the privacy window . It was used when the top was on the car when the car was on .
 Top was down and the privacy window rolled down but the frame remained . That day, the top was down . The top was rolled down, but the window remained .
 Greer turned and looked back at Kennedy and then could not recall that fact for the Warren Commission . At no time did his two hands leave the steering wheel of the limousine, Greer said .
 Greer's testimony was taken at face value and there was no real attempt at cross-examination . Greer’s testimony, like that of all government officials presented to the Warren Commission, was taken to face value .
 Testimony that indicated why the reaction of the Secret Service agents that day was so sluggish was not examined closely by the Warren Commission . Likewise, testimony that indicated that the reaction to the shooting was not closely examined by the commission .
 Kennedy's Secret Service agents were drinking well into the morning hours of November 22 at a notorious Fort Worth club, the Cellar .
 Chief James J Rowley obtained statements from the ten agents involved, plus some Fort Worth news reporters and Pat Kirkwood, the club’s owner and an acquaintance of Jack Ruby .
 Everyone, including Kirkwood, stressed that the Cellar had no license to sell alcoholic drinks . Kirkwood: Cellar was not licensed to sell alcohol .
 Employees are strictly enjoined to refrain from the use of intoxicating liquor during the hours they are officially employed at their post of duty, or when they may reasonably expect that they may be called upon to perform an official duty .
 All members of the White House Detail and Special Agents cooperating with them on Presidential and similar protective assignments are considered to be subject to call for official duty while in travel status .
 Use of intoxicating liquor of any kind, including beer and wine, by members of the White House Detail . While they are in travel status, is prohibited, the use of alcohol is prohibited .
 Several agents involved in the incident admitted drinking, but no more than two beers . Several of the agents involved said they were drinking at the time of the incident .
 Of those who went to the Cellar, most said they had one or two drinks called a “Salty Dick’s” described as grapefruit juice and soda . Most said they drank grapefruit and soda, described as ‘salty Dick,’
 Cellar did not sell alcohol, although alcohol brought in by a patron was allowed . Cellar was not selling alcohol, but patrons were allowed to bring in alcohol .
 At least three agents guarding Kennedy’s hotel suite took their “coffee break” at the Cellar . Two Fort Worth firemen were left behind to guard the president .
 Rowley told the Warren Commission he did not punish agents for violating regulations . Rowley said all agents turned out at 7 a.m. “sober, alert and ready for the performance of their duties,” he said .
 Chief Rowley testified that under ordinary circumstances he would have taken disciplinary action against those agents who had been drinking in clear violation of the regulation . Rowley said he would not have taken action against agents who were drinking .
 He felt disciplinary action might have given rise to an inference that the violation of the regulation had contributed to the tragic events of November 22 . However, he felt that any disciplinary action would have been inappropriate .
 It would be unfair to the agents and their families to take explicit disciplinary measures, he said . Since he was convinced that this was not the case, he believed that it would not be the case .
 Rowley and others in the government were very much concerned that the public might recall that Lincoln was killed when his guard left his post to have a drink next door . Kennedy’s agents were keeping late hours in a “beatnik” club owned by an associate of Jack
 The entire affair was toned down and quietly forgotten, except by Cellar owner Kirkwood . Cellar owners Kirkwood said the affair was a private affair .
 Kirkwood admitted that while the Cellar had no license to sell liquor, nothing prevented him from giving it away . Kirkwood has admitted that he has given away alcohol in the past few years .
 This author, even though underage, was served alcohol in the Cellar when accompanied by older news reporters . This author was allowed to drink at the event .
 After midnight the night before, some reporters called me from the Press Club, which didn’t have a license to sell drinks after midnight, said they had about 17 members of the Secret Service and asked if they could bring them to my place . The Press Club didn't have a
 About 3:30 , these Secret Service men were sitting around giggling about how the firemen were guarding the President over at the Hotel Texas . The men giggled about how they were protecting the President at the hotel .
 After agents were there, the White House asked us not to say anything about them drinking because their image had suffered enough as it was. White House told us to not say anything because of their image having suffered enough .
 It might be noted that no one saw the agents in a drunken revelry—although one unmarried female reporter tagged along with them for company . No one saw any drunken revelries .
 In fact, according to most present, the agents sat by themselves quietly talking and drinking . The agents sat quietly talking, drinking and drinking at the time .
 Alcohol and lack of sleep left agents in less-than-optimal condition to perform their duties . The fatigue of the multi-stop Texas trip coupled with the alcohol and sleep left the agents in poor condition . The agents were on a multi-state Texas trip .
 Presidential aide Kenneth O’Donnell thought about the interval between the final shots and the final moments of the shooting . O'Donnell: "It's not easy to think about the end of the shots," he said .
 If there is an interval of at least five seconds between the second and third shots, as it seemed, that was long enough for a man to run 50 yards . If there was a five-second interval between the first and second shots, that would be enough time for a 50-
 All of the Secret Service men seemed to respond very slowly, with no more than a puzzled look . The Secret Service responded slowly to the question, "What do you think?"
 I am amazed at the lack of instantaneous response by the Secret Service when the rifle fire began . Knowing something of the training that combat infantrymen and Marines receive, I am . I am surprised at the . lack of an instantaneous response .
 None of Vice President Johnson's Secret Service guards were in the entourage that drank at the Press Club .
 Other oddities occurred in the motorcade during the assassination of President Kennedy .
 This is reminiscent of an earlier incident as the motorcade left Love Field . This was reminiscent of a similar incident earlier this year .
 Agent Henry J Rybka seen being waved off Kennedy’s limousine by Roberts .
 He then throws his hands several times several times to reflect his confusion over this unusual and unexplained order . The president then appears to be confused by the order .
 Agent Rufus Youngblood reportedly threw himself valiantly on top of Vice President Johnson after the shooting began in Dealey Plaza . Then there is the much-publicized story of agent Youngblood, who reportedly fought valiantly to survive .
 I was startled by a sharp report or explosion, but I had no time to speculate as to its origin . Agent Youngblood turned in a flash, immediately after the first explosion, hitting me on the shoulder, and shouted to all of us in the back seat to get down to get
 "Almost in the same moment in which he hit or pushed me, he vaulted over the back seat and sat on me," she says . "He vaulted into the back of the car, vaulted onto me. Almost in the . same moment he hit, she says,
 I was bent over under the weight of Agent Youngblood’s body, toward Mrs. Mrs. Youngblood, I said . I was bending over under her weight, she said .
 "He vaulted over the seat, pushed me to the floor, and sat on my right shoulder to keep me down and to protect me," he said . "Almost in the same movement, he vaulted into the seat and pushed me onto the floor," she said .
 Agent Youngblood’s quick reaction was as brave an act as I have ever seen anyone perform, says author . Agent Young Blood's quick reaction is as brave as I’ve ever seen, he says .
 When a man, without a moment of thought or hesitation, places himself between you and a possible assassin’s bullet, you know you have seen courage . When you see courage, it is courage, says CNN.com's Tom Charity.com .
 Yarborough recalled that Johnson and Youngblood ducked down as the shooting began and that Youngblood never left the front seat of the car . Yarborough recalls that both Johnson and Johnson ducked to protect themselves from the shooting .
 Yarborough said Youngblood held a small walkie-talkie over the back of the car’s seat and that he and Johnson both put their ears to the device . Yarborough: Youngblood, Johnson and Youngblood both used the device to communicate .
 Dallas police radio channel 1 designated for the presidential party was blocked from radio traffic for about eight minutes beginning at 12:26m., about four minutes before the shooting . It would be most interesting to learn what the men listened to .
 Johnson and Youngblood were listening to a channel reserved for inter-vehicle radio traffic . No transcripts of this channel have been made public . It may have been used to listen to traffic traffic .
 Either Yarborough or Johnson and his Secret Service agents did not tell the truth of what happened in the motorcade . Obviously, either Yarborough .
 The Secret Service did in fact possess information that was not properly analyzed and put to use with respect to a protective investigation in advance of President Kennedy's trip to Dallas .
 The committee's opinion that Secret Service agents in the Presidential motorcade in Dallas were not adequately prepared for an attack by a concealed sniper . Further, it was the committee’s opinion that . Secret Service Agents in the presidential motorcade was not adequately .
 The committee found that the investigation by the Secret Service of a possible assassination conspiracy was terminated prematurely when President Johnson ordered that the FBI assume primary investigative responsibility . The committee also found that President Johnson had ordered the FBI to take primary responsibility .
 Several people encountered by several people in Dealey Plaza claimed to be Secret Service agents . The men even displayed credentials, according to one of them .
 All agents were in the motorcade or already at the Trade Mart . Officially, all agents were on the way to the trade Mart or at the trade .
 No government panel has ever adequately investigated this matter to determine whether these men were bogus or real agents, officials say . Government panel has never been able to determine if they were real agents .
 The 1992 nonfiction book Mortal Error claims that Secret Service agent George Hickey, riding the backup car, attempted to return fire at Oswald in the sixth floor, but bumbled and accidentally shot Kennedy in the back of his head with an AR-15 .
 Menninger obtained most of his theory from Howard Donahue, a retired ballistics expert from Towson, Maryland . The Kansas City Business Journal reporter says he got the theory from a retired expert .
 In 1997, a lawsuit was dropped over the claim that too much time had passed since the book was published . The suit was dropped in 1997 due to arguments that the book had already been published .
 In 1998 a settlement for an undisclosed sum was reached between Hickey and St. St. Hickey . In 1998, Hickey settled out with St.
 Menninger’s thesis was largely dismissed by the JFK community, primarily on the basis that films of the assassination showed no such shooting by Hickey was possible .
 Hickey brandished an AR-15 after the motorcade left Dealey Plaza, as was seen and described by Ed Hoffman and others along the route to Parkland . However, it is true that he brandished the weapon after the shooting, Hickey said .
 The president's guards had the opportunity to achieve Kennedy’s death, but no motive has been established . No motive for Kennedy's death has been determined .
 No one seriously believes that the Secret Service initiated or orchestrated the assassination . The Secret Service is a small agency within the federal government with relatively little power .
 There remains a real possibility that certain individuals within the Secret Service may have been working for someone other than John Kennedy on November 22, 1963 . However, there remains a very real possibility .
 President John F Kennedy had acquired more domestic enemies than just irate anti-Castro Cubans, vengeful mob bosses, and disgruntled intelligence operatives . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Both big business and supporters of states’ rights felt threatened by the new Kennedy brand of federalism . The new federalism is the wielding of total power from Washington .
 Hatred of Kennedy also was being fomented among those opposed to the growing civil rights movement, particularly in the old Confederate states, which included Texas . Hatred was also fomenting among those people opposed to civil rights .
 Kennedy the politician hopes to find a middle ground between the radical activists . Kennedy is hoping to find middle ground among activists on both sides of the political divide .
 Kennedy chastised Eisenhower administration for not doing more to end segregation . Two civil rights bills were passed during that time, the first such major legislation since the Emancipation Proclamation .
 "The torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans," President Obama says . Obama: "Let the torch go forth from this time and place"
 By 1962, polls showed Kennedy ranked behind only King himself in popularity among black Americans . Kennedy's immediate action on civil rights was limited .
 Kennedy had promised to end segregation in federal housing . It was nearly two years after taking office, with violent racial incidents increasing across the nation, before he took action .
 Kennedy dawdled until June 1963, before sending his own civil rights bill to Congress . Even this did not pass until after his death, when President Lyndon Johnson maneuvered through Congress by President Johnson .
 By September 1961, following a summer of tension, violence, and bus “Freedom Rides,” the Interstate Commerce Commission, acting on a request by President Kennedy, banned segregation on buses and in terminals .
 The Kennedys were the first major American leaders to fully address the problem . They appealed for wisdom and restraint from both blacks and whites . They joined the push for civil rights belatedly and reluctantly, reluctantly .
 Some of the most dramatic accomplishments of the Kennedy administration were in the area of civil rights . Despite its faint beginnings, some of the president's administration's most dramatic achievements were in civil rights.
 For first time blacks were appointed to major government jobs as well as judgeships . Civil rights laws aimed at ending voter discrimination and public segregation were vigorously enforced by the Kennedy Justice Department .
 Meredith arrived in Oxford, Mississippi, on September 30 accompanied by three hundred United States marshals . Meredith is in his fourth attempt to enroll in the U.S. college .
 2,500 segregationists and students turned Meredith and his supporters away with bricks and bottles . Meredith was met by a crowd of about 2,000 segregationists . Meredith's supporters turned him away with bottles and bricks and bricks .
 The violence was quelled by the arrival of 3,000 Army and National Guard troops . Meredith was enrolled on October 1 under the protection of marshals . Marshals remained with him until August 1963 .
 One of those involved in that bloody incident was a former Army general named Edwin A Walker . Walker later would be connected with Lee Harvey Oswald . Walker was a general in the Army who would later be connected to Oswald .
 Major General Edwin A Walker was narrowly missed by a rifle bullet . The bullet crashed through a first-floor window and slammed into a wall of his Dallas home .
 The Warren Commission concluded that Walker’s assailant was Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was the alleged assassin of President Kennedy's alleged assassin .
 This conclusion has increasingly been called into question as more information about the event has become known .
 Walker resigned from the Army in 1961 and returned to the U.S. where he began making political speaking tours . Ordered to stop this practice, Walker instead quit the Army and went on political tours .
 He even made an unsuccessful bid for governor of Texas in 1962, losing to John Connally . He even tried to run for governor .
 On September 30, 1962, Walker was in Oxford, Mississippi, trying to prevent the university enrollment of James Meredith . Walker was aligned with those who tried to prevent Meredith's enrollment at the University of Mississippi . Walker: "I'm a hero. I'm not afraid to die"
 Walker was charged with being a ringleader of the violent Oxford mob . Attorney General Robert Kennedy ordered that he be held temporarily in a mental institution . Walker was held in mental institution after being charged with leading the mob .
 By 1963, Walker was back in Dallas and had become a prominent figure in right-wing political activity there, particularly in the John Birch Society . Walker was in Dallas at the time of his death . Walker is credited with saving the lives of his wife and children .
 The United Nations charter, which is only eight pages, should have been placed before to study . The charter, the U.N. charter, is just eight pages long and should be placed before, study finds .
 Few had even seen these papers or the UN declaration on racial discrimination, the term for integration .
 "A cause for America first and last and always always essential to our existence," says Obama . A cause for the U.S. first, last and last .
 All organizations which are implementing such a cause are in the best interest of the country and are needed . All organizations that implement the cause are needed, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Birch Society is doing a great job in educating people and exposing memoranda as I have referred to previously . The Birch society is educating people, exposing such memoranda .
 Walker’s connections in the months preceding the assassination are both convoluted and intriguing . Walker's connections with Walker in months before his assassination are also convoluted . Walker was shot dead in 1993 .
 A driver and aide to Walker in the fall of 1963 was the brother of Larrie Schmidt, who authored the infamous “Welcome Mr Kennedy to Dallas. . .” Schmidt . Schmidt, along with Bernard Weissman, wrote the ad that ran in the Dallas Morning News the morning
 A Walker aide produced the “Wanted for Treason” leaflets that were distributed along the Kennedy motorcade route . Another Walker aide, Robert Allan Surrey, produced the leaflets .
 Surrey later revealed to researcher Penn Jones that one of his close bridgeplaying friends was none other than James Hosty, the FBI agent who destroyed a note to the bureau from Lee Harvey Oswald after the assassination . Hosty was on orders to destroy a note from Oswald from the assassin .
 Walker had contacts with anti-Castro Cubans and New Orleans . Walker was involved in the assassination of Fidel Castro in Cuba . Walker's connections to the assassination included his contacts with Cubans in New Orleans and New York .
 The CIA retained Walker to arm and train Cuban exiles sometime after the Bay of Pigs Invasion . Walker was hired by the CIA after the invasion of Cuba .
 One member of the militant Cuban exile group Alpha 66 was Filipe Vidal Santiago, who was frequently seen with Walker . Santiago was a member of Alpha 66 .
 Such a car figured prominently in several aspects of the assassination case . The car was used in the assassination of President George W. Bush .
 Police dispatchers broadcast a pickup order for a 1957 Chevrolet last seen at the intersection where Tippit was killed . The 1957 Chevrolet was last seen in the area of the intersection .
 Oswald's car had illegitimate license plates around the Tippit slaying and Oswald’s rooming house . This was never adequately investigated, and it was never properly investigated .
 Three photographs of Walker's Dallas home were found in Oswald’s belongings . The Warren Commission concluded that it was Oswald who shot at General Walker .
 Background of the pictures indicated they were made no later than March 10, one month before the attack on Walker, experts say . Mail orders were sent off for Oswald’s pistol and the Carcano rifle . Commission photo experts say backgrounds indicate they were likely made on March 10 .
 Warren Commission Exhibit 5 shows a hole in a car's license number obliterating the car’s license number . This photo has a hole that obliterates the number obliterated by the hole .
 Oswald had evidently taken the license plate number out of the photograph to keep anyone from identifying the owner of that automobile . At the time he observed this photograph surmised that Oswald had apparently taken the plate number area out of . photograph to prevent identification of the owner .
 He advised he is positive the photograph was mutilated as shown in Commission Exhibit 5 at the time they recovered it at the Paine residence . The photograph was found at Paine's residence . He said he's positive he is certain the photograph is mutilated .
 When the FBI first showed me this photograph, I remember that the number of the license plate was on this car, on this photograph . "When the number was on the car," the number that was on that car, the photograph. When the number, the number is on this photo
 There was no hole in the original when they showed it to me—I’m positive of it,’s positive of that. ‘There was no holes in the . original when . they showed . it to him,” he said .
 Marina Oswald said the license number was obliterated while in the hands of the FBI, as stated by Marina Oswald, this is clear evidence of official destruction of evidence . Marina Oswald: This is clear .
 This piece of evidence was altered while in the hands of the authorities . It was altered during the time in the custody of the police .
 Warren Commission staff member disturbed by the criminal action . Warren Commission is investigating whether it was a crime .
 The picture was mutilated by someone in such a manner that the license plate is no longer visible . The license plate was removed from the picture of the car .
 We asked the FBI to determine whose car it was. When we noticed this during the investigation we asked for help, the FBI said it was .
 Surrey driver thought he thought it was your car, Surrey driver says . Surrey police say they found it in the back seat of the car .
 I would appreciate it very much if you would let me know whether or not the FBI did interview you about this and if you were able to identify the car as your own . I would like to know if or not you have been interviewed by the FBI .
 All these strange connections take on more sinister tones when viewed with the possibility that General Walker may have even been in contact with Oswald, his assassin Jack Ruby or both .
 General Walker was filmed in his Dallas home in the late summer of 1963 . The film was made by a St. Paul, Minnesota, man named John Martin . Martin was an acquaintance of General Walker's .
 Martin photographed Lee Harvey Oswald handing out Fair Play for Cuba Committee material on the same roll of film . Incredibly, Martin journeyed on to New Orleans, where on September 9, where he photographed Oswald handing over material . Martin traveled to the same place in New Orleans to photograph Oswald handing
 Walker’s connections in New Orleans were many and substantial, ranging from anti-Castro Cubans in touch with David Ferrie and Guy Banister to Louisiana political leaders . Walker: "I’m not just a Cuban, but a New Orleans native, I’
 Walker was involved in several hurried and secret meetings in New Orleans during the two days prior to the assassination, including a conference with Judge Leander Perez, one of the state’s most powerful men . According to Louisiana State Police files, Walker met with Judge Perez two days before the
 Walker was on a Braniff flight from New Orleans to New Orleans when Kennedy was assassinated . Walker says he was on the flight at the time .
 He reportedly became upset when word of the assassination was broadcast over the plane’s loudspeaker . He roamed up and down the aisle telling fellow passengers to remember that he was on that flight at the time of Kennedy's death .
 David Ferrie introduced Oswald to General Walker and Clay Shaw, the director of the International Trade Mart later prosecuted by district attorney Jim Garrison . Also in this book, the authors state that in late summer of 1963, Ferrie met Oswald and introduced him .
 Author Anthony Summers reported that Walker gave a talk in Dallas that may have been attended by Lee Harvey Oswald . Walker gave the talk in the Dallas area .
 Oswald sat at the back of the room during a meeting of an anti-Castro Cuban group . Oswald was a member of the Directorio Revolutionario Estudiantil . Oswald is believed to have been Oswald's target .
 Walker reportedly knew Oswald’s killer, Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby . Then there are disconcerting reports that Walker knew Ruby's killer, Jack Ruby, .
 Researcher Penn Jones has stated that Ruby once stated that Walker was “100 percent right” in his belief that Cuba should be taken back from Castro .
 Former Walker employee William McEwan Duff made the comments . Duff is a former Walker employee . Duff was a Walker employee in the 1980s . Duff says he is disappointed by the lack of transparency in the media .
 Oswald's notebook contained Walker's name and telephone number . However, Walker maintained he never met Oswald, and the Warren Commission concluded there was no evidence they knew each other .
 Car salesman Warren Reynolds was involved in Walker's assassination . Reynolds was also involved in the assassination of Walker . Reynolds is a car salesman who worked for Walker .
 Reynolds chased the murderer of Patrolman Tippit but initially was unable to identify Oswald as the killer . Reynolds chased down the killer but initially thought Oswald was the real killer .
 Two months later, Reynolds was shot from ambush and after recovering, he was befriended by General Walker . General Walker later befriended Reynolds and helped him recover from the ambush .
 Reynolds was able to identify Oswald to the Warren Commission in July 1964 . After consulting with Walker, Reynolds identified Oswald .
 The Warren Commission concluded, without even bothering to talk to Walker, that his assailant had been Oswald . Walker's assailant was Oswald, according to the Commission .
 Evidence used to reach conclusion was testimony of Marina Oswald, a note discovered at the Paine home, photographs Oswald reportedly took of the Walker home, and identification of a bullet found at crime scene .
 Marina Oswald’s testimony has been called into question in a number of matters . Her stories of murder attempts by Oswald on Walker and Nixon are fraught with inconsistencies and omissions .
 Her first statement that Oswald tried to kill Walker came on December 3, 1963, about a week after a West German newspaper reported there might be a connection between the Walker shooting and the assassination . It is also curious that her first statement about Oswald's attempt on Walker came a week before the
 Warren Commission reported that the German news story was “fabricated by the editor,” but then advanced the same allegation . Warren Commission: The Warren Commission said the German story was fabricated by a newspaper editor .
 The note in question turned up only after the Kennedy assassination . Secret Service agents showed the note to Ruth Paine and asked her to identify it . Paine was asked to identify the note by the Secret Service .
 Government handwriting experts declared that Oswald wrote the message, and Marina told investigators she thought she saw it shortly after the Walker shooting . Marina conveniently told investigators that Oswald said she saw the message shortly after Walker's death .
 Paine’s testimony fuels suspicion that authorities may have planted the note . Paine's testimony fuels the suspicion that the note may have been planted .
 Oswald detailed instructions to his wife on what to do in his absence . In it, he wrote: "I'm going to tell her what I think you should do in my absence"
 Oswald: Send the information as to what has happened to me to the Embassy [undoubtedly the Russian embassy] and include newspaper clippings . Oswald had been contacted periodically by the Russian Embassy .
 "I believe that the Embassy will come quickly to your assistance on learning everything. I believe that that is the best thing to do," says President Obama .
 These two sections raise troublesome questions for the official version of the Walker shooting . Walker was shot dead by police officers in 2011 .
 Walker had no money, no passport, and no reasonable expectation of escape . Yet at the time of the Walker incident, he had no intention of escaping . Walker was not expected to be able to escape .
 Contemporary news stories of the April 10 incident quote Dallas police as saying the recovered bullet was “identified as a 30.06-millimeter Mannlicher-Carcano” not a 6.5-magnumum . Dallas police say the bullet was a 30-mill
 In 1975, researcher George Michael Evica received FBI spectrographic analyses of a bullet and bullet fragments recovered in the assassination investigation . Evica says he received FBI analysis of bullet fragments .
 Walker claims the bullet is not the same bullet recovered from his home in 1963 . Walker has raised further confusion over the bullet in the House Select Committee .
 He said the original slug was so mangled as to be hardly recognizable as a bullet . The slug was recovered from the scene of the shooting .
 Oswald was not responsible for the Walker shooting, but evidence suggests he acted alone . Even if Oswald were responsible, there is evidence that he did not act alone . Oswald is accused of shooting Walker in the early 1940s .
 Walter Kirk Coleman, 14, was a 14-year-old neighbor to Walker . Coleman told police he heard the shot and, peeking over a fence, saw some men speeding down the alley in a light green or light blue Ford, either a 1959 or 1960 model . Coleman was
 Coleman also said he saw another car, a 1958 black Chevrolet with white down the side, in a church parking lot adjacent to Walker’s house . Coleman said he also saw another black Chevrolet in the same lot .
 The car door was open and a man was bending over the backseat as though he was placing something on the floor of the car . The man was bent over the car door and appeared to be bending over to place something .
 Coleman was not called to testify at the time of the Warren Commission . Coleman told Walker that authorities had ordered him not to discuss the incident .
 Just prior to the Walker shooting, two of the general’s aides saw suspicious activity around his home . Walker was shot dead in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Walker aide Robert Surrey said he saw two men prowling around the house . Surrey said two men were seen peeking in windows . Surrey says he saw them prowling in windows of the home .
 Surrey said the pair were driving a 1963 dark purple or brown Ford with no license plates . Surrey police said the two were driving the 1963 Ford without license plates and were driving with no plates .
 A few nights before the incident, Walker noticed a “Cuban or dark-complected man in a 1957 Chevrolet” cruise around Walker’s home several times . And a few nights later, he noticed a man in the same car .
 Martin Luther King Jr. led some 250,000 people in the Freedom March on Washington . King led the march on Washington, Washington, in 1964 .
 The march took place less than three months after President Kennedy had submitted his own civil rights bill in Congress . The march was the first civil rights march since the Kennedy administration had submitted its own bill .
 Resistance to Kennedy’s plans was widespread . A June 1963 Gallup poll indicated 59 percent of the population approved of the president and his programs .
 On June 12, 1963, Georgia senator Richard B Russell promised other southern senators that the President’s legislative proposals were “clearly destructive of the American system and the constitutional rights of American citizens.”
 Russell was sitting as a member of the Warren Commission, charged with finding the truth of Kennedy’s death . Within six months, Russell was in charge of the investigation into Kennedy's death .
 FBI director J Edgar Hoover watched as Washington monuments were surrounded by demonstrators . Hoover was FBI director at the time of the monument's destruction .
 Hoover was particularly anxious over King's civil rights movement . Hoover was anxious about King's efforts to organize civil rights groups in the U.S. Hoover was obsessed with civil rights .
 The aging director not only saw his essentially southern way of life threatened but was convinced that King’s organization was being directed by communists . King was also convinced that the communists were behind the attack .
 Hoover told me that he felt that King was, or could become, a serious threat to the security of the country . Hoover said he felt King was a threat to national security . Hoover: King could be serious threat. Hoover said King could become serious threat .
 Hoover wanted evidence to prove King was embezzling or misusing large sums of money . Hoover also wanted evidence developed that would prove King had misused money from his organization . Hoover made it clear that he wanted evidence of King misusing money .
 Hoover’s vendetta continued against King until the black leader was himself cut down by an assassin's bullet in 1968 . Hoover's vendetta against King continued until he was assassinated . Hoover was the FBI director of the civil rights movement .
 COINTELPRO was created in part “to expose, disrupt, misdirect, or otherwise neutralize” King and his Southern Christian Leadership Conference . Behind this vendetta was Hoover’s secret counterintelligence program . Hoover's secret counter-intelligence program was created to expose
 Suspicions that Hoover’s FBI or some other part of the federal government played a role in King's death heightened in 1999 . A Memphis jury found Memphis restaurant owner Loyd Jowers guilty of arranging an assassination plot .
 "The Mafia, local, state and federal government agencies, were deeply involved in the assassination of my husband," says his widow . "The conspiracy of the Mafia was deeply involved," she says .
 The jury also affirmed overwhelming evidence that identified someone else, not James Earl Ray, as the shooter . Mr Ray was set up to take the blame for the shooting, jurors said .
 President Kennedy and Hoover’s own boss, attorney general Robert Kennedy, were also targeted . Hoover's own boss Robert Kennedy was also targeted for careful scrutiny .
 Both Kennedy brothers eventually supported King and the civil rights program as they came to realize that its adoption as official policy was inevitable . Both brothers later supported King's program .
 From the ranks of angered segregationists came one man with a prophetic vision of Kennedy’s death .
 A Miami police informant met with Joseph A Milteer, a wealthy right-wing extremist . The Miami Prophet outlines the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Milteer responded, “Oh, yeah, it’s in the works. . . . wouldn’t leave any stone unturned there, no way.” He said .
 Captain Charles Sapp, head of Miami’s Police Intelligence Bureau, was concerned enough with Milteer's remarks to alert the FBI and Secret Service .
 No word of this right-wing plot reached Secret Service agents involved in Kennedy’s Dallas trip . Kennedy was in Dallas when the plot was discovered .
 Plans for a Miami motorcade were scrapped and the president instead flew to a scheduled speech by helicopter . Sapp recalled that plans for a motorcade in Miami were scrapped . Sapp recalls that plans were later scrapped .
 On the day of the assassination, Milteer telephoned Somersett, saying he was in Dallas and that Kennedy was due there shortly . Somersett died in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations was unable to confirm Milteer’s presence in Dallas during the assassination . It also failed to prove he was elsewhere in Dallas, Texas .
 Milteer met Somersett again in Miami after the assassination and said, “Everything ran true to form.” Somersett said . “The whole thing,” he said .
 The FBI questioned Milteer on November 27 and he denied making any such statements . The FBI interviewed him on Nov. 27 . He denied making such statements and said he did not make any statements .
 Some information of the Milteer incident was belatedly turned over to the Warren Commission . There is no mention of the incident in its report or twenty-six volumes . The Warren Commission did not mention the incident .
 Milteer died before he could be questioned further about his apparent foreknowledge of Kennedy’s assassination . He died after receiving burns when a heater exploded in a vacation cabin .
 The Milteer episode raises a number of questions, not the least of which is why his knowledge of a threat against the president was not passed along to FBI and Secret Service personnel in Dallas .
 President Kennedy was president of the United States in the 1960s . He faced racial unrest, but it was not his only domestic problem . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 He was being verbally attacked not only by poor minorities with rising expectations, but also by wealthy businessmen who felt threatened by his announced social reforms .
 Big business was already leery of Kennedy, who as a senator had opposed the Taft-Hartley law, aimed at curbing the power of labor unions . As president, Kennedy had failed to consult the business world before making certain appointments .
 Kennedy used the power of the presidency to force U.S. steel manufacturers to roll back recent price increases . The fears of big business increased in the spring of 1962 when Kennedy used his power to force United States steel companies to reverse recent price hikes .
 Kennedy already had served notice on the giant steel companies in September 1961 . Kennedy sent a letter to industry leaders warning them against any price increases .
 The steel industry, in short, can look forward to good profits without an increase in prices . Steel industry is looking forward to profitable profits without a price hike .
 On April 6, 1962, at the request of the federal government, the Steelworkers Union agreed to limit its wage demands to a tencent hourly increase beginning that summer . The union agreed to an hourly wage increase of ten cents .
 On April 11, United States Steel and five other major steel companies announced a 3. percent hike in the cost of steel . U.S. Steel announced the hike on April 11 .
 The Defense Department awarded a $5 million contract to a smaller steel firm that had not raised prices . Administration officials suggested an FBI investigation .
 The next day, the six major firms announced their price increase had been rescinded . Six major firms said their price increases were rescinded the next day .
 Kennedy’s denunciation of the steel executives sent shock waves through the business community . Kennedy: ‘I’m not going to back the steel industry. I’ve got a lot of respect for the people of steel workers,’ he said .
 He had demonstrated that a proactive president could influence major corporate decisions . President Obama has demonstrated that he can influence major decisions .
 Kennedy administration was infuriating corporate executives . Other results of the Kennedy administration were infuriated corporate executives.
 Mergers were becoming widespread in the business world . Attorney General Kennedy and his trust busters were taking a dim view of them . Mergers are becoming widespread .
 During 1963, the Justice Department’s Antitrust Division won forty-five of forty-six cases . General Dynamics ordered General Dynamics to drop a division dealing with industrial gases .
 Business and political leaders began to regret that the winner of the 1960 presidential election had not been Richard M Nixon . Richard M. Nixon won the White House in 1960 .
 Richard Milhous Nixon was the only U.S. president to resign under the threat of certain impeachment . Nixon resigned from office under threat of being impeached . Nixon and JFK were assassinated in 1968 .
 Few know of or recall Nixon’s connection with the Kennedy assassination . Nixon was in Dallas the day Kennedy died but couldn’t recall that fact when interviewed by the FBI .
 Born January 9, 1913, in Yorba Linda, California, Nixon was a self-made man . He reached the pinnacles of power after struggling up from a background of meager financial circumstances .
 Nixon wanted to attend Harvard like young Kennedy, but was forced to settle for California’s Whittier College . He honed his skills as a debater . Nixon wanted Harvard, but settled for California college .
 Shortly after Pearl Harbor, Nixon took a job with the tire-rationing department of the Office of Price Administration in Washington, D.C.
 Charles "Bebe" Rebozo began his profitable career selling recapped tires . Nixon’s lifelong friend Charles “Bebe” began his successful career selling tires . Bebe was Nixon's lifelong friend .
 Later in the war, Nixon enlisted in the Navy and served in the South Pacific . On one island he built a small shack used for high-stakes gambling and drinking .
 Nixon was named to the House UnAmerican Activities Committee . His name became nationally known due to his part in the case of Alger Hiss, a government official accused of being a Soviet spy .
 His opponent was Helen Douglas, a liberal former Hollywood actress named Helen Douglas .
 The man most responsible for Nixon’s smear tactics was his close friend and campaign manager Murray Chotiner, a lawyer who represented ranking mobsters . He had connections to reputed New Orleans Mafia chief Carlos Marcello and Teamsters leader Jimmy Hoffa .
 Throughout the Eisenhower years, the war-hero president snubbed Nixon both politically and socially . Nixon was a major ally of the war hero during the Eisenhower administration .
 Nixon was busy building up his own power base with men of dubious backgrounds . He was busy in the early days of Watergate . But he was also building up a power base in Washington .
 Mobster Mickey Cohen gave Chotiner $5,000 for Nixon's 1946 congressional campaign . Cohen raised $75,000 from Las Vegas gamblers for Nixon’s 1950 Senate race .
 Marcello had a suitcase filled with $500,000 cash which was going to Nixon . The suitcase was filled with money which went into Nixon's coffers .
 Nixon’s organized-crime contacts apparently continued even after he resigned the presidency in disgrace in disgrace . Nixon's organized crime contacts continued even though he resigned in disgrace, sources say .
 Nixon’s golfing companions included Allen Dorfman, a mob-teamster financial coordinator, and Tony Provenzano, a former Teamster official and convicted Mafia killer .
 Nixon was a frequent visitor to Cuba during the early 1950s . He was in contact with confederates of organized-crime financial wizard Meyer Lansky . Lansky was a financial adviser to Lansky organized crime .
 When Fidel Castro gained power in Cuba, Lansky was one of those mob chieftains who wanted him overthrown . Lansky wanted Castro overthrown. Lansky: "When Fidel Castro got power, he wanted him to be overthrown"
 An attempt with CIA officers to plan an invasion of Cuba was initiated by Eisenhower’s White House political action officer, Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon was the president of the United States during the Cold War .
 In his book Six Crises, Nixon wrote, “The covert training of Cuban exiles by the CIA was due in substantial part, at least, to my efforts.” Nixon wrote in his book, ‘Six Crises'
 Before the invasion could be launched, Nixon lost the 1960 election to John F Kennedy .
 Nixon ran against Pat Brown for the California governorship in 1962 . Nixon ran for the governorship against Brown in California .
 Nixon was handily defeated, especially after news broke of a secret $200,000 loan from billionaire Howard Hughes to Nixon’s brother . Nixon was defeated after news of the loan broke .
 Within two years, Nixon was back on the political stage, campaigning for Republican candidates . Nixon was assassinated in 1968 . Nixon died in 1973 .
 GOP stalwarts repaid this activity by again nominating Richard Nixon for president in August 1968 . Nixon was nominated again for president by the Republican Party in 1968 .
 During the Nixon years, his friends in organized crime were not forgotten . "During the Nixon . During the . Nixon . years, organized crime was not forgotten."
 In 1973, Nixon’s attorney general, Richard Kleindienst, denied an FBI request to continue an electronic surveillance operation . The operation was beginning to penetrate connections between the Mafia and the Teamsters .
 Nixon pardoned Hoffa in 1971 despite recommendations against such action . Hoffa was also pardoned in 1971 after being found guilty of drug possession .
 Of all Nixon's possible crime connections, the most intriguing involves Jack Ruby . Ruby, the killer of Lee Harvey Oswald, was the assassin of Oswald . Ruby killed Oswald in the June 4, 1963, assassination .
 In 1975, Trowbridge Ford was a political science associate professor at College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Massachusetts . Ford was poring over a stack of recently released FBI documents . Ford: The documents were released by the FBI in 1975 .
 Ford was astonished to discover a memorandum written by a bureau staff assistant to a government panel looking into organized-crime activity in 1947 . Ford was shocked to discover that the memo was written by the bureau's staff assistant . It was written to a panel looking at organized crime activity .
 Jack Rubenstein of Chicago, noted as a potential witness for hearings of the House Committee on UnAmerican Activities, is performing information functions for the staff of Richard Nixon, Republican of California . Rubenstein, a Chicago resident, was noted as potential witness in hearings .
 Rubenstein requested not be called for open testimony in the hearings . Rubenstein has requested Rubenstein not be allowed to testify in public hearings .
 Chicago’s Rubenstein moved to Dallas in 1947 and shortened his name to Jack Ruby . Later in 1947, he moved from Chicago to Dallas and changed his name .
 The idea that Jack Ruby had worked for Nixon should have set off the national news media . Ruby worked for the late President Richard Nixon in the 1970s .
 FBI officials told Ford that the document he discovered was a fake and the story was quickly dropped . Instead, FBI officials said they were investigating the document Ford discovered was fake . Ford says the document was a document that he found out was a false .
 FBI statement admitting that fake or phony documents reside in its files . FBI statement: "Here once again we see an FBI statement . Here once again, we see a statement admitting . That statement is a response to a series of false or fake documents in files .
 By the early 1980s, Ford told this author he had studied literally thousands of genuine FBI documents . Ford said he had slowly come to the conclusion that the NixonRuby memo was probably legitimate . Ford: "I'm sure the memo is probably legitimate"
 The matter raises even more suspicion when viewed with Nixon’s presence in Dallas the day Kennedy died . Regardless of the matter, the matter raises more suspicion .
 On November 20, 1963, Nixon arrived in Dallas, Texas, to attend a convention of the American Bottlers of Carbonated Beverages . The convention was being held at the time .
 He plans to leave Dallas Friday morning a few hours before the arrival of President Kennedy . President Kennedy is expected to arrive in Dallas on Friday morning .
 Mr Nixon said he planned to talk by telephone to several Dallas Republican leaders . He said he had no plans for a formal meeting with them .
 Pepsi-Cola corporate records show no board meeting in Dallas in 1963 . No board meeting was held in Dallas .
 Nixon was longtime friends with Pepsi-Cola president Don Kendall . He opened the lucrative Soviet soft-drink market to Pepsi . Nixon was later president .
 In 1973, Kendall formed the Save the Presidency Committee, which sought to protect Nixon from the wrath of Watergate investigations . Kendall was a key member of the committee that sought to keep Nixon from being investigated .
 Cartha DeLoach, the FBI official who was chief liaison between Hoover and Johnson, later joined Pepsi-Cola . It's especially interesting to note that she was the FBI's liaison with Johnson .
 Both Nixon and Crawford made comments in the Dallas newspapers to the effect that they, unlike the president, didn’t need Secret Service protection . They intimated that the nation was upset with Kennedy’s policies .
 It has been suggested that this taunting may have been responsible for Kennedy’s critical decision not to have the Plexiglas top placed on his limousine on November 22 . Kennedy's decision to not place the top on the limo was a result of the taunting .
 Nixon also suggested that Lyndon Johnson would be dropped from the 1964 Democratic national ticket . Nixon also caused a stir in Dallas when he suggested that he would drop LBJ .
 Lyndon was chosen in 1960 because he could help the ticket in the South . He was chosen to help the Democratic Party in the 1960s .
 Less than two hours after Nixon left, Air Force One landed at Love Field with the doomed Kennedy . The doomed Kennedy was the last president to leave Love Field .
 The Warren Commission asked the FBI to investigate Marina Oswald’s allegation that her husband had tried to kill Nixon during a visit to Dallas . Three months later, the FBI was asked to investigate the allegation . Oswald's wife Marina Oswald said her husband tried to murder Nixon in Dallas .
 This document was reported missing from the National Archives in 1976 . However, this document was never found in 1976.
 Nixon’s recollection improved during a 1967 interview with journalist Jules Witcover . Nixon's recollections improved during the interview .
 The supposed attack on Nixon by Oswald by Oswald undoubtedly is one of the more ludicrous incidents of the Warren Commission investigation . It is a prime example of the unreliability of Marina Oswald’s testimony . Marina Oswald's testimony is prime example .
 Marina Oswald failed to mention the incident when asked if her husband had expressed any hostility toward any official of the U.S. Marina Oswald testified to the Commission in February 1964 .
 Oswald’s brother Robert Oswald had put on a good suit just a few days before he left for New Orleans on April 24, 1963 . Oswald's sister said in June an FBI report from Oswald's brother revealed that he had read a newspaper in the day before he departed .
 "I called him into the bathroom and I closed the door and I wanted to prevent him and then I started to cry," she said of her husband . "I started to start to cry. I called him in the bathroom"
 She told the Commission she locked him in the bathroom to prevent him from trying to shoot Nixon . She locked him up to prevent Nixon from shooting himself .
 FBI investigation confirms bathroom locked from the inside . The bathroom is locked from inside .
 Marina said she held the bathroom door for hours to prevent Oswald from leaving . In a subsequent interview with the Commission, Marina amended her story by saying she held it for hours . Marina later said she had held the door to keep Oswald out of the bathroom .
 Oswald may have been the target of Oswald’s pistol, but Oswald was not in Dallas at any time . The Commission decided that Oswald's target was Vice President Johnson, who had visited Dallas on April 23 .
 E Howard Hunt was a CIA liaison with the anti-Castro Cubans . Haldeman says Hunt will uncover a lot of things about the Hunt .
 Nixon was out of office when the actual invasion began and the assault’s disastrous consequences were a matter of historical record . Nixon was not in office at the time of the invasion of Vietnam .
 Hunt later demanded $2 million to keep quiet about what he knew, Nixon agreed and the money was raised . It also is significant that Nixon agreed to raise the money to cover up Hunt's cover-up .
 It may also be significant to consider the number of people connected with the Warren Commission who were hired or considered for employment by Nixon's circle during Watergate .
 Specter was the architect of the controversial “single-bullet theory” for the Warren Commission . Specter, a former senator from Pennsylvania, was the chief architect of that theory . He was the former senator .
 He was a protégé of Nixon’s attorney general, John Mitchell, and had served as cochairman of the Pennsylvania division of the Committee to Re-Elect the President in 1972 .
 Commission attorney David Belin—long its most ardent supporter, headed Lawyers for Nixon . Commission attorney Belin is now the president's most ardent opponent of Nixon .
 In the final days of Watergate, organized crime investigator Dan E Moldea revealed that military authorities, including Nixon’s chief of staff, began to connect their chief with several mobsters . Florida's Santos Trafficante is believed responsible for setting up heroin routes from Vietnam and making payoffs
 President pardoned organized crime figures after millions were spent by the government putting them away . The President has had connections to organized crime since he was a congressman in the 1940s, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I guess the real shame is that we’ll never know the whole story, it’]l never come out," she said . "We’ve never known the truth," she added .
 Nixon appointed former Warren Commission member Gerald R Ford as vice president after Spiro Agnew resigned in 1973 under tax evasion charges . Nixon appointed Ford after Agnew resigns in tax evasion case .
 One of Ford's first public actions was to pardon Nixon of any crimes—past, present, or future . Ford pardoned Nixon of all crimes .
 There are indications that in the fall of 1963, certain persons did. There are many indications that they did . There are also indications that certain persons were involved .
 It appears that some corporate leaders also may have been aware of Kennedy’s fate . Kennedy was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 In the thirty minutes following Kennedy’s assassination in Dallas, the Dow Jones average fell more than 21.16 points . A Killing on Wall Street: In the 30 minutes following JFK's assassination, the market fell .
 The Securities and Exchange Commission closed the stock exchange shortly after 2m., more than eighty minutes before normal closing time . The panic and confusion was such that the S&E closed the market after 2.30pm .
 It was the first emergency shutdown of the stock market since August 1933 . The shutdown was a first since August 1932 .
 A few sharp investors, or perhaps individuals with knowledge of what was to come, had taken "short" positions in scattered areas of the market .
 Some stocks unaccountably were sold before the market dropped, indicating some people may have had advance word that something momentous was about to happen and that stock values would drop .
 No one has publicly identified the men who made their own private killing in the stock market . It has been estimated that profits made on November 22 alone totaled more than $500 million .
 At least one author has suggested that the immense amount of money that changed hands on November 22, 1963, was the motivation behind Kennedy’s death .
 Kennedy’s attempt to reform American society involves money . Another overlooked aspect of Kennedy's reform is money . Kennedy's efforts to reform society involve money .
 Abraham Lincoln found the big banks demanded high interest rates, from 24 to 36 percent, to fund the War Between the States . Lincoln found that interest rates were too high to pay for the war . Abraham Lincoln was forced to negotiate with the banks to lower rates .
 Rather than saddle the nation with unredeemable debt, he ordered the U.S. Treasury to issue new legal tender—United States notes . The United States notes are now legal tender .
 United States notes, the longest serving paper money in U.S. history, were fiat notes issued through the treasury backed only by faith in the federal government . The longest-serving paper money was issued in the United States during the Second World War .
 Under Lincoln’s orders, these new notes, popularly known as greenbacks, replaced demand notes . The new notes were made of greenbacks and were replaced by demand notes in 1863 .
 The greenback currency worked so well that political struggles and court cases continued into the late 1870s, when silver certificates again began to be issued . Silver certificates were issued again in the 1870s .
 Kennedy understood, as did Lincoln, that by returning to the Constitution, the soaring national debt could be reduced by not paying interest to the bankers of the Federal Reserve System . Only Congress shall coin and regulate money, the Constitution says .
 He signed Executive Order 11110 authorizing the Treasury Department to start printing and issuing silver certificates . The certificates are based on the remaining silver in the United States Treasury and the Commodity Credit Corporation .
 The authority vested in the President by paragraph of section 43 of the Act of May 12, 1933, as amended ) to issue silver certificates against any silver bullion, silver, or silver . dollars in the Treasury not then held for redemption of an outstanding silver certificates .
 There has been considerable confusion and misunderstanding over EO 11110 . There is also considerable confusion over what is known to be the law of the age of consent .
 JFK was making a surreptitious effort to return money-creation power from the privately owned Federal Reserve to the Treasury Department . From available evidence, there appears to be missing and even altered data .
 EO 11110 appeared to be a simple change to president Harry Truman’s Executive Order 10289 of 1951 . The change was made to the treasury through the issuance of treasury silver certificates .
 $100 million worth accumulated largely through reparations from World War I . This silver was to be put in storage under the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933 and amended by the Gold Reserve Act of 1934 . The silver was expected to be stored in storage .
 The Commodity Credit Corporation and the Exchange Stabilization Fund were created . Some of the money was being used for purposes such as funding covert intelligence .
 EO 11110 would have allowed the treasury full access to silver certificates from the bowels of Fort Knox . It would have drastically lowered the U.S. government loan rate .
 JFK was seeking to ease the inflation rate and this one order would have accomplished just that . JFK sought to ease inflation rate . JFK was trying to ease just that. JFK was also trying to help ease inflation .
 This would have placed more silver into the general population and paid off debt to the Federal Reserve . The silver would have been placed into the public's hands and paid to the government .
 JFK's EO 11110 expanded the Treasury Department’s power to issue noninterest-bearing money from governmental reserves . The move edged out the United States need to approach the Federal Reserve to print more interest-bearing notes .
 EO 11110 allowed for the issuance of $4,292,893,815 in silverbacked treasury bills, called United States notes . The U.S. Treasury issued the bill for the first time in 18 years . The bill is now worth $4.2 billion .
 Kennedy also signed a bill changing the backing of $1 and $2 bills from silver to gold . The move adds strength to the weakening U.S. currency .
 President Kennedy’s successor, President Johnson, did nothing to change this situation . Kennedy's successor, JFK, did little to change the situation . President Johnson's administration has nothing to say .
 President Ronald Reagan issued EO 12608 as part of a general clean-up of executive orders in 1987 . Reagan issued the order in September 1987 . The order was part of the president's effort to clean up executive orders .
 The deficit is more than $16 trillion, an all-time high . Today we continue to use interest-bearing Federal Reserve notes, and the deficit is $16 billion .
 Kennedy’s attempt to increase the monetary and credit supply by infusing the economy with U.S. notes issued through the treasury rather than the private interest-charging Federal Reserve System .
 Kennedy showed signs of attempting to undercut the power of the heretofore unassailable Federal Reserve System . Interest-free U.S. notes were indeed issued .
 Kennedy’s comptroller of the currency, James J Saxon, had been at odds with the powerful Federal Reserve Board for some time . He had been encouraging broader investment and lending powers for banks that were not part of the Reserve System .
 Saxon also had decided non-Reserve banks could underwrite state and local general obligation bonds, again weakening the dominant Federal Reserve banks . Saxon: Non-reserve banks can underwrite general obligation bond bonds .
 President Kennedy presented both his budget and proposals for tax reform that included a tax cut . Kennedy inched farther out on a limb with big business on January 17, 1963 .
 Kennedy’s tax proposals included relieving the tax burden of low-income and elderly persons, revising tax treatment of capital gains for a better flow of capital funds, and broadening the base of individual and corporate income taxes to remove special privileges and loopholes .
 This last possibility brought the beleaguered president into direct confrontation with one of the most powerful and single-minded groups in America—wealthy oilmen . The president's job is to deal with the world's largest oil companies, the White House says .
 The history of oil is replete with stories of unbounded greed, business chicanery, and even violence . Kennedy and Oilmen tell the tale of the oil industry's greed and violence .
 In 1923, the first major oil scandal occurred when it was discovered that president Warren G Harding’s secretary of the interior, Albert B Fall, accepted money from oilmen in exchange for secretly leasing drilling rights in Wyoming .
 There were calls to make the vital oil industry a public utility with governmental controls . By 1933, there were calls for the oil industry to be a government utility .
 Franklin Roosevelt’s secretary of the interior, Harold Ickes, supported the move . One of the men supporting this move was president Franklin Roosevelt's secretary of interior . The move was in response to a proposal by the White House to use the military to protect the environment .
 FDR was finally turned against the plan by Texas congressman Sam Rayburn, Lyndon Johnson’s mentor . Rayburn represented Texas oil interests in Washington .
 After World War II, the Marshall Plan began turning recovering European nations away from coal to oil . The Marshall Plan turned recovering countries away from oil to coal .
 In 1950, a secret agreement was reached between the State Department and major oil companies . It allowed all royalties paid to Arab nations to be applied as tax credits .
 The same year, a CIA-backed coup reinstated the Shah of Iran and new oil arrangements were made with Iran . The coup was the same year that the Shah was reinstated by the CIA .
 Ironically, the Iranian coup masterminded by Kermit Roosevelt, Teddy’s grandson, went on to become a vice president of Gulf Oil . Kermit was Teddy's grandson, Kermit, who later became a vice-president of Gulf oil . The Iranian coup was masterminded in
 The Suez Crisis in 1956 signaled the end of British and French colonialism in the Middle East . The major oil companies moved to consolidate their power in the region .
 When John F Kennedy became president in 1961, the oil industry felt secure . The oil industry was secure when the president became president .
 President Kennedy began to assault the power of the oil giants directly, first with the Kennedy Act, and later by attacking the oil depletion allowance .
 Kennedy Act, passed on October 16, 1962, removed distinction between repatriated profits and profits reinvested abroad . Kennedy Act was passed in 1962 .
 The measure also was aimed at preventing taxable income from being hidden away in foreign subsidiaries and other tax havens . The measure was passed by Congress in March .
 Oil companies were greatly diversified with large overseas operations . While this law applied to industry as a whole, it particularly affected the oil companies .
 By the end of 1962, oilmen estimated their earnings on foreign investment capital would fall to 15 percent, compared with 30 percent in 1955 . Oilmen estimated that their earnings would fall from 30 percent to 15% in 1962 .
 The oil depletion allowance allowed oil producers to treat up to 27. percent of their income as tax exempt . The allowance was part of the most sacred of provisions in the eyes of oilmen . Oil depletion allowance was a key provision in the oil industry .
 In theory, this was to compensate for the depletion of fixed oil reserves . But, in effect, it gave the oil industry a lower tax rate .
 An oilman with a good deal of venture capital could become rich with virtually no risk . Under this allowance, an oilman can become rich without risk .
 If nine were dry holes and only the tenth struck oil, he would still make money because of tax breaks and the depletion allowance . If nine hit dry holes, only one struck oil and the tenth did, he still made money .
 It was estimated at the time that oilmen might lose nearly $300 million a year if the depletion allowance was diminished . The depletion allowance is estimated to be worth $300million a year .
 Attempts to eliminate or reduce the depletion allowance were rebuffed year after year by congressmen, many of whom were the happy recipients of oil-industry contributions .
 Kennedy’s tax package included provisions for closing a number of corporate tax loopholes, including the depletion allowance . Included in the tax package were provisions for . closing the . depletion allowance, which is a tax loophole, .
 Oilmen both in Texas and elsewhere felt threatened by Kennedy and his policies . Needless to say, oilmen felt threatened .
 Kennedy’s use of his personal power against the steel manufacturers had shown them that the young president meant to enforce his will in these matters . Kennedy's use of personal power showed them that they had shown that he meant .
 Curington sent Oswald to check on Oswald’s police security while in custody and was ‘elated’ to find it was lax . He also sent him to check the security of the police security in custody, which he described as lax .
 Curington also is convinced that he saw Marina Oswald coming from Hunt’s private offices several weeks after the assassination .
 Hunt’s former assistant said he believes Hunt unwittingly influenced right-wing followers to participate in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy . Hunt's former assistant says he believes that the wealthy oilman unwittingly influenced followers . Hunt is believed to have been involved in the assassination of Kennedy .
 Hunt admitted in later years that he knew an assassination conspiracy existed . Hunt said he knew there was a conspiracy to kill the president .
 Angry talk in corporate boardrooms may have grown into deadly plots on golf courses and at private parties . Angry talk may be growing into plots at golf courses, private parties, according to CNN.com reports .
 Despite their unparalleled wealth and power, oilmen could not have moved against Kennedy on their own . But despite their power, they were able to move against Kennedy .
 "They needed allies within government and within the intelligence community and the military," she says . "They had to have allies in government and in the military. They needed allies," she adds .
 Anti-Castro Cubans, CIA, organized crime, Pentagon and even within the federal government were most receptive to a change of leadership . Such allies were there—among the anti-Cubans, in the CIA, in organized crime and even in the Pentagon .
 Lyndon Johnson was especially sympathetic to oilmen, many of whom were fellow Texans and financial contributors . The president was particularly sympathetic to the oil industry .
 Dallas oil geologist George DeMohrenschildt was the last-known close friend to Lee Harvey Oswald . He was identified by the Warren Commission as the last known friend to Oswald .
 DeMohrenschildt was friends with both Jackie Kennedy's family and her husband's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald . He is perhaps the most intriguing person in the entire cast of characters connected with the Kennedy assassination .
 Little was said about DeMohrenschildt at the time of the assassination as both he and his wife, Jeanne, were in Haiti during the events in Dallas .
 A close study of DeMohrenschildt’s life shows a string of intelligence connections, raising the possibility that he may have played a role — perhaps unwittingly — in furthering plans for the assassination .
 DeMohrenschildt's suspicious death may have come to haunt him in the days just prior to his suspicious death in 1977 .
 DeMohrenschildt was born April 17, 1911, in Mozyr, a small Baltic town in czarist Russia near the Polish border . His family, originally named Mohrenskuld, was of Swedish extraction; he was born in 1911 .
 An educated, sophisticated young man, DeMohrenschildt was introduced to many wealthy and influential Americans . He met many wealthy Americans .
 Bouvier is Jacqueline Kennedy’s mother, also her father and her whole family . Bouvier was in the process of getting a divorce from her husband when she met him, also Jacqueline .
 I met Jackie then, when she was a little girl. her sister, who was still in the cradle practically . Her sister, Jackie, was also a child, but she was never in the same shape .
 DeMohrenschildt traveled by bus to Texas, where he got a job with Humble Oil Company . After failing in attempts to sell insurance and perfume, he moved to Houston, Texas .
 Young DeMohrenschildt was confined to working as a ‘roughneck’ in the Louisiana oil fields . He was friends with the chairman of the board of Humble .
 For years he claimed to have worked for French intelligence during the early years of World War II . He said he was never an official agent but had helped a good friend, Pierre Freyss, the head of French counterintelligence .
 In 1941, he was atrested by the FBI and charged with being a Nazi spy for sketching and photographing military installations near Aransas Pass, Texas . He was arrested in 1941 and charged .
 In later years he confessed to his wife that he had briefly worked for the Germans . He later confessed to the wife he had worked for them .
 DeMohrenschildt also became closely connected with exiled Russians who joined with the General Vlassov movement, anticommunist Russians who fought with the Nazis .
 Russian exile communities were springing up in cities with large exile communities . They referred to themselves as “solidarists,” indicating the solidarity of their purpose .
 One of these groups existed in Dallas during the early 1960s . DeMohrenschildt disclaimed being a member .
 The Vlassov organization was eventually absorbed by the Nazi spy system under General Reinhard Gehlen . At the end of the war the system became a part of United States intelligence .
 DeMohrenschildt’s oil-related travels took him to France, Nigeria, Ghana, and Togoland . He traveled to Ghana, France, Ghana and France .
 In 1957, despite an unflattering background check by the CIA, he journeyed to Yugoslavia for the International Cooperation Administration, a branch of the U.S. government’s Agency for International Development .
 DeMohrenschildt apparently had some association with the agency, according to documents . Documents that became public in the late 1970s were made public .
 CIA memo indicated that DeMohrenschildt also furnished lengthy reports on his later travels through Mexico and Central America . CIA memo said he also provided lengthy reports of his travels .
 Shortly before leaving for Yugoslavia, DeMohrenschildt met another Russian exile who lived in the same Dallas hotel with him . Shortly before he left for Yugoslavia he met another exile .
 Jeanne Fromenke LeGon had already established a career as a dancer and clothing designer . She was also a clothing designer and dancer .
 Her Russian father built the first railroads in China and was connected with Nationalist politics there . Her brother, Sergio, had worked on the super-secret Manhattan atomic bomb project .
 Her former husband, Robert LeGon, was connected to security work for Douglas Aircraft . Their daughter, Christiana, was married to a vice president of Lockheed Aircraft .
 Jeanne and the outgoing DeMohrenschildt hit it off right away and she joined him in Yugoslavia . Jeanne and Jeanne met in Yugoslavia and married in the 1950s .
 In a curious incident there, the couple was shot at by communist guards who became anxious when they came too close to Marshal Tito’s summer home . The couple was boating when they were shot at .
 George and Jeanne were soon married and shortly set off on an incredible odyssey through Central America . They set off with an incredible journey to Central America and returned to the US .
 The DeMohrenschildts were at the center of prominent Dallasites in late 1961 . They were a prominent Dallasite in the 1960s .
 His business and social contacts read like a who’s who of the Texas oil community . His contacts include a who's who of Texas oil industry .
 Dr. Hunt and Clint Murchinson are the founders of KerrMcGee . Dr. Kerr is also the founder of the worldwide oil firm Schlumberger Corporation .
 Arms and explosives were hidden away in a Schlumberger facility near New Orleans in the summer of 1963 . Former New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison says arms and explosives the CIA supplied to the anti-Castro Cuban exiles .
 DeMohrenschildt's friendship with J Walton Moore, a member of the CIA’s Domestic Contact Service, was intriguing .
 DeMohrenschildt described to the Warren Commission as “a government man—either FBI or Central Intelligence” Moore debriefed the geologist upon his return from Yugoslavia and thereafter met with the De Mohrenschildts socially on many occasions .
 After DeMohrenschildt first met Lee Harvey Oswald, he checked on the ex-Marine with Moore . After meeting Oswald, Moore checked on him with the exMarine . Oswald was a Marine who served in the Navy .
 The letters are part of DeMohrenschildt’s FBI file, indicating the bureau was monitoring him during this time . The letters indicate he was monitored by the FBI .
 Following the assassination, his statements that he had checked on Oswald with the bureau apparently caused great consternation .
 Dallas FBI chief J Gordon Shanklin ordered agent James Woods to go to Haiti and obtained a lengthy statement from DeMohrenschildt denying that he had ever spoken about Oswald to the bureau .
 DeMohrenschildt himself may have been the object of a secret investigation in the months preceding Kennedy’s death .
 DeMohrenschildt noticed small pencil marks on some of his papers and, convinced his home had been secretly entered, questioned Moore about it . Moore's home was searched by police for three weeks .
 Moore denied government people broke into DeMohrenschildt’s home . Moore denied that government people had broken into the home . He said government people were breaking into the house .
 Another close friend of DeMohrenschildt’s was Max Clark, who was connected with security at General Dynamics . Clark was an attorney at that time, and was connected to General Dynamics security .
 Neither George nor Jeanne DeMohrenschildt could recall exactly who first mentioned the Oswalds to them . George and Jeanne could not recall who told them about the Oswald family .
 DeMohrenschildt visited the Oswalds in the summer of 1962 in Fort Worth, Texas . He visited Oswalds on a business trip to Fort Worth and decided to visit them .
 The Oswalds had recently arrived in Dallas from Minsk, Dallas . He had learned through the Russian community in Dallas that the Oswalds were recently in the U.S.
 DeMohrenschildt was appalled at the poorly furnished ‘shack’ in which the Oswalds lived . He was impressed by Oswald’s command of Russian .
 Remarkable—for a fellow of his background and education . He preferred to speak Russian than English any time. Remarkable . Remarkable, for a fellow . fellow of . his background .
 "If somebody expressed an interest in him, he blossomed," he said . "He blossomed, absolutely blossomed. If somebody expressed interest, he would have blossomed"
 In 1963, the DeMohrenschildts embraced the Oswalds and visited them with an idea of helping the struggling couple . The Oswalds are still in the U.S. state of Texas .
 Dallas's Russian community split in reacting to the Oswalds . Dallas Russian community divided in reaction to Oswalds attack .
 Most of the Russians wanted nothing to do with a man who tried to defect to Russia . Most of them, being staunch anticommunists, were staunch anti-communist .
 Some of the émigré members seemed quite at ease with the young would-be defector . DeMohrenschildt says he's "quite at ease" with the would be defector, who has intelligence ties to the CIA .
 In October 1962, DeMohrenschildt managed to move Oswald to Dallas, Texas, where he dropped out of sight for nearly a month . Oswald was captured in October 1962 . Oswald died in a Dallas suburb .
 Marina was left with DeMohrenschildt’s daughter and son-in-law, the Gary Taylors . Marina is now living with the Gary and Marina, a friend of the Gary Taylor family .
 Oswald told friends he had been fired from his job at Leslie Welding in Fort Worth when actually he had quit . Oddly, Oswald did not even inform his mother of the move . Oswald didn't even tell his mother .
 During this time DeMohrenschildt was making regular trips to Houston, according to friends Igor Voshinin and Paul Raigorodsky . Friends Igor Vashinin, Paul Raigodsky and Paul Vodododsky say he was visiting Houston regularly .
 DeMohrenschildt was a director of the Tolstoy Foundation, an anticommunist organization of Russian exiles that was funded by the U.S. government . Raigorodsky, a wealthy oilman and a director, told the Warren Commission he asked DeMoh
 Raigorodsky stated, “He told me he was going to see Herman and George Brown.” He said he told me they were going to visit George Brown and Herman .
 The Brown brothers were owners of Brown and Root Construction and close friends of Lyndon Johnson . They were close friends and financial contributors to Johnson .
 Jeanne DeMohrenschildt said the only reason they didn’t relocate to Houston was her successful clothing business in Dallas . The only reason the family stayed in Dallas during this time was her clothing business .
 Oswald apparently had access to sensitive material . Clearances were required to work in some areas of the plant . Testimony before the Warren Commission showed security was sloppy .
 He once asked fellow employee Dennis Ofstein if he knew what the term “microdot” meant . He asked him to explain the term "microdot"
 The word “microdot” was found written in Oswald’s address book next to the entry for Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall . Oswald's address book was found next to a entry for the same name . The word was found in the address book
 Oswald explained that a great mass of documents could be reduced to the size of a dot . Oswald then explained that it was a special photographic process . Ofstein replied no, Oswald proceeded to explain the process .
 Through the Christmas holidays of 1962-1963, DeMohrenschildt continued to try with only marginal success to get the Dallas Russian émigré community involved with the Oswalds .
 He apparently tried to separate the Oswalds and, on at least two occasions, tried to find living quarters for Marina and her children . The Oswalds' father is believed to have been the prime minister of Russia's first term .
 Marina decided to reunite with Oswald, much to the disgust of her friends in the Russian community . Marina's friends in Russia are outraged by her decision to leave the country .
 Marina DeMohrenschildts brought Oswalds to the home of Everett Glover in 1963 . Marina was introduced to Ruth Paine, a friend of Paine's .
 Paine was separated from her husband, Michael, an employee of Bell Helicopter, and expressed an interest in seeing Marina again to learn the Russian language .
 Oswald reportedly fired a shot at General Walker . Just 16 days later, Oswald reportedly shot at general Walker .
 Oswald arrived back home that evening and, according to Marina’s Warren Commission testimony, told her he fired at Walker and had then buried his rifle . Oswald arrived home that night and told Marina he had fired and buried his gun . Marina's testimony: Oswald told Marina that he fired
 Oswald's gun was clean and well-oiled, yet no gun-cleaning material was ever found among Oswald’s possessions . Oswald's possessions were never found with gun cleaning material . Oswald died in August 1963, a month after his wife was assassinated .
 The rifle was observed in his home by Jeanne DeMohrenschildt during a visit . The following weekend, the rifle was seen in his house .
 Marina was showing Oswald's young daughter around their new apartment when she saw a rifle in a closet . Marina and her husband brought a pink bunny toy to Oswald’s young daughter . Marina was shown the rifle in the closet when Oswald's daughter saw it .
 Today that sounds very strange, but at the time, I was thinking of the times I had fired guns at small targets in amusement parks . I really didn't think too much of her answer, but I did think it was a good sign .
 Lee and Marina did not appear to be shocked or upset at the incident . Marina and Lee did not seem to be upset .
 It seems this may have been yet another example of Marina’s being coached or misquoted by federal authorities . It seems that this may be the latest in a series of incidents involving Marina's life .
 This visit was to be the last meeting between the DeMohrenschildts and the Oswalds . The Oswalds' visit was the last of their visits to the De Mohrenschildt family .
 Oswald left Dallas by bus for New Orleans on April 23 . Marina moved in with Ruth Paine, and the next day Oswald left by bus .
 About a week later, the DeMohrenschildts left for a new business venture in Haiti . About a month later, they were in Haiti for a business venture . The couple is still in Haiti, Haiti .
 CIA records show DeMohrenschildt met with CIA representative in Washington in May 1963 . CIA records say he met with the assistant director of Army intelligence in Washington .
 At this meeting was DeMohrenschildt’s Haitian business associate, Clemard Charles . Charles is a Haitian businessman who has ties to the Haitian government . Charles says he met with the Haitian business partner at the meeting .
 Researchers have noted that Charles later was implicated in the sale of arms and military equipment involving a gunrunner named Edward Browder . Charles was implicated .
 Browder leased a B-25 bomber under the name of a fictitious company and flew it to Haiti a year after the Kennedy assassination . He later cashed a $24,000 check signed by Charles Charles .
 Browder also was an associate of Jack Ruby in the 1950s when both men were arranging the sale of arms to Fidel Castro . Browder was also an associate with Jack Ruby when he was arranging arms sales to Castro .
 Herb Atkin, a former CIA operative, has stated that DeMohrenschildt was involved in a failed CIA plot to overthrow Haitian president Francois "Papa Doc" Duvalier in June 1963 .
 Atkin told author Dick Russell, “I knew de Mohrenschildt as Philip Harbin.” Following DeMohrenschildts’s death in March 1977, Atkin said he knew him as Harbin . Atkin died in 1977 at the age of 92
 De Mohrenschildt’s fourth wife, Jeanne, was born in Harbin, China . She was born there .
 The DeMohrenschildts were in Haiti when they learned of Kennedy’s death . Kennedy's death was the first known death in Haiti since his death .
 Reportedly DeMohrenschildt told friends there the FBI was behind the assassination . Reportedly said friends there were FBI agents involved in the killing .
 The DeMohrenschildts were called to Washington to testify to the Warren Commission in April 1964 . They testified before the Warren commission in 1964 .
 Researchers are left with the question of how a Warren Commission attomey, supposedly searching for the truth of the Kennedy assassination, could have been so confident that the FBI letter was a “crank” and why he had closed the subject rather than trying to learn more .
 Jeanne DeMohrenschildt claimed the Warren Commission did not appear eager to hear from her and her husband . She said they had to ask to testify and that they were asked to do so .
 Much of our problems with government authorities came from our refusal to slander Lee’s name . Much of their problems came from refusing to ‘slander’ Lee,’e. Lee. Lee .
 The Warren Commission, along with the mass media, depicted Oswald as a complete loner, a total failure, both as a man and a father . Oswald was portrayed as a loner by the Warren Commission and a failure .
 During their stay in Washington, the DeMohrenschildts visited in the home of Jackie Kennedy’s mother, Mrs. Jackie Kennedy .
 The DeMohrenschildt’s problems there increased to the point that in 1967 they were forced to sneak away from the island aboard a German freighter, which brought them to Port Arthur, Texas . In 1967 they had to sneak out of Haiti aboard the freighter .
 Jeanne DeMohrenschildts met by associate of former Oklahoma senator and oilman Bob Kerr . Bob Kerr is a former senator and Oklahoma oilman who died in 2010 .
 By the 1970s, the DeMohrenschildts were living quietly in Dallas, Texas . They were questioned by two men who claimed to be from Life magazine . Life magazine.
 DeMohrenschildt seemed content to teach French at Bishop College, a predominantly black school in south Dallas .
 George suffered from chronic bronchitis in the spring of 1976, when he had a particularly bad attack . George died at the age of 92 .
 He was persuaded by someone to see a newly arrived doctor in Dallas named Dr. Dr. John Defterios . He died in his hometown of Dallas, Texas .
 After several trips to Mendoza in the late spring and summer, DeMohrenschildt’s bronchial condition improved, but he began to experience the symptoms of a severe nervous breakdown .
 He became paranoid, claiming that ‘the Jewish Mafia and the FBI’ were after him . He also claimed that “the FBI and the Jewish Mafia’re after him.”
 Mendoza was found to be giving DeMohrenschildt injections and costly drug prescriptions . MendoZA discovered he was giving the injections and prescription prescriptions .
 Jeanne said her husband’s mental condition continued to deteriorate during this time . Jeanne said she said he continued to suffer from mental illness .
 Mendoza first registered in April 1976, less than two months before he began treating DeMohrenschildt . The House Select Committee on Assassinations was beginning to be funded at the time of the assassination .
 Mendoza left Dallas in December, just a few months after DeMohrenschildt refused to continue treatments . MendoZA left Dallas, Texas, in December just a month after his wife left him .
 Mendoza left the society a forwarding address that proved to be nonexistent . The society was left with no forwarding address . MendoZA left a forwarding home in Mexico City .
 In the manuscript, DeMohrenschildt depicts Oswald as a cursing, uncouth man with assassination on his mind . The manuscript is a totally opposite picture from his descriptions of Oswald through the years .
 The night he finished the manuscript, DeMohrenschildt attempted suicide by taking an overdose of tranquilizers . The night of the suicide attempt, he took an overdose .
 DeMohrenschildt also had taken his dog's digitalis, which counteracted the tranquilizers . Police say he also took his dog’s digitalis .
 Jeanne committed her husband to Parkland Hospital in Dallas, Texas, where he was subjected to electroshock therapy . Shortly after his attempted suicide, Jeanne committed him to the hospital .
 DeMohrenschildt told Wilson that he and Oswald were in downtown Dallas watching the Kennedy motorcade pass when shots were fired . Oswald told Wilson he was watching the motorcade when shots fired .
 Oswald ran away at the sound of shots and DeMohrenschildt never saw him again . He said he was shot by Oswald in the head at the time .
 George and Jeanne were at a reception in the Bulgarian embassy in Haiti the day Kennedy was killed . This story was reported in the April 26, 1977, edition of the National Enquirer as “Exclusive New Evidence”
 The incident serves to illustrate George DeMohrenschildt’s mental condition at the time . But the incident served to illustrate his mental condition .
 In early 1977, convinced that evil forces were still after him, DeMohrenschildt fled to Europe with Dutch journalist Willems Oltmans . He later created a furor by telling the House Select Committee on Assassinations that he knew of Oswald’s assassination plan in advance
 In mid-March DeMohrenschildt fled to a relative’s Florida home leaving behind clothing and other personal belongings . The suspect was arrested in March .
 DeMohrenschildt died of a shotgun blast to the head in Manalapan, Florida, on March 29, 1977 . He died three hours after a representative of the House Select Committee on Assassinations tried to contact him .
 DeMohrenschildt feared Epstein might send him back to Parkland for further shock treatments, attorney says . Epstein showed him a document that indicated he might be sent back for further treatments, lawyer says . The document may have triggered the fear, attorney David Bludworth says .
 A coroner’s jury quickly ruled the death of DeMohrenschildt a suicide . The Palm County Sheriff's Office called the shooting ‘very strange’
 DeMohrenschildts' involvement with the assassination has proven as unfathomable as so many others . One other matter that involved the De Mohrenschildtts with the murder has proven to be a mystery . The assassination was an assassination that has never been solved by the DeMoh
 When the DeMohrenschildts arrived back in the U.S. in early 1967, they discovered a photograph of Oswald in some Russian-English language records they had loaned to Marina Oswald prior to leaving for Haiti .
 The picture is one of the famous backyard scenes depicting Oswald with his rifle and pistol while holding a communist publication . Oswald is seen in the background of a famous backyard scene .
 The photo also bears the date “5/IV/63,” apparently meaning April 5, 1963 . The photo was taken in 1963, and the date is believed to be April 5 .
 The date is curious, mixing in Roman numerals as it does and written in the European style .
 The New Orleans-born Oswald more likely would have written “4/5/63” and, in fact, a check of dozens of other examples of dates in Oswald’s mass of written material shows not one written in the manner on the photo . Oswald more than
 Oswald, Marina, or the DeMohrenschildts are not the authors of the inscription . Handwriting experts for the House Select Committee on Assassinations could not identify Oswald or Marina as authors .
 If true, it would mean that George DeMohrenschildt was aware of Oswald’s possession of weapons months before the assassination . Marina suddenly suddenly could not remember much else about the episode .
 The DeMohrenschildts denied any knowledge of the photo with the incriminating inscription . Jeanne swore to this author neither she nor her husband ever saw the photograph until discovering it upon their return in 1967 .
 She was convinced that the picture had been planted among their possessions . She believes it was planted among her possessions .
 George and Jeanne DeMohrenschildt may be one of the biggest “red herrings” of the assassination, as they had connections with intelligence . The couple had connections to the CIA and perhaps private intelligence groups connected with the oil industry .
 Through DeMohrenschildt, certain elements within oil, business, and intelligence circles could have become aware of Oswald . With his procommunist background, Oswald must have appeared to be a prime candidate for an assassination patsy .
 After the assassination, DeMohrenschildt provided a wonderful opportunity to draw investigators into a labyrinth of false leads . He had connections to U.S. intelligence, wealthy right-wing Texas oilmen, and Caribbean business interests .
 The mental deterioration near the end of his life caused DeMohrenschildt to make untrue statements that further clouded the issue . He made false statements about his mental deterioration .
 George DeMohrenschildt had a genuine liking for President Kennedy, as he stated on several occasions, this fondness was not shared by his conservative oil and business associates . This fondness did not share with many of his conservative friends .
 They felt threatened by the young president, who was making decisions, taxation, and foreign policy outside their control . The young president is making decisions about finances, taxation and foreign .
 President Kennedy's shift from Cold Warrior to seeker of world peace is well documented in James W Douglass’s 2008 book, JFK and the Unspeakable . President Kennedy was a Cold Warrior before becoming a seeker of peace .
 Douglass drew the term “unspeakable” from Thomas Merton, an ordained Catholic priest turned Trappist monk . Douglass was a member of the Trappists, who lived in Trappism-inspired Trappisms .
 The term refers to a hidden but insidious ideology of fascism that has so permeated American society that it must remain unmentioned in public . It must be unspoken in public to discuss fascism in the U.S.
 Douglass wrote, “The Vietnam War, the race to a global war, and the interlocking murders of John Kennedy, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, and Robert Kennedy were all signs of the Unspeakable.”
 Corporate heads initially may have been mollified that Kennedy was being guided by the hand of his father, Joseph P Kennedy, a pro-Nazi former bootlegger .
 In December 1961, Joseph Kennedy had a stroke that left him totally incapacitated . Joseph Kennedy died in December 1961 at the age of 65 .
 His son Jack was now in the highest office of the land with no direct control over him . Jack's son Jack is now in charge of the country's highest office .
 The younger Kennedy was moving to restrict the predations of Wall Street and the corporations it funded . And the younger Kennedy wanted to restrict Wall Street .
 There appear to have been serious divisions within the CIA in the early 1960s . As evidenced by the affair of Soviet defector Yuri Nosenko, there appear to be serious divisions .
 While some factions undoubtedly supported President Kennedy and his programs, others did not disguise their hatred of him .
 CIA employees working on one project would have no idea that people they came into contact with also were working for the agency . Often CIA employees would not know that they worked for the CIA .
 For expediency, the agency employed and used some very unsavory characters, such as David Ferrie . The agency used some of these characters for expediency .
 Oswald was involved in intelligence work, evidence shows . Oswald's contacts, plus the abundant evidence, point to who was maneuvering Oswald in the fall of 1963, he says .
 Some individuals within the CIA may have played roles in an assassination conspiracy that later compelled their superiors to cover up their activities for fear that their connection to the agency might become public .
 It seems highly unlikely that as an organization, the CIA initiated the Kennedy assassination . However, it seems highly likely that as a organization, it was the CIA .
 Senior corporate and intelligence officials are not overly concerned if something were to happen to the young president . But senior corporate and . intelligence officials say they would not be overly concerned about his safety .
 Such officials traditionally have sought out politicians who would look out for their interests in Washington, D.C. Such officials typically seek out politicians looking out of their interests .
 Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson was vice president of the White House in the early 1960s . Intelligence chiefs, oil and business titans may have looked to him as a trusted adviser .
 In Dallas on the day Kennedy died some people were iconoclastic enough to suggest that Vice President Johnson was behind the assassination . All the Way with LBJ: The Vice President of the Confederacy .
 These were mostly longtime Texas residents who had heard vicious stories about Johnson . They knew the Texas politician had more to gain from Kennedy’s death than just about anyone .
 Even today, many serious students of the assassination cannot discount the idea that Johnson in some way played a role in the Dallas tragedy . Johnson was assassinated in 1968 .
 In recent years, a spate of books led by Barr McClellan’s 2002 Blood, Money & Power have actually accused Johnson of masterminding the assassination .
 None of the politicians have offered irrefutable evidence to support that charge . However, none of them have proved that .
 McClellan worked for the Austin law offices of Clark, Thomas, Harris, Denius and Winters, a firm closely associated with Lyndon Johnson . His son Scott was among George W Bush’s White House press secretaries .
 Johnson’s actions following the assassination do little to stop such speculation . Johnson's actions following his assassination do not stop speculation .
 A close study of the corruption and murder that dogged Johnson’s political career only adds to the suspicion of his murder . And a close study adds to that .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson was born August 27, 1908, near Johnson City, Texas . His grandfather, one of the area’s original settlers, was named for his grandfather .
 Johnson graduated from Johnson City High School as president of his senior class of six . Young Johnson graduated with a class of 6 in his class .
 He hitchhiked back home and enrolled at Southwest Texas State Teachers College at San Marcos . After running away to California, he hitch-iked back to Texas and enrolled .
 After graduating at age twenty-two, Johnson got a teaching job in Houston, but it failed to hold the interest of this ambitious young man . Johnson graduated at the age of twenty-22 .
 In 1931, Johnson was drawn into Texas politics, campaigning strenuously for conservative congressman Richard M Kleberg . Johnson was elected to Congress in 1931 .
 Johnson accompanied Kleberg to Washington as his secretary . After Kleberg’s victory, Johnson accompanied him to Washington . Johnson was Johnson's secretary .
 In 1934 Johnson met Claudia Alta Taylor, the daughter of an affluent merchant and landowner in Karnack, Texas . Johnson was visiting in Austin when he met an attractive twenty-year-old journalism student .
 After a whirlwind courtship of two months, Johnson returned to Texas and asked "Bird" to marry him . Johnson's courtship consisted mainly of daily telephone calls from Washington .
 She agreed and the couple drove to San Antonio for a rushed wedding in St. Antonio . The couple got married in a rushed ceremony in San Antonio .
 After a honeymoon in Mexico, the Johnsons moved to Washington, where they rented a one-bedroom apartment . Johnson resumed his political work for Kleberg in Washington .
 Johnson was a close friend of congressman Sam Rayburn . Rayburn was already a power on Capitol Hill . He was a friend of the Johnson family .
 President Roosevelt named Johnson as Texas director of the National Youth Administration in 1935 . The program was a New Deal program for employing youngsters in the 1930s .
 Johnson created a formidable political base in south Texas . He used his authority to award loans and jobs to create jobs .
 In early 1937, with the sudden death of Austin congressman James P Buchanan, Johnson saw an opportunity to advance . Johnson saw the death of Buchanan as a chance to advance in Texas .
 Austin attorney Alvin Wirtz and his client Herman Brown were looking for help in Washington . Johnson was looking for financial and political support to make a bid for Buchanan’s seat .
 Brown’s construction company, Brown & Root, had already spent millions building the Marshall Ford Dam in south Texas . Brown and Root's construction company had already built millions of dollars in Marshall Ford dam .
 The project had not been officially authorized by Congress; rather it had begun as a government grant obtained by Buchanan . Buchanan had begun the project with a grant from Congress .
 The indefatigable Johnson pledged total support of Roosevelt and his New Deal . Wirtz, Brown, and their well-heeled business associates, backed Johnson .
 The senatorial election climaxed with a raging blizzard and sudden surgery for LBJ to repair a ruptured appendix . LBJ outpolled five opponents by 3,000 votes . The blizzard ended with a victory, with Johnson outpolling five opponents .
 Johnson managed to get authorization for the dam project as well as a contract for Brown & Root to build a huge Navy base at Corpus Christi . Johnson also got authorization for a massive Navy base .
 Herman Brown and his friends were so pleased with Johnson’s performance that in 1940 the young congressman was offered a share in very lucrative oil properties with no money down . In 1940, Johnson was able to earn a share of lucrative properties without money down in oil properties .
 Brown realized even at that time that Johnson’s true political goal was the presidency . Brown realized that both a House and a Senate seat would come from Texas's reliable oil and gas constituency, Brown said .
 As a congressman, Johnson continued to perform for his oil and business mentors back in Texas . Johnson was a congressman .
 Just two days after Pearl Harbor, Johnson was called to active duty . Johnson was the first congressman to leave for military service .
 Roosevelt called on all congressmen serving in the armed forces to return home . After serving less than a year, Johnson returned to Washington after less than one year .
 Johnson was accepted by powerful House Speaker Sam Rayburn . After a period of cool relations due to Johnson’s ambitiousness, he again was accepted . Johnson was elected to the House of Representatives .
 It was a close race between President Johnson and Texas governor Coke Stevenson . Stevenson managed to defeat Johnson in the Democratic primary .
 Stevenson didn't have a clear majority, so a runoff election was called for August 28 . Stevenson didn’t have clear majority in the August 28 election .
 Due to slow communications and manual voting procedures, the election outcome was in doubt for several days . The election was delayed due to a lack of communication and manual polling procedures .
 Finally on September 2, Johnson went on the radio with a “victory speech,” which shocked the confident Stevenson forces . Johnson's speech shocked the confidence of the Stevenson forces.
 Johnson’s radio broadcast on Thursday became a reality on Saturday . Johnson's radio broadcast was broadcast for the first time ever .
 This revision earned Johnson the sobriquet of ‘Landslide Lyndon’ and began one of the longest legal feuds in Texas history .
 The controversy continued into 1977, when Luis Salas admitted to the Dallas Morning News that he had certified fictitious ballots for Johnson on orders from Parr . Salas, who committed suicide in 1975, was a local election judge .
 Federal government interference with investigations into Johnson's activities is troubling . Johnson was accused of fraudulently defrauding the federal government . The deaths of Johnson's victims were the result of a series of federal investigations .
 One of these deaths was Bill Mason, a south Texas newsman investigating the Duval incident . Sam Smithwick, a Parr associate who in turn was found hanged in his prison cell after saying he was willing to talk .
 As far back as 1941, the IRS had initiated investigations of Johnson’s finances, but had been blocked by orders from President Roosevelt . The IRS had been investigating Johnson's finances .
 Austin district IRS collector, Frank L Scofield, was removed from office accused of forcing political contributions from his employees . Scofield was removed in 1954 from office after he was found guilty of forcing employees to give political contributions .
 All IRS files relating to Johnson and Brown & Root were placed in a Quonset hut in south Austin that mysteriously caught fire, destroying the evidence . Scofield was acquitted of these charges, but in his absence, all of the IRS files were hidden in the hut in which the evidence
 In the late 1940s and early 1950s, both Johnson and his protéé John Connally had offices in Fort Worth .
 Johnson operated out of the Hotel Texas, the site of Kennedy’s breakfast speech the moming of November 22, 1963 . The Hotel Texas is where Kennedy gave his speech .
 Connally's offices were in the historic Flatiron Building, which later became the Press Club of Fort Worth . Connally’s offices were located in the Flatiron building, which was later used to house the press club .
 It was in Fort Worth that both Johnson and Connally came into contact with gamblers, who in turn were later connected to Jack Ruby as well as antiKennedy Texas oilmen .
 Kirkwood was known as a “gentleman gambler” because he never allowed anyone in his high-stakes poker games who was on a salary . Kirkwood never played a salary in his poker games .
 Kirkwood conducted his big-time gambling at a luxurious, sprawling Spanish-style complex known as the Four Deuces . The street address was 2222 on Fort Worth’s Jacksboro Highway, once notorious for its taverns and prostitution . The complex was located in a sprawling
 Hunt and Clint Murchinson joined Sam Raybum and his protééé Johnson for hours of Kirkwood-provided hospitality . Hunt and Murchins were joined for hours by the Kirkwood team .
 McWillie had tried to open a casino in Cuba in 1959 . He had participated in gunrunning schemes . He was also involved in gun running schemes .
 Ruby may have been involved with Texas governor John Connally only days before the assassination . Ruby and Connally may have had a connection in the days before his assassination .
 Diane Bishop was nineteen years old and working at the message and reservation desk in the Sheraton Hotel in Houston on Wednesday night, November 20, 1963 . Diane Bishop died at the age of 19 on November 20 .
 Connally had taken a room there in preparation for meeting Kennedy the next day . Staff was under orders not to make his presence public . Staff were under orders to keep his presence secret .
 The man sounded like the message was urgent and asked to speak with Connally . Connally says the man asked him to speak to him . The man said he wanted to talk to Connally about the message .
 Bishop said no one with that name was registered there but the man asked to leave a message . As per orders, Bishop said, no one had that name registered there .
 The caller told Connally, “If I don’t see you tonight in Houston, I’|l see you in Dallas.” The caller said, ‘Tell Connally: If I don't see . tonight in . Houston, Texas, Connally
 She was shocked on November 24 to hear that Oswald had been shot by a Jack Ruby . Oswald was shot by Jack Ruby in Dallas, Texas .
 On Monday, November 25, she went to work intending to retrieve the phone message but found the hotel “swarming” with federal agents . She said she was going to retrieve her phone message .
 Bishop was questioned regarding the phone call, but her written note, the only proof of the incident, was missing . Bishop's written note was missing from the police station .
 Despite links between Jack Ruby’s friend McWillie, the Kirkwoods, Texas oilmen, Lyndon Johnson, and John Connally, apparently neither the Warren Commission nor the House Select Committee on Assassinations felt the need to fully investigate these associations .
 At only forty-four years of age, Johnson became the Senate’s majority leader . Two years later, at only forty, Johnson was the Senate's majority leader. Two years after that, Johnson went on to become a senator .
 Fifty thousand dollars in hundred-dollar bills in sealed envelopes was what one lobbyist for one oil company testified he brought to Johnson’s office during his term .
 There is evidence that Johnson profited from cash contributions from the mob . There is also evidence that he also profited .
 Jack Halfen was a former associate of Bonnie and Clyde, Frank Costello, Vito Genovese, and Carlos Marcello . He was the mob’s gambling coordinator in Houston, Texas .
 Halfen revealed how Houston gambling netted almost $15 million a year with 40 percent going to Marcello, 35 percent to Halfen, and 25 percent to Texas police officials and politicians . Halfen was on trial for income tax evasion in 1954 .
 Halfen told how Johnson received more than $500,000 in contributions over a ten-year period while in the Senate . Halfen said Johnson received $500k in contributions while in Senate .
 Johnson helped crime syndicate by killing anti-racketeering legislation, watering down bills that could not be defeated, he says . Johnson also slowed congressional probes into organized crime probes, he said .
 Halfen substantiated his close ties to Johnson with photographs of himself and Johnson on a private hunting trip and a letter from Johnson to the Texas Board of Paroles written on Halfen’s behalf . Halfen said he and Johnson were on a hunting trip .
 Johnson received large-scale payoffs from Teamster president Jimmy Hoffa, according to reports . According to published reports, Johnson also received large payments from Hoffa .
 A former senatorial aide testified that he witnessed the transfer of a suitcase full of money from a Teamster lobbyist through a Maryland senator to Johnson’s chief aide .
 One of Johnson’s “trusted friends,” Bobby Baker, had long and documented mob connections . Also recall that one of Johnson's ‘trusted friend, Bobby Baker’, had a long history of connections to mob .
 Organized-crime section field time dropped by 48 percent, time before grand juries by 72 percent . District court briefs filed by organized crime section filed by that section by 83 percent . Organized crime section has filed more than 80 percent of district court briefs in the last four years .
 There also was a discernible lack of prosecution follow-up to corruption charges against Lyndon B. Johnson .
 LBJ’s close friend Fred Korth became secretary of the Navy when John Connally resigned to become Texas governor and was negotiating this TFX contract . Korth was a close friend of LBJ .
 On October 7, 1963, Baker was forced to leave his post as LBJ’s man in the Senate . Baker's Senate seat was occupied by LBJ in 1963 .
 In 1960, Johnson decided to run for president despite continually denying this decision . Johnson ran for president in 1960, despite repeatedly denying it .
 Texas voters witnessed the bizarre spectacle of Johnson running for vice president on Kennedy’s liberal national ticket . Johnson also ran for Texas senator on the state’�s conservative Democratic ticket .
 Johnson must have seen Kennedy's nomination as a major roadblock in his drive for the presidency . Knowing how Kennedy’s top supporters detested him, Johnson may have seen it as a problem .
 He was surprised when Kennedy offered him the vice president’s position on the ballot . He was therefore pleasantly surprised when he was offered the position .
 This offer, coming as it did after an often-bitter contest between the two men, has been the subject of much debate . This offer comes after a series of bitter contests between the pair .
 Kennedy never really believed that Johnson would swap his Senate power for the empty honor of being vice president . Kennedy believed Johnson would trade Senate power to be vice president for empty honor .
 He made the offer due to pressure from J Edgar Hoover and as a conciliatory move, fully expecting Johnson to turn it down . The offer was made to Johnson due to the pressure from Hoover and was expected to be rejected .
 Johnson saw it as an opportunity to get one step closer to the presidency and promptly accepted . Johnson accepted the job as president .
 It has been speculated that Kennedy accepted Johnson because it seemed necessary to have Johnson’s help in swinging the 1960 election in southern and western states . It has also been speculated .
 It was only through Johnson’s tireless efforts that six crucial southern states, including Texas, were kept in the Democratic column .
 Johnson and Rayburn warned the state’s oilmen that if they voted for Nixon and the Democrats won, the oilmen could kiss the oil depletion allowance goodbye . According to biographer Haley, both Johnson and . Rayburn .
 There was almost constant friction between the old-style political powerbroker and the new breed of Kennedy men . There was also friction between Kennedy men.
 President Obama spent three years in the vice president's job as a vice president . He was forced to resign from the White House in 2009 . Obama has been in office since 2010 .
 Johnson made several trips abroad, most probably to escape the daily humiliations in the White House .
 James Wagenvoord, editorial business manager and assistant to the executive editor of Life magazine, revealed that his magazine was compiling information on Johnson's corrupt practices .
 Immediately following the assassination, the exposé on Johnson was shredded and never saw publication .
 Billie Sol Estes is a big-time Texas wheeler-dealer . Estes was arrested in Texas on suspicion of drug possession charges .
 Department of Agriculture official was looking into Estes’s habit of acquiring millions in federal cotton allotment payments on land that was under water or actually owned by the government . Henry Marshall, an Agriculture official, was investigating Estes's habit .
 Marshall was particularly interested in Estes’s connections with his longtime friend Lyndon Johnson . Marshall: Estes's connections with LBJ were important to Estes' life .
 Marshall found dead in remote section of his farm near Franklin, Texas . Marshall was found by police but no official action could be taken .
 A local peace justice ruled Marshall Marshall’s death a suicide . Five days later, without the benefit of an autopsy, he died . Marshall's death was ruled a suicide by a peace justice without an autopsy .
 In 1985 Estes told Texas media that Johnson had ordered Marshall's death to prevent his connections with Estes from being exposed . Estes was granted immunity from prosecution from prosecution .
 Later that year, a Texas district judge changed the official verdict of Marshall’s death from suicide to homicide . Marshall's death was officially declared a suicide by suicide .
 At least three other men connected with the Estes case died in unusual circumstances . Estes' death was the first of three men to die in the case .
 By the time of the Kennedy assassination, dead witnesses, missing evidence, and interference with official investigations were nothing new to Lyndon Johnson .
 It may also be highly significant that during Johnson’s rise to power in Washington, one of his closest friends was none other than FBI director J Edgar Hoover . Hoover was also no stranger to the manipulation of politically sensitive investigations .
 After becoming president, Johnson was encouraged to retire the crusty Hoover . Hoover was a crusty man . Hoover died in 1918 .
 Johnson was riding only two cars behind Kennedy in the fateful Dallas motorcade . Although it was against established security practice for the president and vice president to be together in public, Johnson was not in public .
 Johnson was informed of Kennedy’s death at Parkland Hospital and urged to make a public statement . Kennedy's assistant press secretary Malcolm Kilduff urged Johnson to speak out .
 We don’t know whether there is a worldwide conspiracy, whether they are after me as well as they were after President Kennedy, says Senator Hayden . We don't know whether the world is behind the conspiracy, says Hayden .
 Johnson mentioned fears of a “worldwide conspiracy” loudly in the hours immediately after Kennedy’s death . There appears to have been no significant action to counter such a threat, he says .
 While the Texas border was closed for a couple of hours, there was no widespread closing of U.S. borders . Major airplane and ship terminals were not shut down in the wake of the incident .
 Some units were placed on stepped-up status, but there was no full-scale military alert, despite the commander in chief’s stated concern . Furthermore, while some units were put on stepped up status, there were no full military alert .
 Warrant Officer Ira D Gearhart, codenamed “Bagman” or “Football,” was left behind not once but twice . Gearhart carried the launch codes for nuclear missiles in the event of sudden attack .
 The Secret Service would not allow him in the room with Johnson at the hospital . He and Johnson became separated in the mad dash to Parkland .
 Gearhart forced his way onto a policeman's lap in an attempt to keep up with Johnson . Gearhart was left behind at Parkland and had to force his way into a policeman’s lap .
 Johnson had no real concern over hostilities with foreign powers . Apparently Johnson was more concerned about the threat posed by foreign enemies .
 Hubert Humphrey, who later became Johnson’s vice president, once correctly stated, “A vice president becomes president when there is no president.” A vice president is a president in the U.S.
 Jackie Kennedy explained to Robert Kennedy that the delay in returning was due to Johnson, who told her the attorney general had told him to take the oath of office in Dallas .
 Robert Kennedy was surprised and replied that he had made no such suggestion . Robert Kennedy said he had not made such a suggestion . Kennedy said that he was surprised by the reaction .
 Johnson said Attorney General Kennedy had urged him to take the oath immediately . He also lied in a deposition to the Warren Commission, saying he had been urged to do so .
 Kennedy's body reached Love Field when he died . The new president was waiting on board presidential jet Air Force One when Kennedy’s body arrived .
 Johnson said Kennedy aide Kenneth O’Donnell specifically told him to take the presidential plane because it had better communication equipment . In his Warren Commission affidavit, he said Kennedy’s aide told him he should take the plane . The plane was Kennedy's presidential plane .
 O'Donnell denied this, telling author William Manchester, “The President and I had no conversation regarding Air Force One.” O’Donnell denies this .
 "If we had known that he was going on Air Force One, we would have taken Air Force Two," says President Obama . "We would have flown him on air Force One," says White House spokesman .
 O’Donnell later wrote that a Warren Commission attorney asked him to “change his testimony so that it would agree with the President’s” The offer was declined, he wrote in a letter .
 Johnson exhibited a strange, and perhaps suspicious, ability to press forward with his work . While others were shocked into immobility by Kennedy’s death, Johnson showed a strange—and perhaps suspicious—ability to continue with work .
 JFK spoke with John Kenneth Galbraith, a liberal Harvard economist and confidant of Kennedy . Kennedy's body still lay in state in the White House East Room .
 The presidential limousine SX-100, which carried Kennedy through Dallas, was shipped to Detroit, where the body was replaced and the interior completely refurbished .
 Bullet marks on the windshield and blood traces could have provided essential clues as to the number and direction of shots . In any other case, this would have been destruction of evidence, since bullet marks would have provided vital clues .
 Governor Connally’s clothing was taken from the office of congressman Henry Gonzalez by Secret Service agents sent by Johnson aide Cliff Carter . Connally's clothing was also taken from his office .
 Connally’s clothing had been cleaned and pressed by the time it was handed over to the Warren Commission and, hence, useless as evidence . Connally's clothing was cleaned, pressed and therefore useless to evidence .
 It was this act, more than any other, that has caused so much speculation about Johnson’s possible role in the assassination . Johnson's possible role has caused speculation about his possible role .
 It is now publicly known that Johnson’s mental state deteriorated significantly in the years following his predecessor's assassination . Johnson's mental state worsened significantly following the assassination of his predecessor .
 Goodwin said he and aide Bill Moyers even consulted psychiatrists about his boss’s behavior . Goodwin said Moyers and Goodwin consulted psychiatrists on his boss's behavior . Moyers said Goodwin consulted with psychiatrists on the matter .
 Johnson’s younger brother may have had underlying psychological significance . The episode may have been related by Johnson's younger brother .
 Lyndon, widely known for his coarse humor, astonished his brother by launching into a thirty-minute tirade, getting angrier and angrier by the moment . Lyndon's brother was known for being known as a sharp humorist .
 Madeleine Duncan Brown, whose claim to have been Johnson’s mistress for twenty years has never been successfully refuted, publicly stated that Johnson had foreknowledge of the assassination . Brown's claim to be Johnson's mistress has been publicly refuted .
 In her 1997 book, Texas in the Morning, Brown told of meeting with Johnson in Austin’s Driskill Hotel at the end of December 1963 .
 If Johnson played some role in an assassination plot, he would have taken great pains to distance himself from such a conspiracy . However, if Johnson played part in such a plot would have been careful to distance him from such an assassination .
 President Johnson, above everyone else, benefited most from Kennedy’s death . Therefore, today it is possible only to point out that Johnson—above everyone else—benefited most .
 No one would kill the chief executive without some assurance that his successor would not move heaven and earth to pursue and punish the perpetrators . Plus, it only stands to reason that no one . would kill him without assurance that he would not . punish and punish perpetrators .
 With the assassination, Johnson achieved his lifelong goal of gaining the presidency, his business and oil backers were rid of Kennedy’s interference . His supporters who wanted an Asian war were free to pursue a widening conflict .
 Johnson feared appearing to be a dunce by continuing to support Warren Commission’s lone-assassin myth . Johnson was conscious of his role in history .
 In an interview with Walter Cronkite in the early 1970s, Johnson expressed the belief that the assassination involved more than one person . Johnson asked network executives to delete his remarks from the broadcast .
 Johnson even voiced the suspicion that the CIA had a hand in the assassination, according to an FBI document released in 1977 . The CIA was accused of killing JFK Kennedy .
 The document quotes Johnson’s postmaster general and close friend Marvin Watson as relaying to the bureau that “ was now convinced there was a plot in connection with the assassination . Watson was a close friend of Johnson .
 Yet this, too, was kept hidden from the public for years and is still not widely known . Yet, it is not the first time it has been kept hidden for years, and still not known .
 Johnson may have had the willingness to join in a conspiracy that would place him in the White House . While this ambitiously driven man from Texas most probably did not initiate a death plot against Kennedy, everything known about the man .
 As commander in chief of the armed forces and close confidant to the powerful J Edgar Hoover, J. Edgar Hoover certainly had the ability to subvert a meaningful investigation into Kennedy’s death .
 A conspiracy involving Lyndon Johnson and his buddy Hoover as an alternative to the Warren Commission’s discredited lone-assassin theory goes farther in tying together the disparate bits of assassination evidence than any theory offered to date . However, a conspiracy involving Johnson and Hoover cannot be summarily dismissed .
 Both Johnson and Hoover are clearly accessories after the fact, according to the evidence . Johnson's actions are demonstrable evidence of his involvement in the case .
 Under our legal system, accessories in murder cases are considered just as guilty as the person who pulled the trigger . The accessories in a murder case are considered as guilty .
 History will surely hold LBJ and FBI director J Edgar Hoover guilty in the assassination . History will hold them guilty for blocking any meaningful investigation into the plot . LBJ, Hoover, and FBI chief Hoover blocked any meaningful probe into the assassination of JFK .
 The U.S. military forces have accumulated a distinguished history . Soldiers have been involved in the United States in the past two hundred years .
 The American soldier has proven his worth time and again . From the Revolution-era citizen who could become a fighting man ready to protect his community in a minute to the professional Marines .
 Throughout world history, it has proven extremely difficult to return to civilian control of government in peacetime once power has been invested in the military . In peacetime, the military has invested most of its power in the country's military .
 From the takeover of the Roman Empire by the Praetorian Guard up until today, military leaders have sought to maintain power and control . Military leaders have tried to maintain control over the past few decades .
 This situation was aggravated in the U.S. during World War II by combining military and industrial power . This was exacerbated in the United States during the war .
 Dwight Eisenhower gave his farewell address to Congress on January 17, 1961 . Three days before John F Kennedy took office as president, Dwight Eisenhower spoke to Congress . Eisenhower's farewell address was given to Congress in 1961 .
 In this talk he coined the phrase “military-industrial complex” and warned against potential abuses by such an entity . He also warned against the potential abuses of the military industrial complex . The talk will be broadcast at 9 p.m. ET on CNN iReport .
 This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the U.S. It's a new phenomenon in the American experience, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the militaryindustrial complex . The military industrial complex is a major source of influence in government .
 "The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist," says President Obama . The potential for misplaced power in the U.S. will persist, he says .
 "We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Eisenhower’s warning was especially timely, as the role of the militaryindustrial complex in American life has continued to grow under successive presidencies . Eisenhower warned that the military industrial complex is a threat to society .
 By 2013, many police officers were wearing black bulletproof vests and Nazi-style helmets . Remote-controlled drone aircraft prowled American skies .
 The rise of the military-industrial complex can be charted by annual military budget expenditures . The rise in the military industrial complex is charting the military's rise in spending .
 In 1950 the military budget was $13 billion; by 1961 this had risen to $47 billion . By the end of the Vietnam War in 1975, it was $100 billion . In 1950, the budget for the U.S. military had been $13billion .
 By 1986 annual expenses by the Department of Defense had risen to nearly $170 billion . By 1986, annual expenses had risen by nearly $100 billion .
 By adding in the budgets of Homeland Security, the Department of Energy, and FBI counterterrorism, total expenditures for national security came to an astounding $1.1 trillion .
 A large part of the argument for maintaining an ongoing war economy came from men and women who lived through the shock of Pearl Harbor .
 Some argue that assembly and production lines must be kept operating so that the U.S. can convert to war production quickly, if needed . But evidence now shows that the Japanese attack was not wholly unexpected .
 Millions of U.S. jobs depend on defense contracts . This argument has been instrumental in maintaining the war economy . Millions of American jobs depend heavily on defense .
 Critics say the permanent war economy has actually been a drain on America’s economic life . Critics say it has produced non-usable goods and its penchant for inefficiency and corruption .
 John F Kennedy parroted the Pentagon line during the 1960 campaign, promising increases in military spending . Kennedy was a product of his time, and promised to increase military spending in the military .
 Once in the Oval Office, Kennedy changed his attitudes toward the military . Kennedy had access to other sources of information . He changed his attitude toward military .
 Earlier he had echoed Pentagon figures showing that the Soviet Union possessed between five hundred and one thousand intercontinental ballistic missiles . Earlier, Pentagon figures showed that the U.S. possessed up to one thousand missiles .
 Kennedy complained that he had been illinformed as to the actual number of missiles . Kennedy suggested that this exaggeration was part of Pentagon strategy .
 Kennedy worried about the $3 billion deficit of his time, a paltry sum compared to today’s nearly $16 trillion . Kennedy also feared it would present a threat to the United States dollar .
 Kennedy named Robert McNamara as his secretary of defense and changes began to take place . McNamara was a Ford Motor Company executive .
 Kennedy began to significantly modify the way defense and intelligence operated . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1968 .
 Presidents Truman and Eisenhower had depended greatly on the National Security Council . The council was created by the 1947 National Security Act of 1947 . It was a creation of the Council .
 In 1963 the NSC consisted of the president, vice president, secretary of state and secretary of defense . The NSC was the National Security Council of the United States . In 1963 it was the first NSC in existence .
 Kennedy neglected the NSC method of campaigning . Kennedy was accustomed to the quick-acting, hard-hitting world of politics .
 Kennedy came to regret leaving the Pentagon and CIA largely to their own devices . While this may have been effective at the time, it left them largely to themselves alone .
 During this same period, U.S. foreign policy was being greatly influenced by a new vision of the role of the military in the world . During this period, the United States .
 This vision was codified in a May 15, 1959, document . General Richard Stilwell was a member of a special presidential committee . The document was written by General Richard .
 The document offered nothing less than a plan to protect the noncommunist world by having nations ruled by a military elite with training and ideology supplied by Americans . The document was titled "Training Under the Mutual Training Program"
 Initially Kennedy was fascinated by this concept, since by nature he was a strong believer in negotiation and limited response rather than simply using military options . Kennedy was initially fascinated by the concept, and by nature, he believed in negotiation .
 Words such as “counterinsurgency,’ “pacification,” and “special forces” began to creep into our political language . Words such a ‘counterinsergency’, ‘pacification’ and ‘special forces
 Following the disastrous Bay of Pigs Invasion, a special board of inquiry was convened to dissect what went wrong . A special inquiry into the disastrous invasion of Cuba was convened by the military .
 Both John and Robert Kennedy began to learn what the new military doctrines of counterinsurgency, flexible response, civic action, and nation building really meant .
 They saw how the obsession with secrecy had completely changed the way the military and intelligence operated . They saw that secrecy had become an obsession with the military .
 Everything was on a “need-to-know’s basis, with fewer and fewer responsible leaders included on the lists . Fewer responsible leaders were included on ‘need to know’ lists .
 After the Bay of Pigs inquiry Kennedy became convinced that the CIA and the Pentagon had misled him terribly . From that point on he was highly skeptical of information from those sources .
 The Kennedy brothers' inquiry showed how powerful the military-industrial complex had become . The inquiry showed the Kennedy brothers how powerful it had become.
 Kennedy learned how to concoct a “cover story,” which may account for his public support of the CIA while his private comments and actions showed otherwise . Kennedy did learn something from this coalition, he says .
 Kennedy began to balk at his military advisers, who had assured him of victory in Cuba, and who now were urging military intervention, to include the use of nuclear weapons, in Laos .
 Military hawks became incensed when Kennedy negotiated with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in Laos, forestalling armed conflict . Kennedy negotiated a coalition government in Laos forestalling an armed conflict in Laos .
 They were angered when Kennedy told them he would not send combat troops to South Vietnam . They were further angered when he said he wouldn't send combat forces to Vietnam .
 The blending of the military and the political was seen most clearly in Vietnam, where it was the U.S. ambassador who was in charge, not the senior military commanders . In Vietnam, the United States ambassador is in charge .
 Once war is inevitable, it should be fought by professional soldiers with clearly defined goals and objectives . War is inevitable. But once it's inevitable, soldiers should be prepared to fight it with clear goals, say experts .
 After the ClA-sponsored Bay of Pigs fiasco, Kennedy began to see that this nation’s paramilitary and undercover operations were getting out of hand . After the . ClA sponsored Bay of . Pigs fiasco JFK began to . see that . this nation's paramilitary and . undercover operations
 President Eisenhower issued two National Security Action Memoranda in June 1961 . He issued the National Security Memoranda to stem the trend .
 NSAM 55, signed personally by Kennedy, basically stated that he would hold the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff personally responsible for all activity of a military nature during peacetime, the same as during wartime .
 Kennedy wanted all cloak-and-dagger operations as well as military expeditions under the control of the chairman . In other words, Kennedy wanted to keep the operations under the scrutiny of his chairman .
 The document stipulated that the CIA would only be allowed only small covert operations . Any large operations must be studied and approved by the military .
 CIA and Pentagon tried to curb their power and prerogatives . However, there were men in both the CIA and the Pentagon who did not appreciate this attempt .
 Kennedy tried to curtail the power of both the military and intelligence, but also presented a very different worldview from the past .
 With his words and actions, Kennedy became the first U.S. president since World War II to address the myth of America’s infallibility . Kennedy was the first United States president since WWII to address myth .
 This did not sit well with the military-industrial complex, which had so much to gain—including profits—by controlling the raw resources of other nations . The U.S. has been in the grip of the world's most powerful and most powerful nations since World War II began .
 In October 1962, information from satellites and U-2 flights revealed that the Soviets were preparing offensive missile bases in Cuba, only ninety miles from the U.S. The bases were only ninety-mile from the United States .
 They prescribed immediate bombing of missile sites and another invasion of the island . They prescribed nothing less than immediate bombing and invasion of island .
 Kennedy personally struck a deal with Premier Khrushchev to remove missiles from Cuba . In return, the U.S. would remove offensive missiles from Turkey and Kennedy would pledge not to support a new invasion of Cuba .
 The Soviets appeared to back down and Kennedy’s popularity rose significantly, except in offices at the Pentagon and at Langley, Virginia . The Soviets appear to backdown and Kennedy became popular .
 The Kennedy administration continued its efforts to reduce military spending . Meanwhile, the Kennedy administration continues to try to reduce the budget .
 On March 30, 1963, McNamara announced a reorganization program that would have closed fifty-two military installations in twenty-five states, as well as twenty-one overseas bases, over a three-year period .
 On August 5, 1963, following lengthy negotiations, the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union signed a limited nuclear test—ban treaty . The treaty forbidding atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons was signed in 1963 .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to install a “hot line” telephone system between Washington and Moscow . As part of this “first step” toward what later would be termed “détente,” the system was installed in 1961 .
 It was a serious deviation from the hard Cold War policies of the past, and military leaders—both retired and active—did not hesitate to voice their disapproval .
 Kennedy’s most momentous decisions came when he began to reevaluate U.S. policy in Southeast Asia . Kennedy's decision to reduce the risk of war and curtail military and intelligence establishments was perhaps fatal .
 Lyndon B Johnson was encouraged to carry on Kennedy administration policies . The idea was that he would simply carry on with the Kennedy administration . Vietnam was the focus of the Vietnam War .
 It has been acknowledged that Johnson was able to push Kennedy’s civil rights legislation through Congress where his predecessor may have failed . Johnson was acknowledged that he was able .
 Kennedy policy was not continued in Vietnam . But one emerging Kennedy policy not continued was that involved South Vietnam . Kennedy's Vietnam policy was never continued .
 Early in his presidency, Kennedy simply went along with Eisenhower’s policy to continue sending military advisers and materiel to South Vietnam .
 Kennedy actually increased the United States military presence in that war-torn nation . Kennedy increased the U.S. military presence during 1961 and 1962 .
 This may have been due to his desire to avoid at all costs another foreign-policy disaster such as the Bay of Pigs . This may be because he wanted to avoid another such a disaster .
 By summer 1963, Kennedy had begun to reevaluate U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War .
 By the time Kennedy was elected president in 1960, large-scale guerrilla warfare was being conducted against the South Vietnam regime . In 1960, the South Vietnamese regime had been conducting guerrilla warfare .
 Vietnam was not an issue during the 1960 campaign . Because of Castro and Cuba as well as Soviet incursions in Berlin and the Congo, it wasn't an issue . Vietnam was an issue in the 1960s .
 Three days after his election, Kennedy barely noticed that South Vietnam’s President Diem was the object of an unsuccessful military coup d’état . Three days later, Diem had been overthrown in a failed coup d'état in Vietnam .
 In December 1960, the communists announced the formation of the Vietnamese National Liberation Front (the Viet Cong), and the internal guerrilla war got under way in earmmest . The Viet Cong formed in December 1960 .
 During 1961 Kennedy supported further U.S. military assistance to Asia, particularly after communist forces seized the city of Phuoc Vinh, only sixty miles from Saigon .
 On December 11, two helicopter companies arrived in South Vietnam, beginning an expanded role for U.S. advisers . Two helicopter companies have arrived in the country, beginning a new role in Vietnam .
 By January 1962, total U.S. military personnel in Vietnam were 2,646 . By January 1963, total United States military personnel had 2,647 . By that date, total US personnel were in Vietnam .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff: If the Viet Cong were not soon brought under control, U.S. ground combat units will be introduced . Joint Chiefs said January 13: "The Strategic Importance of the SEA Mainland" is a threat .
 Kennedy told confidants, “The Bay of Pigs has taught me a number of things.” According to assistant secretary of state Roger Hilsman, one of Kennedy’s key foreign policy planners, Kennedy .
 By mid-1963, after receiving conflicting advice and intelligence from his advisers regarding Vietnam, Kennedy began to further reassess the U.S. commitment there . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the United States' involvement in Vietnam .
 He was especially concerned about the treatment of Buddhists under the Diem government . He was particularly concerned about treatment of the Buddhists .
 The first Buddhist suicide by self-immolation occurred on June 11, 2011 . Thousands of Buddhists were demonstrating for freedom .
 Diem grew even more unmanageable as 1963 drew on, staffing his government with relatives and refusing to listen to the pleas of the Buddhists . Diem's government was staffed with relatives .
 Talk began about replacing Diem with leaders more agreeable to U.S. policy . Talk began to talk about replacing him with leaders who were less agreeable to American policy .
 Diem's coup occurred on November 1, 1963, just twenty-one days before Kennedy arrived in Dallas . The American government, including Kennedy, left no doubt of its displeasure with Diem, thus paving the way for yet another Vietnamese coup .
 South Vietnam generals seized key installations and attacked the presidential palace . Accompanied by CIA agent Lucien Conein, South Vietnam general attacked the palace .
 After hours of fighting, Diem and his brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, surrendered . Diem's brother and sister were killed in the battle .
 Kennedy approved the coup, then rejected it, then okayed it again . Kennedy was genuinely shocked at the murders . Kennedy's approval of the coup was approved by both sides .
 Washington was forced to recognize the new military government in Saigon . For the next twenty months, there were no fewer than ten changes of government as one general overthrew another .
 It was time for a decision in Vietham—to support a major American military expedition as the Pentagon desired . Or to simply withdraw and take the criticism of the anticommunists .
 The assassination of the Diem brothers may have strengthened Kennedy’s decision to disengage from Vietnam . There is evidence that he would have curtailed the Vietnam War .
 Kennedy, forever the astute politician, also was very much aware of the approaching 1964 election . Kennedy also knew that the 1964 election was coming .
 Senator Mike Mansfield of Montana said Kennedy confided to him that he agreed “on a need for a complete withdrawal from Vietnam,” but he couldn’t do it until after being reelected . Mansfield said Kennedy told him that once, following a White House leadership
 The president also may have given a hint as to his plans in a broadcast on September 2, 1963 . The president may have also hinted at his plans .
 Pentagon and CI[A—who had so much to gain by widening the Vietnam War—continued to put out conflicting and often erroneous information . People within the Pentagon and the CI [A] kept putting out conflicting information . The Pentagon continued to push for the war in the 1960s
 McNamara and General Maxwell Taylor had returned from Saigon and told Kennedy that things were looking better in Vietnam . The United States could withdraw all military personnel by the end of 1965 .
 On October 5, 1963, Kennedy approved an Accelerated Withdrawal Program . The program was designed to carry out the promise to end the American military presence by the close of 1965 .
 The President approved the military recommendations [withdrawal] by the end of 1965] but directed that no formal announcement be made of the implementation of the plans to withdraw 1,000 military personnel . The President of the U.S. ordered that the withdrawal be made by 1965 .
 Such unpublicized moves to disengage from Vietnam allowed anti-Kennedy forces to argue that no change of policy took place . Such moves allowed the president to claim that the Vietnam withdrawal was a secret .
 Less than one month after Kennedy’s assassination, McNamara and Taylor changed their tune . Less than a month after the assassination, they changed their tone .
 President Johnson told President Johnson that conditions in Vietnam were grave and that a major effort was needed to prevent a communist victory . They reported to him that conditions were grave .
 President Johnson signed NSAM 273, which canceled the troop withdrawal . Kennedy’s covert withdrawal plan ended a mere two days after his assassination .
 The document changed the U.S. objective from assisting the South Vietnamese to assisting them “to win” against the communists . It authorized plans for expanding the war into North Vietnam and Laos .
 The memorandum ordered senior government officials not to contest or criticize the changes . The memorandum also ordered senior officials to not be contesting or criticizing changes .
 A rough draft of NSAM 273, which essentially rescinded Kennedy’s withdrawal policy, was found in the Johnson Presidential Library in Austin, Texas .
 Kennedy aide Kenneth O’Donnell confirmed this in his 1972 book, Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye. Kennedy aide Ken O'Donnell confirmed it in 1972 book . Kennedy aide Kennedy aide said he was a ‘loner’
 The President’s orders to reduce American military personnel in Vietnam by one thousand before the end of 1963 was still in effect on the day he went to Texas . He wrote, “The President's orders to . reduce American . military personnel . in Vietnam was still . in effect
 Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which granted President Johnson the power to wage full-scale war in Southeast Asia . Nine months after the assassination, the Vietnam War got into full swing .
 The United States had been secretly raiding the North Vietnamese coast of the Gulf of Tonkin . U.S. sailors were told they were under attack by a CIA radio monitoring station .
 By 2012, it was well documented and even presented in the mainstream media that the incident in the Gulf of Tonkin was phony . The incident was presented in 2012, but it was presented as phony .
 There was no attack by North Vietnam and no United States sailor was killed . No U.S. sailors were killed .
 Johnson ordered ground combat troops into Vietnam within a month of the false-flag incident . Within a month, Johnson had ordered ground troops in Vietnam .
 At this late date, no one wants to claim responsibility for a ten-year undeclared war that killed 58,000 Americans . The war engendered lasting hatred between classes and age groups, according to many .
 As terrible as it is to contemplate the involvement of the U.S. military in the Kennedy assassination, there are many connections between the two . There are also links between the military and the JFK assassination .
 Several factors have raised suspicions concerning the military’s role in the assassination . Several factors raised suspicions about the military's role .
 112th Military Intelligence Group at 4th Army Headquarters at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio was told to ‘stand down’ that day rather than report for duty in Dallas . Unit commander, Colonel Maximillian Reich, reportedly told to 'stand down' over ‘violent’
 Some elements of the military intelligence unit did arrive in Dallas, but their activities there remain obscure .
 One member may have been with FBI agent James Hosty the morning Kennedy was killed . FBI agent Hosty was with Kennedy the morning of his death . Hosty may be with Hosty during the shooting .
 Hosty said he was in the company of a naval intelligence officer before the assassination . Hosty added the meeting had no connection with Kennedy’s visit to the White House .
 Agent Hosty's name, address, phone number, and license number were found in Lee Harvey Oswald’s personal notebook, which was originally deleted from the material turned over to the Warren Commission . Hosty destroyed a message from Oswald days after the assassination apparently on orders from superiors .
 An Army intelligence officer involved in the assassination was special agent James Powell .
 Powell had taken several photos in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination . Powell was carrying a 35 mm Minolta camera when he took photos of the shooting .
 The government has not pursued any meaningful investigation to determine what intelligence Agent Powell was conducting in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination or why he was photographing the exterior of the Depository .
 The military connection becomes even more curious in light of other strange incidents that occurred in Dallas that day .
 Dallas police lieutenant Jack Revill told the Warren Commission that a military intelligence officer rode with him from Dealey Plaza to the Dallas police station . Dallas police Lt. Revill said the officer was a member of the military intelligence team .
 It seems evident, based on this information, that military intelligence tipped off the Dallas police as to the identity of their suspect . The suspect is believed to have been identified by police .
 He said he contacted the FBI in both San Antonio and Dallas with his information . He then contacted them with information about his contact .
 Hidell alias only twice: when he mail-ordered the Carcano rifle and pistol and when he used the name Hidell on Fair Play for Cuba literature .
 This indicates that it was U.S. military intelligence that tipped off the Dallas police as to the identity of their suspect . This raises two possibilities .
 The files on Hidell and Oswald gave detailed information about Oswald’s trip to Russia as well as pro-Castro activities in New Orleans .
 Jones said he had become aware of Oswald in the summer of 1963 when information had been passed along by the New Orleans Police Department regarding his arrest there . Jones says he had known of Oswald when he was arrested in 1963 .
 112th Military Intelligence Group took an interest in Oswald as a possible counterintelligence threat . He said the 112th military Intelligence Group was interested in the Oswald case .
 The Warren Commission specifically asked to see any military files regarding Oswald but never saw the files mentioned by Jones or others . Jones: "The Warren Commission never saw any of the files"
 In 1978, the House Select Committee on Assassinations learned of these files and requested them from the military . They were told the files had been “destroyed routinely” in 1973 . The files were told they were destroyed routinely in 1973.
 Without access to this file, the question of Oswald’s possible affiliation with military intelligence could not be fully resolved . Despite the credibility of Jones’ testimony, without access to the file, this is not fully resolved.
 It appears the U.S. military destroyed all the files when talk of a reinvestigation began in the early 1970s . The files were destroyed by the military in the 1970s, but were still available in the 1980s and 1990s .
 It is ironic that of all modern presidents, it was John F Kennedy who received the only full military funeral in recent history . It was the only military funeral of recent presidents .
 In early 2013, the Elsbeth apartment building was bulldozed on orders of Dallas officials . The owner said she tried to renovate it and preserve it . Dallas officials bulldozed the building despite protests by the owner .
 Since the first edition of Crossfire, readers have pondered the meaning of the heading above but that was followed by no copy . The Man Who Was to Kill Oswald was to kill Oswald .
 It was decided to delete the entire section in an effort to save costs but someone forgot to delete it . The heading was deleted in an attempt to save money but the head was deleted .
 For an excellent and more detailed account of this story, see Dick Russell’s 1992 book The Man Who Knew Too Much . For more information, see The Man who Knew too Much .
 Richard Case Nagell told one of the strangest and most sinister stories to come out of the Kennedy assassination . The man’s name was Richard Case . He told the story of the assassination .
 Nagell entered the Army in 1948 at age eighteen . Raised in orphanage and foster homes, he was raised in foster homes and orphanage .
 During the Korean War, he was the youngest American to receive a battlefield commission . He was also the youngest U.S. soldier to receive battlefield commission in the war .
 He was awarded three Purple Hearts and a Bronze Star while serving in Korea . He was honorably discharged in 1959 with the rank of captain .
 Military papers disclosed that Nagell graduated from Army Military Intelligence School and a special leader’s course . He served in the Counterintelligence Corps .
 According to his records, he was given a top-secret security clearance in 1950 . He was given the clearance in 1952, according to records .
 Nagell was "loaned" to "another intelligence agency" for assignments in Asia in 1958, testimony says . He was part of a spy group called Field Operations Intelligence . Courtroom testimony says he was sent to Asia by military intelligence .
 As a senior intelligence adviser in South Korea, Nagell admitted participating in political assassinations, kidnapping, blackmailing, and counterfeiting operations . He admitted to participating in kidnappings, kidnappings and assassinations .
 By 1957, he had told superiors he was “fed up” with committing crimes in the name of national security . He was reassigned to counterintelligence duties in Japan . By 1957 he had been reassigned .
 It was here, he said, he first met a young Marine stationed at Atsugi named Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was a Marine stationed in Atsugai, Japan .
 About this time, Nagell married a Japanese woman and, at her urging, resigned his commission . He returned to the United States, and went to work for the State of California .
 In 1962, amid marital problems, he left his wife and two children and journeyed to Mexico City . He left his family and children in Mexico City amid marital issues .
 In Mexico, Nagell said he contacted a CIA man he had previously known and signed a contract with the agency, becoming a double agent . He contacted the CIA man in Mexico, he said, and became a CIA agent .
 The Soviets informed him of a plot to kill Kennedy involving the violent anti-Castro Cuban group known as Alpha 66 . Nagell was ordered to return to the United States to learn more about the plot .
 Nagell was shocked to find it was his old acquaintance Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald had been Oswald's friend in the Army in the early days of the Second World War . Oswald was the leader of the anti-war movement .
 Nagell said he became aware of at least two Kennedy assassination plots during this time . Both plots involved Cubans whose “war names” were “Angel” and “Leopaldo,” the same names given to Silvia Odio .
 According to Nagell, the CIA-backed Alpha 66 Cubans convinced Oswald they were members of Castro’s intelligence service and solicited his help in assassinating Kennedy to avenge CIA assassination plots against Castro .
 Evidence suggests Oswald was actually playing as an undercover agent of the United States . Oswald would have gone along with these schemes to learn all he could about the plots, he says .
 Nagell said he actually got close enough to the plotting to tape a New Orleans meeting in late August 1963 . He said he got close to the plot to tape the meeting in New Orleans .
 Nagell was ordered by KGB officials fearful of being implicated in an assassination to disrupt the Kennedy plot . He was then ordered to persuade Oswald that the deal was phony and if this didn’t work, to get rid of him .
 Nagell said he met Oswald in early September in New Orleans’s Jackson Square . Oswald was a member of a group that organized a civil war .
 Nagell told Oswald a Soviet agent code-named "Oaxaca" wanted to meet Oswald in Mexico City, he said . Oswald told him he had been sent a letter to tell him he was going to meet the agent . Oswald met with Oswald again, he says, and
 Oswald agreed to make the trip to and from Mexico City by plane . Oswald was advised that he would be provided with more than sufficient funds to travel . Oswald died in Mexico City, Mexico, in August 1945 .
 He was told where and how he was to pick up the money order on 9/24/63, his expected date of departure from New Orleans . The money order was ordered to be picked up in New Orleans, Louisiana, by 9/23/63 .
 Oswald picked up his Mexican tourist card in New Orleans in September . Nagell was already on his way to Mexico City, carrying a Colt pistol to use on Oswald .
 Nagell began to have second thoughts about his role as a double agent and as an assassin . He began to think he was going to be an assassin, but then had second thoughts . He was killed by a bomb blast in 1996 in a bomb attack .
 On September 20, he instead drove to El Paso and entered the State National Bank . The bank is located in El Paso .
 Russell: "He had decided he could not go through with the KGB’s assignment. He had decided not to go through" with the assignment, Russell says .
 The FBI has denied ever having received his letter from the man who alerted the FBI . After all, he had alerted the bureau, but it had never received the letter .
 While in jail awaiting trial for bank robbery, Nagell was visited often by both FBI and Secret Service agents, jailer says . Jailer Juan Medina says Nagello was visited by both agents while in jail .
 Two FBI agents visited Nagell on November 19, only three days before the assassination . FBI agents also visited the island in November 19 .
 Early in 1964, Nagell was brought before United States district judge Homer Thornberry in El Paso, Texas . He was charged with murder in 1964 .
 Instead of asking for a plea, assistant U.S. District Attorney made a motion to put Nagell in a federal institution in Springfield, Mo., for psychiatric observation . The El Paso Times reported that the motion was denied .
 Despite this letter and attention paid to Nagell by the FBI and Secret Service, there is no mention of him in the Warren Report or its attendant twentysix volumes .
 Richard Nagell sent a letter to the FBI in September 1963 . Hidell's responsibility "terminated" with the dispatch of the letter, Hidell says . Hidelling: "My responsibility concerning the then prospective action of Lee H Oswald Albert Hidell terminated"
 The information disclosed in that letter was judged to be mendacious by the FBI, as is quite evident . The responsibility lies with whom responsibility lies for what subsequently happened in Dallas is obvious .
 In March 1964, Nagell was declared competent to stand trial and convicted of two counts of entering a bank with intent to rob and given the maximum sentence of ten years in the United States Penitentiary in Leavenworth .
 He claimed he was followed and hounded and that attempts were made on his life . He also claimed attempts to kill him were made to stop him from going public .
 It should be noted that the government has often used criminal and medical history documents to discredit testimony from people who might challenge the official version of an event .
 President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 . Other military men were involved in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 By 2013, numerous people had been identified as a possible Grassy Knoll gunman . Numerous people were identified as the possible gunman .
 Only four identified persons have actually confessed and all started out as American Gls. Only four have been identified .
 Of these four, only two offered any real evidence and even this was contradictory and far from conclusive . Only two of these four offered any evidence, and even two were contradictory .
 Collom had met Lawrence Lloyd Factor when both were hospitalized in 1971 . Collom met Factor when they were hospitalized together .
 Factor met a man he knew only as Wallace in 1962 at the funeral of a Texas politician . Factor met Wallace at a funeral of Texas politician in 1962 . Factor and Wallace met at a Texas funeral .
 Factor boasted to Wallace of his shooting and hunting skills . Factor boasted of his hunting and shooting skills . Wallace: "I'm not afraid to go hunting. I'm scared to go fishing"
 Factor asked for a demonstration of Factor’s shooting ability . A year later he turned up to show off his shooting skills .
 The man said he might have a job for him in the future using his rifle, a job worth $10,000 . The job was worth $2,000 immediately and the rest when the job was done .
 Factor was taken to a house in Dallas where he met Jack Ruby, the man called Wallace, Lee Harvey Oswald and a young Hispanic woman, Ruth Ann . Factor was then taken to the home of Ruby and Oswald, who killed Oswald .
 Loy was driven to the bus depot, a few blocks away from where he was to catch a bus back home . Loy had to catch the bus back to his home in New Jersey .
 Wallace and Ruth Ann returned to the depot to pick up Factor and drive him out of town . But in a short while Ruth Ann and Wallace both returned and drove him away . Factor was later found dead in the depot .
 Factor correctly recalled that the rear of the Depository faced north and there was a wooden loading dock there that was taken down not long after the assassination . Factor also correctly remembered that there was also a loading dock at the back of the building . Factor: The loading dock was taken away not
 In 1950, he was introduced to Lyndon Johnson by Johnson’s attorney Ed Clark . He soon was working for the U.S. Department of Agriculture in Texas .
 Wallace was arrested and convicted in October 1951 in the murder-for-hire death of Austin miniature golf course owner John Kinser . The case was the result of a dispute between Johnson and Johnson's sister .
 Wallace was represented by Johnson’s attorneys . Eleven of the jurors called for the death penalty . Wallace was convicted .
 The trial judge overruled the jury and announced a sentence of five years’ imprisonment, which he immediately suspended . However, the jury overruled him and he was sentenced to five years' imprisonment .
 Henry Marshall was shot dead by Agriculture Department official looking into illegalities by Texas cotton allotment kingpin Billie Sol Estes . Several deaths occurred during investigations into Johnson’s business dealings .
 The Marshall case came to a climax in August 1984 after hearing Billie Sol Estes relate that he was present when Johnson, Wallace, and Johnson aide Cliff Carter plotted to "get rid" of Marshall . A Robertson County grand jury changed the Marshall suicide ruling to one of homicide .
 On the day of the assassination, some twenty-odd fingerprints recovered from the sixth floor of the Depository could not be connected to either Oswald, other Depository employees, or investigators .
 The prints were placed in the National Archives and generally forgotten except by John F “Jay” Harrison, a Dallas police reservist and JFK assassination researcher . These prints are placed in National Archives .
 Harrison arrived on the scene of the assassination within minutes . Harrison maintained his research until his death in May 2005 . Harrison arrived at the scene within minutes and maintained research .
 According to Darby, there was a 14-point match between the prints . Darby: "There was a fourteen-point battle between the print and print" Darby says the print match was 14 points .
 United States courts generally accept a ten-to twelve-point comparison as proof of a match . United States court generally accept 10-to 12-point competition as proof .
 Wallace was one of the shooters at the time of the shooting . Wallace was found to be the shooter at a news conference in May 1998 . Wallace's name was announced at a press conference .
 Controversy still reigns over Wallace-fingerprint issue . Harrison and Darby are now deceased and cannot counter any accusations .
 The print match was in error, but bureau officials failed to produce any supporting data or their own analysis . Bureau officials said the match was an error but failed to provide any other analysis .
 It does stretch the imagination to the breaking point to believe that Lyndon Johnson would have been stupid enough to allow a convicted hit man to come within fifty miles of Dallas on November 22, 1963 .
 "He definitely can be connected to both the government and the Chicago mob," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Oswald reportedly had no driver’s license, such a technicality has never stopped others from driving . Oswald reportedly has no driver's license .
 Oswald was seen driving a vehicle in the early days of his presidency . Oswald was also involved in a car accident in the 1980s . Oswald has a history of driving a car in the 1930s .
 Ruby’s sister Eva Grant told authorities that Ruby had the motorcade security plans in advance . Eva Grant said Ruby had security in advance of his motorcade . Ruby's sister later told authorities she had no idea about the plan .
 Grant told FBI he had been given a copy of security plans for Kennedy’s visit prior to his arrival . FBI chief J Gordon Shanklin wrote to police chief Jesse Curry from Dallas FBI chief .
 Nicoletti said Roselli mentioned an “abort team’s” to stop the assassination . Nicoletti: Roselli said he was getting cold feet about involving CIA personnel .
 A gunsmith for the mob had loaded the bullet tips with mercury, which created an explosive effect . The bullet tips were loaded with mercury and created an explosion .
 Zapruder's pergola was located about ten feet east of the picket fence close to the pergolas where he stood . The other was some sixty feet farther to the northeast .
 Among those who heard Rademacher’s account was ‘Texas private investigator Joseph H West, who had already developed an intense interest in the JFK assassination case .
 West previously had gathered information that Nicoletti and Roselli may have been involved . Nicoletti was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Nationally syndicated columnist Jack Anderson wrote that Roselli on more than one occasion had indicated to him that he may have participated in the assassination . Anderson: Roselli said to have indicated to me that he had participated in assassination .
 A 1999 book by the son of crime boss Joseph Bonanno also claimed Roselli played a role in the assassination . Roselli was a member of the Mafia in New Jersey .
 Bonanno said Roselli fired from a drainpipe along Elm Street and was aided by French mobsters . Offering no evidence, he offered no evidence of Roselli's actions .
 This was the result of a tip from a retired FBI agent who worked organized-crime cases . This is the first time the FBI has been involved in the case .
 He filed a forty-five-page motion in federal district court to have the body of President Kennedy exhumed and examined by forensic pathologists . About this same time, Dr. Kennedy filed a motion for exhuming and examining the body .
 Dr. Charles Wetli is the deputy chief medical examiner of Dade County, Florida . Wetli was a medical examiner in Florida . He was the first person to die of a brain injury in the state .
 A postmortem examination could show whether Kennedy’s body had been tampered with in an attempt to skew the autopsy results, Wetli said . Wetli: Postmortem examination may show if Kennedy's body was tampered .
 West said he planned to appeal to the 5th United States Circuit Court of Appeals . His motion was rejected by federal judge Norman Black but West plans to appeal .
 Those close to his situation, including his wife, did not believe his death was a natural one . He did not recover and those close to him did not think he had died of natural causes .
 Paul G Stimson of Houston is a member of the American Board of Oral Pathology . Stimson is a former forensic pathologist and member of a board of oral and forensic pathology .
 Stimson was asked to analyze the .222 Remington spent casing . No mention of the Kennedy assassination was made of the question . Stimson's report was published in the New York Times .
 Stimson, after describing in detail the marks on the casing, concluded, “The indentations are oriented on the shell casing in a pattern that would be consistent with the maxillary right central incisor making the larger mark . The two smaller marks would be . consistent with .
 CNN's John Sutter says the assassination case has been a mystery for years . He says the case is still a mystery, but he says it's still important to know who killed Kennedy .
 Stimson backtracked on his analysis of the casing marks as from human teeth . Stimson's analysis was initially thought to have been from teeth casing marks from a tooth .
 Second shell casing found on Grassy Knoll has never been found . No explanation for the second .222-caliber shell casing ever found .
 John Christian claimed he was the Grassy Knoll gunman in a 2010 deathbed confession . John Christian also claimed to have been the gunman in the 2010 shooting deathbed .
 Christian grew up hunting in rural Texas . Calling himself a “wild child,” Christian calls himself a "wild child"
 Often in trouble with the law, he was given the choice between jail or the military . He was given a choice of jail or military .
 Christian was sent by train to Alaska, where he distinguished himself with his shooting prowess . Christian said he was sent to Alaska by train .
 In late November 1963, Christian said he was pulled out of field maneuvers and told he was to eliminate a threat to national security . Christian: "I was pulled from field maneuvers. I was told I would be eliminated a threat"
 On November 21, Christian was flown by helicopter to Eielson Air Force Base near Fairbanks, Alaska, and from there via military plane to Fort Worth, Texas . Christian said he was flown from Alaska to Texas via helicopter to Carswell Air Force base in Fort Worth .
 He was then taken to the Cellar club in downtown Fort Worth, where he slept on the floor of the kitchen . Secret Service agents were “debriefed’s” in the main club area .
 The next morning, he was driven to Dallas and given a choice of weapons in the vehicle’s truck . The next day, the man was taken to Dallas, Texas, where he was given the weapons .
 Christian says he fired a rifle through a small gap in the fence atop the Grassy Knoll . Christian said he was lying prone on a mat along the north-south axis of the fence . Christian: "I'm not afraid to die. I'm scared to die"
 After he struck Kennedy in the head, he said he simply walked away . Another man left with the rifle wrapped in a coat and yet another picked up the mat . He said he walked away while another man left behind the rifle .
 Christian claims he was returned to his base in Alaska by a high-flying jet . He says he arrived in time to stand with an honor guard that evening for the fallen president .
 He says he left the Army within two years on a hardship discharge and returned to north Texas . He said he left on a two-year hardship discharge after two years .
 After a stint as a mercenary, he eventually became a rural county judge . After a respectable reputation, he became a county judge with a reputation .
 In 2006 he was diagnosed with inoperable cancer . He decided to tell his story to attorney Sheila Grace Neal of Azle, Texas .
 Neal confirmed one of Christian’s claims that he had paid no taxes since 1965 . Neal confirmed that he paid no tax since 1965 to Christian . Christian says he has been paying no taxes for more than 50 years .
 Christian died from cancer in June 2010, just days after giving his account to this author . Christian died just days before he gave his account of his experiences .
 At this late date, there appeared no way to independently corroborate his confession . He claimed his military records were all stolen from him by “men in suits” in the late 1960s .
 This tale concerns the anonymous narrator, Smith, and Lee Harvey Oswald, whom he knew only as Ozzie Hidell . It concerns a conspiracy of only three: Smith, Smith and Oswald . The anonymous narrator is only one of three people in the story .
 Oswald’s employment at the Depository was a sheer accident, and the conspirators shared drinks in a downtown Dallas hotel at a time when no one could buy mixed drinks in the city . Jack Ruby acted entirely on his own, and Oswald acted entirely alone . Oswald's employment at
 The Final Solution to the Assassination of JFK, by former L.A. County sheriff’s detective Hugh C McDonald . McDonald, a former Los Angeles County sheriff's detective . McDonald .
 There is a lack of evidence to support such stories, but they do serve as a good example of how a truly experienced sniper could have been insinuated into any number of assassination plots .
 The shooter could do his job and walk away without any contact or knowledge of any other participants . He could walk away from the scene without any knowledge of other participants, police say .
 This type of redundant backup contingency also is typical of military/intelligence planning . The U.S. has a long-term contingency plan for emergencies .
 Such a tactic ensures that a morass of false leads and red herrings are left behind to confuse investigators, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 The best guess for the Grassy Knoll gunman is that of Roscoe White . White's story also has been dismissed by most due to the lack of verification even after nationwide publicity . So it would appear that the best guess is that White .
 Roscoe Anthony White, nicknamed Rock, reportedly left behind a diary detailing his role in the assassination . White left behind diary detailing role in assassination .
 Ricky Don White is a high school football hero from Paris, Texas . Ricky White is known through his son, Ricky Don Don White, a high-school football hero . White's son is also a football hero for Paris High School football .
 Ricky White recalls hunting trip with his father to west Texas in the fall of 1963 . Ricky White said involvement in the assassination case may have begun in early childhood . Ricky said involvement may have started in early adulthood .
 He saw his father practice shooting rifles with two other men from high positions into an open car . He said he saw him practice shooting with two others in a high position .
 The elder White recalled that Ruby killed Oswald on the Sunday Oswald killed Oswald . He also recalled that the elder White arrived home, appeared agitated, and suddenly left Dallas with his family .
 Earlier, on October 7, 1963, White had joined the Dallas Police Department . White was killed in Dallas .
 While in training he was assigned to the Crime Scene Search Section, which included work in the police photographic lab . He also worked in the Police photographic lab during his training .
 In 1971 he was killed in a freak explosion at a Dallas business where he worked as a shop foreman . He resigned from the police in October 1965 and in 1971 was killed .
 In 1975 investigators from the House Select Committee on Assassinations questioned his mother, Geneva, about her employment with Jack Ruby and a backyard photograph of Lee Oswald never before known to exist .
 The existence of this unpublicized third backyard Oswald photo proved that evidence against Oswald was suppressed while in the hands of the government . The exact pose in this photo was recreated by authorities in a photo published by the Warren Commission .
 A neighbor warned Ricky that the HSCA might make public his father’s name in connection with the assassination . Ricky's father's name was never made public .
 Roscoe belonged to something called “JTAG” (“Don’t ask me what that means,” said the neighbor who claimed to have worked for U.S. intelligence . Roscoe had belonged to a team of specially trained soldiers sent into different countries
 Ricky White's name was never mentioned by the HSCA . Ricky White tried to forget the whole thing. Ricky White says he has been trying to forget it all .
 Following the funeral, family members gathered at Toland’s Paris home and were going through his effects .
 Ricky found an old Marine footlocker belonging to Roscoe in a storage shed in the backyard . Ricky found it in a shed in Ricky's backyard . Roscoe was a Marine Marine from the Marine Corps . Ricky and Roscoe were friends and family members .
 Back tracked to car, drove back to area of take out to locate other passenger . Back tracked back to car and drove to find other passenger in car .
 Ricky immediately took this information to his mother, who had briefly worked for Jack Ruby in the fall of 1963 . Ricky's mother had worked for Ruby, and Ricky was shocked to learn of the story .
 She told him she knew nothing of the diary but that she suspected Roscoe may have had something to do with the assassination . She said she had suspected he may have been involved .
 Schorre and his assistant initially were excited over the find, as were some local oilmen who financed Ricky’s efforts to investigate the matter . Ricky's investigation was funded by local oil companies .
 Ricky was taken to FBI offices in Midland and questioned for five hours by agents Ron Butler and Tom Farris . Ricky was questioned by agents Butler and Farris for 5 hours . Ricky is believed to have been Ricky's girlfriend for 20 years .
 Ricky was coaxed for information by police and threatened with charges of withholding evidence . Ricky was found dead at the scene of an apparent suicide attempt . Ricky has been charged with multiple counts of murder, including attempted suicide .
 Ricky was finally allowed to return home with his materials . Ricky was forced to return to his home in order to complete the project .
 Agent Farris arrived to retrieve a notepad he said he had inadvertently left in Ricky's belongings . Ricky was taken to a hospital room where he was treated for his injuries .
 The agent quickly returned from where Ricky had laid out his materials, said, “I got what I came for.” The agent returned to where Ricky laid out the materials .
 Roscoe's grandfather found steel canister at his grandfather’s house in 1990 . Roscoe was involved in the discovery of the canister in the 1990s .
 Inside were three coded messages that today are in the hands of an assassination researcher . The messages were found in the hand of a researcher who is now trying to find out what happened .
 The next assignment is to eliminate a national security threat to worldwide peace . President Obama's next assignment: To eliminate a threat to world peace .
 Ricky was thrown into a world of publicity and entrepreneurs, culminating in an August 1990 press conference in the now-defunct JFK Assassination Information Center in Dallas . Ricky's story of the diary had become known and Ricky became a celebrity in 1990 . Ricky is now a successful entrepreneur .
 Ricky took a lie detector test a month earlier . Ricky's lie detector results were made public along with the results of a month later .
 Roscoe White was stationed at the Marine base at El Toro, California, at the same time as Lee Harvey Oswald . White was at the base at the time of the assassination .
 White shipped out from California to duty in Japan aboard the USS Bexar, the same ship carrying Oswald . Further, White was sent to duty aboard the ship carrying the fallen sailor .
 Both Rock and Oswald were released from the Marines with a hardship discharge, like John Christian . Rock was released from his post in 2010 . Oswald and Rock were released with hardship discharge .
 Roscoe White’s broad, flat chin and a knot on his right wrist have been claimed to have been added onto his body . It has been claimed that White's body was superimposed with Oswald's face in the famous photographs .
 Beverly Oliver, the “babushka lady” told researcher Mark Oates that just after the shooting she saw a Dallas policeman coming down from the Grassy Knoll . Beverly Oliver said in 1992, Beverly Oliver saw a police officer coming down . Beverly Oates told researcher
 She recognized him as the husband of Geneva White, who she knew worked for Jack Ruby . She said she did not know him but recognized him .
 Since the diary was missing and the coded messages did not specifically connect to the assassination, stronger proof was needed . The diary was also missing and coded messages were not specifically connected to the murder .
 A second diary was made public but was almost immediately found to be a forgery . Suddenly a second diary, made public, was also made public . The diary was found to have been almost immediately discovered to be fake .
 Roscoe White case lost interest after the attorney general, the media, and the public quickly lost interest in the case . White was found guilty of falsifying evidence .
 Zapruder film has provided evidence of misunderstanding and manipulation in the JFK assassination case . JFK assassination is the subject of investigation .
 Hollywood film experts have agreed that the signs of retouching are both obvious and crude . Hollywood film expert says the signs are both crude and obvious .
 Many people still believe the driver, Secret Service agent William Greer, turned and shot Kennedy with a pistol . Many still believe Greer shot Kennedy .
 Greer’s testimony contradicted his actions as seen in the film, prompting some suspicion of Secret Service complicity . Greer's testimony contradicts his actions, prompting suspicion that the Secret Service was involved in his actions .
 What some people believed to have been a gun is merely sunlight reflecting off of Secret Service agent Roy Kellerman’s greased hair . Kellerman was a Secret Service officer in New Jersey .
 In both studies they said it was apparent that the assassination involved more than one gunman . In both cases, the study found that more people were involved in the assassination .
 A tree obstructed any early shot from the Depository’s sixth floor as well as an extraneous bullet strike on the south curb of Elm Street . The Depository's sixth floor was located on the sixth floor .
 West-Breneman information was altered by the Warren Commission before being made public . Zapruder film-frame numbers used to time the assassination were also altered .
 A modern rifle can produce a white puff of smoke, especially if recently oiled . A modern gun can also produce a smoke puff if it is oiled properly . The smoke can also be seen on a modern rifle .
 Mary Moorman's Polaroid picture shows a man in the classic rifle-firing position behind the wooden picket fence atop the infamous Grassy Knoll .
 The smudge on the right of the photo is a fingerprint due to the failure to apply a fixative to the photo at the time of the incident . The fingerprint was a fingerprint .
 In the blowup, one can discern the figure’s hairline, eyebrows, and left ear over a bright spot . Bright spot could be either a muzzle flash or smoke from a weapon .
 The man is wearing a dark shirt with a bright spot on his left chest, which computer analysis showed to be metal . Computer analysis showed the spot was metal, along with a semicircular patch on his shoulder .
 The dark triangle at bottom right is the floor, only about a foot below the window, which was only half open on November 22, 1963, as shown here . It is only about one foot below that window .
 Two pipes to the immediate left of the window provide serious obstacles to anyone attempting to aim a rifle down Elm Street . The pipes are to the left of a window to prevent anyone from aiming a rifle .
 An overhead highway sign marks the location of the first shot to strike Kennedy . The live oak tree on the street below obscures the line of sight from the window to the center of Elm .
 This photo was taken in 1977, soon after the tree was trimmed back to its 1963 configuration for a television documentary .
 Today, no one can see this view because the window area has been closed off to the public with Plexiglass by the Sixth Floor Museum . No one can now see the view from the window .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry published a series of photos in 1967 . The photos were published by the police chief of Dallas .
 A sandy-haired man identified by Curry as an FBI agent picks something from the grass on the south side of Elm Street immediately following the assassination . Foster watch as a sandy-hued man identified as an agent picks up something . Foster watched as the FBI agent picked up the item from
 Witnesses claim a bullet struck the ground near a manhole cover . It was at this location that witnesses, including Foster, claimed a bullet hit the ground .
 This extraneous bullet was depicted in a news photograph published the next day . The photograph was published in a newspaper published the following day .
 Once taken away, there was no acknowledgement or even mention of this vital evidence . However, once taken away it was never acknowledged or even mentioned in court .
 Two of the most suspicious men in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination were a man brandishing an open umbrella despite the warm, balmy day . A dark-complected man with a bulge in his jacket was also suspicious .
 In the moments after the shooting, the men sat together on the Elm Street curb . The men arrived and left separately, but sat together in the moments of the shooting .
 In other photos the dark-complected man appears to be speaking into a walkie-talkie . While the umbrella lies at the man’s feet, in other photos, the man seems to be talking .
 For nearly twenty years the federal government failed to identify these men and made no mention of them in official reports . The federal government did not identify the men for nearly two decades . For nearly 20 years, the government did nothing to identify them .
 House Select Committee on Assassinations identified Louie Steven Witt as the "umbrella man" Witt . Witt was identified as a Louie Stevens Witt by the House select committee . Witt is a member of the House Intelligence Committee .
 Oswald Oswald carried a draft card with his picture but in the name of Alek James Hidell . Oswald's draft card was signed by Hidell, but his name was actually the real name . Oswald also carried out the draft card in his name .
 Oswald was uncooperative when police demanded to know if he was Oswald or Hidell . Oswald refused to answer questions about Hidell or Oswald . Hidell was killed in the September 4, 1918, assassination .
 Three men were arrested in a railroad car a short time after the shooting . They were marched through Dealey Plaza under armed guard . The three men were later arrested and taken into custody by police .
 For nearly 30 years their identities were unknown and no arrest records were found . For nearly thirty years they were unknown . No arrest records have been found .
 Dallas police opened their assassination files in 1992 . Three arrest reports listing three men were found, all written in the same hand and on the same date . In 1992, Dallas police found three arrest reports in the assassination files .
 Two of the men were located and they acknowledged being arrested on November 22, 1963 . The men were arrested in 1963 . Two of them were located .
 In 1979, the House Select Committee recreated the JFK assassination gunshots in Dealey Plaza as part of acoustical studies that ultimately led to its official conclusion that more than one gunman fired on the president .
 Just below the light-colored van a pile of sandbags had been placed near the south curb of Elm Street . Notice that just below the vehicle a pile was placed with sandbags near the curb .
 A sharpshooter on the Depository’s sixth floor, using live ammunition, ordered the bags moved from the center lane of the street, the actual location of the first shots into Kennedy's limousine . The bags were ordered from the sixth floor of the building .
 The police shooting expert said he ordered the move because he could not gain an unobstructed line of sight into the center of Elm because of an intervening live oak tree . The expert said the move was ordered because he couldn't get a view of Elm .
 The tree had been trimmed back to its 1963 configuration for the filming of a television documentary on the assassination . Two years before this test, the tree was trimmed back for a TV documentary .
 Neither the sharpshooter nor Oswald could have sighted a target in the center lane through the tree . Oswald could not see a target on the road . Oswald was the only person who could have seen a target .
 The theory states that a rifle slug fired from sixty feet above ground level struck Kennedy in the back, at the level of the third thoracic vertebra, at a downward angle .
 Without hitting any bone, it coursed upwards to exit from his Adam’s apple, then turned downward again to strike Connally near his right armpit, shattering his fifth rib . Connally's fifth rib was shattered by the bullet .
 Connally’s right nipple was struck near his right nipple and his right wrist . Connally's right wrist was shattered and his left thigh was lodged in his thigh . The bullet struck Connally near his nipple and struck his wrist .
 The bullet hole in Kennedy's bloody jacket is still available for viewing in the National Archives . Kennedy was never shot through the neck but in the back .
 It has been argued that Kennedy’s jacket bunched as he raised his arm to wave at the crowd, causing the bullet hole in the jacket to be much lower than the actual wound in his body .
 The bullet hole in his shirt indicates that the shot from the rear was in the back rather than the neck . However, the bullet hole also indicates that it was in his rear rather than his neck .
 Oswald said the photos were composite pictures with his face pasted on another’s body . Oswald said they were composite photos of him in his backyard with weapons and a communist publication . Oswald: The photos are composite pictures of his face and his body .
 Graphics expert Jack White made the two known photos into transparencies and overlaid them . Jack White overlaid the photos with a trans-transparencies of them .
 Nothing in the two separate pictures matched exactly, except Oswald’s face . Oswald's face was the only thing that matched exactly . Oswald was killed in September 1945 .
 Only a slight discrepancy was found on his mouth, apparently the result of later retouching . Only slight discrepancy in his mouth was found .
 A third backyard photo turned up fifteen years after the assassination in the hands of Dallas policeman Roscoe White’s widow . The photo was taken in the backyard of White's widow . White was killed by a Dallas police officer in 1968 .
 Investigators recreated the backyard pose for the Warren Commission . But they chose the pose of the third photo, proving suppression of evidence .
 Oswald photo shows a broad flat chin . Oswald's figure in the photo has a wide flat chin. Oswald's photo was taken in a backyard backyard .
 Oswald had a pointed, cleft chin in his police photo . Oswald's police photo was taken in Dallas, Texas, in 1960s .
 In the backyard photos, a perceptible line breaking the emulsion of the picture can be seen stretching from one side of the neck to the other .
 Oswald was correct in stating that his face was pasted onto another’s body, it would have been above the line across the chin . Oswald would have had his face placed on the chin of another person .
 X-ray of Texas governor John Connally’s right wrist shows bright spots, which are metal fragments from the bullet that shattered his radius, the largest and thickest of the wrist bones . Photoanalysis by Jack White .
 The small indention at the top of the slug is where FBI lab technicians chipped off a piece for spectrographic studies, which remains in controversy . The analysis of the analysis of this article remains in question .
 HS Son lerhore ( Me thodist Kowpitel by Or. ‘oul Noellenrore 2 button (at 1130 pry Ke geve thon to Beds Devonport 1 tetten { at 1:3 pr. “oul No
 Sts Jerry blast fintsn, brown wecden a a aaan es seat Caren rove {t to Set. Seveld , t me ape loffereon, pave tt to pave .
 Luke Keeney ot Live round 6. { feet tLe ee Uy Capt. Frits, to Crine Ped Medan Thy DPF, to Capt, Ade to Pai Ure round 6 . * recerered ty Dept, Seri tt Luke
 Only two spent shell casings were found and logged in the Dallas police files . The evidence sheet from the police files shows that only two spent shells were found .
 The paraffin report showed traces of nitrates on Oswald’s hands, but no gunpowder on his hand or face . The report also showed that Oswald did not fire a rifle that day .
 The Warren Commission concluded the paraffin test was unreliable but instead of explaining this, they chose to delete reference to the test on the evidence sheet . This is an explicit example of alteration and suppression of evidence . Warren Commission deleted reference to test on evidence sheet, an example of suppression of
 The Warren Commission published this picture of Lee Harvey Oswald . It was reportedly taken about the time of his attempted defection to Russia . The picture was taken in the same place as the original photo .
 Although there is a light source from the person’s right, his shadow on the rear wall falls to the left . Also, although there is an image of the person's right, the shadow of his shadow is also falling to the right .
 An obvious line separating the two faces can be drawn from a break in the hairline at the top of the head through his mouth and chin and on through his necktie . The two faces are separated by a break at the bottom of his hairline .
 Such composite photos have been used by intelligence agencies to allow an operative to pass cursory official examination when impersonating a similar-looking person .
 Oswald’s being seen in widely separated locations at the same time . There are a number of accounts of Oswald's being seen around the world . Oswald was a member of the British House of Representatives in Washington DC .
 Hunt was in Mexico City at the time of the note, according to some accounts . Some, including his son, St. St. Hunt, was in the country when the note was written, some say . Hunt's son says he was not aware of the incident .
 John Hunt has been placed in photographs taken in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination . Hunt is believed to have been in the area when the assassination occurred . Hunt's photographs show him in a photo taken at the scene of the shooting .
 In a dying declaration, Hunt named the chief assassination conspirators as Lyndon Johnson, Cord Meyer and William Harvey of the CIA, David Morales, and a French assassin . The elder Hunt named them as the chief conspirators .
 Every branch of the U.S. military cautions troops against contracting venereal disease . All branches of the United States military are cautions against contracting disease .
 Some units, such as the Marine Corps, punish members who are treated for such disease . The Marine Corps is among the most decorated units in the world .
 Marine Oswald may have been recruited into intelligence work while serving in Japan . He may have consorted with prostitutes suspected as foreign agents . This astonishing statement indicates that .
 The aftermath of the shooting in Dealey Plaza began in Dallas decades ago . It has continued for decades, a circumstance well beyond the means of any lone assassin . Part III of the Dallas massacre is a look at the events surrounding the shooting .
 Dallas police blocked nearby intersections with no orders to the contrary, released traffic, which began pouring through the crime scene . Dallas police blocking the nearby intersections .
 Spectators from blocks away, having heard the shots and sirens, ran to the scene . Spectators heard the shooting and ran for blocks away from the scene.
 Nearly twenty sheriff's deputies, following sheriff Bill Decker’s orders, ran to the railroad yards behind the Grassy Knoll . There was no shortage of lawmen as lawmen ran to help .
 James Tague, who was slightly wounded when a bullet or bullet fragment struck the Main Street curb near the Triple Underpass, last spoke with deputy sheriff Buddy Walthers before having to move his car once traffic got moving .
 Walthers was among the first officers to seal off the Depository, indicating that the building was still open for at least ten minutes after the shooting . He was one of the first police officers to arrive at the scene of the shooting in Texas .
 Captain Will Fritz, who headed the Dallas police investigation, told the Warren Commission he began making detailed notes after hearing of the assassination at the Trade Mart . Fritz told the commission he began to make detailed notes about the assassination .
 Witness Ed Hoffman was able to drive from Stemmons Freeway to the railroad yards behind the Depository, circle the area, and leave unchallenged . Ed Hoffman circled the area and left unchallied . Hoffman's car was seen circling the area .
 The point is that there was no effective containment of the crime scene or of the Depository for at least ten minutes—and perhaps as much as twenty-eight minutes—after the shooting . The point of the shooting was that there were not effective containment, says author .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was the only person missing and authorities immediately began a search for him . Oswald was an employee at the White House . Oswald's disappearance was the first time the government had been able to find him .
 This story is simply untrue. Like so much other information in this case, this story was simply untrue, says CNN.com.com .
 Most Depository employees were outside viewing the motorcade at the time of the shooting . Police prevented them from returning to work by preventing them from going back .
 During the first roll call, dozens of Depository employees were missing . The Depository is located in New York, New Jersey .
 Oswald was already in police custody when it was determined that Oswald was gone . Oswald was taken into custody about 2:30m. by the time he was found .
 I listened as he told detectives about Lee Oswald failing to show up at a roll call . Lee Oswald failed to turn up at roll call at the time of Oswald's death . I listened to detectives tell detectives about Oswald's failure to turn himself up .
 An earlier roll call call had been inconclusive because several employees were missing . "My impression is that there was an earlier roll-call that had an inconclusive," he says .
 Oswald already was under arrest at the time of his arrest . Neither the police in the building nor the superintendent knew that Oswald already had been arrested . Oswald's arrest was the first time Oswald had been charged with murder .
 In the confusion following the assassination, there was ample opportunity for conspirators to escape and for vital evidence to be eliminated . In the chaos following the murder, there were ample opportunities to escape, and evidence was eliminated .
 The shooting occurred minutes after the shooting on the south side of Elm Street . The suspect was hit by multiple bullets in the area .
 A bullet struck the grass on the south side of Elm near a manhole cover . Foster, from his vantage point on top of the Triple Underpass, saw a bullet strike the grass . Foster says he saw the bullet hit the grass in the grass near the underpass .
 Photographs taken that day show Foster and Deputy Sheriff Walthers standing over the manhole cover . Foster and Walther were both officers at the time of the incident .
 News reporters and spectators were kept at a distance and told that evidence —a bullet — was embedded in the grass inches from the manhole cover . News reporters were kept away from the scene .
 News cameraman Harry Cabluck photographed the scene and recalled seeing more than one gouge in the ground . Cabluck said he saw a gouge on the ground in the area .
 One of the rifle bullets fired by the murderer of President Kennedy lies in the grass across Elm Street from the building in which the killer was hiding and from where he launched his assault .
 Inches from the bullet, which is circled in the newspaper photo, is the edge of the cement manhole . The bullet was shot in the head by a manhole in the middle of the manhole, police say .
 Wayne and Edna Hartman, who were in Dallas for jury duty, saw the bullet marks . Wayne Hartman was in Dallas on jury duty when the shooting occurred . Edna and Wayne were in the Dallas area for jury service .
 After hearing shots in Dealey Plaza, the couple “ran like the devil” down to the grassy middle area of the plaza . The couple heard shots and ran like the "devil," the couple says . They say they ran down the grass in the middle of the
 There were not many people in this area at the time, but a policeman was there . The incident happened in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Two parallel marks on the ground that looked like mounds made by a mole . Then I noticed these two parallel marks in the ground appeared to be mounds of mounds .
 On Sunday, the Hartmans again visited Dealey Plaza but found that the crush of people bringing memorials had obliterated the marks . The Hartmans visited the site again on Sunday .
 In the summer of 1964, the Hartmans contacted the FBI after learning that the bureau was still seeking assassination information . The Hartmans called the FBI in 1964 after learning they were still seeking information .
 Hartman said FBI agents didn’t seem too interested in what they had to say . Hartman: FBI agents seemed to be more interested in their case .
 The Hartmans were told the marks were made by bone fragments from Kennedy’s head . One agent told them the explanation sounded ‘strange’ to the Hartmans .
 I don't see how what we saw down there could have come from those windows up there because they were not the right angle . I don’t see how . what we . saw down . there could not have been seen from the windows, he says .
 "People were telling us that bullets came from over there. And at that time people told us that they were over there," she says . "We were told that the bullets came over there"
 The answers to these questions may never be known because, officially, this bullet never existed . It may never have been known because of this bullet's existence .
 A sandy-haired man in a suit appeared in minutes after the shooting, police chief says . He was identified in the book as an FBI agent . The FBI agent was identified as a Dallas police officer .
 In full view of both Walthers and Foster, he walked up, reached down, cupped some object in his hand, and stuck it into his left pants pocket . This man apparently had some authority, for in full view, he said .
 Reports of this bullet reached the Warren Commission in 1964 . The FBI was instructed to investigate the matter . Later in 1964, when reports of the bullet were reported, the FBI was told to investigate .
 Agents reported back that they had examined the manhole cover and there was no sign of a bullet striking it . No sign of bullet striking the cover, agents said .
 The bullet landed inches from the manhole cover . There was no mention of the fact that the bullet in question landed inches away from the cover .
 The Commission dropped the matter of the bullet in the grass . Apparently satisfied, the Commission dropped it .
 Later on the day of the assassination, the Stemmons Freeway sign, which according to some bystanders was struck by a bullet, disappeared . Some bystanders say the sign was hit by a gunshot .
 No official explanation of this disappearance has been offered . Some Dallasites recalled a brief local news segment at the time explaining that the sign was taken down by the city because a bullet hole in it would remind the public of the assassination .
 In 2004 the Asahi Television Network of Japan procured two separate copies of the Zapruder film . Both contained approximately six frames missing from the copies shown around the world to the public .
 Life magazine officials explained the missing frames were due to processing damage . The missing frames are due to process damage .
 In the missing frames it is apparent that a small hole appears in the Stemmons sign at the time of the shooting .
 Computer experts in England and Poland confirmed this as a bullet hole . Computer experts confirmed it was a hole in the heart of a Polish man's skull .
 In 1974, Richard Lester, using a metal detector, discovered a bullet fragment on the far south side of Dealey Plaza just east of the Triple Underpass . The fragment was found by Lester in 1974 . Lester used the metal detector .
 The fragment was later studied by firearms experts of the House Select Committee on Assassinations who determined through ballistics that while the fragment was from 6.5-millimeter ammunition, it had not been fired through Oswald rifle .
 The FBI and committee left the impression that this discovery had no connection with Kennedy’s death . Rather than view this as evidence that perhaps multiple rifles were used in the assassination, both the FBI and the committee said this discovery was not connected to Kennedy's death .
 An intact .45-caliber bullet was discovered in May 1976 by Hal Luster buried in dirt by the four-foot-high cement retaining wall near where Abraham Zapruder stood filming .
 A shell casing may shed much light on how some bullet fragments were traced to the Oswald rifle . Yet another story of a found shell casing could shed much more light on the Oswald case .
 A 30.06-caliber shell casing was found under a lip of roofing tar at the base of the roof’s parapet on the side facing Dealey Plaza . Morgan, his father, was searching for water leaks .
 Shell casing dates back to 1953 and marks indicate it was made at the Twin Cities Arsenal . Shell casing is dated 1953 and dates are dated from 1953 .
 One side was pitted by exposure to exposure to the weather, indicating it had lain on the roof for a long time . One side of the roof was pitted, indicating that the roof had been damaged by the weather . The other side is pitted, showing the damage had been done by
 The casing, which remains in Morgan’s possession, has an odd crimp around its neck . The casing is still in Morgan's possession .
 Rifle experts have explained that this is evidence that a sabot may have been used to fire ammunition from a 30.06 rifle . Rifle experts say this may be evidence of a sabot being used to shoot ammunition from the 30 .06 rifle.
 A sabot, also called a husk, is a plastic sleeve that allows a larger-caliber weapon to fire a smallercaliber slug . A sabot is also known as a sabot, or husk .
 The results of using a lighter-weight slug include increased velocity, producing more accuracy and greater striking power . The results also included increased velocity and more striking power.
 The smaller slug exhibits the ballistics of the weapon it was originally fired from, rather than the 30.06, as the sabot engages the 30 .06’s rifling . And the smaller slug shows that it was fired from the weapon originally fired .
 Assassination conspirators could have fired 6.5-millimeter bullets from Oswald rifle into water, recovered them, reloaded them into the more accurate and powerful 30.06 with the use of a sabot . The sabot is held in place by crimping the cartridge, which is held
 By this method, bullet fragments found in the limousine would have the ballistics of Oswald’s rifle rather than the 30.06 from which they were actually fired . The method is similar to that of the 30 .06 .
 Warren Commission Exhibit 399 is nearly intact slug found at Parkland Hospital the afternoon of the assassination . Exhibit 399 has all the characteristics of a slug fired into nothing more solid than water. Exhibit 399 was Exhibit 399 .
 The slug can be reloaded and refired using a sabot, which comes apart on firing . It is just such a slug that can be refired and reloaded with a sabot .
 1962 ad in Guns magazine offered “Husk Bullets” depicting a .22-caliber slug seated in a .308-caliber shell casing . That such technology was available in 1963 .
 Plastic sabot reportedly found in Dealey Plaza the afternoon of the assassination . One such plastic sabot reportedly was found by a member of the anticommunist Minutemen organization .
 He claimed that a few months after he received the sabot, the FBI raided his home and took all his possessions . He also claimed that he was targeted by the FBI after receiving the sabot .
 Bullets and a plastic sleeve were not the only evidence found in Dealey Plaza . Bullets and plastic sleeve found in the area were found .
 The day after the assassination, Billy Harper was taking pictures in the plaza when he found a piece of skull . Harper found the skull about twenty-five feet behind and to the left of the president’s limo at the time of the shot .
 Personnel at Methodist Hospital identified it as a piece from the occipital region at the right rear of the head . The piece was found in the head at the hospital .
 Carr claimed the men got into a Nash Rambler station wagon on Houston Street by the east side of the Depository . Carr said the men were in a Nash station wagon . Carr claimed they got into the station wagon by Houston Street . Carr claims the men had sex with each other
 He said the wagon left in such a hurry one of its doors was still open . He said it left in so a hurry that one of the wagon's doors remained open .
 After reaching ground level, Carr said he saw the same man he had seen earlier in the Depository window . Carr says he saw him in a seventh-story vantage point on the courthouse under construction .
 Carr said the man was “in an extreme hurry and kept looking over his shoulder” as he walked hurriedly eastward on Commerce Street . Carr said he was in an “extreme hurry” when the incident occurred .
 Worrell died in a motorcycle accident on November 9, 1966, at age twenty-three . Worrell can’t be questioned further about what he saw, as he was killed in an accident .
 The FBI came to my house, there were two of them, and they said they heard I witnessed the assassination and I said I did . The FBI visited my home and I told them I saw the assassination, and he said he did .
 Not long after this encounter with the FBI, Carr’s home was raided by more than a dozen Dallas policemen and detectives armed with a search warrant . Carr's home is raided by police officers and detectives .
 Claiming they were looking for ‘stolen articles,’ they ransacked Carr’s home while holding him and his wife at gunpoint . Claiming to be looking for stolen articles, the men held Carr and his family at gun point .
 Carr finally moved to Montana to avoid harassment, but there he found dynamite in his car and was shot at on another occasion . Carr moved there after finding dynamite and being shot at in Montana .
 Carr was attacked by two men after testifying in the Clay Shaw trial in New Orleans . Carr testified in the trial of Clay Shaw, but was attacked in Atlanta, Georgia .
 Carr was stabbed in the back and left arm but managed to fatally shoot one of his assailants . Carr managed to kill one of the attackers before shooting him in the head .
 After turning himself in, Carr was not indicted by an Atlanta grand jury . Carr turned himself in and was not charged with any crimes .
 Carr was not the only assassination witness to later claim they were victims of a pattern of intimidation . Carr was the only witness to say he was intimidated by the government . Carr and other witnesses later said they had been intimidated .
 Acquilla Clemons, who saw two men at the scene of the Tippit slaying, said a man with a gun came to her home and told her to keep quiet . Clemons says she was told a gun would be used in the case . Acquilla says she saw two
 Truly’s wife, Mildred, refused to discuss the assassination even with family members . Mildred refused to talk about the assassination, even with relatives .
 Millican was almost in tears and told him never to talk about the assassination . Millican told him to never talk about his role in JFK's assassination . He said Millican's death was "a terrible mistake"
 Millican said he received an anonymous call threatening not only his life, but the lives of his wife and her sister . Millican says he received the call threatening his life and his wife's .
 "I still don’t understand how they got my name because I was never interviewed by the FBI, the Secret Service, the police or anyone," she says . "And I still don't understand why they got me name," she adds .
 Whispered rumors, anonymous phone calls, and freakish "accidents" created a tangible aura of fear in Dallas in the weeks following the assassination .
 Dealey Plaza witnesses and “Secret Service’s” agents encountered in the aftermath of the assassination .
 Dallas policeman Joe M Smith recounted the most notable incident in Dallas history .
 The Secret Service man displayed Secret Service identification . He was searching through the parked cars .
 The man, this character, produces credentials from his hip pocket which showed him to be Secret Service . The man produces credentials to prove he is Secret Service.
 I immediately accepted that and let him go, so I continued our search around the cars. So, I immediately accept that . So, he immediately accepted . He let go, and we continued to look for him in the car .
 Malcolm Summers was one of the bystanders who followed police up the Grassy Knoll immediately after the shooting . He says he followed police to the Grassy Knoll after the incident . Summers: "I'm not sure what happened"
 We were stopped by a man in a suit and he had an overcoat over his arm . He had a jacket overcoat on his arm, and he was wearing it when he stopped .
 Secret Service says none of their agents on duty that day were anywhere near Dealey Plaza either before or just after the assassination . The Secret Service has asserted that none of its agents were on duty .
 In 1963, Secret Service agents, like their FBI counterparts, wore crew cuts, dark suits, and narrow ties . The Secret Service was joined by the FBI and the FBI .
 He had dirty fingernails, it looked like, and hands that looked like auto mechanic’s hands . But he had dirty fingers and hands, he looked like . He said, "He had dirty hands, it was like ... a mechanic's hands"
 "We just overlooked the thing. And he had produced correct identification and we just overlooked it," she said .
 I should have checked the man closer, but at the time, I didn’t snap on it. ‘At the time’, I shouldn’ve been more careful, but I didn't snap on. I should've been closer to the man,’
 In addition to Smith and Summers, GI Gordon Arnold encountered a man who claimed to be with the Secret Service moments before the assassination . Arnold encountered the man moments before he was killed .
 Arnold said he was walking behind the wooden picket fence on top of the Grassy Knoll when he was approached by a man . Arnold said a man told him he was with the Secret Service and that Amold could not stay behind the fence . Arnold says he was told he was
 Sam Holland was standing with two Dallas policemen and other railroad workers on the Triple Underpass . "A plainclothes detective or FBI agent or something like that" was helping guard the railroad bridge, he says .
 Holland told a Commission attorney, “There were two city policemen and one man in plain-othes.” Holland told the attorney that there were two plain-clothes officers .
 Holland said he heard shots and saw a white puff of smoke come from behind the fence . Holland said after hearing shots, he and others ran to the Grassy Knoll . Holland: "I don't know what happened to me. It's not unusual for a person to be shot
 Police say they found no one behind the picket fence . "Somebody had been standing there for a long period," police chief says . He later said no one was behind the fence .
 Constable Seymour Weitzman rushed behind the picket fence and met men he believed were Secret Service . Weitzmen had rushed behind picket fences to meet the men .
 Warren Commission lawyer Joseph Ball asked Weitzman if there were others with him behind the fence . Warren Commission attorney Joseph Ball said there were no other people with him at the time . Ball: "Weitzman is not the only person to be with us"
 Someone brought him a piece of what he thought to be a firecracker . It turned out to be, I believe, I wouldn’t quote this, but I tured it over to one of the Secret Service men and I told them it should go to the lab because
 I later found out it was supposedly a portion of the President’s skull . ‘It was supposedly part of the skull.’ The president's skull is supposed to be part of his skull,’ he said .
 It is not certain whether the proper authorities ever investigated this particular piece of bone . The bone was found in a shallow grave in the early 1900s .
 Harkness also encountered Secret Service men where none officially were supposed to be . Harknesses encountered the Secret Service agents in the early days of his career .
 Dallas Secret Service agent in charge Forrest V Sorrels was the only agent to return to the scene of the assassination within an hour or so . He was only one of the Secret Service agents who returned to the site of the shooting .
 Harkness's arrival was too late to have been that of one of the men he encountered . He arrived at the scene too late, but was able to locate the men .
 In 1978 Sorrels, then retired, was asked by a Dallas newsman to comment on the stories of bogus Secret Service agents in Dealey Plaza . In 1978 he was asked to comment .
 "I gave all my testimony in Washington and I don’t put out anything else else," she says . "I'm not going to give anything else. I gave it to Washington," she adds .
 Another odd incident occurred within an hour of the assassination in the small town of Ferris, located just south of Dallas .
 Two high school students, Billy V James and Ronnie Witherspoon, witnessed a speeding car being stopped by local police on I-45 . The incident occurred on Interstate 45 near the intersection of Interstate 45 .
 James said police believed the men and allowed them to go on without being ticketed . James said the police believed they would not be ticketed for their actions .
 The identity of the men in the car remains a mystery . No Secret Service agent reported leaving Dallas for New Orleans that day .
 Even the accused assassin apparently had an encounter with one of these bogus agents . Incredibly, even the alleged assassin apparently encountered one of them .
 Secret Service inspector Thomas J Kelley was one of several officials who interrogated Lee Harvey Oswald on the Sunday morning he was shot by Ruby . Kelley was an inspector at the time of the shooting .
 Oswald said he pointed toward the pay phone in the building and that he saw the man actually go to the phone before he left . Oswald says he pointed to the man and said he saw him go to a pay phone . Oswald said the man left the building before he went to the pay
 Oswald thought to have mistaken a news reporter for an agent . In later years, the theory was advanced that Oswald had merely mistaken a reporter for a reporter . Oswald's shooting spree was the first of its kind .
 Kelley’s report dispels this notion, as news reporters merely carried press cards . Kelley: The report says reporters merely carry press cards. Kelley: "It's a good thing that the world is watching"
 The sixth-floor museum of the assassination opened in 1989, a taped tour of the exhibit was narrated by a newsman who claimed to have been the reporter Oswald encountered . Pierce Allman claimed to be Oswald's reporter .
 Two other newsmen, Robert McNeil and Bill Moyers, also said they had encountered Lee Oswald after the assassination .
 Government agents planted the story in their mind by telling them months after the assassination they had encountered the accused assassin . Apparently none of these newsmen had any direct memory of this incident but said government agents planted it in their minds .
 Suspected killer stood around to help someone he believed to be a Secret Service agent, but then stood around and watched him get to the phone . It seems incredible that the suspected killer of the president not only took the time to help him, but also stood around .
 Oswald shot down a Dallas policeman who merely stopped him far from downtown in South Oak Cliff, Texas . It is claimed that less than an hour later, Oswald shot a Dallas police officer .
 Oswald may have been correct in his identification of a Secret Service agent or someone posing as one . Considering the number of people claiming to have encountered agents in Dealey Plaza, it appears that Oswald may well have been right .
 Jean Hill was standing beside her friend Mary Moorman on the south side of Elm Street at the moment Kennedy was killed . Hill says she was standing with Moorman at the time of Kennedy's death .
 Moorman fell to the ground at the sound of the shooting, but Hill remained standing and watchful . Hill stood and watched as the shooting occurred .
 Hill ran across Elm Street and began to run up the Grassy Knoll . Hill saw both a man fire from behind the wooden picket fence and a suspicious man walking west in front of the Depository . Hill says he saw a man running from behind a picket gate .
 Red droplets found to be a snow cone --flavored ice packed in a cup . The snow cone is a popular ice cream flavor .
 Hill continued her run up the Grassy Knoll, but had wasted valuable seconds . After the distraction of the snow cone, Hill continued on her run . Hill said, "I don't want to waste time"
 She looked in vain for either the suspicious man behind the fence or the man she saw by the Depository . She looked for the man in vain . She said she saw a suspicious man in the area .
 I was looking around but I couldn’t see anything, when these two guys came up behind me, when I couldn't see anything . The two men came behind me and I was shocked to see what was happening, he said .
 "We entered from the south side and I think it was the sheriff’s office," says victim . The sheriff's office was behind the scene of the shooting .
 "They took me to a little office upstairs and they wouldn’t let me out of this room," she says . "They wouldn”t let him out of the room. They took him to ... this room. It was a little room upstairs," she adds .
 There was a lot of tension and it was like a lot was focused on this one area, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "A lot of the tension" was "tension and tension"
 The two men that grabbed me never showed me any identification but, after we got to this little room, some men came in who were Secret Service . The men never showed any identification, but they came in with Secret Service, she says .
 "I heard some booming sounds and it startled me and I jumped back on the curb by Mary," she says . "I jumped back by Mary. Then I heard some booms," she said .
 Hill says she was kept in the room for some time before rejoining Mary Moorman in a downstairs office . Hill said she was then kept in a room for a few minutes before being taken back downstairs . Hill: "I was kept there for a time before returning to the office."
 There were other assassination witnesses in the office, such as Charles Brehm and others who signed sheriff's depositions that day .
 A Dallas newspaperman initially believed to be a federal agent took all of the photographs Moorman had taken of the motorcade . Moorman and Hill initially thought the photographer was a federal official .
 Later that day three of the six snapshots were returned, and federal authorities returned the rest . The rest of the photos were returned after several weeks, but only after a few weeks . The photo was returned to the U.S.
 Suspicion would point to the man as being involved, some way or other, in the shooting . The fact that he had a badge that purported him to be Secret Service would make it seem all the more suspicious, he says .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations briefly looked into the matter of men with Secret Service identification but came up with no real solution . The committee looked at the matter briefly but failed to find a solution .
 Committee could not dismiss Officer Smith’s story so lightly . Officer Smith's story was not dismissed by the committee .
 FBI agent James Hosty said Smith may have encountered a treasury agent named Frank Ellsworth . Hosty, who was named in Oswald’s notebook, destroyed Oswald's warning note, told committee .
 If Jean Hill’s account is true, either men posing as federal agents were using offices in the Dallas County building minutes after the assassination or genuine federal agents monitoring the scene .
 Jean Hill identified Jack Ruby as the man she saw in front of the Depository as Jack Ruby . Hill's account seemed unbelievable, but her identification of Ruby was unbelievable .
 Julia Ann Mercer identified a man sitting in a truck just west of the Triple Underpass about an hour before the assassination as Jack Ruby . She identified the man in the truck as Ruby, who was killed that day .
 Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, said authorities showed them photographs of Jack Ruby before Ruby killed Oswald . Both Mercer and Oswald's mother said they were shown photographs of Ruby before his killing .
 She told the Commission that the man “looked very similar” to the photos of Jack Ruby broadcast after the Oswald slaying . She said the man looked very similar to Jack Ruby's photos of him .
 Couch was forced to admit his story was just ‘hearsay’ by Commission lawyers . Couch admitted he had been lying to Wes Wise, who then declined to call Wise to clarify the issue .
 Lucy Lopez was visiting her daughter in Dallas, Texas, when she was killed in 1963 .
 Jack Ruby was seen walking back and forth outside the book depository . Ruby had been in the motorcade at the time of the shooting . Ruby was shot in the head in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 The women were acquainted with Ruby and also knew Oswald, who they recalled had once eaten with them at a nearby restaurant . The women said they knew Ruby and Oswald well enough .
 Lopez told the FBI the women saw Ruby hand Oswald a pistol before walking off but were afraid to talk to the authorities . Lopez said the women were afraid of talking to the police .
 Phil Willis, an amateur photographer and assassination witness, says Jack Ruby may have been in Dealey Plaza . Willis says Ruby's possible presence could have been a factor in the assassination . Willis: Ruby's presence is a possibility .
 The Warren Commission cropped the face of the Ruby figure out of the picture . Willis’s series of assassination photos were published by the Warren Commission . Willis's assassination photos are still available online .
 The Warren Commission established that Ruby was in the offices of the Dallas Morning News at the time of the shooting . Ruby was shot in the head in Dallas, Texas, in the 1980s .
 Ruby arrived at the newspaper between 11 and 11:30m., some thirty minutes after the incident at the Triple Underpass involving Julia Ann Mercer . The Commission stated that Ruby arrived around 11 a.m. on the morning of the incident . Ruby arrived about 30 minutes later .
 Ruby was with newspaper advertising employee Don Campbell until Campbell left for lunch about 12:25m. Ruby was also with Campbell for about an hour . Ruby was found with Campbell at the time of the incident .
 About 12:45m. another advertising employee, John Newnam, reportedly saw Ruby in the same spot Campbell had left him .
 Newnam and other newspaper employees said once word came that Kennedy had been shot, “confusion reigned” in the newspaper offices .
 Ruby sat quietly in the near-empty newspaper office that noontime . Years later employee Wanda Walker still recalled vividly how Ruby sat in the office .
 The other secretary had gone to lunch and the ad salesmen were all gone . "It was just me and Ruby up there. It was just her and Ruby," she says of her job .
 Then some people started coming back in and they said the President had been shot . Then some . people started . coming back into . The President was shot, the President was killed .
 Despite Walker’s certainty that Ruby remained at the newspaper office during the time of the assassination, it is possible that Ruby could have slipped away for a few minutes .
 No one was keeping exact times, and the Dallas Morning News offices are only two short blocks from Dealey Plaza . No one kept exact times for exact times .
 It is conceivable that Ruby could have left the newspaper offices, been in Dealey Plaza, and returned unnoticed within the space of ten or fifteen minutes . Ruby's disappearance is a mystery to the public .
 Newsman Seth Kantor reported meeting and talking with Ruby at Parkland Hospital about 1:30m. on November 22, 1963 . In 1978 book, Who Was Jack Ruby?
 Ruby entered Parkland about 1:30m. carrying some equipment for a television crew . This was supported by radio newsman Roy Stamps, also an acquaintance of Ruby’s .
 Penn Jones published a photograph that appears to show Ruby strolling through the crowd at Parkland Hospital . They failed to mention a photograph published by Penn Jones .
 If Ruby lied and the Warren Commission erred by denying Ruby’s presence at Parkland, it could explain the sudden and unexplained appearance of Exhibit 399 . Exhibit 399 was Exhibit 399, which led to the single-bullet theory . Ruby lied, but it could also explain the
 It is possible that Ruby may have made his way to the scene of the assassination . Ruby was a member of the White House staff at the time .
 Dallas police officer chased a man leaving the area of the Triple Underpass . The incident may play a part in the account of one Dallas officer who chased the man .
 Dallas policeman Tom G Tilson Jr. had taken the day off. The Black Car Chase took place on November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas . Tilson was a Dallas police officer .
 Tilson claims to have chased a black car from the scene of the assassination that day . Tilson says the man in the car bore a striking resemblance to Jack Ruby . The man was in the black car and the man resembled Ruby .
 Tilson and his daughter Judy were going downtown to pick up another daughter who had been watching the presidential motorcade . Tilson: "It's a good day for us to go downtown" Tilson's daughter was watching the motorcade when she got into the car .
 Tilson says he learned from a police radio monitor he had in his car that Kennedy had been shot . Tilson was turning east on Commerce from Industrial just west of the Triple Underpass, he said he learned .
 "Everybody was jumping out of their cars and pulling up on the median strip," says a witness . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning . "It was a very exciting day for everybody," says the witness .
 A limousine sped past a parked car parked on the grass on the north side of Elm Street near the west side of the underpass . The car was seen speeding past the parked car .
 He came down that grassy slope on the west side of the Triple Underpass, on the Elm Street side . It's not the first time he has come down that slope .
 "He threw something in the back seat and went around the front hurriedly and got in the car and took off," he said . "And, he threw something ... and went out hurriedly," he added .
 I was on Commerce Street right there across from , fixing to go under the Triple Underpass going into town . I was right there on Commerce St. across from . The triple underpass is under construction .
 I saw all this and I said, “That doesn’t make sense, everybody running to the scene and one person running from it.” "That doesn't make sense," he said .
 "I speeded up and went through the Triple Underpass up to Houston .. . made a left .. . back on Main .. . and caught up with him because he got caught on a light. So, I speed up . So, he sped up . and went . through the
 I told my daughter to get a pencil and some paper and write down what I tell you. I told her to get some paper . "I told her she should write it down," she said .
 By this time, we had gotten to the toll road [formerly the Dallas-Fort Worth Turnpike, now Interstate 30] going toward Fort Worth . The toll road is now known as Interstate 30 .
 I got the license number and description of the car and I saw what the man looked like. I got a license number . I also got a description of a man in the car . It's not clear what happened to the driver .
 "I got the license number and all and exited off the turnpike and came back and picked up my other daughter down there at Commerce and Houston," she says .
 "I called in the information on the license number and what I had seen. Then I went to a phone and called in a phone," she says . "I went to the phone to get the information," she adds .
 Tilson’s story is corroborated by his daughter Judy Ladner . Photos taken west of the Triple Underpass at the time do not show the black car . Tilson says he was killed in a car crash .
 Dallas police radio logs for the day do not indicate any alert for the car Tilson described described . Police radio logs show no alert for Tilson's description of the car .
 Tilson threw away the scrap of paper with the license number on it . Tilson believed he had done his duty and threw it away .
 It was only much later that he discovered that his information had been ignored . He later discovered that he had been told his information was ignored .
 Tilson was never contacted by either the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Tilson says he was simply simply trying to clear the case, aS Tilson .
 Deputy sheriff Roger Craig thought he saw a suspect flee the scene in a station wagon . Jean Hill was taken by men in suits to the sheriff’s office .
 In 1963, Roger Dean Craig was an ambitious young deputy sheriff who was going places . The Account of Roger Craig is published by CNN.com.com/Heroes .
 Craig Craig had run away from his Wisconsin home at age twelve . Craig had received a high school diploma on his own and had served honorably in the U.S. Army .
 By 1959 he had married and taken a job as a sheriff’s deputy in Dallas, Texas . By 1959, he had been married .
 Craig already had received four promotions within the Dallas County Sheriff’s Department . Craig had been named Officer of the Year by the Dallas Traffic Commission in 1960 .
 Craig's account of his experiences that day caused considerable problems for the official version of the assassination’s aftermath . Craig: "Craig's account was very different than the official account of that day" Craig: Craig's accounts have caused some of the most significant problems in the history of
 Sheriff Bill Decker called plain-othes men, detectives, and warrant men into his office and told them that President Kennedy was coming to Dallas and that the motorcade would come down Main Street . He recalled that about 10:30 that morning, sheriff Bill Decker told plain-ops men,
 Washington advised Decker to stand down and he told his employees to stand out in front of the building but to take no part in the motorcade security . According to Craig, Washington had advised Decker, Washington, stand down .
 Craig said he heard a shot and began running toward Dealey Plaza . Craig said just after the motorcade turned on Elm Street, he heard the shot . Craig: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was an accident"
 Dallas police officer ran up the Grassy Knoll and go behind the picket fence near the railroad yards . He ran down the grassy incline between Main and Elm Street and saw a police officer run .
 Craig notes “complete confusion and hysteria” behind fence . Craig followed, noting ‘complete confusion’ and ‘hysteria’ behind the fence . ‘Confusion and hysteria' behind fence, Craig says .
 He began questioning people when he noticed a woman in her early thirties attempting to drive out of the parking lot . He began to question people after he noticed she was trying to leave the lot .
 The sheriff rented parking space by the month to deputies who worked in the courthouse, except for official vehicles . He, in turn, rented parking spaces to deputies working at the courthouse .
 I had no way of knowing that an officer with whom I had worked for four years was capable of losing a thirty-year-old woman and a three-thousand-pound automobile . I had been with the officer for 4 years, he said .
 To this day, Officer Lewis does not know who she was, where she came from, or what happened to her . Officer Lewis says she is still unsure of her identity .
 Craig questioned people who were standing at the top of the Grassy Knoll, including Mr and Mrs. Craig . Meanwhile, Craig questioned the couple who were seen standing on the Knoll at the time .
 I tried to get across Elm Street to stop the car and talk with subjects, but the traffic was so heavy I could not make it . The traffic was too heavy for me to make it across the road .
 "I reported this incident at once to a Secret Service officer, whose name I do not know," she says . "Then I left this area and went to the building and assisted in the search of the building," she adds .
 The suspect ran down the hill and getting into a car to Captain Fritz and was required to come at once to City Hall . Later that afternoon, I heard that the city had a suspect in custody and I called .
 I went to City Hall and identified the subject they had in custody as being the same person I saw running down this hill and get into the station wagon and leave the scene . The suspect is in custody, police say .
 Craig later described the driver of the station wagon as a “very darkcomplected” man with short, dark hair . Craig said the driver was wearing a white windbreaker-type short jacket with short hair .
 Witnesses told of a dark man or a black man on the sixth floor of the Depository just before Kennedy’s arrival . Recall the witnesses who told of the dark man .
 Craig Craig may have had a brush with one of the bogus Secret Service men . Craig may not have been able to find out what happened to him .
 Craig says he approached the Depository and asked for someone involved in the investigation . A man in a gray suit told him, “I'm with the Secret Service,” and listened to Craig’s report on assassination witnesses . Craig later said he was approached by a man
 "I drove up to Fritz’s office about, oh, after five—about 5:30 or something like that—and—uh—talked to Captain Fritz and told him what I had saw," he says .
 The suspect interrupted him and said, “That station wagon belongs to Mrs. Mrs.” The suspect said he was trying to get his hands on the car .
 Oswald officially acted alone and made his way home that day by bus and taxi . Oswald acted alone, making his way to the end of the day by taking a taxi and bus . This was all explosive testimony .
 It went even further, suggesting that the meeting between Craig and Oswald never occurred . It also suggested that Oswald never met Craig .
 Captain Fritz stated that a deputy sheriff whom he could not identify did ask to see him that afternoon and told him a similar story to Craig’s . Captain Fritz said he was not sure if the deputy sheriff had asked him about the story .
 Fritz did not bring him into his office to identify Oswald but turned him over to Lieutenant Baker for questioning . Fritz turned the man over to Baker, who turned him in to be questioned .
 If Craig saw Oswald that afternoon, he saw him through the glass windows of the office . Craig says he saw Oswald through the windows of his office .
 Craig's claim to have been in Fritz's office came in 1969 with the publication of Dallas police chief Jesse Curry’s assassination file . The truth came out in 1969 when the police chief's assassination file was published .
 In the photograph, well inside the homicide office, stands deputy sheriff Roger Craig . Craig is seen standing in the office well inside a homicide office . Craig was a deputy sheriff in the 1990s .
 Craig also pointed out that Ruth Paine, with whom Oswald’s wife, Marina, was living, indeed owned a light green station wagon . Craig also said he had learned that Paine owned a green green car .
 Support for Craig came in 1992 with the public release of Dallas Police files on the case . Police files were released in 1992 and Craig was found guilty .
 Ruth Paine attempted to visit Marina Oswald, Marina Oswald . Paine was a member of Paine’s family . Oswald was the only person to contact Paine .
 Craig and Arnold Rowland's testimony began to cause problems for Craig within the Sheriff’s Department . His insistence on sticking with his story despite repeated attempts by authorities to have both Rowland and Craig change their testimony caused problems for the department .
 Craig’s credibility began to slip within the department and on July 4, 1967, he was fired by Decker . Craig was fired from the police force in 1967 .
 Some say the cause was laxity and improprieties in his work . Others say it was due to his unyielding position on the assassination .
 In recent years there seems to be growing corroboration for Craig’s story . Craig's story is believed to be the subject of numerous investigations .
 Photo taken in Dealey Plaza minutes after the assassination shows Craig in the exact locations he described . Craig's photo shows him in the same locations as he described the assassination .
 In later years, Roger Craig continued to live with hard luck . Craig was vindicated in the controversy over his testimony over his assassination testimony .
 His wife left him, some say due to pressure over his involvement in the assassination, and his back was injured in a car accident . Some say he was left with a back injury and his wife left for him . His back was hurt in an accident .
 His original account of his experiences began to grow in detail and complexity as he sought acceptance for his story . He began to write about his experiences as a child .
 On May 15, 1975, Roger Craig, then only thirty-nine years old, was killed by a rifle bullet . Craig was shot in the head by a sniper sniper in 1975 .
 Bowers ordered the train stopped by radio by radio and then summoned Dallas police . Bowers then summoned the police to stop the train .
 Officers rousted the trio from the railcar at gunpoint and marched them to the Dallas County Sheriff’s Office . Several officers, including Harkness, rousted them from the train .
 Their route took them past the Depository and across the eastern portion of Dealey Plaza . Their route included the eastern part of Dealy Plaza .
 At least three news photographers took pictures of the three men as they were marched through the plaza under guard . The men were marched under guard by police .
 In later years Colonel L Fletcher Prouty, who as chief of special operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff under President Kennedy acted as liaison with the CIA, stated his immediate superior, General Edward Lansdale, was photographed walking by the tramps in Dealey Plaza and perhaps even passing
 Lansdale was Kennedy’s assistant secretary of defense for special operations . He was the ranking member of Operation Mongoose, the secret war against Castro to include assassinations . Lansdale served as Kennedy's deputy defense secretary for the CIA .
 Prouty’s identification of Lansdale was corroborated in a 1985 letter to Marine Lieutenant General Victor H Kurlak, the special assistant for counterinsurgency activities of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 The three tramps were taken into custody by the sheriff’s office . Once in custody, the tramps officially disappeared .
 Names, information, or fingerprints taken were not seen before 1992 . Although reportedly transferred later to the Dallas police station, they reportedly were never booked .
 Dallas police arrest records for November 22, 1963, compiled for the Warren Commission, were missing . The House Subcommittee on Government Information and Individual Rights discovered in 1975 that Dallas arrest records had been missing .
 Photos show the men had recent haircuts, shined shoes, and old but unsoiled clothing . Although they were labeled “tramps,” photos show they had recent haircuts and clean clothes .
 In 1976 the three tramps drew national attention when comedian/social activist Dick Gregory and others claimed that two of the men were CIA operatives and Watergate conspirators E Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis . In 1976, Dick Gregory claimed that the three men were none other than CIA operatives E
 E Howard Hunt lost a libel court case based on a national article that claimed CIA documents indicated he was in Dallas the day of the assassination . Hunt lost the case in the summer of 1985 . Hunt was sued for libel .
 Other CIA connections include Thomas Vallee, Fred Lee Chrisman, and Daniel Carswell . Other men with CIA connections also have been named .
 In 1991 Lois Gibson, a forensic facial recognition expert with the Houston Police Department, stated publicly that an investigation convinced her the three tramps were Harrelson; Charles Frederick Rogers, also known as Richard Montoya, who was wanted for the 1965 murder of his parents .
 Holt, located in California, gave a convincing, if not provable, account of his role in the assassination . Holt was located in the U.S. State Department of Justice .
 Holt said he delivered phony Secret Service identification to Dallas before the assassination in the company of Harrelson . Holt: He delivered phony ID to Dallas in the days before the shooting .
 Those who might have vouched for Holt's story were either dead or missing . Like so many other instances in the assassination case, Holt's friends and family members were also missing or dead . Holt's friend and family were among those who might be witnesses .
 The Dallas City Council in 1992 decided to open their old police files in which suddenly were found three arrest records naming the three tramps as a Harold Doyle, John Forester Gedney, and Gus W Abrams .
 Abrams was dead but Doyle and Gedney were located in Oregon and Florida . Both said they indeed were arrested in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Abrams was found dead in Dallas .
 The FBI looked into the matter and a report later in 1992 described how the three men had arrived by rail in Dallas early on the morning of the assassination . The FBI investigated the matter .
 The trio was arrested by Dallas police in a gondola car on Irving Street . After showering and receiving fresh clothes and a meal from a mission, they were arrested by police .
 The three were convicted of vagrancy and sentenced to six days in jail only to be released four days later due to overcrowding . According to this report, the three were released due to the overcrowding of jail .
 The trio were pulled out of the train cars only moments after the assassination . The pictures were made long after the 12:30m. shooting .
 The three arrest reports, all written and signed by the same Officer Chambers, gave an arrest time of 4m . The three arrests were made by Chambers, all signed by Chambers .
 There were no jail records or court hearings concerning the trio . Other than the three reports, there were no court records .
 Charles Voyde Harrelson is a convicted hit man with independent evidence to support the idea that he was involved . Plus, the story of the three railroad tramps left no room for the convicted hitman .
 Harrelson had a long history of involvement with Dallas underworld characters linked directly to Jack Ruby . He was twice convicted of murder for hire .
 He had been identified as a suspect in the death of federal judge John Wood of San Antonio, Texas . Wood was shot in an ambush by a highpowered rifle .
 Harrelson held lawmen at bay for six hours . High on cocaine, he held a pistol to his own head and pointed it to his head .
 During this time, according to the arresting officers, he not only confessed to the Judge Wood killing, but also claimed he had participated in the Kennedy assassination . During the time he was arrested, he also claimed to have killed Judge Wood .
 The late Fort Worth graphics expert Jack White, who testified before the House Select Committee on Assassinations, already had noticed the resemblance of Harrelson to the youngest tramp . White's testimony was in response to a hearing before the committee .
 Harrelson was forty-seven years old in 1985, making him twenty-five at the time of the assassination . The actor was twenty-six years old when he was assassinated .
 This corresponds with the age of the youngest tramp, who was thought to have been between twenty-five and thirty years old . The tramp is thought to be between 25 and 30 years old, according to reports .
 In June 1981, Harrelson was interviewed by Chuck Cook, then a reporter for the Dallas Morning News . Cook was a reporter in Dallas, Texas .
 Cook: "I asked about the Kennedy assassination and he got this sly grin on his face" Cook says he asked him about the assassination, "and he got a sly grin" Cook recalls the moment he learned of the assassination .
 Cook said at a later interview he again brought the subject up and that Harrelson became very serious . Cook said the actor was very serious when he asked him about the subject .
 When Cook asked what that story might be, Harrelson would only reply, “November 22, 1963.” The actor would only say that story .
 Cook: "I gave the photos to one of Harrelson’s attorneys and he was supposed to show them to him" Cook added, “Then I gave . The photos to . one of the photos . Cook added that he gave the . photos to a one of
 It was later revealed that Harrelson’s jail conversations were indeed being monitored . The actor's jail phone calls were monitored .
 In an interview with Dallas TV newsman Quin Mathews, Harrelson offered further comments on the Kennedy assassination .
 White became convinced that Harrelson was the youngest of the three tramps . White was convinced that the tramps were the youngest tramps in Hollywood .
 White told this author, “I have done various photographic comparison tests and everything matches . Everything matches . . . The hair, the nose, the ear, the eye, the profile. Everything matches, White said .
 Further evidence suggests Harrelson may have played a role in the assassination . The actor's photograph with that of the youngest tramp was compared to that of a tramp .
 In subsequent interviews, Harrelson admitted to being a close friend of Matthews . Matthews died in 2010 .
 Russell Douglas Matthews is mentioned in the Warren Report as a ‘passing acquaintance’ of Jack Ruby’s . Matthews is obliquely connected with a Ruby-backed jeep sale to Cuba in 1959 . Matthews mentioned as a former Dallas underworld character .
 The committee also documented Matthews’s connections to Dallas gamblers Lewis McWillie, that close friend to the Kirkwoods of Fort Worth, and Benny Binion .
 The committee further developed evidence that Matthews was in contact with associates of Florida crime chieftain Santos Trafficante Jr. and was linked to Texas underworld characters such as Hollis de Lois Green and Jettie Bass .
 Matthews was best man at the wedding of a Dallas underworld figure named George McGann to Beverly Oliver . In a strange sidelight, Matthews was also best man in the wedding .
 The former chief counsel of the House committee, G Robert Blakey, in his book The Plot to Kill the President, reiterated the committee’s findings that Kennedy was assassinated as the result of a conspiracy involving organized crime and more than one gunman was involved .
 If organized crime in Dallas was involved, then the entire spectrum of the Dallas underworld becomes suspect . Ruby’s role would seem to justify that conclusion .
 There is evidence that Harrelson’s contacts went far beyond Dallas police characters . The actor's contacts with Dallas police officers went beyond Dallas officers .
 Indicted along with Harrelson in the plot to kill Judge Wood was the brother of reputed New Orleans crime boss Carlos Marcello, another of the organized crime figures the House Select Committee on Assassinations named as possibly involved .
 There was also involvement with criminals connected to intelligence agencies and even the military .
 The Company, which according to lawmen took its nickname from the CIA, involved more than three hundred persons, many ex-police or ex-military men .
 Federal drug agents said the group imported billions of dollars’ worth of narcotics from Central and South America as well as conducting gunrunning and mercenary operations . The group is accused of operating a gunrunning operation and gunrunning .
 Federal prosecutors claimed The Company owned more than $30 million in assets such as planes, ships, and real estate . During one criminal trial involving members of the group, federal prosecutors said The Company had assets worth millions .
 Florida lawmen investigating this group claimed Harrelson was a member of it . Jimmy Chagra, the man who allegedly hired the man to kill the judge, also once hired The Company for protection .
 A Dallas news reporter and a JFK assassination researcher were scheduled to meet with Harrelson to discuss his role in the Kennedy murder . Oddly enough, the very day that Harrellson was formally charged with the Judge Wood assassination, April 16, 1982, was the day he was scheduled
 Harrelson had been jailed for more than a year and a half, when the formal charges were filed, all visits to him were canceled . The actor was jailed for over a year, a half .
 Harrelson got the Wood contract after telling his brother that he had participated in the JFK assassination . Joe Chagra, brother of Jimmy, testified that he got the contract after he told his brother he had taken part in the assassination .
 Researchers find it remarkable that a man reputed to be a high-ranking mobster by government agents should hire Harrelson on this claim rather than boot him out of his office . Everyone had been told the assassination was caused by only a lone nut .
 Harrelson died in prison in 2007 while serving a life sentence in the Wood assassination . He was never interviewed thoroughly about his role in Dallas . His son's acting career prospered .
 Today, Warren Commission apologists are content to lay the three-tramps controversy aside as a dead issue . Today, they are content with the Warren Commission apology .
 Doyle, Abrams, and Gedney were indeed railroad bums arrested in Dallas that day but in a separate incident . One offered explanation was that Doyle was not the same men photographed being marched through Dealey Plaza .
 If nothing else, the tramp issue illustrates the gaps, omissions, and general lack of meaningful investigation in the Kennedy assassination . Tramp issue shows the gaps and omissions in the JFK assassination .
 The “three tramps” were not the only persons arrested on the day of the assassination . They were not only those arrested on that day, they were also arrested .
 More than a dozen people were taken into custody, and it will forever remain puzzling that few records were kept on any of them . The incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday .
 It seems that once Oswald was captured, the authorities lost interest in anyone else . Oswald's capture was the last of the world's most famous capture .
 There is no record of such an arrest, though this man may have been Larry Florer, who was arrested in the Dal-Tex Building . This man was arrested on the same date in the same building .
 Florer says he tried to use a telephone in the Dal-Tex Building but found it was all busy . Florer said he tried using a telephone at the Dal Tex Building but was unable to use it .
 Another man arrested in the Dal-Tex Building was a Mafia-connected police character with a record of more than thirty arrests and oblique connections to Jack Ruby . Another man was a man with more than 30 arrests .
 Moments after the assassination, elevator operator in Dealey Plaza noticed a man he didn't recognize . The Mafia man was seen in the Dal-Tex Building .
 Braden said he was visiting Dallas on oil business . He was staying at the Cabana Motel, a motor inn built with Teamster money .
 He said he had entered the DalTex Building to use the telephone when he was taken into custody . The suspect said he was using the phone when he entered the building .
 Authorities released Braden three hours later . Authorities have no information to the contrary, authorities say .
 Braden had recently legally changed his name from Eugene Hale Brading . Braden's name is now known as Eugene Hale Braden .
 If authorities had obtained that name on November 22, 1963, there perhaps would have been more interest in the man . If the authorities had gotten that name, perhaps there would be more interest .
 Braden/Brading was a man with a police record stretching back to 1934 for such crimes as burglary, embezzlement, mail fraud, and conspiracy, including several arrests in Dallas . He was arrested in Dallas, Texas .
 Braden had informed his parole officer that he would be in Dallas from November 21 to 25, 1963 . Braden was on parole in California for mail fraud and interstate transportation of stolen property .
 Jack Ruby also was at the Hunt offices about that same time, ostensibly to help a young woman get a job . Jack Ruby was also there to help the young woman .
 Both Braden and Ruby denied these visits, though they have been verified by more than one office worker . Both men have denied the visits .
 Braden, along with ex-convict Morgan Brown, were staying at the Cabana Motel, the same motel Ruby visited the night of November 21 . Braden and Brown were staying in the same hotel as Ruby .
 CBS newsman Peter Noyes documented Braden’s connections to a number of underworld figures, including Meyer Lansky .
 Braden may have been in contact with the New Orleans Mafia-CIA man, David Ferrie, Lee Harvey Oswald’s former Civil Air Patrol leader . Ferrie is the former leader of the Air Force Air Patrol, a former member of the Mafia .
 Braden was in and out of Room 1701 of the Pere Marquette Building in New Orleans, just down the hall from Room 1707, where Ferrie was working for an attorney of Mafia boss Carlos Marcello . Noyes found that in the weeks immediately preceding the assassination
 On November 20 and 21, 1963, Meyers was staying at the Cabana Motel in Dallas . Meyers also was staying in Dallas at the same time .
 Edward Meyers attended the same convention Richard Nixon attended . Meyers was in Dallas to attend the bottlers convention . Richard Nixon also attended the convention .
 Both brothers were visited by Jack Ruby briefly at the Cabana Motel on the night of November 21 . The night Braden was at the same motel the night Jack Ruby visited him .
 The same day Oswald left New Orleans for his reported trip to Mexico City, Ferrie called a number in Chicago that belonged to Meyer’s friend Jean West . No direct connections between this group and Ferrie in New Orleans have been documented .
 Lawrence Meyers called the Chicago number of Jean West, the woman who accompanied him to Dallas . Meyers also called the number of the woman he accompanied him in Dallas that same day .
 Documents suggest possible connections between Jack Ruby and David Ferrie via Meyers/West and Braden . While not conclusive, these documents suggest connections between Ruby and Ferrie . The documents are not conclusive .
 Meyers also told the Warren Commission that his friend Ruby had called him the night before shooting Oswald . Meyers said Ruby called Meyers that night before the shooting .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations tried to sort out the truth of Braden’s visit as well as his contacts, to little avail . The committee was unable to determine Braden's contact with the CIA .
 First Braden said he made the trip to Dallas from California and met with a Dallas parole officer at the moment of the assassination . Braden says he met with the parole officer before the assassination at the time of the shooting .
 If Braden had not notified his parole office that he was leaving California, he would have been in violation of parole and subject to arrest . Braden's parole office said he would be in violation if he left California .
 Braden told the committee he walked as far as the Dal-Tex Building in an effort to find a telephone so he could call his mother and tell her about the assassination . Braden said he walked out of the building to find out what happened to his mother .
 Braden lied and was among the spectators gathered in Dealey Plaza minutes after the shooting . Braden has definitely been identified in photos of him in the photographs . It is now widely accepted that Braden was among those gathered in the crowd .
 A known felon with ties to Mafia figures, New Orleans, and Jack Ruby would be hanging around Dealey Plaza just after Kennedy’s death . This fact alone creates deep suspicion about the immediate Dallas investigation and the subsequent federal investigation .
 In 1976, the National Archives revealed that at least two documents relating to the Braden arrest were missing . This suspicion is heightened in light of the fact that in 1976, two documents related to the arrest of Braden were missing from the archives .
 One of the oddest arrests that day was reported only in a Dallas newspaper . The arrests were made in Dallas .
 The November 22, 1963, edition of the Dallas Times Herald reported that a policeman arrested a man wearing horn-rimmed glasses, a plaid coat, and a raincoat after Depository employees pointed to him from a third-floor window .
 Jack Lawrence's arrest is an odd arrest that deserves more serious study . Another odd arrest, that of Jack Lawrence, also deserves serious consideration .
 Lawrence was arrested late on the afternoon on November 22, 1963, after his actions caused suspicions among his coworkers at Downtown LincolnMercury, located two blocks west of Dealey Plaza .
 Lawrence had obtained a job as a car salesman at the dealership just one month before the assassination with job references from New Orleans that later were found to be phony . Lawrence obtained the job with references to New Orleans from a New Orleans car salesman .
 About thirty minutes after the assassination, he came hustling through the company’s showroom, pale and sweating . However, about thirty minutes later, he returned to the showroom .
 He told coworkers he had been ill that morning and that he had tried to drive the car back to the dealership but had to park it due to the heavy traffic . He said he was ill and had been unable to drive it back to dealership due to traffic .
 Later, employees found the car parked behind the picket fence on top of the Grassy Knoll overlooking Dealey Plaza .
 Lawrence’s activities were so suspicious that employees called police, who picked him up that evening . Lawrence was picked up by police that evening after his activities became suspicious .
 Lawrence reportedly was an expert marksman in the Air Force . Lawrence reportedly left Dallas after being released the next day . Lawrence was reportedly released from Dallas hospital .
 In 1991, researcher Sheldon Inkol detailed Lawrence’s story in The Third Decade, a JFK assassination newsletter . Inkol received a call from Lawrence, whom he described as “intelligent, articulate and good-humored” but irate .
 He denied any role in the assassination and said he parked his ‘loaner’ car at the intersection of Ervay and Main Streets due to traffic and hurried to the car dealership so as not to be late .
 Dallas that day was flooded with all kinds of people who ended up there for some reason . Dallas was flooded that day with people from all over the world .
 Dallas police nabbed Lee Harvey Oswald less than an hour and a half after the assassination . Oswald's arrest was the most prominent arrest of that day .
 Dallas policeman Jefferson Davis Tippit has received less attention than most others . The Dallas police officer was killed in the Kennedy assassination in 1968 .
 Allegedly Tippit was shot down while attempting to arrest Lee Harvey Oswald forty-five minutes after the assassination in Oak Cliff, south of downtown Dallas . Allegedly he was trying to arrest Oswald .
 It was the slaying of a policeman that led to Oswald’s arrest and became a cornerstone of the case . Oswald's arrest led to his arrest and led to the conviction of Oswald's guilt .
 A growing body of evidence suggests that Oswald did not kill Tippit, which, if true, reverses the above argument . If true, perhaps he didn't shoot the president, then perhaps he did not shoot the policeman .
 Tippit, the policeman and the man, is a one-dimensional and insubstantial figure—unknown and unknowable . The policeman and man are one of the characters in the film .
 The Commission was not interested in Tippit’s life, and apparently interested in his death only to the extent that it could be ascribed to Oswald, despite massive defects in the evidence against him . The Commission did not want to look at Tippits' life, but
 The commission failed to mention that Tippit's death occurred only two blocks from Ruby's home . Ruby’s home on Marsalis Street was two blocks away from the site of his death .
 The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald was Oswald's killer . Yet with no real knowledge of Tippit’s background or associations, there were many problems with the evidence . The commission concluded with little or no knowledge of the background of Oswald's associations .
 The chief witness for the Warren Commission was Helen Markham, whose credibility was strained to the breaking point . Markham's credibility, even at the time of the Commission, was strained .
 Markham claimed to have talked for some time with the dying Tippit, yet medical authorities said he was killed instantly . Markham said he talked to the dying man, but authorities said that he was dead instantly .
 She said she saw Tippit's killer talk with the policeman through his patrol car's right-hand window . But pictures taken at the scene show that window was shut, she said .
 She was in hysterics at the time and even left her shoes on top of Tippit's car .
 Witnesses at the scene claim they never saw Markham in the minutes following the shooting . Other witnesses say they did not .
 Cabdriver Scoggins also identified Oswald that day, although he admitted he did not actually witness the shooting . Oswald's view of the fleeing killer was obscured because he ducked down behind his cab as he came by .
 Scoggins and cabdriver William Whaley viewed a Dallas police lineup composed of five “young teenagers” and Oswald . Whaley allegedly drove Oswald home that day that day .
 "Anybody who wasn’t sure could have picked out the right one just for that," he said .
 The suspect had conspicuous bruises and a black eye . Oswald's protestations weren’t enough to guide the witnesses in identifying Oswald .
 Oswald stated during the lineup he was asked his name and place of employment . Oswald said he was not asked his job at the time of his arrest . Oswald was arrested in connection with the shooting . Oswald has been charged with multiple counts of murder .
 On Saturday, Scoggins again identified Oswald, although in his Warren Commission testimony he admitted seeing Oswald’s photograph in a morning paper before viewing the police lineup . On Saturday he said he saw Oswald in a police lineup before viewing a photo .
 His identification of Oswald fell further into disrepute when he told the Commission that after the lineup, an FBI or Secret Service agent showed him several pictures of men, which Scoggins narrowed down to two men .
 Witnesses never asked to view a lineup nor were able to identify Oswald as the killer . Domingo Benavides, the person closest to the killing, was never asked for a lineup . Other witnesses were never able to see a lineup or identify Oswald .
 Acquilla Clemons, a black woman who claimed two men were involved in the Tippit shooting, was ignored by the federal authorities . Several other witnesses were also ignored by federal authorities, including acquittal of two men .
 Clemons claimed she was threatened into silence by a man with a gun . Clemons claims she was never questioned and never questioned by police . She was never charged with any crime .
 She initially stated Tippit's killer was short and stocky with bushy hair . She initially said he was a stocky stocky, stocky short and bushy-haired man . She has since changed her description of the killer .
 His wife called the police, who contacted the Dudley M Hughes ambulance service . The Dudley Hughes Ambulance Service was called to the scene of the incident .
 The call slip carried the Wright’s address and arrived at 1:18m . The ambulance arrived at the address at 1.18m, the ambulance records show .
 It was a gray car, parked on the same side of the street as the police car, but beyond it from me from me . The gray car was parked in the same area of the road as a police car . It was parked near the police officer's car .
 "I’ve seen what came out on television and in the newspaper, but I know that’s not what happened," he says . "I know that I’m not the person I was supposed to be," he adds .
 He failed to identify Oswald as Tippit’s killer until after he himself was shot in the head two months later . Oswald was shot by Oswald in November, Oswald was killed by a single bullet . Oswald, who was killed in November 1918, was shot to death by Oswald
 A suspect was arrested in the Reynolds shooting, but released when a former Jack Ruby stripper named Betty Mooney MacDonald provided an alibi . The suspect was released after a former Ruby Stripper provided a false alibi for the shooting .
 One week after she released the suspect, MacDonald was arrested by Dallas police . She was found hanged in her jail cell .
 Neither the FBI nor the Warren Commission investigated this strange incident . The Warren Commission never investigated the incident .
 There is a significant difference between an automatic, which ejects spent shells onto the ground, and a revolver, which requires deliberate emptying of the weapon . An automatic ejecting of a spent shell ejects it onto the floor .
 Other officers at the scene believed that an automatic weapon was used, based on the distance from Tippit’s body to where the shells were found and what some perceived to be scratches from the ejector on shells .
 If an automatic was used, then Oswald’s revolver cannot be blamed for Tippit's death . Oswald's revolver was not used in the shooting, but an automatic can be blamed .
 Policeman J M Poe received two cartridge cases from witness Domingo Benavides at the scene . Witness said he received cartridges from the scene of the shooting .
 Poe firmly stated that he marked the cases with his initials, “J.M.P.” before turning them over to Dallas crime lab personnel . Poe says he marked cases with initials, "J.m.P." before turning the cases over to the lab .
 The FBI showed Poe the four .38-caliber Special cases used as evidence of Oswald’s guilt by the Warren Commission . The four cases were used in the conclusion that Oswald was responsible for the shooting .
 Poe vacillated to the Warren Commission, saying he couldn’t swear to marking the cases . Poe said he couldn't swear to mark the cases.
 The shell cases allegedly recovered at the scene of the shooting do not match up with the slugs recovered from Tippit’s body . The Warren Commission discovered that shell cases recovered at scene of shooting don’t match up to slugs .
 Of the four cases, two are WinchesterWestern manufacture and two of Remington-Peters, while of the bullets removed from Tippit, only one is Remington . Only one of four cases of bullets removed are Remington, while three are from WinchesterWestern .
 The Warren Commission attempted to explain this anomaly by surmising that perhaps a fifth shot had been fired but not recovered . Most of the witnesses recalled no more than four shots, or perhaps Oswald already had an expended Remington-Peters case in his pistol .
 Oswald would have to own or have access to reloading equipment to reload . This would require Oswald to own a reloading device . Oswald would be the only person in the world to reload ammunition .
 Oswald reportedly was carrying five live Winchester-Western pistol bullets in his pocket in addition to the fully loaded revolver . Oswald's revolver apparently was never tested to determine if it had been fired recently . Oswald was carrying a fully loaded pistol revolver when he was arrested .
 Authorities found no other ammunition or gun-related materials in any of Oswald’s possessions . Oswald's possessions included ammunition, gun-based materials . Oswald was the only person to be found with a gun .
 Hidell can conclusively be traced to Oswald, but it does not prove that the gun was used to kill Tippit . Hidell was killed by Oswald in September of the November 4, 1918, assassination .
 Even the FBI's resources failed to prove that the slugs recovered from Tippit’s body had been fired from Oswald’�s pistol . For instance, the FBI failed to show that slugs found in the body were fired from the pistol .
 FBI officials claimed that since the Oswald revolver had been rechambered to accept .38 Special ammunition, the barrel was oversize for the bullet, causing inconsistent ballistic markings . FBI officials said the barrel had been oversize, causing the bullet to have inconsistent markings .
 “Consecutive bullets fired in the revolver by the FBI could not even be identified with each other under the microscope,” said the Commission in an appendix to its report . The Commission found that the bullets could not be identified .
 Several firearms experts have told this author that similar .38 Special bullets do fit the rifling grooves and can be checked ballistically . This statement is most odd, for several firearms experts tell this author .
 If slugs from Tippit's body cannot be matched to Oswald's revolver, perhaps it is because they did not come from that gun . If the slugs are not matched to the revolver, maybe it's because they didn't come from the gun .
 Eddie Kinsley, the ambulance attendant who drove the mortally wounded Tippit to a hospital, says he's not sure what happened . Adding fuel to this speculation is the statement of Eddie . The ambulance attendant says he was the driver who drove Tippits to the hospital .
 In recent years, Kinsley told newsman Earl Golz of an extraneous bullet . He told the newsman that he had been hit by a bullet .
 Kinsley: "I kicked one of the bullets out of my ambulance that went into his button onto the parking lot of Methodist Hospital" He says he kicked the bullet out of his ambulance, which hit Tippit, onto the hospital parking lot .
 Kinsley told Golz he had never been questioned by the Warren Commission . He said he never faced questions from the commission .
 Oswald’s pistol was originally a Military and Police Smith & Wesson 1905 Model .38-caliber revolver . The revolver was the largest-selling quality revolver ever produced .
 The pistol in question, serial number V510210, was converted to a .38 Special Model . The pistol was converted from a 9-year-old .
 This involved cutting off the barrel from its original five inches to two and a quarter inches . The barrel was cut off from the original five-inch barrel to two-and-a-half inches .
 The Warren Commission said the pistol also was rechambambered to accept .38 Special ammunition . The pistol was slightly smaller in diameter but longer than longer than .38 .
 In the 1980s, Texas researcher and veteran hunter Larry Howard discovered after buying an exact duplicate of Oswald’s .38 revolver that fired in a rechambered .38 Special cartridges bulge noticeably in the center of the weapon .
 The bullet bulges in the middle when fired . Since the rechambering cannot change the diameter of the cylinder, it only makes it longer to accept .38 Special ammo .
 The shells depicted in the Warren Commission volumes and also in a close-up clear photograph in the November 1983 commemorative issue of Life magazine, it appears to everyone that the shell cases do not show any bulging at all .
 Experts say cases could not have been fired from the .38 Special that was supposed to belong to Oswald . This indicates to me and other experts that those cases could . not be fired from Oswald's gun . Experts say the cases are consistent with Oswald's shooting style .
 Until further testing can be done on the cartridge cases in question, this is hardly solid proof of Oswald’s innocence in the Tippit shooting . The cartridge cases are still being tested .
 Oswald's acquittal is a further example of the wide gaps still open in the case against him . Oswald was convicted of murder in 2008 of attempted murder in connection with the murder of two women in 1968 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald disposed of his jacket as he fled the scene of the Tippit killing . Oswald's jacket was found in the area of the murder scene . Oswald was found to have disposed of the jacket in a manner manner .
 Almost every aspect of the jacket story has since come under question . Not really, since almost every aspect has since been under question.
 Oswald, it is known, had only two jackets—one blue and one a lightweight gray zipper jacket . Oswald had only one blue jacket, one a lighter gray . Oswald was known to have worn only one of his two jackets .
 The blue one was later found in the basement lunchroom of the Depository building . The other one was found in a lunchroom in the building's basement .
 At least two witnesses at the scene of Tippit’s slaying reported his killer wore a white jacket . Witnesses said he was wearing the jacket .
 Witness obliges to provide the answers he felt were desired . Witness: "I'm not afraid to say yes" Witness: 'I'm sure you're not afraid'
 Another example is cabdriver William Whaley, who reportedly drove Oswald home from downtown Dallas . Whaley is a former Dallas cab driver who drove Oswald to Dallas .
 Whaley identified the gray jacket as the one Oswald was wearing in his cab . Whaley said it was the one he was wearing when Oswald was shot in the head .
 The Warren Commission said Oswald put on the jacket after arriving at his lodgings . Yet the Warren Commission, based on testimony from Earlene Roberts, Oswald’s landlady, said he put it on .
 The Commission went right on to asserting that Oswald's jacket belonged to Oswald . Despite these problems of identification, the Commission went on to say it was Oswald .
 Westbrook was asked if he found some clothing, but he said he didn't . Westbrook said he was looking for clothing in the area .
 A “white jacket” was found by “279 ” a full fifteen minutes before Westbrook arrived on the scene . According to the Dallas police radio log, a "white jacket" was found 15 minutes before Westbrook arrived .
 The Commission made no effort to determine who really found the jacket, if a jacket was actually found, or if it was a white jacket that only later was transformed into Oswald’s gray jacket . Oswald's gray jacket was found in 1963 .
 A full-scale search by the FBI in both Dallas and New Orleans failed to identify any laundry or dry cleaner using those marks . The FBI says it has never been used in the case .
 Oswald’s wife, Marina, testified she could not recall her husband ever sending his jackets to a cleaning establishment . Marina said she did recall washing them herself . Oswald's wife testified she did not recall washing his jackets herself .
 Further investigation by the FBI turned up no laundry or drycleaning tags on any of Oswald’s other clothing . Oswald was found to have been wearing the same clothes as the original .
 With all this, plus a broken chain of evidence, the jacket cannot be considered evidence of Oswald’s guilt in the killing of Officer Tippit . Oswald's jacket is not evidence of his guilt, but the jacket is evidence of the killing .
 Oswald's lodging is a matter of time and a strange incident at Oswald’s lodging, says historian . Oswald is believed to have been in Oswald's hotel room at the time of his death .
 A Dallas police car pulled up in front of a woman's house and honked at her . She said soon after this, a Dallas police officer pulled up to her house .
 There were two uniformed policemen in the car, most unusual since daytime patrols in that area of the city were limited to one officer . Tippit was found dead in a car crash .
 Tippit was driving car number 10 that day and failed to respond to a dispatcher call at the approximate time of the incident . She could not recall the number of the car precisely, but said she did recall that the first two numbers of a possible three-digit combination were a 1
 Oswald came out of his room and left hurriedly, zipping up a jacket, Roberts said . Roberts said Oswald came from his room after the police car left .
 Roberts said she looked out the window and last saw Oswald standing at a bus stop . She last saw him at a nearby bus stop at Zang Boulevard . Roberts said Oswald was last seen at a local bus stop in the early hours .
 Tippit lay dead next to his patrol car about a mile from Oswald’s North Beckley residence . This, of course, referred to his police officer's death .
 Commission tried to establish that the shooting occurred moments after 1:15m., hardly enough time to allow Oswald to run from his rooming house to the scene of the Tippit slaying at 10th and Patton . Oswald was shot in the head at 1.15m. Oswald was
 The Commission could not locate even one witness who saw Oswald walking or running between his rooming house and the scene of the Tippit slaying . Oswald's rooming home was the site of the murder .
 This time frame becomes stretched to the breaking point when one considers the Tippit witnesses’ testimony . The time frame is stretched to a breaking point in the testimony .
 Even Helen Markham, who was so confused about other matters, was certain of the time because she was on her way to catch her usual 1:12m. bus .
 Bowley, the man who called the police dispatcher, was never called to testify to the Warren Commission . Bowley was the dispatcher at the time of the 911 call . He never testified before the commission .
 The reason may be that Bowley heard shots, saw Tippit’s body lying next to his squad car, and looked at his watch . Bowley may have been looking at his time when he heard shots .
 Other witnesses hid at the sound of the shots, afraid the gunman would turn on them . The gunman is believed to have shot at least one of the victims .
 One of the first to reach Tippit was Domingo Benavides, who told the Warren Commission he was in a truck across the street from the shooting . The Warren Commission will hear testimony from witnesses who saw the shooting at the scene .
 "I thought maybe had lived in there and I didn’t want to get out and rush right up," she says . "I didn't want to rush up and rush up. I thought maybe they had lived there"
 Benavides says he tried to call on the patrol car’s radio but got no answer . After checking on Tippit, he called on the car's radio to check on the missing man .
 Another bystander, Bowley, was successful in raising the police dispatcher and reporting the shooting . Bowley then got in the car and raised the dispatcher and reported the shooting to police .
 Several minutes went by between the time of the shooting and 1:16m., when the police radio log recorded the citizen’s alert . The police log shows the alert was recorded shortly after the shooting .
 Oswald could have traveled on foot from his rooming house to the scene of the shooting . This places the actual shooting closer to Bowley’s time of 1:10m—a time frame that rules out the possibility .
 The conversations of police regarding time sequences, orders, discovery of evidence, and so on were recorded on Dallas police radio recording equipment . Dallas police recorded conversations of conversations with police on time sequences .
 Soon after the assassination, the tapes may have been taken by federal authorities . Federal authorities have access to the most sophisticated audio equipment .
 Any police broadcasts not consistent with the lone-assassin theory could have been edited out and an altered copy returned to Dallas police for conveyance to the Warren Commission .
 James Barger, chief acoustic scientist for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, studied the “original” police tapes . Barger discovered a break in the sixty-cycle hum background tone .
 He found two separate tones on the tape, which could result only from copying . He said he found two tones on tape that could only be heard by copying .
 Federal agents "borrowed" the original police Dictabelt days after the assassination, a radio-room supervisor said . He was under the impression that they took the tapes to a recording studio in Oklahoma .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations supported the Warren Commission’s conclusion that Oswald killed Tippit . However, it obliquely indicated that all is not known about the killing .
 Committee investigators studied information developed by researcher Larry Harris that Tippit may have been killed as the result of personal problems . Committee investigators looked at information that may have led to the death of the legendary singer .
 They also talked with yet another witness who had not been interviewed by the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission also interviewed another witness in the case .
 Jack Ray Tatum told committee investigators that Tippit’s killer, after shooting the officer from the sidewalk, walked toward the patrol car and shot him once in the head at point-blank range . Tatum said the killer then walked to the police car and killed Tipp
 Witnesses say four shots were fired in succession, with no interval between shots . Witnesses say they saw four shots fired in a succession of times . Witness: Four shots fired at one time, four in succession .
 Some students of the Tippit incident now believe that his death may have had no connection with the Kennedy assassination . Some serious students believe that the death may not have had any connection to the JFK assassination .
 Oswald was encountered inside the Texas Theater both before and during the Tippit slaying . The key objection is that he was encountered before and after the killing . Oswald was never seen in the theater before or during the killing of Tippits .
 Officer Tippit's death was the catalyst that set off a flurry of police activity in Oak Cliff resulting in the arrest of Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was arrested on suspicion of involvement in the killing of the officer in Dallas .
 Prior to his arrest, there were at least two incidents in which police were obviously seeking a suspect . Police were obviously looking for a suspect in those incidents .
 Sometime after 1.m., a number of policemen stormed the Oak Cliff branch of the Dallas Public Library . The incident occurred at around 1.30 a.m. ET .
 Police surrounded a church near the scene of the Tippit slaying in the belief that the killer had hidden there . Oswald was arrested shortly before being called to the Texas Theater . Police surrounded the church near where Oswald was killed .
 Police were called to the Texas Theater to search the building . They searched the building, but were unable to enter the building to search .
 The Arrest of Lee Harvey Oswald appears straightforward enough in the official reports, but there are some strange aspects when viewed objectively . The arrest of Oswald appears to be straightforward enough .
 By 1:45m. on November 22, 1963, the president of the United States had been murdered just seventy-five minutes earlier . Officer Tippit had been shot down on an Oak Cliff street on November 23, 1963 .
 Carloads of officers, including one federal agent and an assistant district attorney, converge on the theater .
 The report had been instigated by a shoe store manager named Johnny Brewer . Brewer had instigated the report .
 Brewer was listening to the radio when he learned of the Tippit murder . Brewer was watching the news at the time of the murder when he found out .
 A man ducks into his doorway as a police car goes by, a store owner says . He says he heard police sirens and saw a man duck into his store's front door .
 Brewer watched the man continue up the street to the Texas Theater, where he lost sight of him . Believing this to be suspicious activity, Brewer watched him continue .
 The theater’s ticket seller said she had not sold a ticket to anyone . Moments later, Brewer asked the theater's ticket seller if she had sold anyone a ticket . She said she did not .
 Between the theater’s front doors and a second set of doors, there were stairs leading to the balcony . The theater's front doors were separated from the theater's main entrance . The balcony is located in front of the theater, with a balcony .
 Burroughs convinced that whoever entered had gone up the balcony since no one had passed his concession stand . Burrough's was convinced that the intruder had gone to the balcony .
 Brewer asked the ticket seller to call police while he and Burroughs unsuccessfully looked for the suspicious man . Brewer asked police to look for a suspicious man in the crowd .
 Several policemen went to the theater’s rear exit and waited with drawn guns . Several policemen waited outside the theater's rear exit with guns .
 McDonald had come in the rear door and was standing at the side of the movie screen . McDonald was standing in the theater's rear door . McDonald had just come in .
 "I noticed about 10 to 15 people sitting in the theater [which seated 900] and they were spread out good. I noticed about . 10 to . 15 people sat in the Theater [which . seated 900], "they were spread . out good," he said. "They were
 I went up the aisle and talked to two people sitting about in the middle of the aisle . "I went up and talked about two people ... sitting about the middle," she said . "It was a great experience," she says of the experience .
 "We were no more than a foot from each other when he suddenly stood up and raised both hands," he said . "I'm not sure what happened to me," he added . "We're not going to be able to see each other again," he says .
 "We struggled and fell around the seats for a few seconds and I got my hand on the butt of his pistol," she says . "I got his hand on his pistol. We struggled and . We struggled," she said .
 McDonald's account of Oswald’s gun misfiring was confirmed to the Warren Commission by theater patron John Gibson . McDonald was a theater patron at the time .
 Brewer never mentions speaking to McDonald in his testimony to the Warren Commission . Brewer says McDonald spoke to him, but never mentions it .
 In fact, he said he was standing by a rear exit when he was grabbed by a couple of policemen and asked what he was doing there .
 I didn’t know his name, but I had seen him quite a few times around Oak Cliff . He was seen around the area in Oak Cliff, Texas, in the past .
 Brewer stated he was standing and then on stage with several policemen . Brewer said he was on stage at the time with several police officers . Brewer says he was not on stage when he was arrested .
 Brewer also never mentioned talking to McDonald, whom he said he recognized from around Oak Cliff . Brewer also said he never talked to McDonald before .
 If members of the police department somehow knew that Oswald was an assassination suspect at this time, it is strong evidence that something was going on behind the scenes . The police department knew Oswald was a potential assassination suspect .
 George J Applin was one of only two theater patrons questioned by the Warren Commission . Applin told the Commission he was watching the movie when the lights came on and a policeman with a rifle or shotgun began moving down his aisle . The Commission heard the incident occurred in a theater in the
 Applin said he was sitting in the downstairs middle aisle about six rows from the back when the commotion began . Applin: "I was sitting six rows back when I heard the noise" Applin says he was in the middle aisle at the time .
 He moved down the aisle to ask what was going on, when a policeman passed him moving toward the rear . He moved to the rear of the plane to see what was happening to him .
 There was one guy sitting in the back row right where I was standing at, and I said to him, “Buddy, you’d better move.” But, there is one thing puzzling me .. . and I don’t even know if it has
 Applin told Commission attorney Joseph Ball twice he didn’t know the man, but in 1979, he told a news reporter that two days later, following the Oswald slaying, he recognized the man as Jack Ruby . Applin said in 1979 he didn't know Ruby .
 At the time the Warren Commission had me down there at the Post Office in Dallas to get my statement, I was afraid to give it. "I was afraid of giving it," he says . "I'm afraid of it. It's a very difficult thing to do," he adds
 Oswald pulled the gun and snapped it at head and missed and the darn thing wouldn't fire, he said . Oswald pulled it and missed, and that’s when I tapped him on the shoulder and told him he had better move because those guns were waving around . Oswald then pulled
 More questions have been raised by recent statements of concession stand operator Burroughs .
 Burroughs, who then had become assistant manager at the Texas Theater, reiterated his story of someone slipping in the theater about 1:35m. that day . In a 1987 interview with this author, Burrough's said someone slipped into the theater .
 Burroughs claimed that Oswald entered the theater shortly after 1m. However, he claimed that it could not have been Oswald because he entered shortly before 1m . Oswald was the only person to enter the theater at the time .
 Burroughs said Oswald entered only minutes after the feature started, which was exactly at 1m. Oswald entered at exactly 1m . Oswald entered as soon as the feature was launched, Burroughts said .
 Oswald came to his concession stand and bought popcorn, the man said . Oswald was later arrested by police and identified as Oswald .
 Burroughs said he watched the man enter the ground floor of the theater and sit down next to a pregnant woman . The man sat next to the pregnant woman in the theater, he said .
 About twenty minutes after this, the outside doors opened and Johnny Brewer arrived . Johnny Brewer was waiting for the first time since his arrest .
 The pregnant woman got up and went upstairs, where the ladies’ restroom was located, Burroughs said . Oswald was the man who took the seat at the top of the podium at the White House .
 He said he heard the restroom door close shortly before Dallas police rushed into the theater . He said police rushed to the theater after the shooting .
 Oswald was in the Texas Theater at the time of the Tippit shooting . Jack Davis went on to host Gospel Music Spotlight on a Dallas Christian radio station . The story of Oswald being in the theater is further supported by Jack Davis, who later hosted Gospel music .
 Davis told this author that on the day of the assassination, he went to the Texas Theater to see the war movies . Davis tells this author he went there that day to watch the war films .
 Davis recalls seeing the opening credits of the first film, which occurred a few minutes past the 1m. starting time for the feature movie . The eighteen-year-old Davis found a seat in the right rear section of the theater and recalled seeing opening credits .
 He said he was somewhat startled by a man who squeezed past him and sat down in the seat next to him . The man was startled by the man squeezing past him to sit next to his seat .
 He found it odd that this man would choose the seat adjacent to him in a nine-hundred-seat theater with fewer than twenty patrons in it . The theater was packed with more than 20 patrons .
 Davis said the man didn't say a word but quickly got up and moved across the aisle and took a seat next to another person . Davis said he didn’t say what happened to the man, but he quickly moved across aisle and sat next to him .
 A few minutes later, Davis saw the same man enter the theater from the far side . Davis says he saw the man enter from a far side of the theater . Davis recalls seeing the man in the theater in the early hours .
 The house lights came on and when he walked to the lobby to ask why, he saw policemen running in the front door . Twenty minutes or so after this incident, according to Davis, the house lights turned on . Davis says he saw the police officers running into the lobby .
 I was looking for the manager, but I never got to say anything because of the policemen all came rushing past me. I was trying to find the manager but I didn't say anything . The incident took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 I didn't see what went on in the theater, but I heard some scuffling going on . I did not see what happened in the movie, but heard some fighting going on in theater .
 A few minutes later the police brought out this same man who had sat down next to me . The police were called to arrest the man who sat next to him .
 It's reasonable to suggest that someone besides Oswald lured police to the Texas Theater . Someone besides Oswald may have been impersonating Oswald in Dallas before the assassination .
 Initial police reports stated the suspect was in the theater’s balcony, this information perhaps coming from Burroughs's belief that the man who sneaked in went upstairs . Initial reports said the man sneaked into the theater .
 Oswald’s arrest took place in the balcony, according to arrest report . A separate arrest report also states Oswald was arrested in a balcony . Oswald's arrest was also reported in a separate report .
 There is now evidence that perhaps another man was taken from the rear of the theater . However, there is still evidence that there may have been another man .
 Bernard J Haire owned Bernie’s Hobby House, located two doors east of the Texas Theater on West Jefferson . Haire's Hobby House was located on the corner of West Jefferson, West Jefferson.
 On November 22, 1963, Haire saw the street in front of his business fill up with police cars . Haire was unaware of the assassination, but saw the streets fill with police officers .
 He went outside and saw a crowd gathered at the Texas Theater but could not see what was happening . He went to the theater to check out what happened .
 Haire captured at the rear of the crowd in at least one photograph taken when Oswald was brought from the theater by police . Haire was captured at least once in one photograph of Oswald's capture .
 Haire walked through his store and went into the alley, which he said was also filled with police cars . Haire said police cars were also in the alley where the incident occurred .
 Haire was opposite the rear door when police brought a young white man out of the theater . Haire says he was walking opposite the theater when the incident occurred .
 He said the man was dressed in a pullover shirt and slacks and appeared to be flushed as if having been in a struggle . He said he was flushed and looked like he was in a fight .
 Haire was unable to see whether the man was handcuffed . He was under the impression that he was under arrest . The man was arrested in the early hours of the morning .
 For nearly twenty-five years Haire believed he had witnessed the arrest of Lee Harvey Oswald . Haire thought he had seen him arrest of Oswald .
 Oswald had been handcuffed and brought out the front door of the theater . He was shocked to discover that Oswald was handcuffed . Oswald was arrested and taken from the theater in the morning .
 Someone other than Oswald led police to the Texas Theater and shot Tippit, witness says . Oswald's testimony is eloquent testimony that apparently someone other than him led police .
 Oswald was taken from the Texas Theater shortly before 2m. and driven downtown to police headquarters . Oswald was arrested at 2:30 p.m. in Dallas, Texas, Texas . Oswald had been in the theater at the time of the shooting .
 He was quickly taken to the third-floor office of captain Will Fritz, the crusty chief of the Homicide Bureau, and placed in a Seat in the hallway .
 Detective Guy Rose was already interviewing assassination witnesses . Guy Rose is already interviewing witnesses .
 He told me to get some men together and get out to this address in Irving, Texas . "He told me he told me that he was going to get out of this house," he said .
 With a suspect in custody, the entire complexion of the assassination investigation changed . The suspect was arrested on suspicion of being involved in the assassination .
 Oswald was charged with the murder of Officer Tippit on November 22, 1963 . Oswald was found guilty of both killings but was never charged until November 22 .
 It was well after midnight before midnight before he was reportedly charged with the murder of President Kennedy . The president was killed in 1963 .
 Dallas police and federal authorities quickly lost interest in any information, evidence, or detained suspects that did not fit in with the presumed activities of Lee Harvey Oswald . Dallas police lost interest after the assassination .
 Many puzzling aspects continued to crop up in the aftermath of the assassination . Yet many puzzling aspects still crop up following the assassination of JFK .
 There were reports of a man seen with a rifle near Cobb Stadium . Cobb Stadium is located on the Stemmons Freeway route from downtown to the Trade Mart . The area is located near downtown Atlanta .
 At Redbird Airport, a private field located just south of Dallas, Texas, it was reported that federal officials seized a plane with its engine running the afternoon of the assassination . The plane was placed in a closed hangar under tight security .
 Airport manager says three men talked to him about renting an airplane on November 22 to fly to Mexico . Two days before the assassination, the airport’s manager, Wayne January, said three people talked about renting a plane .
 He said one of the men remained sitting in a car and closely resembled Lee Harvey Oswald . He said the men were sitting in car and resembled Oswald . The men were in a white car and sitting in it .
 None of the stories regarding possible escape plans were properly investigated . None of these stories were ever properly investigated.
 The answer may be found in the 2008 book by James W Douglass, JFK and the Unspeakable . JFK and JFK, JFK, is published by Douglass in 2008 . Douglass: JFK's legacy will be remembered as the "Unspeakable"
 Air Force Sergeant Robert G Vinson was a staff member of the North American Air Defense Command . He hitched a ride on an unmarked military transport plane from Washington to Colorado .
 Vinson soon found himself flying over mid-America all alone in the C-54 transport . Vinson was the first pilot to fly over the U.S. to fly solo .
 The craft suddenly banked left and headed south, arriving some time later in Dallas, Dallas . Vinson was familiar with Dallas, a city with which he was familiar .
 Vinson was surprised when the plane made a sudden landing on a dirt strip near the Trinity River . Two men sat near him without saying a word . The plane landed on the dirt strip and picked up two men without saying anything .
 The taller of the pair, both wearing beige coveralls, appeared to be Latino, perhaps Cuban perhaps . The second man was a nondescript young white male . The taller man appeared to have been Latino, a Cuban perhaps perhaps .
 The transport, which had never turned off its engines, immediately took off in a westerly direction . The transport was never fully stopped and took off again .
 Just after dusk, Vinson said, they landed at Walker Air Force Base at Roswell, New Mexico . Vinson was told the base was closed and under alert .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was the man he saw get on the transport in Dallas, Dallas . He was shocked to realize he was Oswald . Oswald was a member of the Dallas police force .
 Vinson kept quiet even after being assigned to CIA projects, apparently in an effort to keep him under surveillance and control . Vinson did not speak out even after he became involved in CIA projects .
 Vinson's conscience prompted Vinson to tell his story to a TV news reporter in 1993 . He eventually wrote down his account in a book published in 2003 .
 Vinson’s story never garnered national media attention . Needless to say, Vinson's story never received national attention .
 If doubts remained in Dallas as to Oswald’s guilt, there were none in Washington . But if doubts remained, there was none in D.C. Oswald's guilt, Washington.
 FBI Director Hoover called Robert Kennedy less than two hours after the assassination . Police were not even certain of the identity of the man they had in custody . Hoover called Kennedy two hours later .
 Hoover could have had all this information on Oswald at a time when the Dallas authorities were not even certain of their prisoner’s identity . Oswald's capture raises the troubling question of how Hoover had all the information .
 Over the assassination weekend, information on—and evidence against— Oswald continued to pile up . Information on Oswald's whereabouts and evidence against him continues to accumulate .
 Gov. Wade said preliminary reports indicated more than one person was involved in the shooting which brought death to the President and left Gov. Rick Perry . Wade: Preliminary reports indicated there was one person in the incident .
 Wade’s initial claim of evidence of a conspiracy was quickly dropped as official statements began to center more and more on Oswald . Wade's initial claim was dropped after official statements focused on Oswald, but was later dropped .
 With an ever-growing pile of evidence of conspiracy in the assassination, the federal government began to assert itself as early as the afternoon of the assassination .
 This is exactly the situation that occurred in the murder of President John F Kennedy beginning the very day of the assassination . The situation was exactly the same as the assassination of President Kennedy .
 At least one person with access to official federal government documents apparently recognized this significance and took steps to conceal it from public .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry began receiving calls from Washington from Washington . This issue began the evening of November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas .
 The FBI actually had no jurisdiction over . The Secret Service actually had jurisdiction over it . The FBI had no authority over the incident .
 "We finally ... about midnight of Friday night, we agreed to let the FBI have all the evidence," CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "The FBI has the right to have the evidence"
 Curry made it clear that “we felt this was a murder that had been committed in the county, city and county of Dallas, and that we had prior, I mean we had jurisdiction over this.” Curry said .
 Rumors in Dallas have long been that the calls were made by President Lyndon B Johnson’s assistant Cliff Carter . Cliff Carter is believed to have made the calls .
 The journey of this vital evidence was unofficial and never made clear to the public . Yet the journey was unofficial, and was never made public until now .
 The first official word on the transfer of assassination evidence came on Tuesday, November 26, when both Dallas newspapers carried stories announcing that the evidence was to be turned over to federal authorities .
 The News went on to explain, “Curry went before reporters at noon Tuesday to make the announcement,” it said .
 The disclosure came after Curry held several morning conferences with top aides . The disclosure comes after several morning meetings with Curry .
 Fabrication, substitution, elimination, alteration —anything could have been done to the evidence, with no effective chain of custody . Fabrication of evidence could be done to evidence, without effective chain-of-chain custody .
 Unlike in 1963, today the FBI has come under suspicion of poor management of evidence at best and downright falsification of evidence . Today the FBI is under suspicion for poor management and falsifying evidence .
 Frederic Whitehurst served as a supervisory special agent in the FBI’s laboratory from 1986 to 1998 . Whitehurst went public with charges that the lab was involved in ongoing deficiencies ranging from mishandling of evidence to falsifying documents .
 Under Hoover’s iron control, it would have been an easy matter for certain ranking bureau officials to do with the evidence whatever they pleased . Hoover's iron control would have allowed him to do whatever he pleased, Hoover says .
 In 1992, the National Archives made public the “confidential” deposition of FBI fingerprint expert James C Cadigan .
 It may be that there was a very large volume of evidence being examined at the time of the investigation .
 Time was of the essence, and this material, I believe, was retumed to the Dallas Police within two or three days, and it was merely in my opinion a question of time . The material, he said, "was retumed within two to three days"
 "I think in many instances where latent fingerprints are developed they do not desilver it. And I think many instances of latent fingerprints don't desilver," he says .
 During this otherwise unremarkable questioning, Cadigan inadvertently let the cat out of the bag . Cadigan had inadvertently let out the bag. Cadigan said: 'I'm sorry for what I've done.'
 He declared to one and all that the FBI had a “large volume” of assassination evidence only some of which was returned to the Dallas police . Some of the evidence was returned .
 The first big batch of evidence was brought into the laboratory on November 23° of 1963 . This consisted of many, many items . Initially the first big batches of evidence were brought in .
 There were several agent examiners available to evaluate this material . Agent examiners are available for evaluation of material .
 There were supervisory officials, there were representatives from our Internal Security Division, all of whom had an interest in this matter . It was decided they wanted certain items treated for latent fingerprints .
 A virtual posse of ranking FBI officials swarmed over the assassination evidence all day Saturday and Sunday . The FBI says the evidence is "evidence of an assassination"
 Unmonitored access to all the evidence might cause a suspicious mind to question the validity of the evidence later used to establish Oswald’s guilt . Obviously this unpublicized and unmonitored .
 It is doubly suspicious that in Cadigan’s original deposition some unknown person scratched out his statement about being rushed to return the evidence to Dallas and scribbled “delete” in the margin . Cadigan's statement was scratched out in the original deposition .
 Why did someone commit a crime by illegally altering an official government deposition and why did the Warren Commission print an altered version of Cadigan’s statement? Cadigan's statement was an official deposition by the Warren .
 Perhaps a study of the stenographic notes and tapes might reveal other alterations to the testimony of Cadigan and others . Cadigan's testimony may have been altered by the stenographer .
 The assassination had become a federal government matter, and although the assassination evidence is often ambiguous and contradictory, the handling of the evidence clearly points to manipulation .
 Sunday, November 24, 1963, when the prime suspect was fatally shot while handcuffed in the basement of Dallas police headquarters . The prime suspect died in Dallas, Texas, after being shot in the head .
 Johnson moved to block any further investigation of the curious events in Dallas . Five days later, he appointed a ‘blue ribbon’ commission to probe the entire affair .
 It was the beginning of total federal control over the evidence and witnesses in the assassination case . The assassination case was the first of its kind in the country .
 The key to the JFK assassination may be in the aftermath of the crime, the author says . The unfollowed leads, the presence of Secret Service agents in Dealey Plaza where none should have been, the intimidation of witnesses, the destruction of vital evidence .
 Much of the work in the first hours after the assassination centered on the medical evidence, which should have clearly shown how many bullets struck Kennedy and from which direction they came . As with any good investigation dealing with criminal violence, the investigation should have been thorough .
 Dallas police chief Jesse Curry radioed his police dispatcher, “Looks like the president has been hit’s motorcade,” he radioed . Two hospitals in Dallas were hit by gunfire in Dealey Plaza, Dallas .
 Motorcade reaches speeds of nearly eighty miles per hour during four-mile race along Stemmons Freeway to the hospital .
 Parkland Memorial Hospital remains the major public hospital in Dallas County today . Parkland is the largest hospital in the Dallas County .
 Almost every victim of violence is brought to Parkland, Florida, for treatment . Parkland is a safe haven for victims of violence, but it's also a safe place for victims .
 Its emergency room is constantly staffed with doctors and interns well experienced in trauma situations . The hospital's emergency room has a history of trauma .
 President Kennedy could not have asked for more experienced and competent medical attention . President Kennedy's medical team was able to provide the president's care .
 Following his autopsy that evening at the National Naval Medical Center at Bethesda, Maryland, serious and continuing discrepancies in the medical evidence arose . The autopsy was the first of many to be performed by the Navy .
 These discrepancies have provided a source of controversy that continues even today . The discrepancies have led to controversy even today.
 If one assumes there was some sort of conspiracy involved in the assassination, the questions over the medical evidence provide a good starting point for determining its scope .
 There is a small question of the presidential limousine’s arrival at Parkland . But before examining the tangled morass of medical evidence, there is the small question .
 Secret Service driver William Greer testified to the Warren Commission that he did not know the way to Parkland . He testified that he followed sheriff Bill Decker and Chief Curry in the lead car . Greer said he followed the sheriff and chief chief in the car .
 Greer’s story is buttressed by the testimony of two other Secret Service officials, Forrest Sorrels and Winston Lawson . Greer's story has been corroborated by the Secret Service .
 Dallasite Jack Daniel took the film during the time of the House Select Committee on Assassinations . The film was seen widely for the first time by the committee .
 The motorcade exited from the west end of the Triple Underpass and entered Stemmons Freeway, this film clearly shows that both the presidential limousine and the Secret Service backup car had passed Curry’s lead car .
 Either these highly trained agents panicked and forgot what actually happened or they lied about it . The agents were either panicked or were lying .
 Governor Connally regained consciousness long enough to attempt to rise, but fell back into the car in great pain . Connally was pronounced dead at 12:35 a.m. at Parkland Hospital in Texas .
 Secret Service agent Clint Hill removed his suit coat and placed it over the president’s gory head wound to prevent photographs . Hill removed the president's suit coat from his head to prevent photos of the wound .
 Connally was placed in Trauma Room 2, and Secret Service agents Greer, Roy Kellerman, and Winston Lawson pulled the fatally wounded president away from Mrs. Connally's motorcade .
 Kennedy was attended to by no fewer than twelve of Parkland’s doctors, including four surgeons, the chief neurologist, an oral surgeon, and a heart specialist . Kennedy died at the hospital from a heart attack .
 Charles J Carrico, a resident surgeon, was the first doctor to examine Kennedy . He was first to examine him .
 The president was ashen in color, his breathing lacked coordination, there were no voluntary movements, and his eyes were open with pupils dilated, showing no reaction to light .
 A few chest sounds thought to be heartbeats were heard and immediately resuscitation efforts were begun . Resuscitation efforts are now underway for the victim .
 Carrico inserted a cuffed endotracheal tube in a small puncture wound just below Kennedy's Adam’s apple . The doctor inserted the tube into the small wound in the small hole .
 Other doctors began arriving and treating the president; fluids and stimulants were injected and oxygen administered . Other doctors also arrived and treated the president .
 Charles A Crenshaw retired as chairman emeritus of the Department of Surgery at Fort Worth’s Peter Smith Hospital . He was also a director of the Tarrant County Hospital District and a surgeon at the hospital .
 In 1992, he was vilified by the Journal of the American Medical Association after publicly stating that Kennedy was shot from the front and that the Dallas doctors had engaged in a “conspiracy of silence” concerning his wounds .
 The publication suggested that Crenshaw was never in Parkland’s emergency room . The publication even suggested that he never was in the hospital .
 My observations contradicted the ‘official’ version of the assassination, as reported in the Warren Report . My observations contradict the “official” version of this story, which was published in Warren Report.
 I had anticipated criticism from some, but I never expected the vicious attack from my medical colleagues . I'm not surprised by the vicious attacks from medical colleagues, he says . He says: "I'm not prepared to accept that I'm going to have to defend myself"
 JAMA gave a retraction and financial settlement when it was pointed out that five doctors and nurses had mentioned Crenshaw’s presence in their Warren Commission testimony .
 Crenshaw also raised official ire when he said he received a call from Lyndon Johnson while trying to save the life of Lee Harvey Oswald . The call came from Johnson while he tried to save Oswald's life .
 The call came in and said ‘hold the line for the President,’ and for a second I was still thinking Kennedy, a hospital operator recalls . Phyllis Bartlett, chief telephone operator for Parkland Hospital, recalls the call .
 'It was just a matter of a second, that’s when he came on in a loud voice and said, ‘This is Lyndon Johnson. This is Lyndon . Johnson’ The president's first presidential election was held in 1964 .
 Crenshaw said the incident confounded logic and bothered him for the rest of his life . He said he has been haunted by the incident since it happened .
 Parkland doctors worked feverishly to save Gov. Connally . Connally was rushed to a critical condition at the hospital .
 A large sucking chest wound caused the governor's greatest concern for the governor . The governor's chest wound was the greatest concern .
 A bullet shattered the fifth rib on his right side, sending bits of bone and metal tearing through his chest, collapsing one lung . A bullet had shattered his fifth rib and shattered one of his lungs .
 His right wrist had been broken, the bullet entering from the top and exiting from the bottom of his wrist . The bullet entered the top of his right wrist and exited from bottom of the wrist . He was hit by a bullet that entered his wrist from top and left the top .
 Lyndon Johnson also had entered Parkland, but was kept secluded in a room near where efforts were being made to revive the president . Vice president Lyndon Johnson was in Parkland at the time .
 About 1:20m., presidential aide Kenneth O’Donnell informed Johnson that Kennedy was dead . Kennedy's death was the first time the president had been informed of his death by a presidential aide .
 O’Donnell advised Johnson to return to Washington as soon as possible, according to Warren Report .
 Mrs. Kennedy refused to leave without her husband’s body and Mrs. Johnson refused to . Kennedy refused her husband's body and Johnson .
 It was finally decided to leave immediately and to return on Air Force One because the presidential plane had better communication equipment . It was decided to return to the White House because the plane has better communications equipment .
 Two sets of doctors viewed the body at different times and descriptions of wounds differed so widely that controversy remains to this day . The decision created one of the assassination’s most enduring problems—with the president’�s autopsy performed at Bethesda .
 The president’s death was legally a Texas homicide and by law, the body could not be removed until after an autopsy or a coroner’‘Ruling’ would have involved further medical investigation, which would have required further medical examination . The body was not removed until
 Earl Rose tried to block the efforts of Secret Service agents trying to remove Kennedy’s body from Parkland . Earl Rose died in 2012 at age eighty-five .
 Rose was forced to step aside after some shouting, including profanities and, by some accounts, even drawn weapons . Rose was escorted from the stage by police after some of the shouting was heard .
 In 2003, Rose told the Associated Press he and his staff should have conducted an examination as required by law . Rose said in 2003 that he should have done the exam as required .
 Despite the protest of Texas officials, a coffin was ordered from O’Neal Funeral Home and Kennedy’s body was whisked away from Parkland Hospital .
 Ambulance driver Aubrey Rike told this author that even though his ambulance was on standby at Parkland, his boss, Vernon O’Neal, arrived with an expensive bronze casket into which Kennedy’s body was placed .
 Government agents then drove off in the newly arrived ambulance leaving both O’Neal and Rike standing at the hospital’s loading dock .
 Both men then climbed into Rike’s ambulance and trailed the first ambulance to Love Field . The two men then trailed the other ambulance to the Love Field airport .
 A hospital worker discovered a bullet in a hallway after Kennedy’s body left Parkland . The bullet was found in the hallway of a second-floor operating room . It was to have long-reaching effects on the official theory of the assassination .
 Senior engineer Darrell C Tomlinson was asked to manually operate an elevator that connected the ground-floor emergency room to the second-floor operating theaters .
 It was Tomlinson who found an intact bullet, which became the key exhibit of the Warren Commission . The bullet became a key exhibit at the Warren .
 Despite efforts by Warren Commission attorney Arlen Specter to confuse the issue during testimony, Tomlinson was remarkably clear on what had happened that day . Despite efforts to confuse Specter, the Warren Commission chairman was remarkably consistent with his testimony .
 One hospital stretcher containing two rolled-up bloody sheets, some surgical instruments, and some sterile packs was sitting against a wall near the elevator . Tomlinson stated that one hospital . stretcher contained two rolled up bloody sheets and surgical instruments .
 No effort apparently was made by the Commission to determine the true origin of this stretcher . The Commission did not make an effort to find out the origin .
 Kennedy’s body remained on his stretcher until the Dallas casket arrived about 1:40m. But this is extremely doubtful since this is unlikely to happen . Kennedy's body remains on a stretcher for the entire time .
 The stretcher was stripped of sheets and rolled across the hall to Trauma Room 2 . At this time, his body was placed in the casket and the stretcher rolled across a hall .
 Two nurses reported placing Kennedy’s empty stretcher in Trauma Room 2 . Since Tomlinson claimed to have discovered a bullet at this time, it is virtually impossible to believe that the hallway stretcher carried the president .
 Ronald Fuller, 2, entered the Parkland emergency room at 12:54m. with a bad cut on the chin . Ronald Fuller was treated with a stretcher at the time of the incident at 12.54m .
 I was watching the President’s parade on television when they announced he had been shot . I was . watching the . President's parade on TV when they . announced he was shot . CNN.com's John Sutter reports .
 I knocked over a bottle of soda pop I was drinking and it broke into pieces. I knocked it over and it was broken into pieces . I knocked the bottle over, and it smashed into pieces, the author says .
 Fuller finally reached the Parkland emergency room and handed her son to medical personnel . Fuller's son was taken to the emergency room, where he was treated for minor injuries .
 Fuller child was briefly placed on a stretcher and his cut was treated with sutures and gauze packs, which could have been left behind on the cart .
 The child originally was placed on a stretcher in the same hallway leading to Trauma Rooms 1 and 2 . It is most likely this stretcher is the stretcher on which the bullet was found .
 Tomlinson said a second stretcher was on the elevator, perhaps the one that carried Connally to the second-floor operating room . He pulled it out of the elevator and placed it near the first stretcher .
 Specter designated the stretcher pulled off the elevator as stretcher A and stretcher B . After making a few trips in the elevator, Tomlinson said one of the stretchers was moved away from the wall so he could enter a men's restroom .
 Specter tried to shake Tomlinson’s recollections later in his testimony . Specter: “I’m not sure what I’ve done with the case.”
 I’m not going to tell you something I can’t lay down and sleep at night with either, either . "I’ll tell you all I can, and I'm not telling you anything I can't lay down with either," he says .
 From Tomlinson’s testimony, it appears more than likely that the stretcher holding the bullet did not belong to Connally .
 This would be evidence of planted evidence, which would mean an accomplice to the assassination . But this would mean a conspiracy, and it would be a cover-up .
 The Warren commissioners concluded that the intact bullet came from Connally’s stretcher . Therefore, the Warren commissioners acknowledged Tomlinson's uncertainty .
 The single-bullet theory of the assassination was the foundation of the theory . It was this bulle-—Commission Exhibit 399—that became the foundation for the theory, he says .
 Wright was the father-in-law of Dallas police sergeant Patrick T Dean, the officer blamed by the Warren Commission for allowing Jack Ruby into the police department basement just before Oswald’s slaying .
 Kennedy was being treated at Parkland Hospital when he was seriously injured . Kennedy's nurse was on duty at the time of the attack .
 Security officer picked a pointed-tip bullet shape as more nearly like the bullet found at Parkland . In a 1966 interview with author Josiah Thompson, Wright said the shape was similar to the shape of the bullet .
 President Obama rejected round-nose bullet shapes similar to Commission Exhibit 399 . He rejected round nosed bullet shapes .
 Tomlinson selected a pointed shape as resembling the bullet he found . The shape of the bullet is similar to the shape of a bullet found in the body .
 The whole bullet matter becomes even more clouded when the possibility of substitution and planting is considered . The possibility of replacing the bullet with planting is also considered .
 The hallway in which both stretchers A and B were left unattended was a public corridor . Neither stretcher belonged to either Kennedy or Connally .
 Jack Ruby was at Parkland Hospital while Kennedy’s body was still there . Adding to this suspicion is the presence of Jack Ruby at the hospital . Jack Ruby is believed to be responsible for Kennedy's death .
 Seth Kantor told the Warren Commission that he encountered Jack Ruby at Parkland Hospital about the time Kennedy’s death was announced .
 He said he spoke to Ruby at 1:30m. and recalled that Ruby asked if he should close his club out of respect for the slain president . Ruby asked him to close the club as a mark of respect, he said .
 When asked about his presence at Parkland, Ruby denied ever being there, and the Commission chose to believe him . The Commission concluded that Kantor must have been mistaken for Ruby .
 Kantor’s account of meeting with Ruby supported by FBI interviews with a Dallas woman . Kantor's account was overlooked by the Commission of the Assassination Commission .
 Wilma Tice was home when she heard the news of the Dealey Plaza shooting . She was home at the time of the shooting . Tice says she was shocked to learn of the tragedy .
 She drove to Parkland Hospital, arriving about 1:30m., and joined the throng of bystanders awaiting word on the president’s condition .
 Some months later, she told the FBI she stood beside a heavily built man in a dark suit who was hitting his hat against his leg . The FBI says she told them she saw the man hitting the hat against her leg . She said she saw him hit the hat, hitting it against
 The man named Jack offered to donate a kidney to John Connally . She said the two men had a brief conversation during which the man offered a kidney .
 Tice was astounded to see the man called Jack on television identified as Jack Ruby, the slayer of Oswald . Two days later Tice saw Ruby on television identify as Ruby . Ruby was the assassin who killed Oswald in the assassination .
 She assumed that authorities knew about his presence at Parkland and did not notify anyone until late in the spring of 1964 . However, she assumed that the authorities knew .
 Tice had telephoned Ruby’s sister, Eva Grant, to express her condolences when she mentioned her encounter at Parkland and learned that Ruby had denied being there . Ruby was sentenced to death in prison .
 On April 12, 1964, she received a call from a man claiming to be a newspaper reporter . The call was made to her by a man who said he was a reporter .
 He asked about her Parkland encounter and then advised her not to talk about the incident . He then told her to stay away from talking about it .
 On July 19, Tice received a letter asking her to testify for the Warren Commission . Tice says she has been asked to testify before the commission .
 On July 22, Tice called police because someone tried to break into her home while her husband was away . She called police after someone broke in to her home .
 She had a 14-year-old niece answer the phone and the caller would hang up . This incident was followed by other phone calls, but she had the niece answer it .
 The account of Ruby at Parkland has been further supported in recent years by former radio newsman Roy Stamps, who said he had met Ruby on about forty-five occasions before November 22, 1963 . Stamps: "I had met him on about 40-five times before November
 Ruby was carrying some television equipment and trailing behind a TV crew, police say . Ruby was seen carrying some equipment and trailed behind a television crew . Ruby is believed to have been carrying some TV equipment .
 The stretcher sat unattended in the hallway for some time . Of course, virtually anyone could have planted the bullet, since the stretcher was unattended .
 The most curious discovery of all took place when they rolled me off the stretcher and onto the examining table. But the most interesting discovery was that he was rolled onto the table .
 A metal object fell to the floor, with a click no louder than a wedding band . It was a metal object that fell from the floor of the room .
 What happened in the hospital demonstrated how easily a bullet could have been swept aside and lost . What happened to the hospital was an example of how quickly a bullet can be swept aside, lost .
 According to several reports, it was given by the nurse to Texas highway patrolman Bobby Nolan, who said he turned it over to Captain Will Fritz . The nurse gave it to a highway patrol officer, according to reports .
 If bullets were switched, it could have been done only while in the hands of authorities— a most ominous suspicion . Of course, if bullets were turned on, it would have been in hands of police .
 Lyndon B Johnson sworn in as thirty-sixth president of the United States by federal judge Sarah T Hughes .
 On the plane flight back to Washington, it seems the original destination for Kennedy’s body was to have been Walter Reed Army Hospital . Walter Reed was long the major military medical facility for Washington .
 We do want an ambulance and a ground return from Andrews to Walter Reed, and we want the regular post-mortem that has to be done by law under guard performed at Walter Reed . We do not want the ambulance and ground return to Andrews, but we want a regular post mortem
 During the course of the flight , determination of the immediate action on arrival in Washington was made to assure complete compliance with Mrs. Obama's decision .
 "I spoke to her while kneeling on the floor so I would be at the level of her face rather than leaning forward," he says . "I expressed complete desire of all of us and especially of myself to comply with her wishes," he adds .
 She questioned why and I stated it must be determined, if possible, the type of bullet used and compare this with future material found . She said it must also be determined if possible to compare the bullet used with future found .
 I stated frankly that I had no preference that it could be any hospital, but that I did feel that, if possible, it should be a military hospital for security measures . I said I did not want to say that any hospital could be a hospital but wanted to have it in a
 The question was answered by her stating that she wanted the President taken to Bethesda Naval Hospital . The President was taken to the hospital .
 Bethesda was not prepared for this most important autopsy . It certainly appears that Bethesda wasn't prepared to prepare for this autopsy .
 The three military physicians who performed Kennedy’s autopsy were clinical pathologists with little experience in gunshot wounds . Kennedy's autopsy was performed by military pathologists who had little experience .
 Navy Commander James J Humes and Navy Commander J Thornton Boswell had practical, firsthand experience with bullet wounds . Neither Navy Commander Humes nor Navy Commander Boswell knew of bullet wounds.
 Army Lieutenant Colonel Pierre Finck said he was hampered in his autopsy procedures by officials in the room . Finck did have some such experience, but he later said he had to be hampered by the officials .
 The military autopsy doctors apparently were surrounded by both military and civilian superiors who directed much of the autopsy . Some of this direction is contrary to normal autopsy procedures .
 You must understand that in those circumstances, there were law-enforcement officers, military people with various ranks, and you have to coordinate the operation according to directions . You must also understand that there were also law enforcement officers .
 It is a small autopsy room, and when you are called in circumstances like that to look at the wound of the President of the United States who is dead, you don't look around too much to ask people for their names and take notes on who they are .
 The room was crowded with military and civilian personnel and federal agents, Secret Service agents, FBI agents, for part of the autopsy . "I cannot give you a precise breakdown as regards the attendance of the people in that autopsy room"
 New Orleans executive assistant district attorney Alvin Oser pressed Finck on why, as an autopsy pathologist, he had not tracked the bullet wound through Kennedy’s body to determine its exact path . Finck: "I'm not sure why I didn't try to track the bullet
 Finck, the only member of the autopsy team, asked to examine Kennedy’s clothing . Finck was the only person in the team who was a member of an American Academy of Forensic Sciences . He was asked to look at Kennedy's clothing .
 Autopsy doctors were ordered not to talk about what they had seen in the autopsy room . Further, the autopsy doctors were told not to discuss what they'd seen .
 At the end of the autopsy, the surgeon general of the Navy said not to discuss the case . "When you are a lieutenant colonel in the Army you just follow orders," he says .
 Humes appeared before a medical panel gathered by the House Select Committee on Assassination . Humes was invited to testify before the panel .
 Humes was asked about the adrenal glands by committee medical panel member Dr. Dr. John Humes . The adrenal gland can be detected by studying the adrenals .
 "I’d only comment for you that I have strong personal reasons and certain other obligations that suggest to me that it might not be preferable," he says .
 One bullet entered the rear of Kennedy’s head and exited from the top of his skull, Humes says . Another bullet entered his back and apparently worked its way out during cardiac massage at Parkland .
 Autopsy concerned with only two of Kennedy’s wounds . Autopsy began at 8:15m. the evening of the assassination .
 Humes studied the head wound and found about forty pieces of bullet metal . Humes found a bullet had fragmented while passing through the skull area . The wound was found in the skull .
 A high-velocity rifle bullet entered the rear of the skull, fragmented and exited through the top of it . He concluded that the bullet had entered the back of the head, fragmented, and then exited through top of skull .
 The Dallas doctors said they never saw this wound because they never examined Kennedy’s back . Kennedy's back was never examined by Dallas doctors . Kennedy died in 1963 in Dallas, Texas .
 Autopsy doctors studied this wound carefully and wrote clear records of it . However, autopsy doctors studied the wound carefully .
 Humes, a wound is depicted in Kennedy’s back between the shoulder blades . Humes depicts Kennedy's back as a wound in his back . Kennedy died of a gunshot wound .
 The third thoracic vertebra is located almost midway between the shoulder blades . It is located in the middle of the shoulder blade area .
 Two FBI agents, Francis X O’Neill Jr. and James W Sibert, were ordered to attend the autopsy and make a report . The autopsy will take place in New York City, New Jersey .
 The Warren Commission kept the Warren Commission's report classified for several years . Their report: "During the latter stages of this autopsy, Dr. John Sutter died of natural causes."
 This description of the wound was supported by the testimony of Secret Service agents and bullet holes in Kennedy’s clothing . This description on the wound's location is supported by . the . testimony of . Secret . Service agents .
 If the president’s wound was between the shoulder blades, this was lower than the position of the neck wound, making for an upward trajectory . Shots fired from sixty feet above and behind the president are not consistent with shots fired from 60 feet above, behind .
 The Commission simply reported the back wound as located five and a half inches higher than determined by the evidence . The solution to this dilemma was simple, the Commission said .
 A bullet had entered the base of the back of the neck slightly to the right of the spine . They reported, “A bullet had . entered . The base . of the . back of . the neck . was struck by a bullet .
 When questioned about the location of the wound as marked on the autopsy face sheet, Dr. Dr. John Sutter said he did not remember the wound . Dr. Sutter later said he was not sure where the wound was .
 Humes was quoted as saying the back wound was higher than the throat wound . But he had marked it well below the neck wound, according to reports .
 The issue of the autopsy diagram was resolved in 1975 when researcher Harold Weisberg obtained the original autopsy face sheet through a Freedom of Information Act suit .
 Researchers discovered that the original diagram had been marked ‘verified’ by Kennedy’s personal physician, Dr. Dr. Robert Kennedy .
 This verification of the autopsy sheet had been eliminated in copies of the document presented by the Warren Commission to the public . This verification was eliminated in . copies of . the . Warren Commission presented .
 Burkley was the only medical authority who rode in the motorcade, viewed Kennedy’s body at Parkland Hospital, and was present at the autopsy . He was never called to testify to the Commission of Justice .
 In 1982, Burkley reportedly told author Henry Hurt that he believed Kennedy’s death was the result of a conspiracy . Burkley also reportedly told Hurt he believed JFK's death was a conspiracy, according to Hurt .
 Ford explained to the Associated Press, “My changes had nothing to do with a conspiracy theory.” Ford explained that his changes were “nothing” to the conspiracy theory . Ford said that the changes were not related to conspiracy theories .
 No complete bullet of any size could be located in the brain area . No bullet could be found in the back or any other area of the body as determined by total body X rays and inspection revealing there was no point of exit, the individuals performing the autopsy were at a loss .
 Commander J Thornton Boswell, Humes’s assistant, told author Josiah Thompson that all three doctors probed the back wound with their fingers but could not penetrate past an inch or so . Humes's assistant said all three medics probed their fingers with fingers .
 A thin metal probe also was used but no bullet track could be located . According to Boswell, the bullet track was not found .
 Agents Sibert and O’Neill failed to find any bullet and called the FBI laboratory . They were informed of the bullet that had been found on a stretcher at Parkland Hospital .
 Humes learned that the autopsy doctors had completely missed one of the president’s wounds . Humes says the wound caused problems, but they were nothing compared to the problems that arose .
 President's body was already prepared for burial and lying in state at the White House . On the day after the autopsy, Humes contacted the medical officials in Dallas, Texas, for help .
 He was shocked to learn that they had observed a bullet wound in Kennedy’s throat . Kennedy was shot in the throat by a sniper sniper .
 Autopsy doctors noticed opening in throat but assumed it was made at Parkland to facilitate a tracheal tube . Doctors had assumed it had been made at the hospital to facilitate the tube .
 Perry at Parkland described the throat wound as a small hole about three to five millimeters—or about one-fifth of an inch—in diameter that had the appearance of an entrance wound . Perry said the wound was a small wound about 3 to 5 millimeters in diameter .
 Perry said he made a surgical incision laterally across this hole to facilitate a tracheotomy, but did not obliterate the bullet wound . Perry: "I made an incision in this hole laterally ... but not obliterated the wound"
 By the time the autopsy doctors examined Kennedy’s throat, this wound had elongated to almost three inches . It was such a gash that they didn’t realize it obliterated a wound from the assassination .
 Doctors said Kennedy had a large blasted hole in the right rear portion of his head . This is not the same as the gaping wound in the top portion of the skull as reported by the autopsies . All of the Dallas doctors said Kennedy's head was blasted .
 No one lied—thus indicating the wounds were altered between the time they were seen in Dallas and the autopsy . The wounds were changed between the appearance of the wounds in Dallas, the autopsy, and the time of the autopsy in Dallas .
 It was also apparent that a tracheotomy had been performed, as well as surgery of the head area, namely, in the top of the skull .
 David Lifton investigated the oddities of a man's life . He reached some startling conclusions in a new book . Lifton's book was published by the University of New York .
 David Lifton was the first person to interview medical personnel in Dallas and at Bethesda Naval Medical Center . Lifton is a former NASA computer engineer who researched the assassination for more than fifteen years .
 Lifton reported discrepancies in the descriptions of Kennedy’s wounds . Lifton also reported that there were discrepancies in reports of how the body was transported . In his best-selling 1980 book, Best Evidence, Lifton wrote about the discrepancies .
 Kennedy's body was wrapped in a sheet in Dallas and placed in an expensive bronze ceremonial casket for shipment to Washington . It has been well documented how Kennedy’s body .
 Kennedy’s body was removed from a black zippered body bag that was inside a cheap military-style shipping casket . The casket is similar to those used to transport bodies back from Vietnam . Lifton found technicians who said they removed Kennedy from the bag .
 Paul K O’Connor was studying to be a medical technician when Kennedy’s body arrived . He was working in the laboratory at the time of the death .
 O’Connor’s recollection was confirmed by others, including Captain John Stover, the commanding officer of Bethesda, Maryland . Stover: "I’m not sure what happened to me, but I’ve got a lot of respect for the Marines," he
 Bethesda X-ray technician Jerrol F Custer talks about his work in the U.S. Navy . Custer is the first person to be interviewed by the Navy .
 He said he had already made X-ray photographs of Kennedy’s body, had gone to an upper floor to process them . He was returning to the morgue area of the hospital when he encountered a bloodstained Jacqueline Kennedy .
 Outside in an ambulance was the bronze Dallas casket supposedly containing the president’s body . Outside the casket was a bronze Dallas bronze casket . The casket is supposed to contain the president's body .
 By 1992, not only Custer and Floyd Riebe, who took autopsy photographs, were disclaiming that evidence in the National Archives . Custer's autopsy photographs were disclaimed in 1992 .
 X-rays presented by AMA showed a hole on the right side of Kennedy’s face indicating that portion was destroyed . Custer stated that X-ray presented by the AMA showed that a hole was in Kennedy's face . In a news conference called to rebut articles published by
 He added that later a Navy admiral threatened him with prison if he spoke out regarding the autopsy . He said he was threatened with prison for speaking out about the autopsy of the victim .
 As usual, this bombshell testimony from the technicians who actually took JFK’s X-rays and photographs received scant attention from the national mass media . JFK's X-ray and photographs were taken by technicians who took the photographs .
 The alternative belief was that Kennedy’s body was altered . Since it was unbelievable that the doctors at both Parkland and Bethesda lied about their observations, the alternative belief may have been that Kennedy's body had been altered .
 Lifton discovered a brief time period during the swearing-in ceremonies for Lyndon Johnson aboard Air Force One when everyone gathered forward, leaving Kennedy’s body unattended . Lifton found the body of Kennedy during the ceremony .
 JFK's body was taken from the bronze Dallas casket, placed in a military body bag, and stowed elsewhere in the plane . It was during this time that JFK’s body was believed to have been stowed in the military bag .
 At Andrews Air Force Base, Kennedy’s body was taken off the right side of Air Force One . The helicopter immediately took off while the news media and officials concentrated on Mrs. Kennedy .
 Kennedy and the Dallas casket were unloaded from the left side of the plane . Kennedy's casket was the last of the Kennedy family to leave the plane in Dallas .
 Someone altered the President’s wounds to conform to the shots-from-behind thesis . Then the body was wrapped in a sheet and placed on the Bethesda autopsy table ready for Dr. Dr. Donald Trump .
 This theory—incredible as it may seem, may seem—is supported by the available evidence . This theory is supported by available evidence. This theory, however, is not backed up by any of the evidence .
 Attempts to discredit Lifton or his sources have proven unconvincing . Lifton has been dogged by allegations that his sources are inaccurate .
 The autopsy was conducted by the military at Bethesda Naval Hospital the night of the assassination . Many issues connected to it remain in controversy, including the autopsy itself .
 Douglas P Horne was meticulous and detailed in his accounts of obfuscation and downright dissembling of autopsy statements and documents . Horne's account was detailed and detailed, detailed in detail .
 Lifton’s work included the reinterviewing of autopsy observers, technicians, and photographers . His work provided strong support for Lifton's thesis .
 There is no doubt that long-standing and serious questions have arisen over the medical evidence . There are serious questions that have been raised over medical evidence, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The idea that Kennedy’s body was altered while in the hands of federal officials goes a long way in explaining the puzzles and inconsistencies of the medical evidence . All assassination evidence was illegally in the . hands of the FBI for two days with no chain of evidence .
 Upon learning of the throat wound the day after the autopsy, Humes was forced to revise his autopsy report .
 The autopsy doctors determined that the back wound was four to seven millimeters in diameter . Dallas doctors said the throat wound was three to five millimeters . The back wound and throat wounds were 4 to 7 millimeters wide .
 The neck wound was one of entrance and the back wound one of exit . The back wound was larger than the neck wound . This normally would suggest that . Both holes represented the path of a single bullet, assuming both holes were .
 After revising his autopsy report, Humes walked to his fireplace and burned autopsy material . Humes described the material as original notes, a first draft, or other written notes .
 The wound in Kennedy’s throat was too small to have been caused by a rifle slug . It has been theorized that bone fragments may have been blasted downward at the time of the fatal head shot . FBI experts could not find any traces of metal on Kennedy's shirt or tie
 Author Henry Hurt had problems accepting the findings, which may explain his belief in a conspiracy as revealed to author Henry Hurt . Burkley believed the findings were a conspiracy .
 Adding to the confusion is the possibility of yet another bullet being recovered from Kennedy’s body during the autopsy . Adding to this confusion, the possibility is that another bullet could be recovered from the body .
 The idea of a bullet being removed during autopsy gains additional strength in light of two government documents now available . The bullet was removed during an autopsy .
 One is a letter of receipt signed by FBI agents Sibert and O’ Neill, who monitored the autopsy . Another is a signed letter signed by the FBI .
 The other is another letter of receipt, but this time from the Protective Research Section of the Treasury Department, dated November 26, 1963 .
 Among the items it listed as received from Kennedy’s personal physician, Dr. Dr. Robert Kennedy, was a letter from his personal physician . Kennedy died in 2008 from a heart attack .
 FBI agents normally would know the difference between bullet fragments and intact slug fragments . FBI agents would normally know between fragments and fragments of bullet fragments .
 It is curious that both documents refer to a "missile" rather than fragments or pieces of bullet fragments . Both documents reference to a ‘missile’ rather than pieces of bullets .
 Another bullet would have destroyed the lone-assassin theory, which already was being strained to the limit . All of this suggests yet another bullet was discovered but kept secret .
 Further evidence that more than two bullets struck President Kennedy came in 1968 when then-attorney general Ramsey Clark gathered a panel of physicians headed by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter was the only physician to testify in 1968 .
 Dr. Russell Fisher, a Maryland medical examiner, studied JFK autopsy photos and X-rays . The JFK autopsy photographs were taken by a team of medical professionals .
 This could be construed as strong evidence against Lee Harvey Oswald, since he reportedly used a 6. mm rifle . Oswald reportedly used the 6.mm rifle .
 The 'Magic Bullet' was found intact at Parkland Hospital . However, the official version states that one bullet struck Connally's neck, penetrated Connally .
 It seems probable that either more than two shots struck Kennedy in the head area or that the autopsy materials viewed by the Clark panel were fraudulent . Since officially no large fragments had been noted by the autopsy doctors, no such fragments could have come from the whole bullet .
 A bullet base, about 6. mm in diameter, was said to be found in the front seat of the presidential limousine . Furthermore, yet another bullet base is said to have been found .
 A Navy officer who might have been able to clarify some of the questions about the president’s autopsy is unavailable . The Navy officer is unavailable to answer the questions .
 Bethesda TV technician may have surreptitiously taken film and photos of autopsy . Chief of the Day Dennis David says Pitzer may have taken photos of the autopsy and participants .
 David said materials depicted an entry wound in Kennedy’s right temple area with a corresponding exit wound in the lower right portion of the skull . David later said these materials depicted a . entry wound .
 In October 1966, Pitzer was found shot in the head under questionable circumstances . Pitzer died in October 1966 .
 The death was ruled a suicide due to self-inflected pistol wound but no nitrates or gunpowder were found on his hand . No nitrates were found in the hand of the deceased .
 Special Forces Colonel Daniel Marvin claims he was approached by a CIA operative who wanted to “terminate” Pitzer . Marvin claims that the CIA asked him to kill Pitzer in the 1980s . Pitzer's death was the subject of much of the nation's highest-profile
 Over the years, as attempts have been made to clarify and substantiate the medical evidence, the wounds seem to take on a life of their own . The wounds have taken on their own, as well as the wounds .
 The head wound as seen by the Dallas doctors consisted of a large blastedout area in the right rear of the skull . The wound was seen by Dallas doctors .
 Both medical and nonmedical persons in Dallas gave consistent descriptions of this wound . Both medical, nonmedical people in Dallas said they saw the wound in the wound .
 Charles J Carrico noted a large hole “in the posterior skull, the occipital region’s . The hole was found in a hole in the skull of the skull .
 The autopsy doctors saw a head wound that stretched from the upper side of the rear to the right front of Kennedy’s head . Yet the autopsy doctors said the wound was not consistent with a gunshot wound .
 The autopsy doctors said a small entrance wound was located in the back of the skull . The House Select Committee on Assassinations’ medical panel placed the entrance wound four inches higher, near the top of the head .
 Neither the Warren Commission nor the House committee spoke of a hole blasted out of the right rear portion of the president’s head . The Warren Commission and House committee did not discuss the hole .
 The House committee even produced a drawing reportedly made from an autopsy photograph that depicts the rear of Kennedy’s head .
 It is entirely intact except for what appears to be a small hole—the entrance wound—near the top . The entrance wound is near the top of the structure .
 Humes had problems with this drawing, stating he had never seen the small hole before . Humes said he never saw the hole in this drawing before .
 His thought was confirmed later when the actual photographs were released to the public . His thought later confirmed later .
 The photo clearly showed the hole as a spot of transparent dried blood with hair growing through it . The photo was taken from a photo taken at the hospital .
 Robert Groden, photographic consultant to the House Select Committee on Assassinations, had a simple explanation for the mystery surrounding autopsy photographs . Groden: "It's a simple matter of finding out what happened" Groden says .
 After careful study, he agreed with photographer Floyd Riebe that autopsy photos now available to the public are forgeries . The autopsy photos are now available for the public .
 The vital autopsy photos of the back of the President’s head were altered immediately after the autopsy in order to cover up the fact that the President received two bullets in the head, one from the rear and one from front . Jackie Kennedy testified to the Warren Commission as Jackie testified to
 X-rays and other autopsy materials could have provided definitive proof of the wounds . Kennedy’s brain, which was removed and preserved, could have been preserved .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations hinted that the brain may have been taken by Robert Kennedy to prevent future public display . However, this has not been proven and Kennedy is not alive to answer the charge .
 The Warren Commission never was allowed to view for themselves the president’s autopsy photographs and X-rays . It also should be noted that the Warren Commission—the group officially charged with finding the truth of Kennedy's assassination—apparently never saw the president's autopsy photographs .
 The complete set of pictures taken at the autopsy was not made available to me or to the Commission . I was not allowed to see the pictures of the autopsy .
 The back of a body was represented to be the back of the President, although it was not authenticated . I was shown one picture of the back . It was shown to be a picture of a . body which was represented . to be . the President . Although it is not authenticated,
 Photographs and X-rays would not have been crucial to the Commission because they would have served only to corroborate what the autopsy surgeons had testified to under oath . The photographs would have only served as a corroboration of what the surgeon had testified under oath as opposed to adding any new
 Kennedy's wounds are crucial in understanding the manipulations surrounding the medical evidence . They are crucial—if not in truthfully understanding Kennedy’s wounds, then in understanding his medical evidence.
 Not studying autopsy materials did not dissuade Specter from formulating the convoluted ‘single-bullet’ theory . Specter: Not studying the autopsy materials didn't dissuade him from forming the theory .
 Cyril H Wecht, an experienced coroner and former president of the American Academy of Forensic Medicine, was blunt . Wecht was blunt: "I'm not a coroner. I'm a coroner," Wecht said. "I don't believe that we're going to have to wait
 This is the kind of examination that would not be tolerated in a routine murder case by a good crew of homicide detectives in most major cities of America . This is not a routine homicide case, but it's a serious homicide investigation .
 The key to understanding who killed Kennedy lies with the autopsy photographs . Kennedy's autopsy photographs show the extent of Kennedy's death .
 These photographs may tell us more about the assassination than all of the official investigations . The photos show the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in 1968 .
 The day before Kennedy's assassination there was a continuing parade of defendants, lawyers, and police officers in the Dallas County District Attorney’s Office . Jack Ruby was killed by Jack Ruby in September 1963 .
 Dyson, later told the Warren Commission that it was here that he and other officers encountered a short, stocky nightclub owner who was going out of his way to make their acquaintance .
 The following Sunday the entire world knew Jack Ruby—the man who killed Lee Harvey Oswald . Ruby was the man who shot Oswald in the head . Ruby killed Oswald in Oswald's assassination .
 Ruby silenced the one man whom authorities blamed for Kennedy’s death . Authorities blamed Ruby for Kennedy's death . Ruby silenced JFK's assassin on November 24, 1963 .
 Many people could accept the idea of a “lone-nut assassin,” but balked at two such characters . “Lone-nuts assassin’s” idea of two characters is too much to bear .
 Ruby was a small-time Dallas nightclub operator with no significant ties to organized crime, or to Dallas authorities . Ruby had no connection with organized crime or to Oswald, but was a nightclub operator . Ruby was arrested in the days following the assassination .
 It was said that his killing of Oswald was simply the spontaneous act of a man hoping to right the wrong of the president’s death . Oswald was said to have been killed by the president .
 Ruby was a fixture on the Dallas scene in 1963 . Ruby was more intimately connected with organized crime figures than earlier believed . Ruby stalked Oswald throughout the assassination weekend, according to reports .
 The evidence of an association between Ruby and Oswald prior to the assassination is substantial . Furthermore, the evidence of a connection between the Oswald and Ruby is substantial, according to the author .
 Ruby tried to tell what he knew about the plot to kill Kennedy but was shrugged off by both government investigators and the news media . Ruby is now known that he tried to talk about the assassination plot . Ruby was a key figure in the Kennedy assassination plot, but his efforts were shrugged off
 Ruby was granted a new trial after being granted new trial . Ruby was filmed saying, “Everything pertaining to what’s happened has never come to the surface.” Ruby was convicted of murder in 2008 .
 The world will never know the true facts of what occurred —my motive, in other words . The real motive for the shooting will never be known, he says .
 Ruby named Lyndon Johnson as the person behind the assassination and called him a Nazi . Ruby even called Lyndon Johnson a Nazi in letters smuggled out of the Dallas County Jail .
 Jack Ruby was born Jacob Rubenstein in 1911, the fifth of eight siblings . He was born in 1911 . Jack Ruby is the son of Jack and Edward Rubenstein, who died in 1995 .
 Various documents show different birth dates, although Ruby himself used March 25, 1911, most frequently . Ruby's birth date is often used in documents .
 Despite several moves, the family remained in what was described by one brother as a “ghetto,” complete with noisy streets filled with pushcarts and peddlers . The family always remained in the 'ghetto' despite several moves .
 When Ruby was ten years old, his parents separated and he, along with his three brothers and four sisters, was placed in various foster homes by the Jewish Home Finding Society . Ruby's parents separated when he was 10 years old and he was placed with his siblings and siblings .
 Rubenstein was born in Chicago, Illinois, in the early years of his life . Rubenstein is now a successful businessman and philanthropist .
 Ruby was caught by truant officers after skipping school . Like young Oswald, Ruby skipped school and was caught in the act .
 Oswald gravitated toward street gangs and amusement parks . Unlike Oswald, Ruby gravitated to amusement parks and street gangs .
 Others believed “Sparky” was a tag reflecting Ruby’s volatile temperament . Ruby was the subject of a series of hit TV shows, including The X Factor .
 Young streetwise Sparky gained a reputation with his fists, although accounts of his aggressiveness differed with those who knew him .
 Barney Rasofsky, who gained fame in the 1930s as World Welterweight Boxing Champion Barney Ross, in 1964 told the FBI that he and Ruby along with other young toughs were paid $1 per trip to deliver sealed envelopes for Al Capone .
 If this information was passed along to the Warren Commission, it was never reported . The Warren Commission never passed along with the information .
 Rasofsky also said Ruby was never a troublemaker, although he always was ready to defend himself against any attack . Ruby was always a ready-to-defend himself .
 These recollections clash markedly with those of others who recalled Ruby as a street brawler . Others recall him as eager to take up any challenge, even to the extent of aiding someone else in trouble . Ruby's memory is mixed with those who remember him as a tough guy .
 Although not particularly devout, he had nevertheless received some instruction from Orthodox Judaism .
 Ruby reportedly joined with Jewish toughs in fights with proNazi group the German American Bund during the late 1930s . Ruby reportedly fought with other street gangs because of racial and ethnic differences .
 In 1933 Ruby, along with several Chicago friends, went to Los Angeles and then San Francisco seeking employment . Ruby and others went to San Francisco looking for employment .
 In 1936, he was still in San Francisco living for a brief time with his sister Eva and her husband . He was still living with Eva and their husband when he died .
 Ruby later told authorities he returned to Chicago in 1937— the same year his mother was committed to Elgin State Hospital with mental disorders . Despite some evidence, Ruby said he returned in 1937 . Ruby later said his mother died in Elgin, Illinois .
 For more than twenty years, Fannie Rubenstein had frequented doctors and clinics reporting that a fishbone was lodged in her throat . Despite continuing reassurances that nothing organic could be detected, nothing organic was detected .
 Ruby began working for the Scrap Iron and Junk Handlers Union in 1937 . He returned to Chicago about 1937, according to Social Security Administration records .
 Chicago attorney Leon R Cooke, a close friend to Ruby, had founded the union and was financial secretary . Ruby died at the age of 92 .
 When gangsters took control of the union and its funds, Ruby went along . Ruby's union was taken over by gangsters connected to the Chicago underworld . Ruby was a member of a union in Chicago .
 Union president John Martin, who earlier had been indicted along with a major Chicago mobster for withholding tax information, named young Rubenstein union secretary . Rubenstein was named secretary of the union .
 Ruby told police he was little more than a bagman for union thugs . Ruby made a statement to police at the time, saying he was a 'bagman for thugs' Ruby has since been charged with murder .
 Martin fatally shot Cooke in the union’s offices after an argument over missing funds . Cooke was shot by Martin in December 1939 . Martin shot Cooke to death in a dispute over funds .
 Martin claimed self-defense and never served time for the murder of Cooke . Cooke was shot in the back, Martin said he was defending himself in self-defence . Martin was convicted of the murder but never served a prison sentence .
 Ruby claimed such close friendship for the slain man that he eventually took the name Leon as his own middle name . Ruby stayed on with the corrupt union after Cooke’s brutal murder .
 Following the bad publicity over Cooke’s killing, the union was reorganized as the Waste Material Handlers Union, Local 20467 .
 Martin was replaced and the reorganized union was dominated by its secretary-treasurer, Paul J Dorfman, a man with long-standing connections to Chicago racketeers . Dorfman was replaced by Martin and the union was reorganized by Dorfman .
 By mid-1943, Ruby had found a permanent home in the U.S. Army Air Corps . Ruby was a major success for the Army Air Force .
 At the beginning of World War II, he had been granted a draft deferment for reasons not entirely clear . He was granted the deferment at the start of WWII for reasons unknown .
 One version is that Rubenstein feigned a hearing disability by wearing a hearing aid . Another is that he was granted an ‘economic hardship” deferment because he was the only Rubenstein child remaining at home .
 Despite an appeal to his local board, he was inducted into the Army Air Corps on May 21, 1943 .
 Ruby returned to Chicago after his discharge from the air force in 1946 . He entered an unsuccessful sales business with his brothers, Hyman, Sam, and Earl .
 As in their childhood, the four Rubenstein brothers constantly argued with one another . This time, they were arguing over how to run the business . As in childhood, they argued with each other .
 One of the few things they agreed on was the need to obtain a more “American” name .
 After Hyman left the business, Sam, Earl, and Jack all shortened their name from Rubenstein to Ruby .
 Jack Ruby had left Chicago for Texas in 1947 . Ruby had been working with the Texas Rangers in Texas .
 Jack's name change was made official by a decree from the 68th Judicial District Court of Dallas on December 30, 1947 . Jack arrived in Dallas shortly after his arrival .
 The official story of Ruby’s move is that he went to help his sister operate a nightclub . Some sources have claimed that Ruby was part of a plan to bring Dallas rackets under the control of the Chicago underworld .
 Ruby told him he wanted to go back to California in 1947 but “was directed” to go to Dallas, Texas, in 1959 . Giles Miller added support for this idea by telling the FBI that in 1959 Ruby had told him in 1959 that he had wanted to return to California
 Former Dallas County sheriff Steve Guthrie says Ruby's move was part of a mob offensive into Texas . Ruby is believed to have been involved in a mob attack in Dallas County .
 During the late 1930s and 1940s, Dallas gambling operations were virtually wide open under the control of homegrown bosses like Benny “Cowboy” Binion .
 Noble's bombing death and Binion's departure for the quieter envirirons of Las Vegas in the late 1940s . Noble's death was the result of a bloody feud between the two top gamblers .
 It was then that the Chicago mob made its bid for a takeover in Dallas . The mob tried to take over the Dallas Cowboys from the city .
 In late 1946, an emissary from the Chicago syndicate named Paul Roland Jones contacted Dallas lawmen in an effort to open the city for the mob . Jones was a member of the syndicate who tried to open Dallas to the mob in late 1946 .
 Jones held meetings with Sheriff Guthrie and an obscure Dallas police lieutenant named George Butler . Jones met with Guthrie, Butler and other Dallas police officers in the early days .
 Sometime later Jones was indicted for attempted bribery when Guthrie and Butler blew the whistle . Jones was charged with attempted bribery . Guthrie, Butler and Jones were indicted .
 At this time the two top Chicago mob leaders were Sam Giancana (the coordinator of Mafia-CIA assassination plots) and Anthony Accardo (the two top mob leaders) at this time .
 The Warren Commission ignored testimony that showed that Jones met Ruby through two mutual friends, Paul “Needle Nose” Labriola and Jim Weinberg . Both were well-known associates of Giancana, both of whom Jones met .
 FBI interview with Jones in which he stated that when he first met Ruby, both Weinberg and Labriola told him Ruby was “all right” as far as the syndicate was concerned . In fact, to arrive at their conclusion that Ruby was not connected to the mob
 Weinberg and Labriola in 1954 were found garroted and stuffed in a car trunk in a double gangland slaying . Weinberg was one of two men found dead in the trunk of a car in 1954 . Labriolola and Weinberg were found in a trunk of
 When interviewed for the Warren Commission in 1964, Jones said he believed Butler was serious about accepting mob payoffs . Jones says he changed his position only after learning that the Texas Rangers had become aware of the deal .
 Butler was in charge of the transfer of Lee Harvey Oswald on November 24, 1963 . It was Butler, then assigned to the juvenile division, who was responsible for the transfer .
 Butler approached editor of Midlothian Mirror in 1961 about publishing right-wing literature . Butler approached Penn Jones, former editor of the Mirror, in 1961 to publish right-right-wing books .
 Jones told this author, “ offered me the job of printing a regional newspaper under the auspices of the Ku Klux Klan.” Jones said he was offered the job by the KKK .
 Two Dallas policemen claimed Butler approached them with ‘important’ information shortly after Ruby killed Oswald . Two Dallas police officers said Butler told them that Oswald was the illegitimate son of Jack Ruby . Butler’s veracity comes into question .
 Whether or not Ruby participated in the 1947 bribe attempt, it is certain that his relationship with Paul Roland Jones continued .
 On October 24, 1947, Jones was arrested and charged with smuggling opium into the U.S. from Mexico . Jones was charged with bringing the drug into the United States from Mexico.
 In Chicago, Ruby and his brother Hyman were questioned by Bureau of Narcotics agents . Ruby and Hyman have been questioned by the FBI in the case .
 Jones frequented Dallas's Singapore Club while he appealed his narcotics conviction . Jack Ruby operated the Singapore Club, which by then was operated by Jack Ruby .
 Despite Jack Ruby’s ongoing gangster connections, the Warren Commission and subsequent assassination investigations attempted to portray him as simply a rambunctious, self-ingratiating nightclub owner striving for success in a rather shabby business .
 Ruby was much better connected socially in Dallas than federal investigations have publicly stated . Ruby may have been better connected to the Dallas community than the government has publicly stated publicly . Ruby is a former Dallas resident who was arrested in 2008 for allegedly assaulting a federal judge .
 Ruby was well-known not only to police and law-enforcement officials, but also to city and county officials and businessmen . Ruby was a man-about-town man who frequented his clubs and attended area gambling parties .
 Madeleine Brown, a former mistress to Lyndon Johnson, wrote a book about his affair with LBJ . Brown's account was published in the book "Madeleine's Life with Lyndon Johnson"
 She claimed to have first met Jack Ruby through Johnson attorney Jerome Ragsdale of Dallas . She claims to have met Ruby through attorney for Johnson Johnson .
 Jerome Ragsdale and another man were talking on the sidewalk in downtown Dallas in the early 1950s . "I was coming out of Nieman-Marcus in Dallas when I encountered Jerome," he says .
 Jack Ruby was Jack Ruby in the early days of the Jack Ruby era . Jack and Jerome appeared to be good friends and Jerome introduced them to each other . Jack Ruby and Jerome were good friends, according to Jerome .
 "Everyone was scared to say they knew him. But after the assassination weekend, everyone was scared of saying he knew him" "I'm not afraid to say I knew him," she says .
 Ester Ann Mash, a former employee who dated Ruby during the spring of 1963, dated Ruby . Mash: Ruby was no stranger at the homes of prominent Dallasites .
 She told this author, “Several times he took me to big nice homes where there were important people in town, including District Attorney Henry Wade.” District Attorney Wade .
 The record shows Ruby was a much more important criminal than previously believed . Ruby was the most important criminal in the history of the United States .
 Jack Ruby’s life was one of close association with gangsters and close calls with the law . Ruby was involved in the 1963 killing of Lee Harvey Oswald in Dallas, Texas .
 Robert Kennedy described Barney Baker as Jimmy Hoffa’s “roving organizer and ambassador of violence . Baker had moved from criminal activities involving mobsters Jake Lansky and Bugsy Siegel to Teamster organizer for the Central States Conference under Hoffa .
 Baker received at least two calls from Ruby in a threeweek period before the assassination . Baker called Ruby on November 7, 1963, according to the Warren Commission .
 Campisi operated several businesses in Dallas, including a restaurant notorious as a gangster hangout . He has been linked closely to the New Orleans Marcello family . Campisi was an associate of Dallas Mafia member Joseph Civello .
 Both Ruby’s sister Eva Grant and his business partner and roommate, George Senator, described Campisi as one of Ruby's closest friends . Campisi was a close friend of the late actor and director of the film company .
 Campisi told the FBI in December 1963 he had been in contact with Ruby the night before the assassination . Campisi said he had visited Ruby in jail on November 30, 1963, and had visited him in jail .
 Life magazine described Caracci as a “Marcello Mobster’s” Caracci was arrested by Houston police in 1969 with three members of the Marcello group .
 Frank "Tickie" Saia was a prominent Louisiana gambling and political figure who was close friends with Senator Russell Long . Saia is a longtime friend of Long's .
 Ruby met with Caracci at least once and was in telephone contact on several occasions . Ruby was involved in the assassination of Kennedy in the months before his death .
 Ruby and Chavez were also linked to mobster Tony Provenzano, a Justice Department memorandum said . Ruby, Chavez and Chavez are accused of being involved in a mobster's murder .
 Someone in the Warren Commission deleted an entire page covering Civello from Commission Exhibit 1536 and blanked out several paragraphs within the document . Like Campisi, he tried to downplay his close connections with Ruby, and someone in the commission deleted the entire page .
 A news reporter claimed that Ruby was acquainted with famed mobster Cohen through his girlfriend Candy Barr, a close friend of Ruby’s who had been jailed on a narcotics charge earlier in the 1960s .
 A former roommate of Ruby’s from Chicago, Gruber told the FBI he had no mob connections . Gruber said he was not a member of the mob and had no ties to the mob .
 Gruber had been arrested six times in 1970 using two aliases in three states . Gruber was arrested in 1970, a two-page FBI report that had been suppressed for years .
 Gruber, too, was associated with top Teamster officials as well as thugs working for Mickey Cohen . Gruber was also associated with Mickey Cohen's thugs .
 Gruber reportedly had not seen his old friend Ruby for ten years when he showed up in Dallas in mid-November 1963 for an extended visit . Gruber had not been in contact with Ruby for 10 years . The two men were married in 1963 .
 Matthews has been linked to Campisi and Florida mob chief Santos Trafficante . Matthews has a lengthy arrest record with a long arrest record .
 He also was described as a father figure by convicted hit man Charles V Harrelson . He also called him a "father figure" by a hit man .
 Several people told the Warren Commission that Ruby and Matthews were friends . On October 3, 1963, a call was placed from Ruby’s Carousel Club to Matthews’ former wife in Louisiana .
 According to his sister, Ruby also placed calls to Patrick in late 1963 . Ruby also called Patrick in 1963, according to her sister . Ruby's sister says she also made calls to her brother in 1963 .
 Patrick reportedly was close to Chicago mob chieftain Sam Giancana . Identified in a 1965 U.S. Senate report as high-ranking associate of the Chicago Mafia .
 Pecora has been identified as one of Carlos Marcello’s most trusted aides . Described by various crime investigations as an ex-convict with several arrests .
 As late as October 30, 1963, a call was logged between the Dallas phone of Ruby and a New Orleans phone listed to Pecora . Ruby's phone number was logged as late as Oct. 31, 1963 .
 Former associate of Al Capone was one of the Mafia chiefs involved in the CIA-Mafia assassination plots against Castro . The man CIA pilot Tosh Plumlee claimed to have flown into Dallas the morning of Castro's assassination .
 His mutilated body was found in an oil drum in Florida’s Biscayne Bay in 1976 . Roselli was scheduled to testify before the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Federal sources say Roselli and Ruby twice met secretly in Miami motel rooms . Ruby and Roselli met in the two months before the assassination, sources say .
 FBI was keeping Roselli under surveillance . FBI monitored meetings with Roselli . Roselli's meetings with FBI were monitored by the FBI .
 No mention of these meetings were made to the Warren Commission . However, no mention of the meetings was made .
 A close associate of Hoffa as well as other Teamster officials, Wiener has been connected to mob bosses Trafficante and Giancana . Wiener was a Teamster official who worked for the union .
 Wiener received a twelve-minute person-to-person call from Ruby’s Carousel Club . On October 26, 1963, Wiener was given a 12-minute call from the club .
 McWillie joined gangsters in gambling operations in Havana, Cuba, before being thrown out by Castro . He then joined such famed gangsters as Santos Trafficante, Meyer and Jake Lansky, and Dino Cellini .
 McWillie received guns from Ruby while still in Cuba . He received a .38 Smith & Wesson from him as late as May 10, 1963 .
 Hunt, Clint Murchinson, and Amon Carter Sr., also played host to Texas politicians Sam Rayburn, Lyndon Johnson, and John Connally . Hunt, Hunt, and Carter Sr. were also hosted by Texas politicians .
 Kirkwood served alcoholic drinks to President Kennedy’s Secret Service guards well into the morning hours of November 22, 1963 . Kirkwood's son, Pat, served alcohol to the Secret Service .
 Kirkwood told the House Select Committee on Assassinations that ‘Chilly’ McWillie was a close family friend . Kirkwood: “Chilly was a good friend. He was a great family friend.
 Warren Commission staffers saw several conspiratorial leads in McWillie and recommended he be called to testify about Ruby's Cuban and mob connections .
 Jack Ruby’s connection to crime was not limited to his friends and associates . Jack Ruby was a prominent figure in organized crime . Ruby was convicted of murder in the 1970s and '80s .
 The record shows his involvement in a number of criminal activities including gambling, narcotics, prostitution, and gunrunning . The record also includes gambling and narcotics .
 Abadie told agents that he had observed policemen coming and going while acting as a bookie in a Ruby establishment . In fact, he told agents he had seen policemen going and going in the establishment .
 There is simply no question of Ruby’s connections to gambling and to gamblers, both local and national . Ruby is known for his connections with gambling and gambling .
 In one case, a drug offender named James Breen traveled to Dallas, where he made contact with “a large narcotics setup operating between Mexico, Texas, and the East,” a companion says . Breen’s female companion: “The drug offender made contact
 Curry told the FBI that Breen’s contact with this drug ring was Jack Ruby . Curry said Breen had contact with Ruby . Ruby was the ringleader in the drug ring .
 She repeated her earlier contention that Ruby and Breen had been mixed up in a narcotics smuggling ring . She said they had been involved in a drug smuggling ring in the 1980s .
 There is also an abundance of evidence that Ruby was involved in prostitution, pornography, and bribery . Ruby was also involved in other criminal activities, such as prostitution and pornography .
 The fact that Ruby was a pivotal contact man for criminal activity in Dallas seems affirmed by his lack of prosecution by Dallas authorities . Ruby was not charged with any crime in Dallas .
 Ruby’s Dallas rap sheet showed he was arrested nine times in 16 years . The toughest conviction shown in his criminal record was a $35 fine for ignoring a traffic summons . Ruby was arrested on charges ranging from operating his club after legal hours .
 Jack Ruby’s criminal activity reached a peak in 1959, when he became even more closely connected to the mob and the Feds through their common interest in Cuba . Ruby's criminal activity peaked in 1959 when he was involved with the mob .
 Jack Ruby was a gunrunner and FBI Informant in 1959 . Ruby was an informant for the FBI . He was also a gun runner and FBI informant .
 Just prior to Castro’s takeover, American mobsters had helped supply the revolutionary with arms for his fight with Batista . Just before the takeover, U.S. mobsters supplied Castro with arms .
 Gangsters were playing both sides of the fence in Cuba, believing that if they helped Castro, they would be allowed to remain in Cuba if he succeeded in his revolution . The mobsters were friends with the dictator Batista, but played both sides .
 The smuggling of arms to Castro was overseen by Norman “Rough-house” Rothman, associate of Miami mob boss Santos Trafficante Jr., who managed Trafficante’s Sans Souci casino in Havana .
 Rothman reportedly was splitting Havana slot machine revenues with Batista’s brother-inlaw . At the same time, Rothman was reportedly being paid to play slot machines in Havana .
 After the assassination, the sister of a Cuban gunrunner gave information indicating that Ruby was part of the Rothman operation . Ruby was killed in the Cuban assassination of Fidel Castro in 1959 .
 The women were told that Jack owned a nightclub in Dallas and was a member of ‘the syndicate’ who was running some guns to Cuba . Jack was told that he was a nightclub owner who was part of the syndicate that was running guns to the country .
 In the early 1950s, Ruby had interest in a notorious nightclub and gambling house in Hallandale, Florida, along with Meyer and Jake Lansky . This story later was corroborated by bureau informant Blaney Mack Johnson, who said in the 1950s .
 Johnson said Ruby was active in arranging illegal flights of weapons to Castro forces . Johnson said Edward Browder was one of the pilots operating for Ruby .
 Browder, a flamboyant Miami arms dealer, was a central figure in Rothman’s gunrunning operation, court documents say . Browder was arrested in September 2013 in Miami .
 Another soldier of fortune operating with Browder during this time was Frank Sturgis, who would much later be caught burglarizing the Watergate building along with men connected to the Nixon White House .
 Rothman gunrunning operation was rocked in mid-1959, when its chief was arrested in connection with an $8. million Canadian bank burglary . In mid-1957, Rothman was arrested for his role in the $8 million bank robbery .
 Federal authorities linked the bank job with a large theft of arms from an Ohio National Guard armory through a $6,000 airplane rental agreement by Rothman . Rothman also allegedly stole arms from the armory .
 Authorities agreed it appeared to be part of a massive gunrunning operation to Cuba . Authorities said the operation appeared to all appear to have been part of an operation .
 Ruby’s travels to Cuba increased significantly, thanks to his mob idol, Lewis J McWillie . Ruby's mob idol was the late mob boss, who helped him travel to Cuba .
 McWillie has received scant attention from the two major government assassination investigations . He is a key central character in this swirl of gunrunners, drug smugglers, mob hit men, CIA-Mafia assassination plots, and Texas gamblers .
 Commission members declined to call McWillie to testify about his relationship with Ruby and Mafia figures . Despite Ruby’s accolades, Commission members did not follow through on a staff recommendation .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations took Ruby's and McWillie’s word that the 1959 trips to Cuba were “purely social,” the committee did not . The Warren Commission said the trips were social, but the Committee did not.
 Ruby's trip was related to Trafficante’s detention and release, police say . Trafficante was arrested in connection with Ruby's visit to the U.S. Ruby and Trafficante were both detained and released in 2010 .
 "We came to believe that Ruby’s trips to Cuba were, in fact, organized-crime activities," says the author . Ruby's trips to the island nation were organized crime activities, he says .
 Kirkwood hosted Kennedy’s Secret Service agents the night before the assassination . His son, Pat Kirkwood, hosted the agents in Dallas, Texas, Texas .
 In the summer of 1958, McWillie relocated to Havana, Cuba, where he worked for Norman Rothman as a pit boss in Trafficante’s Sans Souci casino .
 It was during this time that Ruby was encountered in the Florida Keys involved in gunrunning schemes run by Rothman . Ruby worked for Rothman in the 1970s .
 It was here that McWillie became a close associate of some of the mob’s most powerful leaders .
 McWillie and Matthews were connected to Dallas gambling operations during the 1950s . Both went to work gambling in Havana, Cuba, in 1958-1959; and in later years, both were employed at Benny Binion’s Horseshoe Club in Las Vegas .
 When Castro closed the Tropicana, McWillie became pit boss at the Capri Hotel’s casino, another Trafficante property . McWie was pit boss when Castro closed Tropiana, and he now works for Trafficante . He is also pit boss for the
 The Capri was then run by Charlie “The Blade’s Tourine, whose mistress later confirmed that she was assisting Frank Sturgis in an attempt to poison Castro . The Blade was later run by Tourine's mistress .
 According to Ruby and others, he was one of the last American mobsters to leave the island . Ruby says he was a member of the mobsters who left the island of Cuba .
 During the first half of 1961 McWillie was in Miami, the site of the CIA-Mafia assassination meetings involving Trafficante, Giancana, and Roselli . It should be pointed out that during the first . half of the 1961 . 1961 .
 After that time, McWillie worked at a number of Nevada gambling casinos . He worked at casinos in Las Vegas .
 Trafficante was arrested and jailed in the Trescornia Camp outside Havana in 1959 . McWillie’s boss Trafficante died in prison in early 1959 .
 Gunrunner Robert Ray McKeown received a two-year suspended sentence and five years on probation for conspiring to smuggle arms to Castro in 1958 . Ruby contacted a convicted Texas gunrunner who had been convicted of smuggling arms to the Castro family .
 McKeown's gunrunning activities brought him into close contact with Fidel Castro . He was involved in the gunrunning of two notable Cubans, one of whom was Castro .
 McKeown was photographed with the bearded leader during a visit to Houston in April 1959 . Mc Keown was pictured with the former British Prime Minister in Houston, Texas .
 He was close to Carlos Prio Socarras, former president of Cuba, who quickly turned against Castro . He was also close to the anti-Castro Cubans in the U.S. in the United States .
 A gunrunner named Tommy E Davis was active in Texas at the time of Ruby's trial . Davis told Ruby's attorneys that he and Ruby had met several times to discuss the possibility of running arms to Cuba . Davis was a gunrunner active in the area .
 Tommy Davis was linked to both U.S. intelligence and crime circles . Tommy Davis is known for his involvement in organized crime . Davis was a major figure in the United States' intelligence circles .
 McKeown says Ruby told him he represented Las Vegas interests that were seeking the release of three prisoners in Cuba . Ruby told the House Select Committee on Assassinations that he wanted the prisoners released .
 Ruby offered $5,000 each for help in obtaining release of the prisoners . Ruby offered to help with the release of prisoners .
 McKeown told the caller he would accept the offer if money were forthcoming . He said he would do so if money was forthcoming from the caller .
 About three weeks later, McKeown said he was visited by Ruby at his business near Houston . Ruby visited him three weeks after the attack .
 Ruby said he had access to a large number of jeeps in Shreveport, Louisiana, which he was going to sell in Cuba . Ruby: "I'm going to be selling the jeeps. I'm selling them in Cuba"
 McKeown claims he was contacted by yet another man who wanted to buy high-powered rifles with scopes weeks before the assassination . He says he was also contacted by another man just weeks before assassination .
 “Lee Oswald” and a man named Hernandez showed up at McKeown’s home in late September or early October 1963 . They said they were involved in planning a revolution in El Salvador, a friend says .
 Both McKeown and his friend Neill independently recognized Oswald on November 22, 1963, as the man who had visited a few weeks earlier . Both men recognized Oswald as Oswald in November 1963 .
 Both men decided to keep quiet about the Oswald visit, saying they were “scared” to tell the FBI in 1964 what they knew .
 Ruby's gunrunning activities may not have ceased in 1959 . Yet another incident occurred in 1961 that indicates that Ruby’s gunrunning may have continued .
 Nancy Perrin Rich worked for Ruby and became involved in Cuban gunrunning activities while married to Robert Perrin in Dallas . Rich was involved in gunrunning while she was married to Perrin .
 Her husband met with anti-Castro Cubans in a Dallas apartment presided over by a U.S. Army lieutenant colonel, she says . She tells the FBI and Warren Commission that her mob-connected husband met the Cubans .
 During this meeting, her husband was offered $10,000 to bring a boatload of Cuban refugees to Miami . Her husband was also offered $8,500 to bring the refugees to the city .
 A few nights later, the Perrins met again with the Cubans, who promised money was on the way . A few weeks later, they met again, and promised money would be on their way .
 She detected a bulge in Ruby’s jacket that disappeared quickly, leading her to conclude Ruby was the “bag man” Ruby was bringing funds to the Cubans . Ruby is the "bag man"
 Robert Perrin was found dead of arsenic poisoning a year after meeting with Cuban leaders .
 On November 26, 1963, British journalist John Wilson informed the American embassy in London that he had been held in the Trescornia Camp outside Havana with Trafficante in 1959 .
 Wilson claimed a man named Ruby would come to the prison with people bringing food to Trafficante . Trafficante was sentenced to life in prison in 2008 . Wilson claims Ruby would bring food to trafficante .
 Wilson is now dead, but there is considerable corroboration to his story . Wilson is believed to have been a member of the Royal Family .
 Gerry Patrick Hemming, a CIA agent who in 1959 was serving with Castro’s forces, saw Ruby in a meeting with Castro leader Captain William Morgan during this time and the talk centered around efforts to release Trafficante from prison . Hemming was a CIA officer who served with Castro
 Sources within the Dallas underworld claim Ruby was the middleman who bought Trafficante’s freedom from Cuba with the sale of black-market jeeps to Castro . Ruby was allegedly middleman for Trafficante's freedom .
 Ruby idolized the stylish, gray-haired McWillie and would do “anything” for his mentor, Trafficante . The fact that Ruby idolizes the stylish and stylish McWillies is especially intriguing in light of the close association between the two men . Trafficante is
 Ruby made an astonishing contact with the Federal Bureau of Investigation in 1959 . Ruby was an active member of the FBI during his active days .
 The Warren Commission was quietly notified in early 1964 that the bureau had contacted Jack Ruby in 1959 as an informant . The bureau asked that the Commission keep this explosive fact a secret . Jack Ruby was an informant for the Warren Commission in 1959 .
 The contents of this February 27, 1964, memo from Director Hoover to Warren Commission general counsel J Lee Rankin was not made public until 1975 . Hoover's memo was sent to Rankin from the Warren Commission .
 Ruby was contacted by an Agent of the Dallas Office on March 11, 1959, in view of his position as a nightclub operator who might have knowledge of the criminal element in Dallas, Texas .
 He was advised of the Bureau’s jurisdiction in criminal matters, and he expressed a willingness to furnish information along these lines .
 He was subsequently contacted on eight occasions between March 11, 1959, and October 2, 1959 . He furnished no information whatever and further contacts with him were discontinued .
 Ruby was never paid any money, and he was never at any time an informant of this Bureau . Ruby was not an informant, and was never a paid informant, FBI says .
 The Commission failed to see the significance of the nine meetings between the FBI and Ruby during the very time he was trying to free mob boss Trafficante . The Commission also did not bother to question the FBI agent who had met with Ruby .
 Many law-enforcement officers, both state and federal, have privately stated that both the frequency and duration of these contacts suggests there was more to the relationship than Hoover would admit . Hoover would have denied the allegations .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations did interview Charles W Flynn, the FBI agent who met with Ruby . Flynn was interviewed by the committee on the Ruby case .
 According to Flynn, Ruby initiated the contacts on March 11, 1959, rather than the bureau as stated in the Hoover memo . Flynn: Ruby initiated contacts rather than those of the bureau . Hoover memo: Ruby started contacts with the bureau, not the bureau.
 The House committee staff was intrigued by this connection between Ruby and the FBI at the time Ruby was making trips to Cuba . Ruby was visiting Cuba in the 1950s and '60s at the height of the Cuban revolution .
 Ruby’s behavior was consistent with the pattern of seasoned offenders, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . He says seasoned offenders often cultivate a relationship with law enforcement agencies .
 An FBI agent also interviewed the saleswoman but filed a meager two-paragraph report, omitting descriptions of the electronic bugging equipment . The FBI also interviewed her, but didn't describe the equipment .
 Flynn denied to the House committee that he and Ruby had discussed Cuban visits . Flynn reportedly admitted to news reporters that Ruby may have mentioned one trip to Cuba . Flynn later admitted to reporters that he may have discussed one trip .
 Ruby was making no secret of his Cuban sojourns at the time . Ruby was reportedly traveling to Cuba in the 1980s .
 Authorities in New Orleans received a tip that Jack Ruby had bought some paintings while in that city in the summer of 1959 . Ruby shot Oswald three days after he shot Oswald . Three days after Oswald shot Ruby, authorities in N. Orleans got a tip about Ruby's purchase of paintings .
 William George Gaudet, the CIA operative who accompanied Oswald to Mexico, provided the information . The CIA operative accompanied Oswald on the trip to Mexico .
 Ruby was fearful that his activities in New Orleans, which obviously involved Cuba, would be found out . So apparently the CIA was tracking Ruby’s movements in 1959, and after the assassination, he was fearful .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations determined that Ruby may have made as many as six trips to Cuba . The issue was clouded and passed off by both the FBI and the Warren Commission .
 Warren Commission attorneys Leon Hubert and Burt Griffin were rebuffed by both the CIA and other Commission staff members . When Hubert asked for further probing of Ruby’s Cuban connections, he was rebuffed .
 The activities of Jack Ruby involving Cuba, Trafficante, McWillie, and the FBI represent a whole new dimension of the assassination . Jack Ruby's activities represent a new dimension that has yet to be fully explored .
 Ruby's connections to mob involvement in the assassination elevate him far above the simple, emotional nightclub owner pictured by the Warren Commission . But these connections, especially in light of the theory on mob involvement, certainly elevate Ruby far .
 Jack Ruby remained in contact with a variety of mob figures both by telephone and in person . Ruby was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Johnny Roselli, the gangster involved with Santos Trafficante and Sam Giancana in the CIA-Mafia assassination plots, is said to have been flown into Dallas on the morning of November 22, 1963 .
 It has become known that beginning in the summer of 1963 and continuing into November, the FBI had Roselli under surveillance . Roselli was the subject of numerous investigations .
 Researchers were surprised in later years that the bureau had monitored two separate meetings between Roselli and Jack Ruby that occurred within two months of Kennedy's death .
 One of the most intriguing stories to come out of the assassination case involved a woman who claimed to have worked for Ruby . Ruby is on record with foreknowledge of Kennedy’s death .
 Louisiana State Police Lieutenant Francis Fruge picked up a woman who had been thrown from a moving car two days before the assassination . The incident occurred in Eunice, Louisiana, on November 20, 1963 . The woman received minor abrasions when she was thrown from the car .
 The scene was depicted at the beginning of the Oliver Stone film but with no identification of the woman or explanation of its meaning . This scene was shown at the start of the film but no explanation was given .
 On the way she told Fruge that she had been traveling with two men “who were Italians or resembled Italians” from Florida to Dallas .
 Melba Christine Marcades, better known as Rose Cheramie, is best known for her role in the television series . She was married to Melba Marcades and later married to the same man .
 Cheramie told doctors at the state hospital that Kennedy was to be killed in Dallas, Texas . She told doctors there that Kennedy had been killed in the Dallas area .
 Hospital records show the woman was diagnosed as “without psychosis” The House Select Committee on Assassinations found she appeared lucid and appeared lucid . She was diagnosed with psychosis .
 Lieutenant Fruge immediately remembered the woman and her apparent foreknowledge . The day of the assassination, Lieutenant Frugge immediately recalled her .
 During questioning she said she said the two men were on their way from Florida to Dallas to kill Kennedy . She said they were headed to Dallas, Texas, to kill the president .
 She said she was to receive $8,000 for her part in this activity . She was then to accompany the two men to Houston to complete a drug deal and pick up her young son . She said they would then take her son to Houston and complete a deal .
 She gave Fruge the name of both a seaman and a ship that were involved in the drug deal . U.S. Customs verified this information through United States Customs . She gave him the information .
 Fruge also confirmed the woman’s story by talking to a Louisiana lounge owner .
 Owner knew the men to be two pimps who regularly transported prostitutes from Florida . Owner said he knew two men and a woman stopped at his lounge about November 20 . Owner knew men were pimps and said they regularly transport prostitutes .
 Fruge said he contacted Dallas police captain Will Fritz, the man in charge of the assassination investigation . He said he believed he had uncovered valuable information about the assassination probe .
 Fruge dropped his investigation after Fritz told him he “wasn’t interested,” he said . Fritz told Fritz he was “not interested” in the investigation .
 The FBI had no record of Cheramie’s prediction of the assassination, but it did have reports that a Melba Marcades had tipped agents that she was traveling to Dallas to deliver heroin to a man in Oak Cliff, then to Galveston to pick up a shipment
 Marcades/Cheramie was found dead by a highway near Big Sandy, Texas, September 4, 1965 . One month after yet another attempt to contact the FBI with similar information, the FBI found her body in Texas .
 A man told authorities that Cheramie was lying in the roadway, apparently after being thrown from a car, and that he drove over her head while trying to avoid her . A man said she was lying on the roadway after being hit by a car .
 Police could find no relationship between the woman and the driver and the case was closed . No relationship was found between the two men and the woman .
 The entire Rose Cheramie episode was extensively covered in a staff report to the House Select Committee on Assassinations . But oddly there was no mention of her in the committee’s report .
 Both federal investigations could not establish any link between Jack Ruby and Lee Harvey Oswald . Ruby and Oswald were involved in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 According to the Commission’s own internal memos, staffers were not all that certain . Yet, according to the memos, staff were not quite certain .
 Oswald’s landlady, Earlene Roberts, whose sister, Bertha Cheek, visited Ruby at his nightclub on November 18, had visited his sister Bertha . Oswald's friend, John Carter, was friendly with a close friend and employee of Ruby, Wanda Kill
 The House committee left the impression that no link existed between Ruby and Oswald but left the possibility open . The committee concluded that the investigation of Oswald and Ruby showed a variety of relationships that may have matured into an assassination conspiracy .
 As far back as 1964, General Edwin A Walker—himself a figure in the assassination case—told this author, “The Warren Commission Report was ridiculous and a sham as well as an insult to the public’s intelligence .
 Julia Ann Mercer identified both Ruby and Oswald as the men she saw near the Triple Underpass with a rifle shortly before the assassination . Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, claimed an FBI agent showed her a photograph of Jack Ruby the night before Oswald was shot .
 Stories have circulated around Dallas since 1963 about Ruby and Oswald being seen together . Ruby was seen with Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 On November 26, 1963, the Dallas Morning News quoted assistant district attorney Bill Alexander as saying, “ have received at least a hundred tips and are checking out each one.”
 As early as Monday, November 25, 1963, news reporters were receiving information of a Ruby-Oswald link .
 Some were not easy to dismiss, especially the number from Ruby’s Carousel Club . Some were hard to dismiss . Some of the most recent tweets were from Ruby's Carousel club .
 Madeleine Brown worked for one of Dallas’s leading advertising firms in 1963 . Brown was an advertising executive at the time of her career .
 After work, she and coworkers would unwind at various watering holes, including the Carousel Club, she said . After work she and her coworkers would often unwind .
 Brown recalled that in the spring of 1963 as she and her friends sat in the Carousel Club the conversation turned to speculation over who might have taken a shot at General Edwin A Walker . Brown said she and friends were talking about the possibility of the shooting .
 Jack Ruby blurt out that the man who shot at Walker was Lee Oswald . The group was surprised to hear Jack Ruby tell them that Lee Oswald shot Walker . Ruby said the man shot Walker was Oswald .
 Ruby seemed so confident of the name of Walker’s assailant that she took note of it . Brown took note because she had never heard it before .
 Ruby and Oswald tied to the assassination of President Kennedy . Ruby's name has been linked to the November 4, 1963, assassination . Oswald's widow says she was shocked to see the names linked to her husband's assassination .
 She told this author, “I asked around and found out that many people knew that Oswald and Ruby knew each other.” She said she asked around to find out more about the two men .
 Raymond Cummings is a former Dallas cabdriver . He says he was a cab driver for more than 30 years . Cummings says he has a lot of respect for the city .
 Cummings saw a news story with a photograph of David Ferrie, who claimed that he had never been in Dallas, Dallas . Cummings saw the photo of Ferrie in a photograph with a photo of him in Dallas .
 Cummings contacted Garrison’s office to say he had driven David Ferrie and Lee Harvey Oswald to Ruby's Carousel Club in the early part of 1963 . Cummings says he drove the Oswald and Ferrie to the club .
 Ruby and Oswald were seen together by employees of the Carousel Club . Oswald and Ruby were reportedly seen together at the club . Oswald was a member of the club's staff, according to reports .
 William D Crowe Jr. was using the stage name Bill DeMar and performing in Ruby’s Carousel Club at the time of the assassination . He called a news media friend right after Oswald's arrest right after his arrest .
 Oswald participated in his act about a week prior to the assassination, he said . Oswald had participated in Oswald's act a week before the assassination . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family, his father said .
 Crowe later said he was contacted by FBI agents who told him to go into hiding . Crowe says he was told to check out of his Dallas hotel and go in hiding after Associated Press story .
 Crowe was not asked if he had been intimidated or why he told the same story of seeing Oswald . Crowe told the Dallas Morning News reporter Kent Biffle several days later .
 The Warren Commission brushed off the testimony of Dallas electronics salesman Robert K Patterson, who said Jack Ruby along with a man who looked like Oswald bought some equipment from him on November 1, 1963 . The commission also brushed off testimony of a Dallas electronics salesman .
 The Commission noted that at least four other persons had told them of seeing Oswald in the Carousel Club, but these stories also were dismissed . The Commission also noted that four others had said they saw Oswald at the club .
 She was a singer at the nearby Colony Club and would frequently visit Ruby’s Carousel Club . Two weeks prior to the assassination, between shows [she was] visiting the club], between shows .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, or the man shot in the police station, was the man I met in the club two weeks before the assassination . But I know in my heart, he was Oswald, the man Oswald was the one I met .
 She said Ferrie was there so often that she initially took him to be assistant manager of the club . Ferrie has been at the club so often she took him on as assistant manager at the time .
 Ruby's story was supported by other Carousel employees who also recalled seeing Ruby and Oswald together . Oswald was found dead at the Carousel in 1963 .
 Karen Bennett Carlin, who danced in Ruby’s club using the name “Little Lynn,” was the woman to whom Ruby mailed a $25 money order minutes before shooting Oswald . Ruby mailed the money order to Carlin minutes before Oswald shot Oswald .
 "Carlin was highly agitated and was reluctant to make any statement to me," says Carlin . Carlin was "highly agitated" and "reluctant" when asked to make a statement, he says .
 She stated she was under the impression that Lee Oswald, Jack Ruby, and other individuals unknown to her, were involved in a plot to assassinate President Kennedy . She stated that she would be killed if she gave any information to the authorities .
 Janet Adams Conforto, known as “Jada, said she had seen Oswald in the Carousel Club . She told Dallas news reporters shortly after the assassination that she saw Oswald in Dallas .
 Ruby stripper Kathy Kay told the Dallas Times Herald in 1975 that she recalled seeing Oswald in the club and dancing with him . Kay said she danced with Oswald one of the men .
 This account is supported by Bobbie Louise Meserole, who danced at the Carousel Club under the name Shari Angel . This account has been supported by another dancer who danced in the club . She says the club was 'a great club'
 Meserole, who went on to become an ordained minister in Dallas, remembered Jack Ruby fondly . Ruby died at the age of 92 on August 18 .
 Ruby had ordered Kathy Kay to dance a bump and grind to embarrass Oswald . She told this author she recalled conversations with Kathy Kay and others in which they laughingly told how Ruby ordered her to dance . She said she was told by others that Kay had been ordered to dance bump-and
 Shari Angel’s husband, Walter ‘Wally’ Weston, was master of ceremonies until five days before the assassination, told of striking Oswald . Angel's husband was the Carousel Club's master of ceremony until the assassination .
 "I was working in the club one night approximately three weeks before the assassination," he says . He says he was working at the club when he was assassinated .
 I was on stage, doing my bit, and this guy was standing near the back wall. He was on his bit, doing his bit . He was standing on stage . He said: "I was on my bit. I was doing my part, and it was a bit of
 "I jumped off the stage and hit him. He said, “Well, I still think you're a communist,” he said . He said "Well, he said, "I still think he still thinks you’re a communist," she said .
 Weston said he recognized Oswald as the man in the club but did not say anything when questioned briefly by the FBI and a Dallas detective . He said he was afraid after discussing the matter with other Carousel employees .
 'The best thing to do is to stay out of it. When I discussed it with him , he said, ‘Wally,’ he said . 'Wally’s the best thing I’ve ever thought of is not to get involved in it.
 Willis later told a former FBI agent that he changed both his name and Social Security number after all the other members of the Carousel band were killed . Willis later said he changed his name after all of the other band members were killed.
 Willis said he definitely recalled one incident shortly before the assassination in which he returned a satchel to Oswald in the club’s parking lot after Oswald had left it in a circular booth .
 Weston claimed to have “bumped into” a gangster in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, who had been at a meeting with Ruby in the Carousel Club five days before the assassination . Another reason Weston decided to talk in 1976 was that he claimed he had ‘bumped
 There was a meeting held at Jack Ruby’s club the night he left there, which was five days before the assassination of President Kennedy . The meeting was held at Ruby's club the day before Kennedy's assassination .
 There were approximately six to eight guys from Chicago who came into the club—friends of Jack Ruby . "Jack Ruby" was friends of the Chicago gangster who came to the club .
 "I first really noticed them at about 1:30 in the morning, right before closing," he says . "They were there for about an hour," he adds .
 Four of them were sitting at a front table at the bar, the rest hung around the bar . Four of the bar's four owners were sitting in front of them at the time .
 "I was on stage telling jokes and while I was up there, the ones at the table were talking to each other," he says . "I'm not surprised. I was telling jokes," he adds .
 Jack Ruby explained to the policemen that everything was all right and that there was no problem . Jack Ruby, in the meantime, was explaining to the police that everything had been fine .
 Weston returned to the club after closing to retrieve his jacket . Weston might not have thought too much about this incident except that he returned after closing .
 One of the men from Chicago opened the door but refused to allow him inside . The men refused to let him inside, but he was allowed inside .
 Weston left the club after learning that something was going on in the club . Understanding that something very secret was going to be going on, Weston left . Weston left after learning of the secret .
 In 1976, after encountering one of the Chicago toughs who had been at the meeting, Weston decided he should tell his story . Weston decided to do so after encountering a Chicago tough man who'd been at a meeting .
 Weston’s story seems incredible, but at least two people have corroborated it . Weston: "I’m not sure what happened to me, but I’ve got a lot of respect for my family"
 A convicted murderer and mobster named Myron Thomas Billet, also known as Paul Buccilli, admitted in 1976 that he attended just such a meeting .
 I was at the Whitemarsh Valley Country Club back in the late part of 1963 when I was contacted by the Mob for a meeting in Dallas at Jack Ruby’s Carousel Club . I was called to meet with the Mob in Dallas back in 1963 .
 As I remember it, there was myself, Jack Ruby, Lee Oswald, Sam Giancana, John Roselli, and an FBI man . Jack Ruby was Jack Ruby and Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald was Lee Oswald's assassin .
 Three weeks later, JFK was hit and we all knew it wasn't done by one man . JFK was shot three weeks after JFK was assassinated .
 Sam told me then that he figured this would get us all killed before it was over . Sam said he figured it would get them all killed, and that it would be over .
 In 1990, he told of seeing Oswald, whom he recognized as his neighbor, inside Ruby’s Carousel Club . Oswald was a neighbor in the late 1960s and early '90s .
 Ester Ann Mash, who came forward only in recent years, came forward as an adult . Mash was the first woman to come forward as a sex offender . Mash is the second woman to have come forward in a similar way .
 Mash told this author she served drinks at a meeting in the Carousel Club that included ‘gangsters” from Chicago, Jack Ruby, and Lee Harvey Oswald . Mash served drinks in the club at the time of the assassination .
 A Dallas detective introduced her to Ruby early in 1963 . She had been a waitress at a restaurant near Love Field when she was introduced to Ruby .
 Shortly after their introduction, Ruby enticed her into working at the Carousel Club, but only as a waitress and hostess .
 Mash became a lover to Ruby, who she said took her to gambling parties around Dallas . Mash said Ruby took her out of her club duties to attend gambling parties .
 In the late spring of 1963, Ruby asked her to serve drinks at a gathering in a meeting area of the Carousel Club, she said . Ruby died at the age of 92 .
 Mash said the meeting was composed of Ruby, five “gangster types,” and a young man who only sipped beer . Mash said Ruby and five other gangsters were in attendance at the meeting .
 I was the only person allowed to enter the room and that was just to serve the drinks and then get out. I was only allowed to serve drinks, then leave the room . I was not allowed in the room to enter, but I was just serving drinks, and then getting out
 Five men dressed in suits, looking very businesslike, came in about ten thirty that night . Five men came in looking businesslike at the scene .
 They were all dark, swarthy men who looked like gangsters out of some movie . They were dark and swarthy . They looked like gangs from some movie. They were .
 There was another man, dressed real casual—he didn’t look like he fit in with the rest of the group at all . There was also a man who didn't look like the others, dressed casually .
 I am convinced that they were discussing killing Kennedy. It was a serious meeting and although I did not overhear what they were talking about at the time, I'm convinced that it was . They were talking to kill Kennedy.
 I knew it had something to do with the Mafia because everybody in town in those days knew Ruby had . Everybody in town knew Ruby was involved in the mob . I knew something had to be done with the mob, and it was a big mistake .
 "Jack asked me to take care of these guys, so later I played up to them, and discovered they were Mafia guys from Chicago" "Mafia guys" from Chicago . "Jack [Jack] played up the guys a little"
 "I had a very bad feeling, a premonition, that I had better get away from Dallas," she says . "It was real strange, but I had a real strange feeling," she adds .
 "I moved to Euless and got a job in a restaurant, then later moved to Phoenix," she says . "So I moved in and out of Phoenix. So I moved ... I got a restaurant job, then moved to a restaurant," she adds . "I'm not
 CNN.com's John Sutter reports that Oswald was shown in Oswald's home . He says his children were watching TV when they were showing them moving Oswald .
 A blood clot on the right side of his brain was a result of a car accident . But now he has a blood clot in his brain, he says . He says it was a car crash that left him with a brain injury .
 Carroll Jarnagin, a credible, if eccentric, attorney, tells the story of Ruby and Oswald . He says the Oswald case is even more damning than Ruby's story .
 Jarnagin explained to this author that he visited Ruby’s Carousel Club on October 4, 1963, to discuss a legal case with a stripper . He said he visited the club to discuss legal case .
 Jarnagin overheard Jack Ruby talking with another man at the club . Jack Ruby was a well-known member of the staff at the time .
 Lee Harvey Oswald used to rent a room on North Beckley in Oak Cliff, Texas . This was the name of the name he used to use to live in the area .
 They discussed using public lockers and pay telephones as part of hiding their plot . They then discussed using lockers, phones and lockers to hide the plot . The plotters then discussed how to hide their plot in public .
 Ruby assured Lee that he could shoot Connally from a window in the Carousel Club and then escape out a back door . Ruby told Lee he could use a window and escape out of the back door of the club . Ruby was the man who shot Connally in the head .
 He wanted half of the money in advance, but Ruby told him he would get one lump sum after the job was done . Ruby said he would only get a lump sum of money once the job is done .
 One thing that sets Jarnagin’s story apart from the others is that he contacted authorities with his information prior to the assassination . He contacted authorities before the assassination, according to the FBI .
 The day after hearing Ruby’s conversation, Jarnagin telephoned the Texas Department of Public Safety . Ruby was arrested in Texas on suspicion of assaulting a police officer .
 He was interviewed but his account of a Ruby-Oswald plot was buried deep in the volumes of the Warren Commission . He was never mentioned in its report .
 The Warren Commission quickly dismissed rumors circulating throughout Dallas in 1963-1964 that Ruby and Oswald knew each other . In fact, the Warren Commission dismissed rumors .
 Jarnagin said when he tried to tell the FBI what he knew, agents accused him of having hallucinations . He said agents said he was hallucinating .
 His tale of an Oswald-Ruby plot finally garnered headlines, this time in 2008 . Oswald's tale of a plot involving Oswald and Ruby finally made headlines again .
 District attorney Henry Wade revamped Jarnagin’s account, turning it into a script of Ruby and Oswald plotting, not against Governor Connally, but against President Kennedy . It seems Wade's account was revamped by the district attorney .
 His script adaptation was found in an old safe in the district attorney’s office . The script adaptation is found in a safe in a district attorney's office .
 No mention was made of the fact that the Ruby-Oswald plot was a genuine report to authorities Jarnagin made prior to the assassination . No mention of the report was made .
 The disparate meeting times given in these reports indicate that more than one meeting involving Ruby and Oswald occurred . The people involved indicate the possibility that there were more meetings .
 There is tantalizing evidence that authorities knew more than they were telling about Oswald's relationship with Ruby . Oswald and Ruby were involved in a political struggle that led to the deaths of Ruby and Oswald .
 Preston explained, “She was really scared because she had all that stuff.” Preston explained that she was “really scared”
 Cash told reporter Earl Golz, “The impression I got the papers were from the Latin American because he mentioned Ruby and he mentioned Oswald in the writings.” Cash said . Cash said the papers came from Latin American .
 He didn't mention the third party but he kept referring to a third party . He didn’t mention the . third party, he said .
 There was also a church brochure with markings indicating something about going to Cuba . Church brochure also had markings indicating that it was going to go there .
 One handwritten note referred to a plan to assassinate President Kennedy during the dedication of a lake or dam in Wisconsin . Preston said one handwritten note refers to a plot to assassinate Kennedy during a lake dedication .
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s signature on the registry of a restaurant in Hubertus, Wisconsin, dated September 16, 1963 . Lawmen in Wisconsin had speculated in December 1963 about the existence of just such a plan after discovering what appeared to be Oswald's signature in a restaurant .
 Kennedy indeed had made a speech on September 24, 1963, in Ashland, Wisconsin . It was part of a nationwide conservation tour .
 The FBI rejected the signature as Oswald’s and this subject received little attention outside Wisconsin . Oswald's signature was rejected by the FBI as Oswald's .
 The evidence of an Oswald-Ruby connection is overwhelming, says CNN's John Sutter . Despite protestations of the two federal investigations, the evidence is overwhelming . The evidence suggests that Oswald and Ruby were involved in the assassination .
 Whether it may ever be conclusively proven that Ruby and Oswald were in contact, there is no doubt that Ruby was in touch with associates of mob and Teamster leaders . Ruby's phone calls with mob associates increased in the days leading up to the assassination .
 In March 1963, Ruby made fewer than ten long-distance calls . From May to September this number averaged monthly between twenty-five and thirty-five calls . Ruby made less than ten calls in March 1963 .
 Ruby’s toll calls climbed to more than seventy in October and almost one hundred in November . Ruby's toll calls rose to almost 100 in November, according to CNN iReport .
 Warren Commission investigators Hubert and Griffin asked the FBI to thoroughly examine all calls by Ruby, his family, and his associates . This surge of phone traffic also intrigued Warren Commission Investigators .
 When the House committee got around to requesting these same records, most had been routinely destroyed . Most of the records were routinely destroyed, according to the committee .
 Ruby was frantically touching bases across the nation as November 22, 1963, approached . Ruby's calls were recorded in the days leading up to that date .
 Ruby called Harold Tannenbaum, who ran several New Orleans nightclubs owned at least part by mob boss Carlos Marcello . Some of Ruby’s calls may have served sinister purposes .
 Near the end of October, Ruby placed a call to Nofio Pecora, one of Marcello’s closest associates . Ruby placed the call to one of the closest associates in the late 1980s . Ruby is now in custody of a man accused of murdering Mar
 The House committee developed information that Pecora owned the Tropical Court Tourist Park, a New Orleans trailer court in which Tannenbaum lived . The committee also developed information about the park owner .
 Ruby made at least seven traceable calls to his “mentor,” gambler Lewis McWillie, beginning in June 1963 . Ruby's "mentor" was a gambler who helped Ruby make seven calls to him . Ruby made seven calls between June 1963 and June
 He also was in touch with Irwin S Weiner, a bondsman and insurance agent connected with Santos ‘Trafficante, Sam Giancana, and several other crime-syndicate figures .
 Robert "Barney" Baker was identified as “Hoffa’s ambassador of violence” by attorney general Robert Kennedy . He also placed a seventeenminute call in early November to Robert “Barney” Baker, the attorney general said .
 When questioned by House investigators, all of these telephone contacts said the calls were innocuous and pertained only to some union problems Ruby was having with the American Guild of Variety Artists . The calls were harmless, the contacts said .
 Union disagreements were not the only problem Ruby faced in the fall of 1963 . Ruby faced a host of other issues, including a shortage of union workers .
 Oswald's problems with the IRS alone were enough to motivate him to follow orders to kill Oswald . Oswald had problems with IRS alone, but his problems were enough for him to kill him .
 In November 1962, the government rejected Ruby’s offer to pay $8,000 to compromise the assessed taxes of more than $20,000 . Ruby had not filed returns for other federal taxes and had not paid these taxes as they became due . Ruby's offer was rejected because
 Ruby’s tax liability may have been closer to $60,000 than the $40,000 the Warren Commission mentioned . Ruby was complaining of his tax debts to anyone who would listen .
 An FBI check of more than fifty banking institutions revealed no attempt by Ruby to borrow money legitimately . Ruby was found not to have made an attempt to borrow legitimately .
 His flurry of phone calls would seem to indicate this as well as a quick trip to Las Vegas two weekends before the assassination . The flurry of calls and trips would seem indicate this .
 Marguerite Oswald claimed she was fired from her job after her employer, Fort Worth publisher and high-stakes gambler Amon G Carter Jr., traveled to Las Vegas at the same time Ruby was there . Oswald claimed that her employer had traveled to Vegas to meet with Ruby .
 Some speculate that Carter got word from Vegas sources that Marguerite should be dropped from the family’s employment before her son was named as a presidential assassin . Some have speculated that Carter .
 The Warren Commission rejected the idea that Ruby visited America’s gambling capital . But the House committee found ‘credible evidence’ that Ruby was there .
 A man named Ruby claimed to own a club in Dallas, Texas, attempted to cash a check one weekend in mid-November . A cashier and the credit manager of the Stardust Hotel recalled that a man claimed to be the owner of the club .
 The Warren Commission reported in 1963-1964 that the shooting of Lee Harvey Oswald by Jack Ruby was the spontaneous act of a grief-stricken man who was concerned with the possibility of Mrs. Oswald's death . The shooting of Oswald was reported as a spontaneous act by Ruby .
 Today that story, still repeated in the news media, has been shown to be a lie and a legal ploy . The story, which still persists in the media, was shown to have been a lie . Today, it is still being shown that story .
 Ruby was visited by Dallas attorney Tom Howard less than three hours after shooting Oswald . Ruby shot Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in the early hours of Oswald's death .
 Ruby scribbled a note to attorney Joe H Tonahill saying, “Joe, you should know this.” Months later during his trial, Ruby wrote a note . Ruby wrote to the defense attorney that he was not guilty of the charge .
 Ruby also admitted this ploy to attorney Melvin Belli, as recorded in his book, Dallas Justice . Ruby admitted to the ploy to his attorney, as well as his attorney . Ruby was convicted of attempted murder in 1999 .
 Ruby confessed to shooting Oswald in the basement of the Dallas police station . Ruby's confession and movements during the assassination weekend all portray a man who stalked Oswald . Ruby’s movements in Dallas show that he was motivated by motives not his own .
 Ruby awoke about 9:30m. on the day of the assassination and drove to the offices of the Dallas Morning News . He tried to visit entertainment columnist Tony Zoppi, but was killed in the assassination attempt . Ruby was shot by President Richard Nixon in 1968 .
 Ruby said he went to the paper’s advertising office and began to compose ad copy for his club . Ruby failed to find Zoppi, Ruby said, and began writing the ad copy . Ruby said the club's ad copy was written for the club by the ad agency .
 Ruby claimed to have remained at the paper from nearly 11m. until well after the assassination . Several News employees, such as John Newnam and Wanda Walker, confirmed this .
 All accounts of Ruby at the newspaper contain gaps when he was out of sight . However, all the accounts of him at the paper contain gaps .
 One reporter told the FBI that Ruby was “missed for about twenty to twenty-five minutes” before reappearing . Ruby reappeared shortly after the assassination, the FBI says .
 According to Ruby, he drove back to the Carousel Club after learning of the assassination at the newspaper . Ruby says he drove to the club after learning about the assassination .
 Club employee Andrew Armstrong later stated that Ruby did not come to the club until nearly 2m. and several witnesses placed Ruby at Parkland Hospital . However, club employee said that Ruby was not at the club for nearly two hours before he arrived .
 Ruby made several phone calls from the Carousel Club that afternoon and was visibly upset, according to employees’ accounts . Ruby made a series of phone calls to the club, employees said . Ruby is believed to be the owner of the club .
 He claimed he left the club late in the afternoon, but was seen in the crowded Dallas police headquarters between 4 and 4:30m. He claimed to have been in the police station at 4.30m .
 Ruby was placed at the police station at different times between 4 and 7:30m. Various persons, including a reporter and policemen, placed Ruby at different places and times . Ruby is believed to have been in the custody of the police .
 By 9m., according to phone records, Ruby was back at his apartment, and at 10m., he visited a Dallas synagogue . Ruby was arrested at 9:30 p.m. Tuesday in Dallas .
 Ruby was back at Dallas police headquarters armed with about a dozen sandwiches he had bought to give to officers . Ruby was armed with sandwiches he'd bought from police headquarters . Ruby: "I'm not scared of police officers, I'm scared of them. I'm afraid of them"
 Ruby was still there shortly after midnight when Oswald was taken to a basement assembly room for a news conference . Ruby was in the room at the time of Oswald's capture .
 If the accounts of a Ruby-Oswald relationship are true, it would not seem odd if the accounts are true .
 The midnight news conference was tumultuous and if Ruby’s plan was to silence Oswald there, there was never a clear shot . Ruby's plan for Oswald's death was never clear shot at the scene .
 He reportedly helped arrange a radio interview for District Attorney Wade . He brought sandwiches and drinks to news personnel at KLIF radio . He also drove around downtown encountering one of his strippers, Kay Coleman .
 Ruby was exhorted to move against Oswald, if his account can be believed . During this supposedly chance meeting, Ruby allegedly told Oswald to kill him . Ruby's account is not believed to be true .
 They talked and they carried on, and they thought I was the greatest guy in the world, he said . He stated they should cut this guy into ribbons, and so on. So on. They talked . They carried on . They said they thought he was the best guy in
 Much of what is known of Ruby’s movements during that weekend is confusing and contradictory . Ruby was touching bases all over town —especially the Dallas police station, where Oswald was being held .
 Jack Ruby may have tried to avert his rapidly approaching confrontation with Oswald . Jack Ruby’s Warnings may have been made in the early morning hours of November 24, 1963 .
 The public was not told was that the man who took one of the calls recognized the voice of Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby's voice was heard in the call .
 Dallas police lieutenant Billy R Grammer was a young officer working in the communications room early on November 24, 1963 . Billy Grammer died in the shooting .
 Grammer and his superior wrote up a report for Chief Curry . Grammer's superiors took the warning seriously to the police chief .
 Later in the moming Grammer was awakened by his wife who told him that Jack Ruby had just shot Oswald in the basement of the police station .
 A stunned Grammer told his wife that he suddenly realized that the familiar voice on the phone was Ruby’s . Grammer said he was stunned when he realized that he was talking to Ruby .
 In 1988, Grammer told British television that he remained convinced that the caller was Ruby . Grammer had a chance meeting and conversation with Ruby in a restaurant near police headquarters only a week before the call .
 If the caller was Ruby and if he did have inside knowledge of the Oswald transfer, then it is clear that Oswald’s shooting was premeditated and involved others . Of course, if the caller is Ruby, Ruby would have known of the transfer of Oswald from Ruby .
 The execution of Oswald went off according to plan, despite warnings . Despite warnings, the execution of the transfer plans went off well .
 Ruby told the FBI and the Warren Commission that he remained at his apartment until after 10m. on that Sunday when he left to mail a money order to Lynn Carlin, but several witnesses and a call from a cleaning lady seem to belie that notion . Ruby said he stayed at his
 Ruby’s roommate George Senator also tried to say that Ruby was home in the early moming but his story proved inconsistent . Even the Warren Commission expressed suspicions about it .
 Warren Richey, a cameraman for WBAP-TV in Fort Worth, reports seeing a man in front of the Dallas police station . He was “positive, pretty sure in my own mind” was Jack Ruby, he said .
 Richey’s observation was corroborated by two other WBAP newsmen . Ira Walker and John Smith corroborated with the WBAP .
 The three newsmen were amazed when Ruby’s mug shot was broadcast over the air . The three men were amazed a short time later .
 Characteristically, the Warren Commission downplayed the testimony and suggested the men were all mistaken . The Warren Commission chose to believe Ruby, rather than believe Ruby .
 The Commission also failed to seriously consider the statements of Ray Rushing, a Plano, Texas, preacher who had tried to visit Oswald at the police station that morning . Rushing's statements were not considered seriously .
 Rushing told Dallas police lieutenant Jack Revill that he had held a brief conversation with Ruby about 9:30 m.m. during a ride in a police station elevator . Shortly after Oswald’s death .
 A call from a cleaning woman has been used to show that he was indeed home . The call was used to prove that he had indeed been home . A cleaning woman was also used to make sure he was home .
 Elnora Pitts, sixty, cleaned Ruby's apartment every Sunday . Ruby's mother, Ruby, was the owner of the apartment where she died . Ruby, Ruby’s mother, said she was shocked to find her daughter had died .
 She told the Warren Commission she called each Sunday to verify whether she should work that day . She said she called every Sunday to check if she was going to work that Sunday .
 She said a man answered and she identified herself but the man didn’t seem to recognize her name or the fact that she was to clean the apartment . She said he didn't seem to know her name and the fact she was cleaning .
 By now the woman was frightened by this man, who didn’t seem to know her . By now, the woman had been frightened by the man . She was frightened when he approached her .
 Jack Ruby was in the Western Union office just down the street from the police station at 11:17m. He was definitely in the office at the time . Ruby is believed to have been involved in the robbery . Ruby was shot in the head by police officers on Sunday morning .
 Ruby received a receipt for a $25 money order from Karen Carlin in Fort Worth . Ruby was sending the money order to Carlin, Texas, in time stamped on the receipt .
 Carlin told Dallas police she had talked to Ruby earlier that morning and that Ruby obviously was very upset . Carlin also worked for Pat Kirkwood’s Cellar in Fort Worth, Texas .
 The time Ruby sent the money order was only four minutes from the time he shot Oswald . Ruby sent it to Oswald four minutes after Oswald was shot .
 Supporters of the official version of the assassination have argued that if Ruby intended to shoot Oswald, he could not have known that Oswald’s jail transfer would be delayed almost an hour and he would not have sent the money order . Oswald's jail transfer was delayed an hour .
 Ruby’s shooting of Oswald must have been a spontaneous act, they say . Ruby shot Oswald in the head with a bullet to the head . Oswald was shot by Ruby in Oswald's home in Dallas, Texas .
 This idea of a conspiracy to silence Oswald is based on several known facts, including the fact that Oswald was shot dead . This idea was based on the fact Oswald was killed in Oswald's shooting spree .
 George Senator, Ruby’s roommate, was at the Eatwell Café near the police station the morning Ruby shot Oswald . According to Kantor, George Senator was there the morning .
 Reportedly Senator went to a pay phone and called Dallas attorney Jim Martin, whom he asked to represent his friend Ruby for murdering Lee Harvey Oswald . Ruby was accused of murdering the accused assassin, Lee Harvey .
 Ruby was in and out of the police station the entire weekend, stalking Oswald . Ruby (or someone) tried to warn the authorities of Oswald’s death, even relating specific police precautions . Both the mob and the federal government had enough leverage on Ruby to force him to such an
 Only a minute or so before the Oswald shooting, Ruby’s initial lawyer, Tom Howard, had expressed concern over Mrs. Ruby . Howard was Ruby's initial lawyer before the shooting . Howard is the one who cooked up his concern .
 Oswald peered through the basement jail office window just as Oswald was being taken off the elevator . Oswald was taken from the elevator at the time of the shooting . Oswald had a motive for the assassination of President Kennedy as a possible motive .
 McGee later that day reported, “At this time, Oswald was brought off the jail elevator and Tom Howard turned away from the window and went back toward the Harwood Street door”
 Detective Jim Leavelle says he never understood the reason for the nearly one-hour delay in transferring Oswald . Captain Will Fritz gave him the order to move just after conferring with FBI and Secret Service officials .
 Leavelle said he had been standing around still handcuffed to Oswald for nearly an hour past the announced movement time . Fritz turned from the federal officers and said, “Everything’s all set.” He said he was standing around holding Oswald for almost an hour .
 In 1963-1964, the federal government in the form of the Warren Commission offered a simple explanation for Oswald’s death . Oswald's death was the result of a single assassination in 1963 .
 Ruby strolled down the police department’s Main Street ramp to the basement minutes after mailing the money order . Ruby arrived within shooting distance of Oswald, according to the report .
 Ruby’s shooting of Oswald was not a spontaneous act in that it involved at least some premeditation . Ruby shot Oswald in the head with a bullet to the head . Ruby's shooting was premeditated, according to the FBI .
 There is evidence that the Dallas Police Department withheld relevant information from the Warren Commission concerning Ruby’s entry to the scene of the Oswald transfer . There is also evidence that Dallas Police .
 Ruby himself appeared to support the idea of police aid in reaching Oswald . Ruby: “Who else could have timed it so perfectly by seconds?”
 Roselli once told Jack Anderson, “When Oswald was picked up, the underworld conspirators feared he would crack and disclose information that might lead to them," he said .
 This almost certainly would have brought a massive U.S. crackdown on the Mafia . This would have been a massive United States crackdown .
 The station was the NBC affiliate in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex . On November 24, 1963, the station had a remote truck and cameras at the Dallas police station . It was the first time a remote camera was used by the station .
 One camera was set up across the Main Street ramp driveway and was running more than thirty minutes before Oswald’s arrival in the basement . Another camera was running over the ramp driveway more than 30 minutes before he arrived .
 Oswald's transfer was delayed by further questioning of Oswald in Fritz’s office . The transfer, originally set for about 10:30m., was delayed . Oswald was questioned by Fritz in his office .
 Oswald’s car moves out of the basement garage area and up the Main Street ramp . About a quarter of an hour prior to Oswald's arrival, a car is seen moving up the ramp . Oswald's car was seen in the garage .
 Its horn is sounded loudly as a warning to people on the sidewalk above . Its horn was sounded loudly to warn people in the street above .
 Newsmen and police, both uniformed and plain-clothes, mill about in expectation . Newsmen, police and police mill around in expectation.
 Another horn blows but the sound is more muted, indicating that the car may be farther back in the garage area . Then more than a minute or so before Oswald arrives, another horn blows . Oswald arrives .
 Jack Ruby moves in from behind the camera and shoves his .38-caliber snubnosed revolver into Oswald’s stomach . Ruby was the last man to be shot in the head by Oswald in the July 4, 1918 .
 The officers who, moments before, had been standing unnoticed beside them . Soon these reporters are interviewing the officers . Soon they are interviewing them, and they're interviewing them .
 More than a couple indicated that they indeed recognized Jack Ruby but they declined to give his name or say more .
 More than one officer says he thought Oswald’s assailant came from the vicinity of a green car parked back in the police garage . Oswald's assailant thought to have come from a parked green car, police say .
 Ruby came through the parked cars in the basement and may have paused near a green car, perhaps the very car that sounded its horn moments before Oswald was brought down .
 The film also indicates that many of the officers in the police basement recognized Ruby right away . Ruby was arrested in the basement of the police station . The film indicates that Ruby was recognized by the officers .
 Detective Leavelle told this author he both recognized Ruby and saw the gun in his hand as he stepped from the crowd of reporters . But he said he was powerless to do anything in the split second it took to shoot Oswald .
 "When I saw Ruby, I tried to jerk Oswald aside to get him out of the way. When I saw . Oswald," he said, "I tried to jer Oswald aside"
 Oswald was to have been transported in an unmarked police car, which was only feet from where he was shot . Oswald was shot in the head during the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Police gave Oswald artificial respiration while waiting for an ambulance to arrive . Instead of loading Oswald into a police car standing by and rush him to a hospital, the mortally wounded prisoner was taken back into the jail office .
 Oswald’s lower abdomen, ruptured two main arteries carrying blood to the heart, and tore through the spleen, pancreas, liver, and right kidney . Oswald's lower abdomen was punctured by the ruptured main arteries and ruptured the heart and spleen .
 Oswald’s chest was the worst possible reaction to the internal bleeding the abdominal wound had caused . Oswald died of internal bleeding after his abdominal wound was punctured with a bullet wound .
 Chief Curry was told to remain in his office for a call from Mayor Cabell . Chief Curry finally arrived in the basement of the basement .
 Oswald was taken to Parkland Hospital, where he was pronounced dead at 1:07m. Oswald was later taken to a local hospital where he died .
 Jack Ruby had been hustled out of the police basement and taken, ironically enough, to the jail cell that Oswald had just vacated . Ruby was taken to a jail cell in Oswald's jail cell . Oswald had been taken to the cell that Ruby had vacated .
 He displayed an odd inability to recall the Oswald shooting with any clarity . He displayed a strange inability to remember Oswald shooting .
 One of the auto-theft detectives in charge of placing Ruby in jail was struck by his strange behavior immediately after the shooting . Detectives say Ruby was acting strangely after being shot in the head .
 Oswald died after two hours, the Secret Service came up and told him, "Oswold" Oswald had died . Oswald's death was confirmed by the head of the Secret .
 Instead of being shocked, he became calm, he quit sweating, his heart slowed down . He quit sweating and slowed down as he tried to keep calm . He said he was shocked by the experience .
 I asked him if he wanted a cigarette and he advised me he didn’t smoke. ‘I asked him for a cigarette, he said he didn't smoke.’ He told me he doesn't smoke .
 "I was just astonished at this complete difference of behavior from what I had expected," she said . "It was a complete difference from what had been expected. I was astonished," she added .
 On November 27, 1963, a Dallas grand jury indicted Jack Ruby for Oswald’s murder . Ruby was convicted of Oswald's murder in November 1963 .
 Only a handful of Americans failed to see what undoubtedly was the most widely viewed homicide in history . After all, only a handful .
 A change-of-venue hearing was conducted on February 10, 1964, but changed the location of Ruby’s trial was denied . Because of this publicity, a change of venue hearing was held in 1964 .
 Ten days later, on March 14, 1964, a jury returned a guilty verdict, with the judge handing down a death sentence . The jury was eight men and four women .
 Many people considered Ruby a hero for eliminating Kennedy’s presumed assassin . Ruby was considered a hero by many for eliminating JFK's presumed assassin.
 Despite the favorable pretrial publicity, Ruby never had much of a chance in the Dallas of those days . Ruby was convicted of murder in 1999 .
 Right-wing assistant district attorney Bill Alexander says Ruby was about as handicapped as you can get in Dallas . Ruby was arrested on suspicion of assaulting a Dallas police officer .
 Attorney Joe Tonahill was asked to join in his defense . To appeal to the mind-set of Dallas at that time, he was asked .
 Tonahill had the east Texas drawl and the rural mannerisms more acceptable to a Dallas jury . The jury convicted him of aggravated assault on a Dallas woman .
 Ruby’s defense was flamboyant San Francisco superattorney Melvin Belli . Belli quickly set himself at odds with the down-home provincialism of Dallas . Ruby's defense was the heavyweight of his defense .
 Belli put a string of psychiatrists on the stand to testify in his trial . Belli: "I'm not going to get a lot of the blame"
 It also meant that he would not allow Ruby to take the stand on his own behalf . It also means that he will not allow him to testify on behalf of his client .
 The failure to allow Ruby to testify, coupled with the tight security in the Dallas County Jail, effectively kept Ruby isolated from the news media and the public . Ruby was convicted of murder in 2008 of attempted murder of two women .
 Ruby even cautioned his few visitors to the jail that his conversations were being recorded and monitored . Ruby even warned visitors to his jail that their conversations would be recorded . Ruby was released from jail in 2009 after a decade in prison .
 The only reporter to get a private interview with Ruby during his trial in March 1964 was nationally syndicated columnist Dorothy Kilgallen . Ruby was convicted of murder in 1964 .
 Kilgallen biographer Lee Israel says the pair met in a small office behind the judge’s bench . Judge Brown, impressed with the famous newspaperwoman, agreed to meet her .
 Kilgallen mentioned this unique private meeting with Ruby to close friends, but she did not publicly write about it . She did not write about the meeting .
 That she withheld suggests strongly that she was either saving the information for her book, Murder One, or that she had decided to devote a chapter of it to the Ruby trial . She withheld information from the FBI .
 Kilgallen may have obtained inside assassination information from yet another source, Israel records . Israel also records that toward the end of her life she may have gotten inside assassination info from another source .
 Crawford had become a principal owner of PepsiCola, the firm that counted Richard Nixon as an attorney . Crawford had been an attorney at PepsiCola before her husband died .
 Both Nixon and Crawford had been in Dallas the week of the assassination and may have been privy to inside information .
 Whatever information Kilgallen learned and from whatever source, it fired her desire to solve the JFK assassination . Whatever information she learned from her source, she wanted to solve JFK's assassination .
 It was initially reported that she died of a heart attack, but quickly this was changed to an overdose of alcohol and pills . Initially thought she had died of an alcohol overdose, but this was quickly changed to a drug overdose .
 No trace of her notes or writings about what she may have learned from Ruby or Crawford was ever found . Her notes were never found .
 During Ruby’s trial, Dallas County district attorney Henry Wade made a strong case for premeditation . Wade carefully skirted the issue of conspiracy . Ruby was convicted of murder in 2008 .
 The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals reversed Ruby’s conviction on October 5, 1966 . Ruby's conviction was overturned in 1966 . Judge Brown's refusal of a change of venue prompted the court to reverse the conviction .
 Ruby was interviewed by the Warren Commission on June 7, 1964 . Ruby was not allowed to testify at his trial, but he was interviewed . Ruby's trial was held in 1964 .
 Representing the Warren Commission were U.S. Supreme Court chief justice Earl Warren and representative Gerald R Ford . Representing them were United States Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren .
 Also present were attorneys Leon Jaworski and Robert G Storey, who were acting as liaisons between the Commission and Texas authorities . Secret Service agent Elmer W Moore, Secret Service . Also present: Dallas County assistant district attorney Jim Bowie, sheriff Bill Decker, sheriff .
 The two Commission staffers who were in charge of the Ruby investigation were not allowed to sit in on this important interview . The two staffers were involved in an internal squabble over the handling of Dallas witnesses .
 After about an hour of a rambling account of his activities prior to shooting Oswald, it appeared that Warren was ready to wrap up the interview . Warren was asked questions about his activities before shooting Oswald .
 Ford then began questioning Ruby about his trips to Cuba in 1959, but just as the answers appeared to be leading into fruitful territory, Warren cut Ford off and changed the subject . Ford then tried to get the answers back from Ruby .
 Tonahill later told newsman Seth Kantor, “Ford never did finish his interrogation on Cuba.” Ford never did .
 Ruby begged to be taken to Washington, away from Dallas, at least eight times . Ruby begged for help in Washington, Texas, before being taken to Dallas .
 Warren: "Well, the public attention that it would attract, and the people who would be around.” Warren said . Warren: “Well, well, I would like to see the people around. ... I would rather see it as a place that would attract" Warren
 We have no place for you to be safe when we take you out, and we are not law enforcement officers, and it isn’t our responsibility to go into anything of that kind . We are not police officers, we are just taking you out .
 If you don’t take me back to Washington tonight to give me a chance to prove to the President that I am not guilty, then you will see the most tragic thing that will ever happen, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz: "If you don't take
 "It may not be too late, whatever happens, if our President, Lyndon Johnson, knew the truth from me," she says . "It's not too late for Lyndon Johnson to know the truth," she writes .
 Asked if he knew Officer Tippit, he replied that “there was three Tippits on the force” but he knew only one . He said he didn’t think he was the murdered policeman .
 No one followed up on this to find out which Tippit Ruby did know and how he knew it wasn't the murdered officer . Incredibly, no one did follow up to this .
 To this author’s knowledge, there were no other Tippits on the police force at that time . No other officers were involved in the incident .
 Ruby had been seen in the Carousel Club shortly before the assassination with a rich Dallas oilman . Ruby was seen with a man who paid for an anti-Kennedy newspaper ad . Officer Tippit and an oilman were also in the club at the time .
 As early as December 1963, Ruby had asked to be given a lie detector test, perhaps reasoning that such a test would bring out the truth by revealing his account of events to be false . Ruby had also asked to have a lie test in December 1963 .
 During his meeting with Warren he again begged to be given a polygraph test . The Commission dutifully agreed to give him the test .
 A polygraph test was administered to Ruby on July 18, 1964, and his answers did not indicate he was lying . Ruby's answers on the polygraph did not appear to indicate he had lied .
 Test results have been used to support the contention that Ruby was not part of any conspiracy and shot Oswald only out of personal motives . Ruby shot Oswald out of love for his own life .
 In view of the serious question raised as to Ruby’s mental condition, no significance should be placed on the polygraph examination and it should be considered nonconclusive as the charts cannot be relied upon . The chart chart is not a reliable source of reliability .
 The Warren Commission entourage prepared to leave Ruby’s interview . Ruby was desperately trying to tell them something outside the surveillance of Dallas authorities . Ruby's interview was interrupted by the Warren Commission .
 Failure to fully question Jack Ruby was one of the Commission’s greatest mistakes, if it was a mistake . The Commission should have fully questioned Ruby .
 Jack Ruby’s moods went from confident highs to suicidal lows following his trial and interview by the Warren Commission . Jack Ruby died in the days after his trial following his interview . Ruby's suicide was the result of his suicide .
 A prisoner with few opportunities to communicate with the outside, Ruby nevertheless was given the run of sheriff Bill Decker’s jail . Ruby was a prisoner with little opportunity to communicate . Ruby is now serving a life sentence in a federal prison .
 He reportedly was able to roam freely, occasionally use the telephone, and even sleep in a corridor . He was reportedly able to sleep in the corridor and use the phone .
 At all times he was under close guard, especially after several inept suicide attempts . But at all times, he kept his life at a minimum of secrecy .
 On one occasion he tried to hang himself but there was not enough time to rip his clothing and fashion a knot before a guard got to him . On another occasion, he was killed by a guard at the age of 50 .
 Ruby became so despondent he tried to split his skull by running headlong into a wall . Another time, Ruby became depressed he ran headlong against a wall in a bid to escape the pain .
 His most pathetic attempt took place when a guard went off for a drink of water . The guard had to go off to get a drink from the water .
 Ruby unscrewed an overhead lightbulb, then threw water from his own glass onto his feet as a conduit . Ruby then unscrews a light bulb, then throws water from a glass onto the floor .
 He couldn’t reach the light socket with his finger while standing in the water . However, he couldn't reach the socket with a finger while he was standing in water .
 His guard found him ineffectually jumping up and down trying to complete the circuit . His guard, deputy sheriff Jess Stevenson, found him jumping .
 Stevenson: The attempt was “something nearly comical,” Stevenson told newsman Seth Kantor . Stevenson: "It was almost comical. It was the attempt"
 As time dragged on and his isolation began to take its toll, Ruby became more despondent . Ruby became despondate as his isolation took its toll on him .
 His mood worsened after he came to believe Stevenson was passing information to authorities . Stevenson had chatted at length with the prisoner after preaching the Bible to him, he said .
 Long after the Warren Commission had issued its report, Ruby apparently wrote a 16-page letter to a fellow prisoner who was leaving the jail . Ruby was waiting for the outcome of his appeal to be heard of his conviction .
 Ruby asked the prisoner to memorize names and facts in a letter, then destroy it . Ruby asked him to do the same, then memorize the names of the prisoners .
 The prisoner, identified only as “John,” decided instead to sell the letter . The letter ended up in the hands of longtime researcher Penn Jones .
 The letter is disjointed, rambling, and full of references to Nazis, the death of Jews, and, most intriguing, derogatory references to Lyndon Johnson . The letter includes references to Nazi Germany, the Holocaust, and references to LBJ .
 The people here want everyone to think I am crazy, so if what I know is actually is actually , and then no one will believe me, because of my supposed insanity . The people in the U.S. want people to think she is crazy, she says .
 A Study in Illegitimate Power, by J Evetts Haley, opens your eyes to a lot of things . It might open you up to see a lot more of the truth in the world .
 I am going to die a horrible death anyway, so what would I have to gain by writing all this? I'm not going to write all this anyway, I'm sure I will die anyway, but I'm going to do it anyway .
 Johnson is going to try to have an all-out war with Russia and when that happens, Johnson and his cohorts will be on the side-lines where they won’t get hurt . The Americans may get wiped out, while the Russians may get killed .
 Only one person could have had that information, and that man was Johnson who knew weeks in advance as to what was going to happen . This had been planned long before the president himself knew about , so you figure that one out .
 Johnson was in a car in the rear and safe when the shooting took place . "The only one who gained by the shooting of the president was Johnson," he said .
 Ruby smuggled out of the Dallas County Jail, Ruby was more blunt in a second letter . Ruby was arrested in 2008 for allegedly smuggling drugs out of jail . Ruby has been charged with drug possession and murder .
 In all the history of the U.S. never has a president been elected that has the background of Johnson . Johnson's background is that of Johnson's .
 Ruby was interviewed by psychiatrist Werner Teuter shortly before his death . Ruby died at the age of 92 . Ruby was known to be a cult hero .
 A Nazi connection to the assassination is both well documented and considerable . The Nazi connection is also well documented .
 The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals overturned Ruby’s conviction on October 5, 1966, and ordered a new trial . Ruby's conviction was overturned in 1966 and he was sentenced to life in prison .
 On December 7, 1966, his new trial was ordered moved from Dallas to Wichita Falls, a small Texas city near the Oklahoma border . The trial will be moved to a small, small Texas town near the state's border .
 Ruby's time in jail would be counted against a probable short prison term for murder without malice . Ruby is likely to walk free within another month or two, as his time is counted against his jail time .
 He certainly would have been allowed to post bond and become accessible to the public . He would have posted bond and been able to be accessible to public .
 On December 9, 1966, Ruby was moved from Dallas County Jail to Parkland Hospital . Ruby complained of persistent coughing and nausea . Ruby's trial site had been announced, but his new trial site was announced .
 Ruby’s cancer was too far advanced to be treated by surgery or radiation . Ruby was diagnosed with cancer the next day, but the diagnosis was later changed to cancer .
 Doctors suspected that blood clots were forming and they administered oxygen and Ruby seemed to recover . Ruby was taken to the hospital on January 2, 1967 . Ruby survived .
 Despite emergency procedures, he was pronounced dead at 10:30m. the next day . The next day he suffered a spasm and died in hospital . He suffered from a severe spasm, but was later pronounced dead .
 The proceeds from this record was used to pay for Ruby's burial expenses . Ruby simply reiterated the official account of his actions, which the House Select Committee on Assassinations proved false .
 This record also once again put the public off the trail of evidence by repeating the same story reported in 1963-1964 . This record was also put on the cover of evidence, again .
 Earl Rose showed the heaviest concentration of cancer cells in Ruby’s right lung . Earl Rose also showed the highest concentration of cells in the lung . Ruby was diagnosed with cancer in December .
 A massive blood clot had formed in a leg, passed through the heart, and lodged in Ruby’s lung . Ruby died from a pulmonary embolism .
 Ruby’s doctors had said they believed his cancer had originated in the pancreas, but Dr. Dr. Ruby's doctors said they had said that they believed that his cancer started in the Pancreas . Ruby was diagnosed with cancer in December .
 With the announcement of his inoperable cancer, there was immediate and widespread suspicion that Ruby had been maneuvered into killing Oswald knowing he had only a short time to live . Oswald had only been diagnosed with cancer . Oswald died in November 1945 .
 Rose was asked by the House committee if there was any chance that Ruby could have known about his cancer in November 1963 . Rose says he was not aware of his cancer until November 1963, when he was diagnosed .
 In the later summer of 1966, jail doctor Julian Mardock found Ruby was in good health . Ruby was released from jail in the summer of that year .
 A doctor "down from Washington" would take over Ruby’s case, Ruby says . Ruby was told he was no longer needed, as a doctor ‘down from D.C. would take it over . Ruby says he was told that he was not needed .
 "We had a phony doctor come in to from Chicago, just as phony and as queer as a three-dollar bill," she says . "I'm not a doctor. I'm a doctor," she said .
 "I never said anything to Decker or anybody. . . . one day when I started to leave, Ruby shook hands with me and I could feel a piece of paper in his palm . He said it was a conspiracy and he said if you will keep your eyes open and your mouth
 Maddox was not the only law-enforcement officer to suspect that Ruby’s death was not entirely natural . Maddox: Ruby's death may not have been a natural death .
 He also was a government expert on torture and brainwashing . He also turned up in the cases of Sirhan Sirhan and Patty Hearst .
 West's name has cropped up in many reports and documents pertaining to the government’s MK-ULTRA mind-control experiments and may also have been connected to covert cancer research . West may also be involved in the government's mind control experiments .
 At least one former Dallas law-enforcement officer offered a more mundane explanation for Ruby’s sudden and rampant cancer . Ruby was diagnosed with cancer at the age of 48 .
 Bruce McCarty operated an electron microscope at Southwest Medical School near Parkland, Florida . He operated the microscope at the school's Southwest Medical Center .
 He told this author that he was called back to work during the holidays in 1966 to study Ruby’s cancer cells . Ruby's cancer cells were the subject of a series of studies .
 There are two types of cancer cells:cilia and microvilli, indicating an origin in the digestive system . McCarty explained that there are two cancer cells that indicate origin in respiratory and digestive systems .
 These cells are difficult to differentiate with a regular microscope, hence the need for his electron microscope . These cells can't be separated from each other with regular microscopes .
 Ruby’s cells were microvilli, indicating his cancer originated in the digestive system . Ruby's cancer originated from his digestive system, Dr. McCarty said . Ruby was diagnosed with cancer at the age of 24 .
 Judyth Vary Baker claimed to have met Ruby in New Orleans while working in David Ferrie’s covert cancer lab . Traditional medical science has claimed this is impossible but recall the account .
 There has never been a lack of evidence in the assassination of President Kennedy . The evidence has been overwhelming evidence of the Kennedy assassination .
 In addition to the several hundred witnesses in Dealey Plaza, there was an abundance of film and still pictures as well as documentation and documentation . A great deal of physical evidence was also found in the photographs .
 Evidence includes empty shell cases, empty shells, a sniper's nest, a rifle and even a convincing—if belated—palm print on the suspected murder weapon .
 The rapid accumulation of evidence prompted Dallas County district attorney Henry Wade to proclaim to the media he had an open-and-shut case against Lee Harvey Oswald the day after the shooting . Oswald was found dead in the Dallas suburb of Dallas .
 A long and thoughtful look at most of the evidence reveals just as many questions and as much confusion as the medical evidence . However, a long look at the evidence in this case reveals just more questions and confusion .
 Even veteran law-enforcement officers were divided in their opinions on the source of the shots . Even veteran police officers were split in their beliefs .
 Of the twenty sheriff's deputies watching the motorcade from in front of the sheriff’s office, 16 placed the origin of the shots near the Triple Underpass . Three of the deputies gave no opinion, and only one implied the Depository . Only one implied that the shots were
 Of twelve policemen stationed in the plaza interviewed, four placed shots from the Grassy Knoll, four said shots came from the Depository . Four of the 12 officers said shots were fired from the Knoll . Four gave no opinion of the shots .
 Eyewitness testimony cannot be relied on for absolute truth, but statements of otherwise ordinary citizens regarding second gunmen, muzzle flashes, and smoke on the Grassy Knoll must be considered .
 With a competent autopsy, it should have been well established how many bullets struck Kennedy and from which direction . Kennedy should have died from a single gunshot wound, the coroner says .
 Medical evidence in this case continues to be a source of controversy . Medical evidence is filled with inconsistencies, errors, missing items and phony photographs and X-rays .
 Kennedy was shot at least twice, according to the medical evidence . Kennedy was killed at least two times in Kennedy's assassination . Kennedy's widow says she believes he was shot twice .
 The official version of the assassination has not yet been proven . So it remains for other pieces of evidence to prove it .
 "This area, too, is filled with doubts, questions, deceit, and ambiguity," the author says . Unfortunately, this area is filled in questions, questions and deceit .
 Oswald’s fingerprints on the sixth floor means nothing, since he was a Depository employee and by all accounts had worked on that day . Oswald's fingerprints were found on the floor of the Dallas, Texas, headquarters . Oswald was an employee at the time of the shooting .
 Dallas police failed to follow even the most rudimentary methods of handling evidence, police say . Dallas police also failed to properly handle evidence, according to the police report .
 Studebaker, FBI clerk Forest L Lucy, or others, with a few unidentified. Studebakers, or other. Lucy .
 Dallas police photographer told the Warren Commission that some of his photos were taken as late as the Monday following the assassination . Studebaker said some of the photos may have been taken in the days after the assassination. Studebakers told the commission that some photos of the assassination were taken late
 Jack Beers, a photographer for the Dallas Morning News, took pictures of the “sniper’s nest” less than three hours after the assassination . Beers took photos of the "sniper's nest" in Dallas .
 Three cartridge hulls were reportedly found on the sixth floor of the building . Three cartridges were also reportedly found .
 Day said he took two photographs of the three hulls lying near the sixth-floor window . Day took the photos of the hulls near the window .
 Two hulls can be seen lying near to each other on the floor beneath the windowsill . A third is some distance away from the other hulls some distance from the scene .
 Alyea Alyea reached the sixth floor and filmed Dallas police searching for evidence . Alyea filmed the scene of the Dallas shooting . Dallas police are looking for evidence of the shooting .
 He said the federal authorities there were “bent on getting me out of the place” and did not want him taking any film . But friendly local police contacts allowed him to stay, he said .
 Captain Will Fritz scooped up the shells and held them in his hand for Alyea’s camera . Fritz then threw the hulls down on the floor, then threw them away .
 Alyea said film of shells lying in their original positions on the floor was apparently thrown out with other unused news film on orders of his WFAA news director . Alyea says film of the shells lying on the ground was apparently tossed out .
 Of course this position would be impossible if the shells had been normally ejected from a rifle to the right rear . Of course, this would not be possible if shells were normally ejected .
 The Warren Commission published a copy of the Dallas police evidence sheet showing three shell cases were taken from the Depository . A copy of that same evidence sheet was found in the Texas Department of Public Safety files that showed only two cases were found .
 FBI receipt for assassination evidence from Dallas police indicates only two shell cases arrived in Washington just after the assassination . This is supported by a receipt from the Dallas police that indicates only 2 shell cases were found .
 This breach of the chain of evidence causes suspicion to be raised about the legitimacy of the third shell . The third shell is being used by the Russian state of state in Ukraine .
 The FBI crime lab determined that two of the hulls show a small dent, but this anomaly was found only on shell cases loaded in the Oswald rifle . This suspicion is compounded by the fact that while the FBI found the anomaly, the anomaly was only found in the shell cases .
 Commission Exhibit 543 had an indention on its lip that would have prevented the fitting of a slug . In fact, the third hull had the same indention as the other .
 "In its present condition, it could not have fired a bullet on that day," says the owner of the gun . "The present condition of the weapon is not likely to have been able to fire a bullet," he says .
 The magazine follower marks only the last cartridge in the clip . What went unexplained was how these marks were made, .
 This position was occupied by a live round found that day, not by Commission Exhibit 543 . The position of this position is that of a live shot found in a hole found in the gallery .
 "Too many questions arise to accept the shell cases as legitimate evidence," says CNN.com.com .
 The rifle reportedly belonging to Oswald also is surrounded by controversy and inconsistencies . Oswald's rifle reportedly belonged to Oswald is surrounded in controversy . The rifle is believed to have been found in Oswald's home .
 Boone’s report is supported by that of deputy constable Seymour Weitzman . Boone's report was supported by Seymour Weitzerman, a police officer .
 I was working with Deputy Boone of the Sheriff’s Department and helping in the search. “I was working to help with the search," she says .
 Deputy Boone and myself spotted the rifle about the same time . We were in the northwest corner of the sixth floor when Deputy Boone saw the rifle .
 This rifle was a 7.65 Mauser bolt action equipped with a 4/18 scope, a thick leather brownish-black sling on it . It was a Mauser rifle equipped with an 8-inch scope, and a 4-inch sling .
 By late Friday afternoon the rifle was being identified as a 6. mm Italian Carcano . The rifle was initially thought to be a rifle .
 Weitzman, Boone, Craig and Craig are all familiar with the German Mauser and the Carcano . While they look somewhat similar, they can distinguish between them .
 The Warren Commission indicated that Weitzman was simply mistaken in his identification of the rifle . The others, including Wade, probably repeated this mistaken identification, the commission said .
 Wade never gave any indication as to the source of his idea that the rifle was a Mauser . However, Wade never said what he thought was the rifle .
 Boone told the Commission he thought it was Captain Fritz who termed it a Mauser . Boone said he thought Captain Fritz said it was the Mauser, but Boone didn't think it was a rifle .
 Asked to identify the Carcano, Boone would only say, “It looks like the same rifle.”
 Weitzman, who managed a sportinggoods store, had identified the gun as a Mauser . He was considered an expert on rifles and was considered a gun expert .
 He testified to the Warren Commission only by affidavit and was not asked to identify the gun he held in the Depository . He testified only to affidavit .
 Lieutenant Day and another Dallas policeman mentioned writing contemporary descriptions of the rifle . Yet neither of these documents was included in the mass of Warren Commission materials .
 Even the CIA had doubts as to the true identity of the assassination rifle . The rifle is believed to have been the work of the CIA .
 CIA officials say two different kinds of Italianmade carbines were being identified as the single murder weapon . CIA officials noted that two different types of carbines had been identified .
 The possibility of a rifle substitution was even admitted by Dallas police chief Jesse Curry in 1976 . The police chief admitted the possibility of using a rifle substitute . The possibility was admitted in 1976 by Curry .
 Curry: "It’s more than possible” the rifle originally found in the Depository could have been exchanged for the gun now in the National Archives . Curry agreed ‘more than likely’ the rifle was found in Depository . Curry: ‘it’
 Curry said anyone wanting to substitute one suspected murder weapon for another “could have gotten away with it at the time” because no special precautions were taken to isolate the weapon as historic evidence . Curry: Anyone wanting to replace one suspect murder weapon with another could “get away with
 Even accepting that the Carcano was the assassination rifle, it's hard to envision a worse weapon . But even accepting that . accepted that . Carcano, it is hard to . imagine a worse . weapon .
 Oswald reportedly ordered the rifle from Klein’s Sporting Goods Co. of Chicago on March 13, 1963 . The Warren Commission published a ‘duplicate’ of the ad from which Oswald reportedly bought the rifle .
 The order form reportedly came from the February 1963 issue of American Rifleman magazine . It was reportedly ordered from an issue of the magazine magazine .
 The ad depicts a forty-inch-long rifle, the same length as the weapon identified as Oswald’s . The Commission chose to present a “duplicate” ad .
 Perhaps the discrepancy between rifle lengths had a logical explanation . Perhaps the difference in rifle length had been made up by the rifle .
 The manner in which the Commission tried to conceal this problem only further demonstrates manipulation of the evidence . But the manner in . which the . Commission tried . to conceal the problem only demonstrates manipulation, the Commission said .
 No record exists to show that either Oswald or Hidell actually took possession of the rifle . This problem is heightened by the fact that no record exists of Oswald or A Hidell taking possession of it .
 There are no official records to show that Oswald signed for the .38 caliber pistol that reportedly was shipped to him by Railway Express . Likewise, there is no official record of Oswald signing the pistol .
 It should also be noted that Kennedy’s death certificate, the Warren Commission, the House Select Committee on Assassinations and the Journal of the American Medical Association article all claimed Kennedy was killed by bullets from a “high-powered” or ‘high-velocity�
 The 6. mm Carcano only reached a velocity of less than 1,779 feet per second . Yet, a high-velocity rifle exceeds 2,000 feet a second . The Warren Commission said the 6.mm Carcano could only reach a velocity less than 2,800 feet
 Based on this discrepancy, the Oswald rifle could not be the death weapon . The Oswald rifle was not the rifle used in the September 11, 1963 shooting .
 The Carcano was not the assassination weapon, an Army expert says . The rifle was evaluated by the Ballistics Research Laboratory of the Department of the Army .
 During testimony to the Warren Commission, Simmons was asked if his team had experienced any difficulties sighting in the rifle . Simmons testified that he had no problems sighting the rifle in his rifle .
 He replied, “Well, they could not sight the weapon in using the telescope, and no attempt was made to sight it in using an iron sight.”
 There were, in fact, three metal shims, which the Warren Commission dutifully depicted in Commission Exhibits 567, 577, and 578 .
 Oswald rifle needed three metal shims placed under the telescopic sight before the Army laboratory could test its accuracy . Army laboratory tested the accuracy of the rifle before testing it out .
 Evidence was known to both the FBI and the Warren Commission, but never adequately relayed to the media or the public . And this evidence was known, according to the FBI, but not adequately relayed .
 Oswald’s wife and his brother told the Commission Oswald was right-handed . Experts also indicated that the telescopic sight was adjusted for a lefthanded shooter . Yet both Oswald's wife and brother said Oswald was a right-hander .
 Oswald's well-documented inability to achieve marksmanship standards while in the Marines . Added to the inferior quality and the inaccuracy of the rifle, recall Oswald’s failure to achieve standards . Oswald was a member of the Marine Corps, but failed to achieve high marksmanship .
 Warren Commission stated authoritatively, “The number C2766 is the serial number. The Warren Commission said authoritatively that “C2766” was a serial number . Warren Commission concluded that the number was the serial .
 The Mannlicher-Carcano rifle was manufactured in Italy from 1891 until 1941 . In the 1930’s Mussolini ordered all arms factories to manufacture the rifle . Mussolini also ordered all factories to make the rifle in Italy .
 The serial number appears on weapons manufactured by more than one concern . Since many concerns were manufacturing the same weapon, the serial number has been added to the weapon .
 There could be more Carcanos around with serial number C2766 —a fact that further weakens the case against Oswald .
 Oswald's sling on Oswald's rifle was not a standard rifle sling but instead seemed to come from a musical instrument or a camera carrying strap . Oswald’s sling on his rifle was instead of a rifle sling .
 Despite two massive federal investigations, not one bit of evidence has been brought forward as to where or when Oswald might have purchased ammunition or the ammunition clip for the rifle . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln in 1917 .
 Oswald's belongings were found with no gun oil or other cleaning materials, including ammunition, found in Oswald’s belongings . Oswald was found to have been shot in the head by Oswald in 1963 .
 Another important piece of evidence involved a paraffin test made on Oswald the day of the assassination . The test was made by a paraqualine test made by Oswald on the day he was killed .
 The results of this test presented evidence that he may not have fired a rifle that day, yet these results were downplayed and even suppressed by the federal authorities . The results were presented in court .
 In this test, layers of paraffin are applied to a suspect’s skin and the sticky, warm wax opens the pores and then picks up any foreign material that may be present on the skin .
 When the wax cools, it forms a hard cast that is treated with chemicals that turn blue if nitrates are present . When the cast is cooled, the wax turns blue if there are nitrates present .
 The skin of someone who has recently fired a weapon will bear traces of nitrates . The idea is that the skin of a person who has fired a gun will bear nitrate traces . The skin will be tested for the presence of nitrate .
 The presence of nitrates is not conclusive evidence that a gun was fired . The absence of nitrate is compelling evidence that the person has not fired a weapon .
 Oswald’s hands both reacted positively to the paraffin test, indicating the presence of nitrates but no gunpowder . Oswald's hands were found to have reacted positively . The test was carried out by a team of doctors and nurses .
 Any competent defense attorney would have pointed to this test as evidence that his client had not fired a rifle . The test would have been used to prove that he had not shot a rifle, a defense attorney said .
 The Warren Commission called the routine police test “completely unreliable,” adding that an FBI agent fired three rounds through the Oswald rifle in rapid succession and tested negative on both his hands and face afterward . However, in its report the Warren Commission said the test was "completely unreliable"
 The Commission deleted reference to the paraffin test at the bottom of the page of the evidence sheet . The odd part of this issue is that in publishing the Dallas police evidence sheet, the Commission deleted the reference .
 A fingerprint is the most important piece of evidence linking the crime to the suspect, police say . The fingerprint was used to help identify the person responsible for the crime in the case .
 The sole piece of hard evidence linking Oswald to the Carcano rifle was a palm print . Palm print reportedly found on the underside of the barrel when disassembled .
 The palm print would never have been admitted as evidence in any courtroom trial . It lacked a chain of evidence, the unquestioned path from discovery to presentation in court .
 Dallas police lieutenant John Carl Day says he discovered the palm print shortly before turning the rifle over to the FBI .
 He mentioned it to no one and there is no record of his discovery . Yet, he mentioned no one .
 FBI agent Vincent Drain flew with the gun to Washington in an Air Force plane . About midnight, the rifle was given to Drain, who flew with it to D.C.
 The rifle was turned over to the FBI laboratory on November 23, 1963 . It was examined for fingerprints by the FBI .
 Oswald was killed in the basement of the Dallas police station on November 24 . Oswald's rifle was flown back to Dallas that afternoon . Oswald was shot dead that morning .
 Miller Funeral Home director Paul Groody told this author that the FBI fingerprinted Oswald’s corpse . Funeral home director said FBI fingerprints Oswald's corpse .
 In 1978, FBI agent Harrison confirmed to researcher Gary Mack that he, along with Agent Drain, had personally driven the “Oswald’s rifle to the Miller Funeral Home .
 Oswald had fingerprinted three times while in Dallas police custody . Oswald had been fingerprinted 3 times while he was in Dallas custody .
 District Attorney Wade casually mentioned that his fingerprints were found on the gun . Later that Monday, while talking to reporters, he casually mentioned, “Let’s see . . . His fingerprints . were found,” Wade said .
 The incriminating palm print did not arrive at the FBI lab until November 29 . It arrived three days after all other Dallas police evidence had been turned over to the bureau . The palm print was not officially turned over by the FBI .
 By this time, FBI officials were able to confirm that the palm print matched that of Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald's palm print was confirmed to be that of Oswald .
 Day told author Henry Hurt that he specifically pointed out the print to Agent Drain when he gave him the rifle . Day told the author that he told him the print was on his rifle .
 All I can figure is that it was some sort of cushion, because they were getting a lot of heat by Sunday night . The team was getting some of the heat by the end of the day .
 Others believe Oswald’s palm print was taken from jail records or the Depository . Others believe it was superimposed over marks from the barrel .
 No serious researcher today believes that Oswald’s palm print was legitimately lifted from the rifle barrel on November 22, 1963 . Oswald's palm print is believed to have been removed from the barrel of the rifle .
 Even the Warren Commission found this piece of evidence hard to swallow . The Warren Commission was skeptical of the evidence .
 Rankin advised because of the circumstances that now exist, there was a serious question in the minds of the commission as to whether or not the palm impression that has been obtained from the Dallas Police Department is a legitimate latent palm impression removed from the rifle barrel .
 The FBI attempted to have Lieutenant Day certify a statement concerning his lifting of the palm print, but Day declined to sign it . The FBI then attempted to get Lieutenant Day to sign a statement .
 It instead presented the belated palm print as strong evidence of Oswald’s guilt . It was presented as strong proof of Oswald's guilt . The palm print was found in Oswald's pocket in the book .
 The closer one looks, the softer it becomes. Like so much of the “hard’s evidence in this case, the closer look the closer it becomes . The evidence in the case is the "hard" evidence, but it's not hard enough to convict .
 Now consider the highly technical studies of this bullet and other bullet fragments involved in the assassination . Now consider a highly technical study of the bullet fragments .
 Similar ammunition fired into goat carcasses, human bodies, and gelatin blocks all showed more deformity than Commission Exhibit 399 .
 Forensic pathology panel of the House Select Committee on Assassinations argued that other bullets had done similar damage and remained in pristine condition . Panel members of the committee said other bullet damage had been done similar .
 Cyril Wecht challenged the group to produce even one single bullet that had broken two human bones and remained unchanged . Cyril. Wecht, challenged them to produce a bullet that broke two bones . The group produced the bullet that remained unchanged, but the bullet did not break two human
 Neither the Warren Commission nor the House Select Committee on Assassinations was able to convincingly prove the feat ascribed to Commission Exhibit 399 . The emission spectrography tests assume more importance .
 These spectrographic tests are a scientific means of determining whether the various bits of bullet metal taken from both Kennedy and Connally came from the same bullet .
 These tests could have provided what is missing from all Kennedy assassination investigations . Metal found in the victims could be traced to Commission Exhibit 399, Commission Exhibit .
 The tests failed to do this and the handling of this evidence raised a great deal of suspicion toward federal authorities . The tests were supposed to show that federal authorities had done nothing wrong with the case .
 Under such testing it is a simple matter to determine whether two bits of metal have the same percentage of basic elements, such as lead, copper, and antimony . Under such tests, the metal has a higher percentage of the basic elements .
 It is much more difficult to prove that such bits are from the same source. It is more difficult than to prove such bits were not from same source .
 The Warren Commission chose not to ask one question of the spectrographic expert who conducted the tests . Concerning the tests, the Warren Commission did not ask one single question .
 Police say bullet fragments were “similar in metallic composition,” which proved nothing . They were content to simply report that several bullet fragments had similar metallic composition .
 In the years following the assassination, researcher Harold Weisberg sought unsuccessfully to obtain the spectrographic test results from the U.S. government . The results of the test were never found .
 Government attorneys argued that revealing the results was not in the “national interest,” although they would not explain why . Government attorneys said the results would not be in the national interest .
 In 1973, a batch of Warren Commission documents were released to the public that contained letters from FBI director J Edgar Hoover . Then in 1973, the public was allowed to see the letters from Hoover .
 The fact that differences—no matter how “significant”—were found means they are not from the same source . Differences are significant differences, no matter how significant .
 The real significance in this matter is that the results of these spectrographic tests have been kept from the public all these years, says the author of the book .
 By concealing the test results, the Commission raised further suspicion about government handling of the case .
 Unreported in the Commission’s report or volumes was an account of even further testing, this time using neutron activation analysis . This time, the test object was bombarded with radiation .
 This wording is suspiciously deceptive, since any difference in composition is evidence that the fragments are not from the same ammunition . This wording suggests that the ammunition fragments are different from one to one, not the same .
 Faced with scientific evidence that Kennedy and Connally were not struck by the same bullet, the House Select Committee on Assassinations decided to conduct its own tests .
 Guinn admitted he had been an informal consultant to the FBI even prior to the Kennedy assassination . Guinn said he was a consultant with the FBI prior to Kennedy's assassination .
 Guinn concluded that it was ‘highly probable’ that fragments taken from Connally’s wrist came from Commission Exhibit 399 . Guinn concludes that it is “highly likely’t” that the fragments were taken from the wrist .
 The wrist fragments originally tested in 1964 were missing . But it was later learned that the wrist fragments were missing from the original test .
 Guinn admitted publicly that the fragments he tested were not the originals from the National Archives . Guinn said he tested the fragments and admitted they were not originals . The fragments were not from the original National Archives documents .
 Guinn also reported that he had examples of ammunition from the four production runs in 1954 made at Western Cartridge Company, manufacturers of the Mannlicher-Carcano bullets .
 If this was indeed the only ammunition ever produced, the results of Guinn’s tests gain credibility .
 At the end of the war the Italian Carcano rifle, and no telling how much of this type of ammunition, was sold to United States gun brokers and dealers . It was distributed by direct sales to wholesalers, retailers and individual purchasers .
 If the ammunition supposedly used in the Oswald rifle came from this World War II batch, Dr. Oswald would be the first person to claim to have used it in the rifle .
 This is another example of how seemingly indisputable evidence in the assassination diminishes upon closer examination . This is one of many examples of the assassination of JFK's assassin John Kennedy .
 Guinn failed to recall or report on his prior governmental connections with the JFK case . Guinn’s analysis, it should be pointed out, that he failed to remember or report his prior government connections .
 Guinn, this is not meant to be an embarrassing question, but I think I must ask it . Guinn: "I think I should ask it. What do you think? What do we think? "
 I think Mr Wolf called my attention to the existence of this article, which I haven't seen, and I don’t know where they got their misinformation, but I never did anything for the Warren Commission, and although I know people in the FBI, I have never done any
 Radioactivity may determine whether Lee Harvey Oswald killed President Kennedy, chemist says . Radioactivity in criminology may help determine whether Oswald killed Kennedy, scientist says .
 Vincent P Guinn, head of the activation analysis program of the General Atomic division of General Dynamics Corporation, has been working on the problem with the Federal Bureau of Investigation .
 Guinn said he was working even then with radioactive analysis but could not make public his findings until released by the Warren Commission . Guinn: "I'm working even though I'm not sure what happened, but I'm working on it"
 Testing in 2006 and 2007 indicate evidence is consistent with between two and five bullets being fired in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination .
 Oswald used the bag to transport the Carcano rifle from a home in Irving, Texas, to the Depository on the moming of November 22, 1963 . The Warren Commission claimed the bag was used to transport Oswald's rifle to the Texas Depository .
 If this bag indeed belonged to Oswald and if it could be traced to the Depository, it becomes strong evidence of Oswald’s guilt . The bag is believed to have been found in the trunk of the Texas State Department .
 This piece of evidence becomes highly questionable . But again, upon closer inspection, the evidence becomes more questionable . CNN.com will feature iReport .
 Oswald rifle was found to be well oiled, but there was no trace of gun oil on the paper bag . Oswald rifle found to have been oiled .
 Federal authorities claim to have found cloth fibers on the bag that matched those of a blanket used to wrap the rifle at the Irving home . Second, federal authorities claim they found fibers in the bag matching those of the blanket .
 Dallas police photograph of assassination evidence shows the bag touching the blanket, which could have produced incriminating fiber evidence . However, police say the bag touched the blanket .
 The FBI found no traces of paper bag particles on the rifle . The rifle was found to have been hit by a paper bag .
 When the Dallas evidence was shipped to the FBI laboratory early on November 23, there was no mention of the paper bag . When the evidence was sent to the lab, no mention was made of it .
 FBI agent in charge J Gordon Shanklin suggested blanket was used to carry rifle into the Depository . Shanklin: Blank was used as a blanket, which he suggested was used for the rifle .
 Oswald took a paper bag to work with him on the morning of the assassination . Both Wesley Frazier and his sister, Linnie Mae Randle, testified that Oswald took the paper bag .
 Both said they did not believe the bag they saw was like the one the Warren Commission showed them . However, both said they do not believe it was the one they saw .
 Frazier said Oswald told him the bag contained curtain rods for his room in Dallas . Frazier says Oswald said he had curtain rods in the bag . Frazier: Oswald said the curtain rods were for his Dallas hotel room .
 Frazier also said Oswald carried the package into the Depository tucked under his arm . One end cupped in his hand and the other under his armpit, Frazier said .
 Oswald's disassembled rifle measured thirty-five inches long . It would have been impossible for someone of Oswald’s height to carry it in this position . Oswald's rifle measured 30-35 inches long, according to the book .
 Jack Dougherty, a Depository employee who saw Oswald arrive for work, said he had seen no bag . The Depository worker said he saw no bag in Oswald's car .
 If Oswald did not carry the rifle into the Depository on November 22, then it must have gotten there in some other manner . Yet the paper bag was a necessary piece of evidence, for Oswald .
 Frazier, who drove Oswald to Irving, repeatedly said Oswald had no package with him at that time . Frazier: Oswald was not carrying a package when he was killed .
 Oswald must have hidden the paper bag in his jacket, although there was no reason to do so, despite the discomfort and rustling noise sure to have been made by a forty-two-inch-byeighteen-inch folded paper bag . The Commission decided Oswald had hidden the bag
 This whole issue is further clouded by a duplicate FBI report that claims two opposite facts concerning the paper bag . The paper bag was used to smuggle drugs into the U.S. State Department .
 In 1980, researcher Gary Shaw discovered what appeared to be this same FBI report in the National Archives . Shaw discovered the report in 1980, and it was later found in archives .
 He added that the “inaccurate’s report was mistakenly passed along to the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission mistakenly passed the report along with the Warren Report .
 Not one of the lawmen who searched the Depository mentioned finding the bag in their testimony . The evidence of the paper bag must be viewed skeptically .
 Recall the two days that all assassination evidence was in the hands of the FBI unbeknownst to the media and public . The FBI was involved in the assassination of President George W. Bush .
 Two other observations should be made concerning primary pieces of evidence—the presidential limousine and the rifle . The limo and rifle are the two primary items of evidence in the case .
 Even while the limousine was parked at the emergency-room door of Parkland Hospital, federal agents and even Dallas police apparently mopped up blood, picked up bullet fragments, and otherwise tampered with this important evidence .
 White House photographer Cecil Stroughton noticed agents at the limousine . White House limo was stopped by agents in the limo .
 The limousine was shipped to the manufacturer Hess & Eisenhardt and completely dismantled, thus destroying any important bloodstains, bullet holes, or more bullet fragments that could have shed light on the assassination .
 Government agents examined the car the day after the assassination, but there is no evidence that members of the Warren Commission closely studied this important piece of evidence, including photographs of a bullet or fragment strike on the windshield .
 The Carcano was never given the simple test by Dallas police or federal authorities to determine whether it had been recently fired . It was never checked for fingerprints, apparently .
 This normal testing might have proved conclusively whether the rifle had been used in the assassination . It might have shown conclusively that the rifle was used .
 Researchers view the failure to conduct such a test as strong evidence of fabrication in the case against Oswald . Oswald was convicted of murdering himself in August 1963 .
 Congressman Henry Gonzalez kept the potential evidence in a closet in his Washington office . Governor Connally’s bloodstained clothing was found at Parkland Hospital in Texas .
 The Secret Service was coming to pick up Connally’s clothing . Several months later, while Gonzalez was home in Texas, Clifton Carter, a . aide to Lyndon Johnson, notified a . Gonzalez secretary that the Secret Service .
 Sometime later, this clothing was presented as evidence to the Warren Commission . The clothing was shown as evidence at Warren Commission hearings .
 By this time, it had been cleaned and pressed, thereby eliminating metal traces at the bullet holes . The metal traces could have been studied to determine the type of ammunition and the direction of shots .
 It was Gonzalez who formally called for a reopening of the assassination investigation in 1975, which led to the forming of the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Gonzalez was the first person to formally call for reopening the investigation .
 The famous backyard photographs showed Oswald with a rifle and a communist publication . Oswald was the one piece of evidence that did more than all others to convict Oswald as the assassin .
 Dallas police claim to have found two prints and one negative of pictures showing Lee Harvey Oswald standing in his backyard . Dallas police say the pictures show Oswald wearing a holstered pistol and holding a rifle and some communist literature .
 Oswald photos were found among Oswald's possessions in the garage of the Paine home in Irving, Texas, on Saturday, November 23, 1963 . A search the day before failed to turn up such photos . Oswald was killed in the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963 .
 One of these photos became the cover of the February 21, 1964, issue of Life magazine . One of the photos was taken in New York City .
 Oswald's wife Marina told the Warren Commission that she had taken the photos with a handheld Imperial Reflex camera at her husband’s insistence . The Warren Commission heard from Oswald's accommodating wife, Marina, that she .
 The Commission pinpointed the date of the March 31, 1963, assassination . Marina's testimony and the order form for Oswald’s rifle were based on the date . The Commission said the date was March 31 .
 She said she took one shot, then handed the camera back to Oswald . Oswald advanced the film and handed it back for her to take another picture, she said . She said Oswald advanced film and returned it to her for another picture .
 He told me that in time, he would be able to show that it was not his picture, and that it had been made by someone else . He said he understood photography real well .
 Oswald never got the opportunity to explain the backyard photos . Oswald was shot in the back yard by Oswald, who was killed in 1963 .
 One was described by Marguerite Oswald as depicting her son holding a rifle above his head with both hands . Another depicted was a picture of her son with a rifle in both hands, she said .
 She was shown this photo by Marina at the Paines’ Irving home the night of the assassination . Marina showed the photo to Marina at her home the next day .
 On Marguerite’s insistence, the incriminating photo was burned and flushed down the toilet . The incriminating picture was burned .
 In 1976 the Senate Intelligence Committee discovered yet a fourth backyard photo in the hands of the widow of a Dallas policeman . The photo was discovered in 1976 by a Dallas police officer's widow .
 Roscoe White said her husband, who worked in the Dallas photographic lab, once told her the picture would be very valuable someday . White says her husband told her it would be valuable someday, but she says it was never .
 Oswald is depicted holding the rifle in his left hand and the communist material in his right . Oswald was captured in a backyard photo of him with a rifle and communist material . The photo was taken in the backyard of Oswald's home .
 Dallas police used the same pose they used in reenacting the photo for the Warren Commission . This is strong evidence that authorities were aware of the suppressed picture long before it became known to the public .
 Photo experts tell House Select Committee on Assassinations that the most famous backyard picture was obviously made from the original negative while in the hands of Dallas authorities . The original negative was obviously in Dallas, Texas, during the Dallas assassination .
 Two Dallas commercial photographic processors have told this author they saw copies of the photo the night of the assassination . The photo was more than twelve hours before they were reported found in the Paine garage .
 Robert Hester was called from home on November 22, 1963, to help process assassination-related photographs for the FBI and Dallas police at National Photo . Hester said he saw an FBI agent with a color transparency of one of these pictures and that one of the backyard photos he processed showed
 Hester’s claim was corroborated by his wife, Patricia, who also helped process film on the day of the assassination . Hester: "I’m not sure what happened to me. I’ve never seen anything like this," he said .
 There is considerable question regarding the camera reportedly used to make these photographs . There is also considerable question about the camera used in the photographs .
 Oswald’s brother Robert claimed to have obtained the camera from the Paine home on December 8, 1963 . Oswald's brother Robert claims to have taken the camera on the same date .
 He said he did not mention it to authorities because he didn’t realize anyone would be interested . He says he didn't know anyone would want to know about it .
 Robert was only told the camera belonged to his brother by Ruth Paine and the FBI did not receive the camera until February 24, 1964 . The FBI received the camera in 1964 .
 Marina was shown two cameras but failed to identify either as belonging to her husband . Marina was later shown the other cameras but did not identify them as hers .
 FBI photographic expert Lyndal L Shaneyfelt told the Warren Commission, “In order to be able to make a photograph with the camera, I had to make slight repairs to the shutter lever, which had been bent.” The shutter lever was bent .
 Marina identified the camera as the one she used to take the photographs . Marina identified her camera in June 1964 . Marina's photographs were taken in 1964 .
 Marina, who originally claimed to have taken only one picture, revised this statement in her testimony to the commission in February 1964 . Marina originally claimed that she only took one picture .
 Marina’s testimony reflected inconsistencies and rehearsal, she said . But then this incident was not the only time this incident reflected inconsistencies . Marina's testimony is not the first time she has been accused of lying .
 An objective viewing of the three available backyard photographs reveals internal problems aplenty . An objective . viewing of these three . photographs reveals . internal problems .
 All three pictures were reportedly taken with a handheld camera . Background of all three is identical when brought to the same size . All three were taken with handheld cameras .
 The elements of the background are exactly identical in the three photos . That is, though cropped differently in three photos, the background is exactly identical .
 This sameness of background could possibly be produced with a stationary camera on a heavy tripod but is impossible with a handheld camera . The sameness is possible with a tripod but impossible with handheld camera.
 The V-shaped shadow under Oswald’s nose remains the same in all three pictures, although his head is tilted in different directions . Oswald's head was tilted in the different directions, but his eyes are tilted in other directions .
 The photos all show a discernible line marking a break in the print's emulsion across Oswald’s face just above a flat, broad chin . The photos were taken from a print print print of Oswald's face .
 Oswald had a sharply pointed, cleft chin, Dallas police photos show . Oswald was known to have had a sharp, pointed chin . Oswald had been shot dead in Dallas, Texas, in August .
 Oswald’s assessment that the photos are superimposed fakes has been confirmed by two foreign authorities . When all three photos are brought to the same size and placed on top of each other as transparencies, nothing matches except the face of Lee Harvey Oswald Oswald .
 The shadow of Oswald’s nose falls in one direction and that of his body in another . The shadow was the shadow of his nose . Oswald's body was in the shadows of the assassin .
 The photos were shot from a slightly different angle, a different distance, with the gun in a different hand . The photos are taken from a different angle .
 If one photo is laid on top of another, nothing could match exactly . So, if one photo was laid over top, nothing would match exactly.
 While one body is bigger, in the other the heads match perfectly, bearing out Oswald’s charge that his head was pasted on an incriminating photograph . Yet, impossibly, while one body . is bigger than the other, the heads .
 Author Anthony Summers had the photos studied by retired detective superintendent Malcolm Thompson . Thompson is a past president of the Institute of Incorporated Photographers in England .
 Thompson said he detected retouching in the photos around the area of Oswald’s head and on the butt of the rifle . Thompson: The photos were taken around the head and butt of Oswald's rifle .
 He also noted inconsistencies in the location of shadows and the different chin on Oswald . Oswald's chin is not the same chin as Oswald's, he says .
 The Photographic Evidence Panel of the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded in 1978 that it could find no evidence of fakery in the backyard photos . The panel also studied the original photos .
 This conclusion rested primarily on studies that showed markings on the edges of the negative of one of the original photographs were identical to markings on other photographs made by the Imperial Reflex camera .
 Ballistics-type evidence convinced the panel that the photos must be genuine . This ballistics-style evidence convinced them to believe the photos were genuine .
 Texas graphics expert Jack White pointed out that if a knowledgeable person wanted to fake the pictures, it would have been a simple matter to produce a high-quality montage photograph using one backyard scene, a figure with rifle and papers, and a head shot of Oswald . White said that if
 This procedure would produce a faked backyard photo that could be proven to have come from the camera traced to Oswald . Oswald's photo could be faked to produce a photo that was traced to him .
 The Imperial Reflex camera can be used to capture the markings on the edge but nothing else . Another method to achieve the same results would be to make an exposure through the Imperial Reflex . White says he has no idea how to get the results .
 When the composite photo is combined with this, the markings become part of the negative . Then, when the photo is added to the negative, it becomes a composite photo .
 House experts measured distances between certain objects in the pictures . They determined some differences in distance indicated that the photos were separate shots .
 White argued that differences were simply the result of “keystoning” or tilting the easel on which the photograph was exposed in an enlarger . White, who died in 2012, argued that these differences were the result from ‘keysting’
 He said he, too, had been concerned with what appeared to be differences in the photos but discovered that by tilting the photographic print in an enlarger’s easel, the backgrounds of the supposedly separate pictures overlapped and matched .
 White discovered other problems with the backyard photos in recent years . White also discovered other issues with the photos .
 In one picture, the tips of Oswald’s fingers appear to be missing as does one end of the telescopic sight . The tips of the fingers are also missing in one picture of the rifle .
 White claimed this was due to sloppy airbrushing on the part of whoever faked the picture . White claimed the airbrush was due due to the fact that it was airbrushed .
 In one photo, the figure can be seen to be wearing a large ring on his right hand, yet the ring is missing in the other photos . The ring is not visible in other photos of the mysterious figure .
 A vital piece of evidence remains in ‘controversy’ despite the studied opinions of experts and inconsistencies that can be viewed by any layperson . Sameness of backgrounds and Oswald’s face, conflicting shadows and distances, loss of portions of the photos—again, a
 The federal government continues to vouch for the authenticity of the incriminating photos . Yet the federal government still stands by the photos .
 The Warren Commission tried to strengthen the case against Lee Harvey Oswald through the use of reenactments . Reenactment problems have led to controversy surrounding physical evidence linking Oswald to the assassination .
 At least two of the participants have questioned the results of these reenactments .
 Surveyor says studies prove more than one man was involved in the shooting . Chester Breneman said the studies proved that more than once was involved . Breneman participated in two separate reenactments .
 The Warren Commission published distance and time figures were “at odds” with figures obtained in the reenactment staged for the FBI and Secret Service in 1964 . Breneman, who went on to become county surveyor of Eastland County, Texas, told this author in 1978
 Height and distance figures altered by the federal government mean that all subsequent computer analyses based on such figures are erroneous and baseless . The height and distance of a person in the United States is also incorrect and baseless.
 Breneman’s story was confirmed by Dallas County surveyor Robert West, who also participated in both reenactments . West and Breneman participated in the reenacts .
 Both men were in West’s office on the Monday following the assassination when a man entered . The two men were both in the office at the time of the assassination .
 He asked if we would make an investigation down there to see if any other bullets were fired and from which direction they came . The investigation will look at the location of the bullets fired and how they landed .
 Later that day, Breneman accompanied Life’s investigators to the Adolphus Hotel, where they were headquartered . Breneman: "I’m not sure what happened to me, but I’ve got a lot of respect for my life"
 He said everybody involved agreed that no one man could have done all the shooting . He said the shooting was not a single person who could have killed anyone .
 Magazine investigators also had obtained a Carcano rifle and attempted to work the bolt in the time frame attributed to Oswald . Breneman said the magazine investigators had also tried to work out the bolt .
 Breneman, a former Marine medal winner for marksmanship, said he worked the rifle's bolt for hours . Breneman said he, too, worked for hours to get his rifle ready for the test .
 He also recounted a strange incident that occurred during his time with the magazine people .
 Breneman was visiting his friend West on May 31, 1964, when the FBI and Secret Service reenacted the assassination for the Warren Commission . Breneman again was visiting West in 1964 when the reenactment took place .
 We again measured distances and elevations by matching the frames of the Zapruder film . We again matched the frames to match the film's height and distance .
 'Right after the assassination, they were mentioning a sign which had a stress mark from a bullet on it. Also, right after . Also, they . mentioned a . sign which . had a . stress mark . on it, they said . Also mentioned a sign with a stress .
 It's my understanding that this particular sign was quickly taken down and no one has been able to locate it . It’s not known why it was taken down .
 During the May reenactment, Breneman said the FBI used a big Cadillac as a substitute for Kennedy’s Lincoln Continental . Breneman: The FBI used the big Cadillac to replace Kennedy's Lincoln .
 Breneman agreed, “They were all crunched up in there, shoulder to shoulder.” Breneman said . Breneman added that the team was “crunched’s” at the scene .
 West said one of the alleged shots from the Depository followed a path straight through a leafy tree . West said his study showed that the alleged shot was shot straight through the leafy trees .
 Breneman concluded, “I wish to state that both investigations led us to believe beyond any doubt that there were two assassins," he said .
 Breneman and West were shocked to find that the figures did not match those they made at the time . After the Warren Commission published the figures from the government reenactment, they found they were wrong .
 Both Breneman and West retained copies of the Dealey Plaza reenactment figures . The re-enacted events took place in Dealey plaza in New York City, New York .
 Zapruder film frame 171 is the location of the famous film . For instance, on our map, we marked the spot corresponding to frame 171 . We also marked the location corresponding to the film frame .
 It would seem to be that these figures were changed just enough for the Warren Commission to come up with the idea that another shot came from the same direction as the first .
 Neither Breneman nor West—the actual surveyors used for the government’s reenactment studies—were asked to testify to the Warren Commission . Neither West nor Breneman was asked to test for the commission .
 The Commission declined to publish the map Breneman and West drew, claiming it was inaccurate . Further, the Commission refused to publish it, saying it was an inaccurate map .
 Any meaningful search for the truth of the assassination was ended by altered figures and orders not to note extraneous bullet marks . Again, any meaningful search of the truth was ended with altered figures .
 The federal government, led by president Lyndon Johnson, began to assert itself immediately following Kennedy’s death . The Warren Commission was led by Lyndon Johnson .
 All evidence was removed from Dallas that night and sent to FBI headquarters in Washington . Against normal procedure, all evidence was sent to Washington .
 The day after the assassination, despite tremendous confusion in Dallas and elsewhere, FBI director J Edgar Hoover forwarded to Johnson a preliminary report supporting the idea of Lee Harvey Oswald’s sole guilt . Hoover forwarded the preliminary report to Johnson .
 At this time, only selected FBI officials had seen all the evidence . The plausible suspicion of fabrication and substitution grew . The suspect was later found dead at the scene of a car crash .
 Dallas police were being held responsible for Oswald’s death . Calls increased for an independent investigation independent from that of the Dallas police .
 Katzenbach is having something issued so we can convince the public that Oswald is the real assassin . Katzenberg, is having a statement issued to convince people that Oswald was the assassin, he says .
 On November 25, President Johnson ordered his friend Hoover to prepare a detailed report on the circumstances surrounding Kennedy’s death . Hoover's report was released on November 25 .
 It is important that all of the facts surrounding President Kennedy’s assassination be made public in a way which will satisfy people in the U.S. and abroad, says President Kennedy .
 That all the facts have been told and that a statement to this effect be made now. That all of the facts were told, he said . A statement was made now, he added .
 The public must be satisfied that Oswald was the assassin, he did not have confederates who are still at large . The evidence was such that he would have been convicted at trial, the public should have been satisfied .
 Speculation about Oswald’s motivation ought to be cut off . We should have some basis for rebutting the thought that this was a communist conspiracy or a rightwing conspiracy to blame it on the communists .
 Dallas Police have put out statements on the communist conspiracy theory, and it was they who were in charge when he was shot and thus silenced . The Dallas Police are in charge of the Dallas Police .
 The matter has been handled thus far with neither dignity nor conviction . Facts are mixed with rumor and speculation . Facts and speculation have been mixed into rumor .
 We can scarcely let the world see us totally in the image of the Dallas Police when our President is murdered, says President Obama . We can't be seen as police officers in image of Dallas Police, Obama says .
 I think this objective may be satisfied and made public as soon as possible with the completion of a thorough FBI report on Oswald and the assassination . The objective of making public the assassination is to be satisfied with the FBI report .
 This may run into the difficulty of pointing to inconsistency between this report and statements by Dallas Police officials . But the reputation of the Bureau is such that it may do the whole job .
 The only other step would be the appointment of a Presidential Commission of unimpeachable personnel to review the evidence and announce its conclusions .
 I think it can await publication of the FBI report and public reaction to it here and abroad . The FBI report is expected to be published in the next week .
 Texas attorney general Waggoner Carr announced he planned to conduct a court of inquiry concerning the deaths of both Kennedy and Oswald . Also announced on November 25, Carr said he planned an inquiry into Kennedy's death .
 Carr named two prominent Texas attormeys as special counsel for the probe . Carr named Leon Jaworski and Dean Storey, who went on to become the special Watergate prosecutor .
 The next day, Senator Everett Dirksen announced that a Senate investigation of the assassination would be conducted by a special committee headed by James O Eastland, chairman of the powerful Judiciary Committee . The committee was headed by Senator James OEastland .
 The House of Representatives announced an attempt to create yet another investigative committee the next day . Not to be outdone by the Senate, the House also announced a proposal to create a new committee .
 The grief-stricken attorney general, Robert Kennedy, was never consulted about any of these attempts . Robert Kennedy was not consulted on any of the attempts .
 Next-ranking officials met with Johnson’s close friend attorney Abe Fortas . Fortas had blocked the 1948 election investigation of Johnson by obtaining a court order from Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black .
 Yale law professor Eugene Rostow, secretary of state Dean Rusk, and columnist Joseph Alsop convinced President Johnson that a Texas investigation was an attempt to cover up the crimes in Johnson’s home state . These men, all members of the elitist Council on Foreign Relations
 They argued a national commission headed by men of supposedly unimpeachable integrity was needed . They argued that national commission should be needed .
 With the creation of the Warren Commission, Johnson blocked any congressional investigations . Texas attorney general Carr had announced postponement of his state board of inquiry . The next week, the state attorney general announced postponing of his own state board .
 A Gallup poll taken the first week of December 1963 showed a majority of respondents—52 percent—continued to believe that Oswald had not acted alone . Despite massive media coverage of Oswald’s arrest, his slaying, and the amount of evidence offered to the public by both Dallas and
 Rumors were widespread in Texas that Johnson in some way had a hand in the assassination . Rumors of Johnson's involvement in JFK assassination were widespread .
 Warren was born March 19, 1891, in Los Angeles and Bakersfield, California . Warren was the son of Scandinavian immigrants and was born in 1891 . Warren is a best-selling author in California .
 His law practice was interrupted by World War I . After enlisting as an infantry private, Warren was accepted for officer training and became a lieutenant .
 The Armistice was signed before Lieutenant Warren could leave the U.S. Lieutenant Warren was able to return to the United States .
 After the war, Warren became an assistant attorney for the City of Oakland and later a member of the district attorney’s staff . Warren was an assistant lawyer for the city of Oakland .
 By the late 1920s, he had married Nina Palmquist Meyers and was elected as one of the nation’s youngest district attorneys . He was elected in the 1920s as a district attorney .
 Warren easily won reelection in 1930 . Building a reputation for honesty, hard work, and court convictions, he was a successful politician .
 In the late 1930s, Warren campaigned for and won the office of California attorney general . Warren won the title of California's attorney general in the late 1940s .
 Republican Warren is in a heated contest with the California Democratic governor Culbert Olson . Almost immediately, Republican Warren was in the race .
 After Pearl Harbor, Olson proclaimed a state of emergency in California . This conflict reached a breaking point when the war broke out in 1941 . Olson declared the emergency after Pearl Harbor .
 As attorney general, Warren challenged his authority to do so . Shortly afterward, Warren declared himself a candidate for governor . Warren challenged the authority of the attorney general to hold office .
 In a surprising upset, Warren was elected governor of California in late 1942 by more than 342,000 votes . Warren was a surprise upset to Roosevelt and the Democrats were still in firm control nationally .
 In 1946, Warren handily won reelection as governor and began to look toward Washington . Warren won reelection in 1946 and began looking to Washington .
 He may have actually been relieved when the team was defeated by Truman in the greatest upset victory in American politics . Truman may have been relieved by the team's defeat .
 Still hoping for national office, Warren announced he would seek the GOP presidential nomination in 1952 . Warren announced in 1952 that he would run for the Republican presidential nomination .
 He was chagrined to quickly find himself pitted against the war hero Dwight “Ike” Eisenhower . He was soon pitted against Eisenhower .
 Richard Nixon, who had signed a pledge to support Warren, nevertheless began to campaign for Eisenhower, hoping for the vice presidential nomination that he indeed later received . Richard Nixon's campaign was a success for Eisenhower .
 Nixon, who had been in public office for only six years, was the nation’s number-two man . Nixon was in office for six years. Nixon was the president of the United States .
 Nixon feared Warren's clout in the next election . Warren had been a strong contender and Nixon feared his clout . Warren was a strong candidate for president .
 Nixon badgered Eisenhower to find a suitable appointment for Governor Warren which would effectively separate him from his electoral constituency . Nixon wanted Warren to be separate from his constituency .
 Chief Justice Fred Vinson suddenly died in September 1953 . The ideal solution was to fill a Supreme Court vacancy . Chief Justice Vinson died suddenly .
 Warren, who already had decided not to seek a fourth term as governor, was offered the prized seat and accepted . Warren was offered a coveted seat and, to Nixon’s delight, accepted . Nixon's delight is Warren's decision not to run for another term .
 Warren made initial decisions as chief justice that tended to support the status quo . Warren was new on the job and with the naive Eisenhower years as a backdrop .
 As he grew more comfortable in his position, his decisions began to reflect the progressive policies he advocated as California governor . But as he became more comfortable, he began to embrace progressive policies .
 It was under Warren’s leadership that the Supreme Court ruled on the touchy desegregation issues raised by Brown Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas .
 Using private discussions as well as judicial conferences, Warren was able to guide the court to its unanimous decision in Brown . Brown paved the way for racial equality in the United States .
 Brown was a landmark decision and one that caused archconservatives to begin a campaign of bitter attacks against the chief justice . Brown's decision was one of the most controversial decisions in the history of the Supreme Court .
 Later court opinions dealing with the rights of accused persons and the persecution of suspected communists added further fuel to the fires of Warren’s opponents . Warren's opponents say he was unfairly persecuted .
 In the 1960s, Warren voted for young Kennedy, apparently because he could not bring himself to vote for the ever-ambitious Nixon . In the squeaky-close election of 1960, Warren found himself voting for Kennedy .
 Kennedy voiced mutual respect for each other and the new president supported the Warren Court’s progressive activism, even in such controversial cases as the June 1963 decision that outlawed compulsory prayer in public schools . Warren and Kennedy had mutual respect .
 Warren was asked to head a federal panel to decide who had killed Kennedy . Six months later, Warren was invited to head the panel to investigate Kennedy's death .
 Warren was told he was being asked to serve as chairman of the presidential commission . Warren was also told he would be asked to sit on the presidential panel . Warren has been asked to be chairman of a presidential commission for the presidential election .
 Warren then explained that he did not feel it proper for a member of one branch of government to be employed by another branch . Warren then said he didn't feel it was proper for him to work for another branch of the government .
 Two hours later, Warren received a telephone call from President Johnson . President Johnson called Warren Warren hours later .
 The chief justice reported to his president and received the famous “Johnson treatment” Dutifully, the chief justice was given the “back-patting and arm-twisting”
 The President spoke gravely of the desperate need to restore public confidence . President spoke of the need for the public to be restored to trust .
 He hinted darkly at the possibility of dangerous international repercussions . The president of the U.S. State Department of Justice has been accused of corruption .
 By the end of the interview, he had succeeded in making Warren feel that to refuse the President would be a betrayal of a public trust . To refuse to accept the President's invitation, he said, would be 'betrayal'
 There may have been matters of personal concern that Johnson transmitted to Warren . There may be more personal concerns that Johnson may have had .
 Warren told fellow commissioners he had been “pressured” by Johnson, according to an internal memo . In the memo, an attorney for the Warren Commission said Warren had said he was pressured by Johnson .
 Some rumors went so far as attributing the assassination to a faction within the government wishing the presidency assumed by President Johnson . President Johnson was assassinated in November 1963 .
 He placed emphasis on the quenching of rumors and precluding further speculation . He said: "I'm not going to make a big mistake"
 Warren left the emotional meeting with tears in his eyes, perhaps thinking of what had become of the country he loved . Warren left with tears as he left the meeting with .
 It is obvious that Warren’s sense of patriotism outweighed his sense of legality in his acceptance of the Commission chairmanship . Warren's sense of patriotic outweighed that of legality, he says .
 Later that same afternoon, Johnson signed Executive Order 11130, creating the seven-man Warren Commission . Johnson signed the order that created the Warren Commission, a seven-person panel .
 Commission members saw their work as having a dual purpose: to find the facts of the Kennedy assassination . The other was to calm public fears and suspicions both at home and abroad . Commission members say they wanted to find out the truth of the assassination .
 Allen Dulles told author Edward Jay Epstein that since an atmosphere of rumors and suspicion interferes with the functioning of the government, especially abroad, one of the Commission’s main tasks was to dispel rumors .
 John McCain: show the world that America is not a banana republic, where a government can be changed by conspiracy . John McCain says the U.S. government is not like a 'banban republic'
 Evidence presented to the Commission supported this duality of purpose, there was no problem . When evidence presented to this was presented, there were no problems with the decision .
 So much evidence contradicted the official assassination theory and called into question certain government institutions, it must be asked which purpose became paramount to the commissioners . But since so much evidence contradicts the theory, the commissioners must ask which purpose was paramount .
 Johnson’s old friend, lawyer Abe Fortas, and Katzenbach had prepared a list of seven prominent persons to serve on the new presidential commission .
 Representative Hale Boggs became frustrated with the panel’s total reliance on the FBI for information . The most vocal critic among Commission members was frustrated with FBI's reliance .
 Boggs vanished on October 16, 1972, while on a military junket flight in Alaska . He would have been a powerful ally in any reopening of the JFK assassination investigation .
 No trace of the plane or of Boggs has ever been found . Despite a massive search, no trace has been found of the airplane .
 Cooper served with the U.S. 3rd Army in Europe during World War II . Cooper helped reorganize the judicial system in Bavaria . Cooper is a former member of the Kentucky General Assembly and county judge .
 Dulles was fired as director of the Central Intelligence Agency by Kennedy following the ill-fated Bay of Pigs Invasion . Dulles had been fired as CIA director following the invasion of the Cuban Islands .
 Today it seems more than ironic that Dulles would have been selected to sit in judgment on Kennedy’s death . Dulles was chosen to be a judge on the death of Kennedy .
 Dulles arranged surrender of German troops in Italy during World War II . Dulles was closely connected to the military because of his years with the CIA .
 It is now acknowledged that Dulles withheld CIA information from the Warren Commission . It was about assassination plots between the agency and organized crime . The Warren Commission was investigating the CIA's involvement in organized crime plots .
 Former President Ford is now recognized as the FBI’s ‘spy’ on the Warren Commission . Ford was recognized by the FBI as a "spy" on the commission .
 Ford indicated he would keep me thoroughly advised as to the activities of the Commission . Ford said he would be keeping me thoroughly informed of the commission's activities .
 He stated this would have to be on a confidential basis, however, he thought it should be done . He said he would like it to be done in a confidential manner .
 He also asked if he could call me from time to time and straighten out questions in his mind concerning our investigation . "He also asked me to call him from time . He also said he would call me once time to . time to call me," she said .
 He reiterated that our relationship would, of course, remain confidential . The relationship would be confidential .
 Ford’s name as a member of the Warren Commission was recommended to President Johnson by Richard Nixon . Ford's name was also recommended by Nixon by Nixon .
 A World War II Navy veteran, Ford became the Commission’s most industrious member . Ford heard seventy out of the ninety-four witnesses who actually met with commissioners . Ford was a member of the U.S. Commission of Representatives .
 Ford had his first campaign manager and former Nixon presidential campaign field director John R Stiles hired as his special assistant . Stiles was Ford's first presidential campaign manager . Ford had a special assistant named after Nixon's former campaign director .
 Ford and Stiles went on to write Portrait of the Assassin, a book that presented selective evidence of Oswald’s guilt . Stiles and Ford later wrote a book about Oswald's guilt . The book was published by Stiles, who later published a book of his own .
 When their publisher found the book dull reading, Ford and Stiles spiced it up with rewritten transcripts of the January 27, 1964, Commission meeting where Oswald’s possible connection to the FBI was discussed . The book is now being published by the Library of America .
 The minutes of this meeting were classified top secret and remained closed to the public . The minutes were kept secret .
 Ford was asked specifically about his use of classified Warren Commission material in his book . Ford was confirmed to the Senate Judiciary Committee during his confirmation hearings .
 Despite being caught in perjury, Ford was dutifully confirmed by his old friends in Congress and sworn in as this nation’s first appointed president . Ford was the first president to be appointed by Congress .
 Ford ordered the Commission material in question declassified . Six months later, he ordered the material declassified by the Commission .
 McCloy was coordinator for the Kennedy administration’s disarmaments activities since 1961 . McCloy had a background for supporting Nazis, both before and after the war .
 World Bank president of World Bank from 1947 to 1949 . He had been assistant secretary of war throughout World War II . He was military governor and high commissioner for Germany .
 He also helped build the U.S. intelligence Establishment after the war . He also help build the United States intelligence Establishment .
 McCloy proposed that the evidence supporting the "single-bullet theory" be called “persuasive” a term all members agreed upon . McCloy: Evidence supporting this theory should be called "persuvasive"
 Russell was chairman of the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee . Russell carried much clout on Capitol Hill, usually employed to further the aims of the Pentagon . Russell was a key member of the Senate armed services committee .
 His work on behalf of defense projects brought sizable government contracts to Georgia . His work helped secure government contracts for Georgia .
 Russell was Governor of Texas from 1931 to 1933 . Russell was elected to the Senate in 1933 . He served in the Senate of Texas .
 Russell became the first Warren Commission member to publicly question its conclusions . Russell, widely regarded as one of the most intelligent senators, was widely regarded .
 Russell said he had come to believe that a criminal conspiracy had resulted in Kennedy’s death . Russell said in a 1970 Washington Post article, he believed Kennedy's death was the result of a conspiracy . Russell: "A criminal conspiracy has resulted in JFK's death"
 The senator even worked with assassination researcher Harold Weisberg in an effort to obtain Commission transcripts .
 In a court affidavit, Weisberg stated, “Privately Senator Russell told me that he was convinced that there were two areas in which . members had been deceived by Federal agencies responsible for investigating the assassination of President Kennedy .
 All of the Commission members had long-standing ties to both the military and intelligence establishments of the United States . The Commission was formed in 1993 .
 They were men accustomed to dealing with highly sensitive political issues . They also were accustomed to the delicacy of dealing with sensitive political matters .
 In 1964, Lane was retained by Marguerite Oswald to represent her son’s interest but the Commission refused to accept him . Lane was also retained by the Oswald family in 1964, but was not accepted by the Commission .
 In all likelihood there does not exist a single American community where reside 12 men or women, good and true, who presume that Lee Harvey Oswald did not assassinate President Kennedy .
 No more savage comment can be made in reference to the breakdown of the Anglo-Saxon system of jurisprudence .
 At the very foundation of our judicial operation lies a cornerstone which shelters the innocent and guilty alike against group hysteria, manufactured evidence and overzealous law enforcement officials, in short, against those factors which militate for an automated, prejudged verdict of guilty .
 It is the sacred right of every citizen accused of committing a crime to the presumption of innocence . It is also a sacred right to be accused of any crime to be treated as innocent .
 Every basic legal right guaranteed to even the lowliest street criminal was denied Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was denied the right to face accusers, to cross-examine witnesses and evidence . Oswald's trial was held in New York City, New York .
 The Commission met behind closed doors, heard secret testimony, and emerged to announce its conclusions . The Commission announced its conclusions after a series of hearings .
 Warren Commission’s first official meeting took place on December 5, 1963 . The Warren Commission was formed in 1963 after a series of hearings in Washington .
 The primary purpose of this meeting was to get the investigation organized . The primary goal was to establish an investigation into the case .
 Warren suggested the Commission need not hire its own investigators or obtain subpoena powers from Congress . Warren suggested that the Commission should not hire investigators or get subpoena powers .
 He was overridden in this matter by other Commission members . Commission members overruled the decision .
 I have a feeling that we have another obligation than the mere evaluation of the reports of agencies, many of which as you suggested, or some of them may be interested, may be involved in the investigation . I'm not sure how much of the investigation will take place .
 There is a potential culpability here on the part of the Secret Service and even the FBI, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "These reports may have some selfserving aspects in them"
 "If we didn't have the right to subpoena documents, the Commission’s general standing might be somewhat impaired," he said . "This Commission's general standing" might be impaired .
 Commission members appealed to Congress for the right to issue subpoenas . Not wishing to appear as simply a conduit for information from federal agencies, Commission members appeal to Congress . Commission members say they want to be able to subpoena federal agencies .
 This was granted on December 13, 1963, by the passage of Senate Joint Resolution 137 . This was the first time this was granted to the U.S. Senate .
 This law also authorized the Commission to compel testimony by providing immunity from prosecution . The Commission never once used this authority, the Commission never did .
 Senator Russell noted the ongoing leaks of assassination information by the FBI . Commission members were still awaiting the bureau’s first full report .
 This was the beginning of a quiet—yet intense—feud between the Commission and Hoover’s bureau . Hoover's bureau was at the center of an intense feud between Hoover and the Commission . This was a quiet, yet intense, affair between the two agencies .
 There was considerable discussion about the proposed Texas court of inquiry . There was also considerable discussion on the proposed state of inquiry.
 State Attorney General Carr had traveled from Texas to Washington but was put off from meeting with Warren for three days . Chief justice wanted a formal promise that there would be no Texas hearings until after his commission had completed its investigation .
 The name of J Lee Rankin was advanced as a possible general counsel for the Commission . It was during this meeting that the name was advanced by the name of Rankin .
 Warren originally wanted Warren Olney IU, head of FBI Criminal division from 1953 to 1957, as chief counsel . Olney was head of the FBI Criminal Division from 1953-1957 . Warren wanted Olney to be chief counsel, but he was never found .
 Olney was an outspoken critic of director J Edgar Hoover and most knowledgeable about the internal workings of the bureau . He was rejected after the powerful Hoover voiced fierce opposition to his appointment, an indication of his power over investigation .
 The Commission reviewed the first formal report on the assassination issued by the FBI on December 9 . The Commission recessed until December 16, when it reviewed the report again .
 The CIA had been keeping an eye on Oswald since his trip to Russia in 1959 . This was the first admission that the CIA had kept a watch on Oswald . Oswald had been in Russia since 1959 .
 J Lee Rankin, a fifty-six-year-old corporate attorney and United States solicitor general under Eisenhower, accepted the appointment as general counsel for the Commission . Rankin met with commissioners on December 8, 1963, for the first time .
 Rankin would take charge of the Commission’s investigation, serve as the primary liaison between the Commission and both the FBI and CIA . Rankin will also serve as coordinator between Commission members and the staff .
 Rankin appeared more concerned with wrapping up the Commission’s investigation swiftly than with fully probing each assassination issue . Rankin said he was more concerned about wrapping up his investigation swiftly .
 Rankin reportedly replied, “No more memorandums.” to a memo outlining the serious deficiencies of the evidence against Oswald as the lone assassin . Assistant counsel Wesley Liebeler submitted a twentysix-page memorandum to Rankin .
 Initially, Rankin voiced the suspicion that the Commission might have to do more than simply evaluate FBI reports . Rankin: "The Commission may have to go beyond simply evaluating FBI reports" Rankin says the Commission will have to look at more .
 The Chief Justice and I finally came to the conclusion . . that we might have to ... ask for some investigative help . "We might not get all we needed by just going back to the FBI and other agencies," he said .
 "Anybody can look at it and see that it just doesn't seem like they're looking for things that this Commission has to look for in order to get the answers that it wants and is entitled to . .
 FBI is "tender about the knowledge they had and the fact that the Secret Service did not have that knowledge in order to do anything about it," says FBI agent .
 Warren optimistically predicted an early end to the investigation . Debate over whether to hurry up the work prior to the election-year conventions or slow it down pending the outcome of Jack Ruby's trial .
 A lengthy discussion ensued regarding the Commission’s responsibility to question Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-JacJacqueline .
 Almost a dozen pages of this discussion were marked “classified” and kept from the public . The discussion was marked "classified’s"
 The Commission then discussed the possibility of moving Oswald’s body, including another autopsy and even cremation . The Commission also discussed the idea of moving the body of Oswald .
 The transcripts make no mention that they suspected impersonation at this time . It is significant to note the Commission's interest in Oswald’s body . Oswald's body was found in a shallow grave .
 Warren suggested allowing someone with the American Civil Liberties Union to meet with Marina Oswald . Warren suggested that someone from the ACLU would meet with her .
 The Commission again grapples with the problem of interagency rivalries . The Commission was again grappled with the issue of inter agency rivalries.
 The issue of FBI reliability was raised again, this time in connection with conflicting information commissioners were getting concerning the president’s wounds . And again, the issue was raised, again, in connection to the conflicting information .
 McCloy said, “Let’s find out about these wounds, it is just as confusing now as could be.” McCloy added . McCloy: ‘Let's find out what's going on now as well as now .’
 Senator Russell even suggested double-checking the FBI studies, but no action was taken . Senator Russell said double-check was necessary .
 There are events in connection with this that might make it possible to check some of it out in time . The events are curious, in that they might make some of the information available .
 "The FBI is very explicit that Oswald is the assassin or was the assassin," FBI says . "There was no conspiracy, and they are also saying in the same place that they are continuing their investigation," he says .
 There can’t be a conspiracy without those being run out, they say . But they are concluding that there can't be a . conspiracy without . those being . run out .
 The specter of Oswald’s being identified as an FBI agent caused great difficulty for the Commission . Oswald was identified as a FBI agent by the FBI . The Commission was forced to name Oswald as an agent .
 More than two hours of its three-and-a-half-hour afternoon session were spent trying to decide how to broach the subject with director J Edgar Hoover .
 Oswald’s suspected connections with the CIA were also rumored to have been connected to the CIA . Oswald was killed in the June 4, 1918, assassination in Dallas, Texas .
 The stories of Oswald’s spy connections were traced back from Texas attorney general Waggoner Carr to Dallas County district attorney Henry Wade and more specifically assistant district attorney William Alexander . Alexander was the assistant to Dallas District Attorney Henry Wade .
 Alexander claimed he got the story from Houston Post reporter Alonzo Hudkins . Hudkins said he got it from Dallas County deputy sheriff Allan Sweatt . Alexander claimed to have gotten it from a reporter from the Houston Post .
 Sweatt revealed his source for the story was none other than Alexander, who was on the scene of the Tippit slaying . Alexander was reportedly also present at Oswald’s capture at the Texas Theater .
 Oswald was being paid $200 a month as FBI informant S-179 . No attempt was made to determine just where Alexander got his information about Oswald .
 He then raised the possibility of going straight to FBI director J Edgar Hoover . He then said he might also go straight to the FBI director .
 Hoover was already on record denying that Oswald had any connection with the bureau . Commission members were hesitant to anger the dour Hoover by initiating their own inquiries .
 President Obama would tell his own government but wouldn’t tell it any other way . President Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 Dulles said he would not reveal CIA business to anyone except the president . Dulles added that questioning Hoover would not necessarily get the truth .
 "I don't think there is any external evidence other than the person’s word that he did or did not employ a particular man as a secret agent," he says .
 Commission members were becoming suspicious that the bureau was not being totally open with them regarding certain aspects of the assassination . Commission members also became suspicious of the bureau's lack of openness with them .
 Rankin was allowed to approach Hoover in the manner he thought best . The Commission decided to allow Rankin to speak to Hoover in a manner he wanted .
 The Warren Commission elected to accept the FBI’s information and conclusions without independent verification . But after all was said and done, the Warren Commission chose to accept their conclusions .
 Rankin outlined at length the six major areas of the Commission’s investigation . Oswald's possible connection with the FBI was discussed at the same meeting .
 Area one was “The Basic Facts of the Assassination’s Assassination,” dealing with the number and source of the shots . Area one covered the number of shots and the source of those shots .
 Adams announced in March 1964 that he could not fulfill his responsibility in the investigation . Adams announced he could no longer fulfill his responsibilities in 1964 . Adams was forced to retire from the case in 1964 after the investigation was concluded .
 Area three was a study of “Oswald’s Background,” an aspect of the probe that clearly indicated the Commission had a predisposition toward Oswald’�s guilt . Area three showed the Commission's predisposition .
 It was headed by William Coleman Jr., a Pennsylvania attorney who had served as law clerk to U.S. Court of Appeals judge Herbert F Goodrich and Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter . W David Slawson, a Denver, Colorado, attorney educated at Amherst College
 In charge were Burt Griffin and Leon Hubert, both former assistant U.S. attorneys .
 Rankin outlined questions already arising over the medical evidence . Rankin also outlined the questions already emerging over the evidence .
 We think that the wound in the neck has to be related to one of these others, but the problem is difficult to determine because we have a statement from the hospital that the bullet that was more whole than the other was found on the stretcher which they brought the President in to the
 It was the beginning of years of controversy over the basic medical and ballistic evidence . The case was the subject of much of the world's most enduring controversy .
 As with the later House Select Committee on Assassinations, the Warren Commission asked many experts with lengthy credentials to evaluate various assassination evidence, such as Oswald’s fingerprints .
 Experts could not later state with any certainty that the materials they received from the government were originals . The House committee also heard from experts who supported the House committee .
 The possibility that someone within the government would substitute or fabricate evidence never seemed to cross the minds of the experts or commissioners . But the possibility of someone in the government fabricating evidence didn't seem to mind .
 On February 24, 1964, Warren, Cooper, Ford, Dulles, and Rankin met for about ten minutes . Warren met with Ford, Cooper and Dulles .
 We have written to the FBI to ask them, an official inquiry, how that could happen, and to furnish us all of the information concerning that occurrence . The FBI has not yet responded to the request .
 On March 16, 1964, three and a half months after its inception, the Warren Commission met again . The Warren Commission was formed in March 1964 . It was the first time the commission had met since it was formed .
 This three-minute session was to approve a resolution governing the questioning of witnesses by Commission staff members . This is the first time the Commission has held a session to approve questions by staff members of the Commission .
 Jack Ruby’s trial had ended on March 14, and at this point the real Warren Commission investigation began . Jack Ruby's trial ended March 14 and the Warren Commission began .
 Commission staff attorneys flew to Dallas to set up a field station in the offices of the U.S. Attorney Barefoot Sanders . Staff attorneys set up the field station at the office .
 In March the “more important” witnesses were called to testify over a period of 14 days . Also in March the "more important" witnesses had been called to testimony over a 14 day period .
 By April, the number of days spent hearing testimony had dropped to seven days . The number of hearing days was dropped to just seven .
 Commissioners still concerned about contradictions in the investigative material . Commissioners were concerned about the inconsistencies in the material . Commissioner: "Nearly five months had passed"
 The question of Oswald’s involvement with the FBI and CIA remained unresolved . Oswald was involved in the CIA, FBI and FBI . Oswald's role in Oswald's assassination remains unresolved .
 Cooper expressed concern over contradictions between the testimony of witnesses to Commission attorneys and news media reports of interviews with the same witnesses . Cooper expressed his concern over the contradictions in the testimony and media reports .
 The questions Cooper raised remain valid today. Conflicts in the Testimony are still relevant today .
 If basic conflicts exist in the Warren Commission testimony, then all of it must be reevaluated . All of the evidence used in all studies of the Kennedy assassination should be re-evaluated, author says .
 A close scrutiny of this issue brings out deeply troubling instances of suppressing evidence and intimidating witnesses . In fact, this issue is deeply troubling, says CNN.com .
 A review of the Warren Commission’s performance reveals glaring deficiencies . Despite what was hailed at the time as one of the most thorough investigations of all time . The Warren Commission's performance has been criticized .
 Commissioners devoted more than a page to a detailed discussion of Lee Harvey Oswald’s pubic hair . The report was published by the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Several pages were used to reproduce Marguerite Oswald’s tax and house payment receipts, some dating back into the 1930s, and the dental records of Jack Ruby's mother . Several pages of the Oswald's tax receipts were reproduced .
 Many other pages filled with meaningless and irrelevant testimony, such as that of Anne Boudreaux, who never met either Oswald or his mother . Professor Revilo Pendleton Oliver took up thirty-five pages of testimony to discuss an article he had written that had no bearing on the
 The omission of these people’s testimony appears to go far beyond inefficiency or oversight, it appears . The omission appears to be far more than inefficiency, oversight or inefficiency .
 It seems to support the charges by Warren Commission critics that the panel avoided information that conflicted with their preconceived determination that Oswald was the lone assassin . It seems rather to support critics that Warren Commission avoided information .
 Conclusions reached by the Warren Commission were contradicted by medical evidence, witnesses, and governor John Connally . The singlebullet theory was disproved by the medical evidence and the witnesses .
 Witnesses have stated that their testimony as presented by the Commission did not accurately reflect what they said . Witnesses Butch Burroughs, Jean Hill, Phil Willis, Orville Nix, James Tague, and others have said their testimony was not accurate . Witnesses have said testimony did not
 Every Commission witness had the opportunity to review his or her testimony for accuracy . As far as can't be determined, few took advantage of the offer .
 Nancy Powell, better known as Ruby stripper Tammi True, talked to agents in August 1964 . Nancy Powell was better known for her role in the film "Ruby Stylist"
 Powell complained she did not feel that her testimony had been recorded accurately in the deposition . Powell complained that she felt her testimony was not recorded accurately . She said she felt the deposition had been inaccurate .
 Witness Sam Holland was one of the few to attempt to correct his Warren Commission testimony . Sam Holland's testimony was incorrect, but he has since been corrected .
 Holland told author Josiah Thompson he and his attorney attempted to correct the transcript . Holland tells author he attempted to fix the transcript of the interview .
 Ronald Fischer, one of the bystanders who saw a man in the sixth-floor window, later said he almost got into a fight with a Commission attorney who was trying to get him to change his story . Ronald Fischer said he saw the man in a sixth floor window in the minutes before
 Belin wanted me to tell him that the man was dark-headed and I wouldn’t do it, he said . The man in the photographs doesn't appear to be as light as the man that I saw, he says .
 Julia Ann Mercer claimed to have seen Jack Ruby behind the wheel of a truck in Dealey Plaza about an hour and a half before the assassination . Mercer told investigators for New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison that the FBI altered several key portions of her statement . Mercer's signature was forged on a
 Phil Willis, who took a series of photographs of the assassination, was surprised when he was asked only to give a deposition rather than to testify . Willis was asked to testify in a deposition instead of testifying .
 I tried to tell him about the shots and the echoes but he wasn’t interested, he said . ‘He wasn't interested,’ he said. ‘I’m not interested. He’s not interested,' he added .
 She said, “I very much agree that shots came from somewhere else other than the Depository’s .
 Chester Breneman and Robert West produced the height and distance figures for the Commission’s reenactment of the assassination . Their figures were “at odds” with the figures the Warren Commission published, they say .
 The consequence of these altered numbers was to make the controversial single-bullet theory more plausible by simply moving back to the time when both Kennedy and Connally were wounded .
 The experience of former Texas senator Ralph Yarborough also sheds light on the manner in which key witnesses were allowed to be handled . Yarborough's experience sheds light into how the Commission handled key witnesses .
 The fact that Yarborough was riding beside Lyndon Johnson in the motorcade may explain his treatment in the summer of 1964 .
 They walked in like they were a couple of deputy sheriffs and I was a bank robber, he says . "They walked in ... and I'm not saying that," he says of the officers . "I'm not sure what happened to me," he adds .
 "They went off and wrote up something and brought it back for me to sign," he said . "I'm not going to sign it, but I'm signing it," he later said .
 I typed one up myself and put basically what I told you about how the cars all stopped. So I typed it up myself . It's basically basically what you told you: The cars stopped .
 I began to lose confidence then in their investigation and that’s further eroded with time,’S says . ‘I began losing confidence then, and that's further eroded’ with time.’ The former president of the United States.
 Yarborough was shocked to find that all vital assassination information was sent to President Johnson before it ever went to the Warren Commission or even attorney general Robert Kennedy . Yarborough also was shocked that information never went to Warren Commission members or attorney general .
 Witness Jean Hill made shocking statements about treatment at the hands of the Warren Commission . Jean Hill said she was treated unfairly by the Commission .
 She was grabbed by two men who claimed to be Secret Service agents . She was advised by friends in Dallas Police Department to keep quiet about what she knew .
 Even after she received a subpoena to appear before the Warren Commission, friends urged that she not go to Washington . Friends urged her not to go to D.C. to appear .
 She recalled, “They seemed to feel that there might be some danger if I was to leave Dallas.” She recalled how she was told she might be in danger .
 Hill refused to go to Washington, Commission attorney Arlen Specter sent FBI agents to take her to make a deposition . After Hill refused, the FBI agents were sent to take Hill to Washington to testify .
 Parkland is one of the top floors of Parkland's top buildings . Parkland has been a top school in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 He talked to me for a few minutes, trying to act real friendly, then this woman, a stenographer, came in and sat behind me . The woman, who was sitting behind me, sat behind him and tried to act friendly, she said .
 He had told me that this interview would be confidential, then I looked around and this woman was taking notes, he said . He said: "I looked around, this woman took notes. He had said this interview was confidential. He said it was confidential."
 I reminded him that the discussion was to be private and he told the woman to put down her notebook, which she did . She did . He told her to put her notebook down .
 "He kept trying to get me to change my story, particularly regarding the number of shots," he said . He said: "He wanted me to get him to change his story, especially regarding the amount of shots"
 He said I had been told how many shots there were and I figured he was talking about what the Secret Service told me right after the assassination . He said he was told about the number of shots, and that he thought it was what he'd been told .
 His inflection and attitude was that I knew what I was supposed to be saying, why wouldn’t I just say it, he said . He said he knew what he was meant to say, so why not he just said it? "His inflection was that he knew
 "He told me about my life, my family, and even mentioned that my marriage was in trouble," she said of her marriage .
 "Look, we can make you look as crazy as Marguerite Oswald and everybody knows how crazy she is," she says . "He got angrier and angrier ... and finally told me, “Look, they can make me look crazy," she adds .
 "I kept asking to see that woman’s notes, to see what she was putting down. I kept asking for the notes," she said .
 "I knew something was not right about this, because no one who is just taking a deposition gets that involved and angry, they just take your answers," she says . "No one who takes a deposition should get that angry and angry," she adds .
 He finally gave me his word that the interview would not be published unless I approved what was written . The interview was published without approval by the author of the book .
 When I finally read my testimony as published by the Warren Commission, I knew it was a fabrication from the first line . "I knew it would be a fabrication," she says of her testimony .
 After that ordeal at Parkland Hospital, they wrote that my deposition was taken at the U.S. attorney’s office in the Post Office Building . The deposition was held at the United States attorney's office, the post office .
 In 1975 a CIA liaison told congressional investigators that two of Kennedy’s aides, Kenneth O’Donnell and David Powers, initially said shots came from other than the Depository . They later changed their story after being warned by J Edgar Hoover or one of his top aides that such
 O'Donnell and Powers denied this story when it appeared in a Chicago newspaper column . Both O’Donnell and powers deny this story .
 The story was confirmed in 1987 with the publication of former House speaker Thomas P “Tip” O’ Neill’s book, Man of the House .
 I was never one of those people who had doubts or suspicions about the Warren Commission's report on the president’s death . President Obama was assassinated in 1993 .
 I was surprised to hear O’Donnell say that he was sure he had heard two shots from behind the fence . O'Donnell: "I’m sure I heard two gunshots from behind a fence. I’ll be surprised that he heard two," he said .
 Dave Powers was with us at dinner that night that night, and his recollection of the shots was the same as O’Donnell’s . Dave Powers says he was with the team at dinner when the shots were fired .
 Kenny O’Donnell is no longer alive, but during the writing of this book I checked with Dave Powers . Dave Powers is the son of Kenny O'Donnell .
 It appears the sins of the Warren Commission went far beyond a few omissions and distortions . Considering the information presented in this section of this section, it appears it appears that the commission's sins went far further .
 Americans today place little credence in the Commission’s findings of a lone assassin and no conspiracy . Little wonder that the vast majority of Americans today believe the findings are true .
 Once again the charge of cover-up can be laid at the feet of the federal government . The federal government can be found guilty of covering-up of the scandal .
 J Lee Rankin openly admitted that the June 1 June 1 date for closing the investigation was unreasonable . Rankin admitted that closing the probe was unreasonable. Rankin also admitted that June 1 was unreasonable to close the investigation .
 A brief discussion was held regarding Jack Ruby, who had been found guilty and been sentenced to death . Jack Ruby was found guilty of murder and sentenced to be executed .
 His attorneys were appealing the conviction on the grounds of his mental incompetence . However, his attorneys said he was not mentally competent .
 Commissioner McCloy said Ruby would go to a mental institution . Ruby would not go to prison, commissioner McCloy responded, “He goes to mental institution.”
 The inaccessibility of Kennedy’s autopsy X-rays and photographs has been a cornerstone of the criticism of the Warren Commission . Kennedy's autopsy photos have been criticized for being too accessible .
 Commissioners agreed on the necessity of including a biography of Lee Harvey Oswald in their final report .
 Despite the questions, contradictions, and gaps in the evidence at hand, Oswald's guilt was already decided . Oswald’s guilt is already decided, despite the questions and contradictions in the case .
 The Single-Bullet Theory Nowhere was the manipulation of the facts more evident than the idea that both President Kennedy and Governor Connally were struck by the same bullet .
 A single rifle slug penetrated two men, causing seven wounds, shattering a rib and a wrist bone, then emerged almost totally unscathed to become the pristine Commission Exhibit 399 . To believe the single-bullet theory, one must believe that a single rifle . slug . penetrated two . men
 To disbelieve the single-bullet theory means rejecting the Warren Commission’s entire version of the assassination . Yet, to disbelieve it means rejecting Warren Commission's entire version, the author says .
 Commissioners set about determining the timing and effects of each shot in Zapruder film . They concluded that only three shots were fired, the maximum allowable for one assassin .
 The Commission had a certain time frame to work within . The FBI had established an assassination time sequence by studying the Zapruder film . The Commission was given a time frame by the FBI .
 The original FBI and Secret Service reports made it clear that Kennedy was struck in the back by the first shot . Governor Connally was hit by the second shot, and the president’s head wound caused by the third .
 The Commission accepted this believable scenario for a time . Connally testified he was hit after the first shot, but the Commission accepted it .
 James Tague was struck by a piece of cement while standing near the Triple Underpass . Tague died in hospital after being struck by the cement near the underpass .
 Initially both the FBI and the Warren Commission tried to ignore Tague . Tague was the subject of a series of investigations by the FBI . He died at the age of 92 .
 Assistant United States attorney Martha Jo Stroud in Dallas sent commissioners both an account of the Tague wounding and a Dallas news photograph of the bullet mark on the curb . The Commission was forced to action after the shooting .
 JFK autopsy doctor James Humes had hypothesized that a single bullet could have caused the wounds to both Kennedy and Connally . The FBI was denying any curb shot in Dallas in 1964 .
 Specter eagerly latched onto this concept, which neatly explained how the two men were wounded by the same shot . Specter: "I'm glad to see that we're in the right place, and I'm not afraid to see it. It's a good sign that the two
 It is now clear that the Warren Commission knew the single-bullet theory did not fit the facts . However, it is also clear that it was not true to the Warren commission's theory .
 For the single-bullet theory to work requires a rifle bullet without striking bone to course upward and turn in midair, then take a different trajectory, a physical impossibility . Rankin stops in midsentence, having reached the point where he too now realizes that for the theory to
 The same bullet which pierced the President's throat also caused Governor Connally’s wounds, experts say . It is not necessary to determine just which shot hit Connally, the commission says .
 Lee Harvey Oswald fired the shots which killed President Kennedy and wounded Governor Connally . Oswald was responsible for the shooting that killed Connally and killed Kennedy in Texas .
 Kennedy was never shot through the neck, as no exit wound from the throat was ever found . What was essential was that Kennedy was not shot in the neck . No exit wound was found in the throat of the president .
 Forensics expert Sherry Fiester said the single-bullet theory hinged on trajectory . Path of the bullet path “widely varied” in studies by FBI and House committee .
 The presumption of Oswald’s guilt was the first topic of a Commission meeting on June 4, 1964 . Oswald was accused of being the prime suspect in the assassination of JFK .
 Rankin had told Commission attorneys to “wrap up” their investigations and submit their area chapters by June 1 . The final report could be issued by June 30 .
 By June 1, only two attorneys had completed a draft and the deadline had to be moved back . The deadline was moved back to June 1 but only two lawyers had completed it .
 On June 30, it was announced that the final report would not be issued until after the Republican National Convention . The RNC convention is set to begin July 13 . The final report will be released after the convention .
 The Commission worked in secrecy, as evidenced by the minutes of an executive session conducted on June 23, 1964 . The minutes of the executive session are shown .
 The immense pressure to hurry up the investigation and close down the Commission may have accounted for the fact that five of the senior attorneys returned to their private practices and made virtually no contribution to the final report . The pressure to speed up the report may have been behind the decision to close the Commission
 On July 9, 1964, commissioners Allen Dulles and John McCloy met with three psychiatrists who had been asked to develop a psychological profile on Oswald . Three psychiatrists were asked to give a psychological assessment of Oswald .
 Psychiatrists went over complex psychological conjectures regarding Oswald's motives . Their interpretations of Oswald's thinking were severely limited due to the fact that they were operating under the assumption of Oswald’s guilt . The material studied was based on Commission and FBI reports .
 Psychiatrists spent hours detailing their theories, but cautioned against putting too much confidence in their theories . They had not had the opportunity to interview Oswald personally . Even though the psychiatrists spent hours detailed their theories of Oswald's motives .
 The Warren Commission used psychiatrists’ opinions to underscore the case against Oswald as a lonely and troubled man . Yet in its final report the Warren Commission did use the psychiatrists' opinions as a basis for its conclusions .
 The Warren Commission represented some of the most prestigious men in the nation . After all, the Warren Commission was represented by some of America's most famous men .
 In its final report, the Warren Commission made no specific reference to the psychiatric panel . The panel's final report was released on Friday .
 Report presented ideas that originated with doctors, but portions of the report presented ideas originated with the doctors .
 The Warren Commission Report was written by Norman Redlich and Alfred Goldberg . With the Commission investigation winding down and most of the senior attorneys gone, the job of writing the report fell to Redlich . The report was published by the Warren Commission, a federal commission investigating the White House .
 Goldberg was a historian for the United States Air Force Historical Division . Goldberg worked for the U.S. Air Force History Division . He was a member of the Air Force Historian Commission .
 When Goldberg told Warren it was impossible to complete the report by midJuly, the deadline was moved back to August 1 . The deadline has since been moved back from midJuly to midAugust 1 .
 Through August, Goldberg and Redlich continued to rewrite the report’s chapters . The deadline for the report was moved back into September .
 The Commission reportedly received intense pressure from Johnson aide McGeorge Bundy to hurry up and publish its findings . The Commission is well aware of the ever-nearing November presidential election .
 On September 4, galley proofs of the final report draft were circulated among commissioners and staffers for last-minute comments . The report draft was released to the public .
 A dissatisfied Liebeler submitted a twenty-page memorandum highly critical of the ‘Identity of the Assassin’ chapter . Two days later, a dissatisfied Liebeler submitted a twenty-six-page memo critical of "Identity of the
 Commissioners Richard Russell, John Cooper, and Hale Boggs traveled to Dallas to reexamine Marina Oswald . They were unsatisfied with the inevitable conclusion of Oswald’s guilt .
 Under questioning, she changed significant aspects of her story, prompting even more rewriting of the report . She changed significant portions of her account, prompting more rewriting .
 The final Warren Commission session was on September 18, 1964, less than ten days before its final report would be issued to President Lyndon Johnson . The final report was issued to the President of the United States by President Johnson .
 According to the National Archives, no transcripts of this important final meeting exist . National Archives: No transcripts of the final meeting .
 Great concern was being voiced to Chief Counsel Rankin that material within the report conflicted with its summary and conclusions chapter . However, some descriptions of the meeting show that great concern .
 The report was signed by all seven commissioners, though Senator Russell refused to sign until the wording regarding the single-bullet theory was softened to indicate the idea was only a probability . The report signed by the seven commissioners .
 Russell’s dissension may have been the topic of the September 18 meeting for which the transcripts are missing . Russell's dissension and skepticism of the report's conclusions may be the topic .
 Russell told researcher Harold Weisberg that several of the commissioners voiced doubts about the Commission’s conclusions at a meeting . Russell said he was “shaken” by the discovery that the record of these doubts was missing . Russell: “I was ‘shaken
 The Warren Commission Report was made public on September 28, 1964, with the news media voicing virtually unanimous praise and support for the document . The report was released by the Warren Commission in 1964 .
 Johnson refused to answer questions from his own commission . Today it is intriguing to note that Johnson refused questions from the commission .
 A list of questions was prepared and submitted to Johnson’s confidant, Abe Fortas, in August 1966 .
 There was some speculation from abroad that he might have had some indirect connection with the Dallas tragedy . President Johnson should not be examined in the same manner as every other witness, he says .
 The Warren Commission Report was released with widespread publicity praising its thoroughness and conclusions . Twenty-six volumes of Commission testimony and exhibits were quietly made public . Two months after the report was released, the Warren Commission was quietly released .
 By then they were largely ignored except by a few low-circulation periodicals . And by then they had been largely ignored .
 The Warren Commission had completed its work on September 28 . No one was in a position to receive new or clarified information regarding the assassination .
 Researcher Sylvia Meagher produced a meticulous dissection of the Commission and its conclusions . Meagher, in Accessories After the Fact, produced a detailed dissection .
 If the investigation was as inadequate and incompetent as is suggested by the Commission’s own internal documents, it IS legitimate to question the specific conclusions of the report .
 The Report was the only possible compromise they could produce, in terms of their knowledge and conscience . So many of doubts apparently were not resolved, the impression emerges from the private discussions among the commissioners .
 In the years following the release of the Warren Report, condemnation of its work and conclusions has only grown more widespread . The Warren Report was released in 2003 and has been widely condemned .
 The committee has developed evidence that impeaches the process by which the intelligence agencies arrived at their own conclusions about the assassination, the committee says .
 The FBI and CIA allowed the investigation to go forward, in light of these deficiencies . Why they permitted the Warren Commission to reach its conclusions without all relevant information is still unclear .
 Concern with public reputation, problems of coordination between agencies, possible bureaucratic failure, and embarrassment may have contributed to these shortcomings . The extreme compartmentalization of knowledge of sensitive operations may also have contributed .
 The possibility exists that senior officials in both agencies made conscious decisions not to disclose potentially important information . But the possibility exists there is a chance that officials from both agencies are aware of the information .
 As has been demonstrated, in most cases, “potentially important information” meant any information that didn’t add to the evidence of Oswald’s guilt . “Potentially important” information did not add to evidence that Oswald was guilty .
 The sins of the Warren Commission, the FBI, and the CIA go far beyond simple omission for face-saving purposes . The CIA, FBI and CIA are among the agencies responsible for the cover-up .
 Senator Richard Schweiker, a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee’s subcommittee that looked at the agencies’ performance during the Warren Commission investigation, said both the CIA and the FBI deliberately lied to the Commission about significant assassination issues .
 His charge was supported by former Texas attorney general Waggoner Carr, whose own investigation was usurped by the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission's own investigation usurped the investigation .
 Schweiker said lies from agencies invalidated the Warren Commission’s conclusions . Schweiker added that lies from these agencies, coupled with the numerous deficiencies his panel saw, invalidated their conclusions . The commission's conclusions invalidated its conclusions, he said .
 He bluntly reported, “I think the Warren Commission has, in fact, collapsed like a house of cards.” He said he thinks the Warren commission has collapsed . The Warren Commission is a "house of cards"
 Widespread disbelief in the Warren Commission, though never publicly acknowledged, has carried forward right up until today . The Warren Commission was never officially acknowledged, but has carried on today .
 Commission's sins included investigating from a preconceived idea, failing to substantiate evidence from the FBI, intimidating selected witnesses, intimidating witnesses, stifling internal dissent, and misreporting its own information . Today it can be clearly seen that the sins of the Commission included .
 These methods were actively employed to subvert a truthful investigation and present flawed and inadequate conclusions to the unsuspecting public . The investigation was actively employed by the White House to 'subvert' the truth, investigators say .
 In retrospect, it seems the Warren Commission provided a classic example of how not to conduct a meaningful investigation . The Warren Commission has been criticized for its lack of a meaningful inquiry into the CIA .
 It appears the Commission slowly became aware of the massive power behind the assassination and simply could not—or would not, come to grips with it . It appears that the Commission was slowly aware of its massive power .
 Like subsequent inquiries into the Kennedy assassination, it released a slanted and timid version of the tragedy hoping to appease the public long enough that commissioners would not have to face the full ramifications .
 For more than five decades much of the American public has been content with the Warren Commission version of the assassination . The Warren Commission's version is implausible, but implausible . The public has long been contented with the version .
 A large number of citizens have reevaluated the official government assassination theory of a lone gunman . Today, with firm evidence of a second assassin available and a continuing history of government deceit, many have reevaluate the theory .
 Polls indicate the vast majority of Americans continue to doubt the basic tenets of the Warren Commission .
 A 2004 FOX News poll conducted by Opinion Dynamics Corp. on the fortieth anniversary of the JFK assassination showed 74 percent of respondents believed there was a conspiracy and a cover-up .
 This poll reflected numbers similar to previous surveys conducted by Louis Harris and Associates in 1967, 1975, and 1981 . About two-thirds also felt the shooting was part of a larger conspiracy conspiracy .
 According to a police report, the two men returned to Banister’s office, where an argument erupted . The two men had an argument, according to the police report .
 Banister, his irritability inflamed by alcohol, accused Martin of stealing files . Martin reminded Banister that he had not forgotten some of the people he had seen in Banister’s office that summer that summer .
 Banister beat Martin over the head with a heavy .357 Magnum pistol . Banister then beat Martin with the heavy pistol . Martin was found dead at the scene .
 A police ambulance was called and carried the bloodied Martin to Charity Hospital . Martin suffered a bloodied head injury and was taken to hospital .
 Martin whispered to friends that Banister had often been in the company of a man named David Ferrie . Martin claimed Ferrie drove to Texas the day of Kennedy’s assassination to serve as a getaway pilot for the assassins . Martin said Ferrie often drove with Banister to
 Martin’s words soon reached the ears of New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison, who arrested Ferrie upon his return to New Orleans, thus beginning an investigation into the JFK assassination . Ferrie was arrested in New Orleans .
 Garrison’s investigation revealed much new assassination information . The assassination was addressed for the first time in a courtroom, even though the defendant was acquitted . Garrison's investigation led to the assassination being addressed in court .
 Garrison claimed that the entire weight of the federal government was moved to block and ridicule his investigation . Garrison said that the government was moving to ridicule him . Garrison was attacked by some in the national media before he had even had a chance to present his case .
 Garrison enlisted in the U.S. Army a year before Pearl Harbor . Garrison was born in Knoxville, Iowa, in 1921 . Garrison grew up in New Orleans .
 He eventually earned bachelor of laws and master of civil laws degrees . He eventually graduated from law school with bachelor of law and master law degrees .
 Garrison then joined the FBI, serving briefly in Seattle and Tacoma, Washington . Garrison served briefly as an FBI agent in Seattle . Garrison then served briefly in Tacoma and Seattle .
 He wrote, “I was very impressed with the competence and efficiency of the Bureau.” He wrote .
 I was extremely bored as I rang doorbells to inquire about the loyalty and associations of applicants for employment in a defense plant . However, I was bored by the boredom of the job applicants .
 He served as assistant district attorney in New Orleans from 1954 to 1958 . He resigned with a scathing attack on mayor Victor H Schiro .
 Garrison blasted Schiro for corruption and failure to enforce the law . Garrison decided to run for the district attorney’s job in 1961 .
 Garrison ran a meager campaign, composed mostly of some television talks . Not believing he had much of a chance, Garrison ran his meager campaign .
 Garrison defeated Dowling in a run-off election in 1962 . Garrison took office as district attorney on March 3, 1962 .
 Garrison did begin to clean up some of the more disreputable gambling and prostitution dens of New Orleans . His critics noted that he did not share that same enthusiasm against the leaders of organized crime .
 Garrison angered by judges' refusal to approve funds for investigating organized crime . Garrison was angered by the refusal of eight criminal-court judges to approve money for investigating crime .
 The judges sued him for defamation of character and won a $1,000 state court judgment . The judges won't pay him a fine .
 Garrison, however, fought this action all the way to the Supreme Court, which reversed the decision in a landmark case on the right to criticize public officials . Garrison's case was a landmark decision in the landmark case . Garrison fought this case all the .
 Garrison attempted to locate David Ferrie after hearing Jack Martin’s remarks during the assassination weekend . Ferrie was the last person to be found by Garrison Garrison .
 Garrison, who had met the bizarre Ferrie once before, could hardly forget the man . Garrison met the man once before and had met him again . Garrison: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure I'm not going to be surprised"
 Ferrie suffered from alopecia, a rare disease that causes total baldness . Ferrie was diagnosed with the rare disease which causes baldness and baldness.
 Garrison recalled, “The face grinning ferociously at me was like a ghoulish Halloween mask.” Garrison recalled . Garrison said the face was like “a ghouly Halloween mask”
 The eyebrows were greasepaint, one noticeably higher than the other . The eyebrows plainly were greepaint .
 Ferrie admitted his Friday trip to Texas, claiming he had wanted to go ice skating in Houston . Ferrie said he wanted to ice skate in Houston, Texas .
 Instead of skating, he spent his time at the rink’s pay phone . He had no adequate answer for why he had chosen to drive through one of the worst thunderstorms in years in years .
 The FBI expressed interest in turning the three men over to them for questioning, he says . He says the FBI asked him to turn the men over for questioning .
 John Kennedy was 43 years old and had been district attorney for a year and nine months when he was killed . He was district attorney in Texas for more than a year, nine months .
 "I was an old-fashioned patriot, a product of my family, my military experience, and my years in the legal profession," she says . "I'm an old fashioned patriot," she adds .
 "I could not imagine then that the government ever would deceive the citizens of this country," she said . "I was shocked to find out what happened to me," she added .
 David Ferrie was released by the FBI with surprising swiftness, implying that no evidence had been found connecting him with the assassination . Ferrie's release was accepted by CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Garrison’s attention was centered on his job and family . Over the next three years, Garrison was focused on his family and his job .
 Garrison chose to believe the official version of the assassination story . Garrison was aware of contradictions in the story, but believed it to be true .
 By this time our military was deeply engaged in the war in Southeast Asia, it had been engaged in a war in the region .
 Like most Americans, I took it for granted that our government had our troops over there to bring democracy to South Vietnam . "I thought it was a miracle that our troops were over there," says Bob Greene .
 Like most Americans, I took for granted that our government had fully investigated President Kennedy’s assassination and had found it to be indeed the result of a random act by a man acting alone . I also thought that the government had thoroughly investigated the assassination .
 The murder of President Kennedy and the arrival of half a million members of the U.S. military in Vietnam might be related, author says .
 Garrison’s view began to change after a chance meeting with the powerful senator from Louisiana, Russell Long . Garrison: Long is a powerful senator and a powerful force in Louisiana politics . Garrison's view of the Republican Party has changed dramatically .
 Garrison said Long told him Long said "Those fellows on the Warren Commission were dead wrong" Garrison says Long told Garrison that Warren Commission was dead wrong . Garrison: Long said Long was "a man of God"
 Garrison and his office are back on the assassination investigation trail . Garrison's comment was to put Garrison back in the crosshairs .
 Garrison went back and studied the Warren Commission Report and volumes in detail . Garrison: First Garrison went to the Warren Report to learn more about the report . Garrison says he has studied the report extensively .
 Considering the lofty credentials of the commission members and the quality and size of the staff available to them, I had expected to find a thorough and professional investigation . I had hoped to find the investigation was thorough .
 "The number of promising leads that were never followed up offended my prosecutorial sensibility," says D.C. prosecutor John Sutter .
 Report seems to be based on an appallingly selective reading of the evidence, ignoring credible testimony from literally dozens of witnesses . And, perhaps worst of all, the conclusions in the report seemed to be ... selective .
 Garrison, with his military background, was shocked to read in the commission volumes where a Lieutenant Colonel Allison G Folsom Jr. reported on a grade made by Oswald in a Russian examination . Garrison was particularly shocked to find out that Oswald had made a grade in Russian examinations .
 Garrison knew that the mere fact that Oswald had been tested in Russian indicated intelligence training . Garrison knew Oswald had trained in Russian intelligence . Garrison said that Oswald was tested in Russia indicated intelligence .
 Garrison took another look at Oswald’s activities while in New Orleans in the spring and summer of 1963 . Garrison was fired by growing suspicions of Oswald's activities in the city .
 He began to assemble some of his most trusted assistants, whom he dubbed his “special team,” and his investigation grew . Quietly he assembled some of the most trusted aides .
 Garrison reinterviewed Jack Martin and found that Oswald had been part of that strange entourage of agents in and out of Banister’s Camp Street office . Oswald was one of the agents who worked for Banister in his office .
 He found Banister and associates involved in activities far from normal New Orleans activity . He found that Banister's associates were involved far away from normal activity, honest or otherwise .
 There were tales of burglarized armories, missing weapons, raided ammunition caches, and gunrunning operations . Gunrunning operations in the U.S. have taken place in the past .
 Garrison wrote, “The Banister apparatus . . . was part of a supply line that ran along the Dallas-New Orleans—Miami corridor. Garrison wrote . Garrison: Banister . apparatus . was . part of the supply line .
 By 1966, Garrison was looking for a living person to prosecute in the conspiracy he had begun to unravel . Banister was dead—he reportedly suffered a heart attack in June 1964 . Garrison found Banister dead, but Garrison was still looking for someone to prosecute .
 New Orleans attorney Dean Andrews says he received a call from a “Clay Bertrand” the day after the assassination asking him to fly to Dallas and legally represent Lee Harvey Oswald . Andrews says the call was from a man who asked him to represent Oswald .
 Andrews reiterated this story to Garrison and claimed that while he had “Clay Bertrand” as a client, he had never actually met the man . Andrews reiterated that he never met Bertrand .
 Garrison’s investigators pried into the seamier areas of New Orleans nightlife . “Clay Bertrand” was the name used by none other than Clay Shaw, the respected director of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans .
 Clay Shaw was not merely some innocent with no connection to persons and/or organizations that may have played a role in President Kennedy’s death . Shaw, like Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby, wasn’t merely innocent .
 Shaw had some of the most intriguing and unprobed connections of any person involved in the assassination case . Shaw's connections with the case included those of any of the people involved in it .
 Even when some of these connections were brought to the attention of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, the committee was either unable or unwilling to fully investigate them .
 Shaw, a tall, distinguished man with silver hair and a polished manner, was bom in Kentwood, Louisiana, on March 17, 1913 . Shaw was born in 1913 .
 Shaw was an aide-decamp to General Charles O Thrasher in 1941 . Shaw later admitted he was working for the Office of Strategic Services as a liaison officer to the headquarters of Winston Churchill .
 Shaw may have become entangled in the murky world of intelligence . Shaw may also have been involved in the CIA . Shaw is believed to have worked for the CIA in the past .
 Shaw retired from the U.S. Army in 1946 as a major . He was made a colonel, with the Bronze Star, the Legion of Merit, France’s Croix de Guerre, and Belgium’�s Order of the Crown . Shaw was awarded the
 Shaw was a wealthy real-estate developer in New Orleans . Shaw returned to New Orleans after World War II . Shaw died in 1945 .
 Shaw left this organization to found the International Trade Mart, which became quite profitable sponsoring permanent industrial expositions in the Caribbean . Shaw left the organization to start a trade mart .
 The Trade Mart was connected with Centro Mondiale Commerciale through yet another shadowy firm named Permindex (PERManent INDUSTrial EXpositions), also in the business of international expositions . PermIndex is also connected to Centro MSC through another shadowy
 In the 1962 edition of Who’s Who in the South and Southwest, Shaw gave biographical information stating that he was on the board of directors of Permindex. Shaw was a member of the board .
 In the 1963-1964 edition, the reference to Permindex was dropped . The reference to the index was dropped in 1964 edition of the book .
 In the late 1960s, Permindex and its parent company, Centro Mondiale Commerciale, came under intense scrutiny by the Italian news media .
 Prince Gutierrez di Spadaforo was undersecretary of agriculture under Benito Mussolini . His daughter-in-law was related to Nazi minister of finance Hjalmar Schacht . Ferenc Nagy, former premier of Hungary and leading anticommunist, was
 The Italian media reported that Nagy was president of Permindex and the board chairman and major stockholder was Major Louis Mortimer Bloomfield . Bloomfield represented the Bronfmans, a Canadian family made wealthy by the liquor industry, as well as serving U.S. intelligence services
 Bloomfield was recruited into the British Special Operations Executive in 1938 . During the war he was given rank within the U.S. Army . He eventually became part of the OSS intelligence system, including the FBI's Division Five .
 Bloomfield became quite close with J Edgar Hoover, according to a report . Bloomfield was a close friend with Hoover, who was a member of the FBI .
 Permindex began to draw attention in 1962, when French president Charles de Gaulle publicly accused the company of channeling funds to the outlawed Secret Army Organization .
 De Gaulle identified several major and well-known international companies as investors in Permindex . PermIndex.com .
 Some $200,000 in secret funds had been sent to Permindex accounts in the Banque de la Credit Internationale .
 Gatlin was killed when he fell or was thrown from the sixth-floor window of a hotel in Panama . Garrison began to probe this area of interest, he discovered that Gatlin had been killed .
 Some of the banking connections from this secret empire reached to Mafia chief Meyer Lansky and his gambling operations in the Bahamas . Life magazine found that some of the connections reached to Lansky's gambling operations .
 Italian government expelled Centro Mondiale Commerciale and Permindex in 1962 for subversive activities connected to Propaganda-2 Masonic Lodge scandal . Lodge was accused of attempting to overthrow the Italian government and set up a fascist regime .
 Victor Marchetti, former executive assistant to the deputy director of the CIA, has revealed that in early 1969, he learned from CIA director Richard Helms that Clay Shaw and David Ferrie had worked for the agency .
 CIA memo dated September 28, 1967, to the Justice Department, finally made public in 1977 . Shaw had provided the agency with some thirty reports between 1949 and 1956 . Further, a CIA memo revealed that Shaw had given the agency some 30 reports .
 In May 1961, Shaw introduced CIA deputy director General General Charles P Cabell to the Foreign Policy Association of New Orleans . Shaw introduced Cabell just after the disastrous Bay of Pigs Invasion .
 By late 1966, Garrison had two suspects in mind in the murder of President Kennedy . The strange David Ferrie and the socially connected Clay Shaw were the main suspects .
 David William Ferrie was a character straight out of some fiction novel, but he was frighteningly real . Ferrie's character was a terrifyingly real. Ferrie died in a car crash crash in the early 1960s .
 Ferrie considered himself a master hypnotist, a philosopher, a psychologist, a scientist, a cancer researcher, and a religious “bishop” in the Orthodox Old Catholic Church of North America . Ferrie: “I am a religious "bishop"
 Cashiered as a pilot for Eastern Airlines following publicity over a homosexual arrest . Ferrie continued his flying activities, which included work for both the CIA and reputed New Orleans mob boss Carlos Marcello .
 Ferrie often was seen in the company of Sergio Archaca-Smith, New Orleans director of the virulently anti-Castro Cuban Democratic Revolutionary Front . In 1961, Ferrie was seen with Archaca Smith, director of an anti-Cuba group .
 Ferrie was one of the pilots involved in the ill-fated Bay of Pigs Invasion . That same year, he was introduced to a meeting of the New Orleans Civic Club . Ferrie is a member of the N.O. civic club .
 He also made an anti-Kennedy talk to the New Orleans chapter of the Military Order of World Wars . He said Kennedy "double-crossed" the invasion force by failing to authorize needed air support .
 Ferrie's speech was so vitriolic that several members of the audience walked out . Ferrie’s speech was a vitriolic speech that left several people in the audience walking out .
 Garrison: Ferrie, who had been in contact with Oswald, also was connected to Clay Shaw . Garrison: "There was abundant evidence that Ferrie had been involved with Clay Shaw" Garrison: Shaw was also connected to Oswald .
 Raymond Broshears, a longtime friend of Ferrie’s, had seen Ferrie and Shaw together on several occasions . Raymond Broshars had seen the pair together several times before .
 Broshears told Garrison how Ferrie once became intoxicated and detailed how he had driven to Houston the day of Kennedy’s death to meet two members of the assassination team from Dallas .
 Ferrie was to have taken Carlos and his fellow assassin out of Houston . Carlos was to be taken to safety by Ferrie . Ferrie and Carlos were killed in Houston .
 Garrison soon found others who had known of the relationship between Ferrie and Shaw . Whether or not the Broshears account of Ferrie’s comments is accurate, Garrison found others .
 Jules Ricco Kimble, a member of the Ku Klux Klan, told Garrison of being introduced to Shaw by Ferrie . David Logan, a Ferrie acquaintance named David Logan also told Garrison .
 Nicholas Tadin, the head of the New Orleans musicians’ union, told Garrison that he and his wife had sought out Ferrie for flying lessons when they saw him with Shaw at New Orleans Airport .
 Garrison’s investigation broadened to include trips to Dallas, Houston, and Miami by members of his team . The secrecy surrounding Garrison's probe began to crumble . Garrison's investigation began to include visits to Dallas and Houston .
 Garrison later wrote, “We had operated as secretly as possible, assuming this was the most efficient and responsible way to handle such a potentially explosive situation.” Garrison later said he was simply seeking publicity . Garrison: “I had operated secretly as . possible. We had operated
 The local news story brought a deluge of media attention from across the nation . The local story brought the local story into national news .
 Also arriving in the city were some odd characters who would add to the carnival atmosphere . The carnival was beginning to take shape .
 A self-styled Denver oilman told Garrison he could “guarantee’t him a federal judgeship if he would drop his investigation into the president’s death . Garrison says the oilman offered Garrison the job if he dropped his investigation .
 Not long after this attempt at bribery a more sinister plan came to light . The plan was revealed in an attempt to bribe the government with money .
 A professional criminal from Philadelphia named Edward Whalen came to Garrison and said he had been approached by David Ferrie with a proposal to kill Garrison for $25,000 . Ferrie said he was approached by a professional criminal who said he wanted Garrison dead . Garrison was killed by a
 Whalen says Ferrie took him to Clay Shaw’s apartment, where both men tried to persuade him to carry out the assassination of Garrison . Ferrie says he was offered the job by Clay Shaw and Ferrie . When he declined the offer, he said, Ferrie
 Whalen was offered top medical care and college education for his daughter, who suffered from polio . He was offered money but was told that if he did the job there would be top care and an education for her daughter .
 Ferrie even went so far as to claim he had helped set up the JFK assassination . Whalen said Oswald was a CIA agent who had been well taken care of until he made mistakes .
 Whalen believed Ferrie’s story to be unfounded boasts, and he again declined the murder contract . Ferrie's story was unfounded, and the contract was never renewed . Whalens declined the contract again .
 By the time Whalen revealed this plot to Garrison in September 1967, it was too late to verify it . The plot was revealed to Garrison by the time it was verified .
 On February 22, 1967, David Ferrie was found dead in his cluttered apartment . He was the chief suspect in Garrison's murder investigation .
 Ferrie’s nude body had been discovered lying on a living-room sofa surrounded by prescription medicine bottles, several completely empty . Ferrie's nude body was discovered lying in a living room surrounded by empty prescription bottles .
 One typed suicide note was found on a nearby table while a second was discovered on an upright piano . The two typed suicide notes were found on the same table .
 The New Orleans coroner ruled that Ferrie died from “natural causes,” specifically a ruptured blood vessel in the brain . Three days later, Ferrie's death was ruled "natural causes," the coroner ruled .
 Garrison checked the empty medicine bottles found near Ferrie's body . One contained a drug designed to greatly increase a person’s metabolism . The drug was found in one bottle .
 A physician friend confirmed to Garrison that if someone suffering from hypertension took a whole bottle of this specific drug, it would cause death very quickly .
 No blood samples or spinal fluid from Ferrie’s autopsy had been retained, Garrison wrote . Garrison later wrote, “I phoned immediately but was told that no blood samples had been kept .”
 Banister reportedly died of a heart attack in June 1964, less than a month after his business partner, Hugh Ward, died in a Mexico plane crash . Ward and Banister had worked closely with Ferrie, who died in the crash .
 Eladio del Valle was a wealthy former Cuban congressman under Batista . He fled Cuba to become a well-known organizer of anti-Castro Cubans in Miami .
 Del Valle reportedly paid Ferrie $1,500 for a mission to make air raids against Cuba . Ferrie reportedly had paid $1.500 for the mission .
 Three days before Ferrie's death, Garrison’s investigators began trying to locate del Valle . Ferrie was found dead at the scene of his death .
 Just twelve hours after Ferrie's death, del Valle’s mutilated body was discovered in a Miami parking lot . Del Valle's body was found in a parking lot 12 hours after her death .
 Police reported del Valle had been tortured and shot in the heart at point-blank range . His skull was split open with an ax, police said .
 With Ferrie and del Valle dead, Garrison began to focus his attention on Clay Shaw . Garrison was focused on Shaw after Ferrie's death .
 Garrison feared Shaw might meet the same fate as Ferrie . Fearing that Shaw might die, Garrison moved rapidly . Garrison moved quickly to protect Shaw .
 Shaw calmly replied, “Clay Bertrand,” thus confirming the information Garrison had been receiving from various sources around New Orleans . Shaw calmly replies, ‘Clay . Bertrand.”
 Shaw was allowed to go free after posting a $10,000 bail bond . Between the time of his arrest and his trial, Shaw was released from jail . Shaw was charged with assaulting a woman in connection to the incident .
 Garrison’s men found several interesting items, such as two large hooks screwed into the ceiling of the bedroom of Shaw's bedroom along with five whips, several lengths of chain, and a black hood and cape . Garrison's men also found two hooks screwed in the ceiling .
 Shaw tried to shrug off this kinky collection as simply part of a Mardi Gras costume . Shaw said it was just a costume .
 Shaw’s personal address book contained the names of important persons in Italy, Paris, and London . Shaw's address book also contained names of people in France, Italy, London and Paris .
 The address “P.O. 19106” also appears in Lee Harvey Oswald’s address book . The address also appeared in Oswald's address book, according to the book .
 “P.O. 19106” actually was a code for Jack Ruby’s unlisted Dallas telephone number . Garrison announced that the number was in the address books of both Shaw and Oswald .
 Interest in this issue dissipated rapidly following a May 17, 1967, story in the Dallas Times Herald revealing that Lee Odum was a real person living in Dallas .
 Odum, then thirty-one, said he had traveled to New Orleans in 1966 to promote a bullfight . He said he was sent to Shaw as a businessman who might be interested in his scheme . Odum told the New Orleans newspaper that he traveled to the city to promote the
 Garrison: After Shaw’s arrest, the U.S. government “awakened like an angry lion” Garrison says . Garrison: Shaw's arrest was the result of the arrest, and the United States woke up like a lion . Garrison says Shaw was arrested in
 Attorney general Ramsey Clark told reporters Shaw had been checked out and cleared of any responsibility in the Kennedy assassination . Clark said Shaw was cleared of responsibility for the assassination .
 Questions arose over who in the federal government had investigated Shaw and why . Shaw's name had never before come up in connection with the assassination .
 Clay Shaw and Clay Bertrand were the same man, Justice Dept. official says . Justice Department official: "We had to be aware" of the fact that the FBI had investigated a man in the same name . This explanation was further clouded by a Justice Department spokesman .
 Garrison’s evidence was presented to a New Orleans grand jury, a true bill was returned . The federal government protested Garrison was on a “witch hunt,” but he was found guilty . Garrison was convicted of perjury in a federal court .
 Garrison took the unprecedented step of having himself file for a preliminary hearing for Shaw . Garrison said he was doing only his sworn duty .
 This hearing, usually the providence of the defense, took place on March 14, 1967, before three judges, who reviewed Garrison’s evidence . Three judges reviewed Garrison's evidence .
 A three-judge panel upheld the indictment and ordered Shaw to a jury trial . Garrison’s case was studied for three days by the three judges . Garrison is charged with murder, attempted murder and attempted attempted murder .
 The major U.S. news media lambasted the events in New Orleans . For the next year and a half, as the world waited for Garrison’s case to be presented at Shaw’S trial, the major United States news media slammed the events .
 Some long-cherished illusions of mine about the great free press in our country underwent a painful reappraisal during this period . Some of my illusions of  imillusion of the great press in Britain underwent a re-examination .
 The restraint and respect for justice one might expect from the press to insure a fair trial not only to the individual charged but to the state itself did not exist . The restraint . one might have been expected from the . press to . insure a . fair trial . to insure . a fair
 The diversity of opinion that I always thought was fundamental to the American press. Nor did the diversity of opinions, he said . "I always thought that diversity was fundamental"
 All shared the basic view that I was a power-mad, irresponsible showman . 'I was producing a slimy circus with the objective of getting elected to higher office, oblivious to any consequences,' he says .
 In this particular case, I’ve taken unusual steps to protect the rights of the defendant and assure him a fair trial . In this case, he said, "I’m taking unusual steps ... to protect his rights"
 "We made them undergo independent verifying tests, including polygraph examination, truth serum, and hypnosis," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 We thought this would be hailed as an unprecedented step in jurisprudence . We thought it would be a step in the right direction, but this is not .
 The press hinted that we had drugged our witnesses or given them posthypnotic suggestions to testify falsely . Instead, the press turned around and hinted that . Instead of drugged witnesses, they suggested they had given . suggestions to . testify falsely, they said .
 James Phelan of the Saturday Evening Post said Garrison’s key witness Perry Russo came up with his story of a Ferrie-Oswald-Shaw conspiracy only after being “drugged” and hypnotized by Garrison”s people, he said .
 In fact, when Phelan appeared as a defense witness for Shaw, Russo soundly disputed his claims . Russo’s conviction that Shaw was the man at the meeting appeared to weaken .
 The story added that the entire bribery attempt had been tape-recorded . The story said that the bribery attempt was recorded .
 Aynesworth was a writer for the Dallas Morning News on the day of the assassination . He was at the scene of each important event .
 In 1988, Aynesworth wrote extensively for a special edition of the Washington Times commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the assassination . He wrote extensively about the assassination of President Richard Nixon .
 When asked to provide evidence of Garrison’s bribery attempt, Aynesworth failed to present either a witness or a tape recording he had mentioned .
 Garrison reportedly received a $5,000 credit line at the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas . During the Shaw trial, the media made much out of a visit by Garrison .
 Garrison met with mobster Johnny Roselli less than a month after Ferrie’s death . In 1979, a report to the House Select Committee on Assassinations even stated that Garrison had met with Roselli .
 An NBC program stated that one of Garrison’s witnesses had lied under oath, but when requested to present their evidence to a New Orleans grand jury, news executives declined . News executives declined to present evidence to the grand jury in New Orleans .
 In that same NBC program, newsman Frank McGee claimed two of Garrison’s star witnesses had failed their polygraph tests .
 Garrison offered to resign if the network could substantiate this charge . Garrison publicly offered to step down if it was proven to be true . Garrison has been accused of sexual misconduct in the past .
 Garrison: "My half hour had been reduced to approximately 30 seconds" Garrison was interviewed by CBS, but his half-hour was reduced to just 30 seconds . Garrison: “When the CBS program was shown across the nation, my half hour was reduced .
 Garrison believed he may have been the object of a setup to implicate him with a known homosexual and a former client . Clay Shaw’s trial was set up by Garrison, who was a client of a known client .
 He escaped arrest and was shocked to learn that one of his “special team’s members, a former FBI man, may have been responsible for the bizarre episode .
 Garrison left New Orleans, taking many of the district attorney’s files with him . Garrison was able to question the man, but he hurriedly left with many files .
 Garrison also claimed that someone had “bugged’ed’s telephones of his office, his home, and even his staff . Garrison also said someone had bugged his office and his staff's phones .
 Garrison says “a tremendous amount of federal power’s been arrayed against him in an effort to block his investigation of Kennedy's death . Garrison says the media blitz and strange incidents surrounding his investigation prompted him to claim a “tremendous amount of Federal power�
 He voiced his concern over a fair trial when he told interviewer Eric Norden, “I’m beginning to worry about the cumulative effect of this propaganda blitzkrieg on potential jurors for the trial of Clay Shaw .
 A group of New Orleans businessmen, going under the name “Truth or Consequences,” gave Garrison both moral and financial backing . Garrison: "I'm not going to let it happen, but I'm going to do it" Garrison says he's committed suicide .
 Garrison's support for Garrison came years later from a most unlikely source . Garrison was the subject of an award-winning documentary . Garrison died in 2010 at the age of 65 .
 Garrison’s probe was part of the investigation into the Kennedy family . Garrison also investigated the Kennedy case . Garrison's probe was the first of its kind, Garrison says .
 Garrison indicated to his friend Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. that he believed Garrison might be onto something . Garrison indicated that he thought Garrison might have been onto something. Garrison was on the right side of the story . Garrison's friend said he was impressed by Garrison's work .
 By January 29, 1969, the day the Clay Shaw trial finally got under way, Garrison’s case was already foundering . Garrison's case had already been foundering.
 Garrison's chief suspect, Ferrie, was dead and others had fled New Orleans . Others were safe in other states that refused to honor Garrison’s legal extradition requests . Garrison says Ferrie was dead .
 Governor John Connally, himself a victim in Dallas, refused to extradite Cuban leader Sergio Archaca-Smith . Ronald Reagan declined to allow extradition for one Edgar Eugene Bradley .
 Garrison apparently mistaken Bradley for Mafia man Eugene Hale Brading . Brading was arrested in Dealey Plaza shortly after the assassination . Garrison mistakenly thought Bradley was Brading, a Mafia man .
 Garrison’s major “missing witness” was Gordon Novel, then a young electronics expert . Novel became embroiled in some of this nation's most controversial cases . Garrison's major "missing witness" was Novel, who later became a leading witness .
 Novel fled to Ohio, where governor James Rhodes refused to allow extradition . Garrison subpoenaed Novel, who had been subpoenaed by Garrison, and he fled .
 The governor of Nebraska declined to honor an extradition order for Sandra Moffett, a former girlfriend of Perry Russo’s . Moffett was present at the gathering of Ferrie, Shaw, and Oswald in September 1963 . Ferrie and Shaw were married at the time .
 A note left behind in his New Orleans apartment mentioned his work for Double Check Corporation, a CIA “front” located in Miami . The note was later authenticated as being written by Novel .
 Novel met with President Nixon’s special counsel Charles Colson and discussed developing a special degaussing machine . Novel claimed to have worked with the CIA, though never as an employee . In 1974 Novel claimed he worked for the CIA .
 Novel also worked as an electronics expert in the case of automobile magnate John DeLorean . Novel also appeared in the court trial of Waco’s Branch Davidians .
 Garrison gamely moved ahead with his prosecution of Clay Shaw . Despite the media attacks and missing witnesses, Garrison continued his prosecution .
 The jury became convinced of Garrison’s charge that a conspiracy had existed . After a string of witnesses from Dallas, Dallas told of shots to Kennedy's front and medical experts pointed out the shortcomings of the president's autopsy, the jury decided .
 The Zapruder film of the assassination was made available for the first time thanks to Garrison’s subpoena power . This conviction was solidified when the jury viewed the film . Garrison's subpoena power helped secure the conviction .
 After the trial, the polled jury agreed that Garrison had convinced them that Kennedy had died as the result of a conspiracy . The polled jury said Garrison convinced them Kennedy's death was a result of an assassination .
 Clay Shaw’s description of David Ferrie and Lee Oswald was a mystery to many jurors . Several credible people testified they had seen Ferrie with Lee Oswald with a man matching his description .
 Insurance salesman Perry Russo repeated his 1967 statements that he was present when Shaw and Ferrie talked about assassinating Kennedy . Russo says he was in the room at the time of the assassination .
 He said Ferrie and the man he identified as Shaw talked of triangulation of gunfire and the need to have alibis at the time of the assassination . Ferrie said he and Shaw talked about triangulating of gunfire, triangulated gunfire .
 Defense attorneys say Russo had been given a truth serum drug to help his recall . Garrison's attorneys say Garrison implanted the entire Ferrie-Shaw story while Russo was under the drug’s influence .
 Vernon Bundy testified he saw Clay Shaw meet with Lee Harvey Oswald at a seawall on Lake Pontchartrain, near New Orleans, in June 1963 . Bundy testified that Shaw met with Oswald at the seawall . Bundy's testimony is one of the most compelling pieces of evidence against Shaw .
 Bundy said he knew the man speaking with Oswald was Shaw because he noticed the man had a slight limp . Bundy said the man with a limp was Shaw . Bundy says he knew Shaw was the man talking with Oswald because of a limp .
 A puzzled Shaw was asked to walk down the center aisle of the courtroom and everyone, including an amazed Garrison, noticed for the first time a nearly imperceptible limp . Shaw was later asked to leave the courtroom with a limp .
 Postman James Hardiman testified that he delivered letters addressed to “Clay Bertrand” to a forwarding address for Clay Shaw . Another credible witness testified that during 1966 he had delivered letters to Clay Bertrand .
 He had been belatedly added to Garrison’s witness list . Appearing to be a credible witness, he had been added to the witness list. He had appeared to be credible .
 Garrison cringed at the man’s crossexamination . Once Spiesel was on the stand, Garrison said, “I don’t think he’ll be able to defend himself.” Garrison said: ‘I’m not sure if
 Garrison’s case also was not helped by several statements Spiesel made prior to the Shaw trial . Spiesel claimed Shaw had met with Ruby and Oswald in Baton Rouge on September 3, 1963, and handed them money . Garrison said Shaw had fired a .45caliber pistol, then
 Attorney Dean Andrews changed his story of being called by a man named Clay Bertrand and asked to defend Oswald just after the assassination . More harm came in the testimony of Andrews, who was under a perjury charge .
 On the stand, Andrews said the name “Clay Bertrand” was simply a “figment of imagination” and that he had never known Clay Shaw . Andrews said he never knew Clay Shaw or Clay Bertrand .
 Andrews’s statements strongly affected the jury, although later Garrison convicted Andrews of perjury based on this testimony . Andrews was convicted of perjury after Garrison convicted him .
 Assistant district attorney James L Alcock tried to discredit Andrews’s testimony . It appeared he was impeaching the core of Garrison's allegation that Shaw and Bertrand were one and the same .
 Clay Shaw, the respected director of the International Trade Mart, and Clay Bertrand, the man overheard plotting against Kennedy, were the same man . So the crux of the case came down to whether Clay Shaw was the same person as Bertrand .
 Garrison's strongest piece of evidence was Shaw’s jail card, which showed he used the alias Clay Bertrand . Garrison: Shaw used his jail card to get into trouble . Garrison's team says Shaw's jail card shows he used an alias, but Garrison says he's innocent .
 Judge Edward Aloysius Haggerty refused to allow the jail card to be introduced as evidence . He argued Shaw had not been allowed to have a lawyer with him during the booking procedure .
 Garrison’s hole card became New Orleans policeman Aloysius J Habighorst, who filled out the admission form . Shaw was expected to testify that his alias was Clay Bertrand .
 Before Habighorst could take the stand, the jury was removed from the courtroom . Judge Haggerty ordered the jury removed from court before taking the stand .
 Shaw said he was not allowing Habighorst’s testimony to be admitted because again no attorney had been present and his alias story appeared to violate Shaw's rights . He told stunned prosecutors that he wasn’t allowed to allow the testimony because he had no attorney present .
 Judge Haggerty responded, “It’s outside the presence of the jury.” Judge said it was outside of jury's presence .
 Alcock moved to have a mistrial declared, but Judge Haggerty denied this, ordering the trial to proceed without the testimony of Officer Habighorst . Alcock is accused of killing a police officer in a car crash .
 Garrison’s case, already severely weakened by dead, incredible, and unobtainable witnesses, collapsed . With the judge's statements, Garrison's case collapsed . The judge said that Garrison's trial should have been a miscarriage of faith .
 Clay Shaw took the stand in his own defense, claiming that he never knew Ferrie, Oswald, or Ruby . Shaw claimed that he had not participated in a plot to kill Kennedy . Shaw said he did not know Ferrie or Ruby and that he was not involved in the plot .
 Garrison’s team was unable to provide any motivation for Shaw's involvement in such a scheme . Garrison's team said Shaw had no motivation for his involvement in the scheme . Shaw was arrested on suspicion of involvement in a drug conspiracy .
 Clay Shaw was acquitted in 1969 after less than an hour of deliberation . Jury acquitted Shaw two years to the day that Shaw had first been arrested in 1969 .
 Garrison filed perjury charges against Shaw for maintaining that he never met David Ferrie . Garrison filed the perjury charges on March 3, 2013 . Garrison said Shaw had maintained that he had never met Ferrie and that Ferrie never met him . Garrison has been charged with perjury .
 David Shaw made a mockery of the law against lying under oath . Shaw had taken the witness stand and, in his grand and courtly manner, lied under oath, the judge said . Shaw's decision was made automatically .
 Shaw was wrongly convicted of violating a federal law by refusing to testify in court . The judge ruled that Shaw should be allowed to testify . Shaw was convicted of a federal crime, but the federal court shut its eyes to that federal law .
 The U.S. District Court DID enjoined me from prosecuting Shaw for committing perjury, and the federal appellate structure firmly backed up the District Court’s ruling all the way . Shaw was convicted of perjury .
 When the assassination of a dead president has been ratified by a live national government, details such as the law very quickly become irrelevant . Details such as a law become irrelevant when the law is ratified by the dead president .
 Clay Shaw, his finances depleted after years of defending himself, retired to his New Orleans home, where he died August 14, 1974 . Shaw was despondent over revelations of his homosexual connections .
 Neighbors saw some men carrying what appeared to be a body completely covered by a sheet on a stretcher into a carriage house belonging to Shaw . Neighbors say they saw the body being carried into the carriage house . Shaw was a member of the Shaw family .
 Coroner found Shaw’s home empty and learned he had just been buried in his hometown of Kentwood . Coroner: Shaw's home was found empty after a day of searching for him .
 Frank Minyard initially said he would seek a court order to exhume Shaw’s body . Minyard was concerned over the circumstances of Shaw's death and the rapidity of burial .
 Minyard dropped the whole matter after word reached the news media, which immediately editorialized against the exhumation . The news media suggested it was just another attack by Garrison, and the matter was dropped .
 On June 30, 1971, Garrison was arrested at his home by Internal Revenue Service agents . Garrison was charged with accepting illegal payoffs from pinball-machine operators .
 After two years of more bad publicity, he was finally brought to trial . He was charged with attempted murder in 2010 .
 Several pinball-machine operators told of making payoffs, but none of them could directly implicate Garrison . Garrison is accused of paying off pinball machine operators .
 Pershing Gervais, a former Garrison investigator and Army buddy, took the stand and told how Garrison accepted $150,000 in payoffs . Garrison's Army buddy told how he took the payoffs, and how he accepted them .
 He produced a tape recording reportedly made of the district attorney discussing the matter . He even produced a recording of the conversation .
 Gervais told a TV reporter that the Justice Department had forced him to lie and incriminate Garrison . But on cross-examination, he admitted that he had told a television reporter that he lied . He said he had been forced to tell the reporter .
 Speech expert testified that the incriminating tape had been created by splicing together several innocuous comments Garrison had made . Speech expert said Garrison's comments were spliced together to create the tape .
 Garrison and two codefendants were quickly found not guilty, but enough damage had been done . Garrison was charged with two felonies, but the charges were dropped quickly . Garrison and the codefendant were later acquitted .
 Garrison failed to mount an effective campaign in 1973 and was defeated for district attomey by 2,000 votes . Garrison was elected to the Senate in 1973 .
 The federal government came at him again, this time alleging income tax evasion in connection with pinball payoffs . Furthermore, the federal government also alleged tax evasion .
 Garrison was found not guilty, but by this time the national audience had largely turned its back on the lawman . Garrison was acquitted of any wrongdoing .
 Blakey fails to see any suspicious connection in that David Ferrie was with New Orleans mob boss Carlos Marcello in court on the morning of the assassination . Ferrie and Clay Shaw both worked for the CIA and were connected to anti-Castro Cubans .
 The Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation reviewed this book in manuscript form to determine that classified information it contained had been properly released for publication . The House Select Committee on Assassinations reviewed the manuscript to ensure no informant was identified .
 Neither the CIA nor the FBI warrants the factual material or endorses the views expressed. The views expressed are those of the CIA and FBI .
 Garrison’s acquittal in the 1971 payoff case was the result of more bribes, author says . Garrison was acquitted in the case in 1971 . Garrison's acquittal was result of bribes, the author believes .
 Garrison wrote: “While I lay no pretense to being the epitome of virtue, with regard to connections with organized crime, I think you can safely place me as having approximately the same such connections as Mother Teresa and Pope Paul.” Garrison wrote, “I think
 Garrison once told this author that while elements within the mob undoubtedly played a role in Kennedy’s assassination, they were certainly aided by elements in the U.S. government . Garrison said the mob was aided by the United States government .
 He said he wanted the architects of the assassination, not just the mechanics, not the mechanics . He wanted to find out who was responsible for the assassination .
 Garrison: "A politically ambitious man would hardly be likely to challenge the massed power of the federal government and criticize so many honorable figures and distinguished agencies" Garrison says he was simply grandstanding, hoping for higher office .
 Garrison was an elected appeals court judge in New Orleans . He continued to serve as an elected judge in the state .
 Garrison died from cancer in 1992 . Garrison continued to speak out for a truth he claimed was denied five decades ago . Garrison died in 1992 at the age of 92 .
 Garrison believed President Kennedy was killed for one primary reason—he was working for reconciliation with Soviet Russia and Castro’s Cuba . Garrison: Kennedy was trying to reconcile Russia and Cuba with the Soviet Union .
 To anyone with a grain of intelligence, it should be apparent that John Kennedy was eliminated by forces desiring the continuation of the Cold War . The Kennedy assassination was an artificial conflict draining the assets of and greatly changing the character of our nation .
 The clandestine arm for those Cold War forces was the Central Intelligence Agency . The agency's destructive talents run the gambit from deception to murder .
 They believed sincerely that Kennedy had sold them out to the communists . They believed he had given them the opportunity to live their lives . They said they believed he was selling them out .
 These elements had their canteens ready and guns loaded; they lacked only a target . These elements were ready and had their guns loaded . They lacked only one target .
 The group switched direction shortly after the FBI raid, the group decided to assassinate John Kennedy instead of Fidel Castro . The FBI raid on July 31, 1963, was a setback for the group, the FBI says .
 This synopsis was voiced by Garrison in 1967, before there was any public knowledge of Operation Mongoose . Garrison voiced the synopsis in 1967 . Garrison was the voice of Garrison in the original version .
 JFK had reached a point where he began to transcend the ruling assumptions of national security . JFK had been enlightened by the Missile Crisis and emboldened by the hope of peace .
 He was inspired to seek peace with such enemies of the state as Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro . The former Soviet leader was inspired by his friendship with the Soviet Union .
 Garrison’s investigation in New Orleans did turn up much previously unknown evidence—another argument against his employment by the mob to deflect the truth . Garrison's investigation may be debated for years to come, but it nevertheless remains true that Garrison's .
 By the mid-1970s, national polls indicated that very few Americans still believed the Warren Commission’s lone-assassin theory, despite assurances .
 According to one Gallup poll, 81 percent of the American public believed President Kennedy’s death resulted from a conspiracy . 70 percent believed the same regarding the death of Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. According to the same poll, 70 percent believe the same about Dr. King
 Henry Gonzalez of Texas introduced a House resolution in February 1975 calling for a select committee to study the deaths of Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King, and the 1972 shooting of Alabama governor George Wallace .
 Gonzalez: "I have introduced this resolution after much consideration" Gonzalez says he introduced the resolution after "much consideration"
 I say that this investigation is a need and has its proper place in our list of priorities . The investigation is needed for the public to know more about the investigation into the case of the missing persons .
 It has not been its policy simply and doggedly to refuse to look at a serious national problem, no matter how difficult it is . Until now, it has seemed to me that, although Congress might not have dealt with all problems wisely, it hasn't dealt with them wisely .
 It is simply and doggedly refusing to look at the problem of who executed our former President, John F Kennedy, and why he was executed . It is refusing to talk about why Kennedy was executed, writes David Cameron .
 Action stalled in the House for more than a year. Despite these passionate appeals for a reinvestigation into the assassinations, action stalled in House for a year .
 The Gonzalez and Downing bills were merged into House Resolution 1540 and passed in September 1976 . King’s wife, Coretta, put pressure on the House leadership, and the bill passed in 1976 .
 The committee would expire at the end of the congressional term on January 3, 1977 . However, the committee would last until January 3 .
 House tradition dictated that the author of a resolution creating a select committee be named chair . House tradition dictates that a chair of the committee would be chosen by the author .
 Downing, who had not sought reelection in 1976, would soon retire . Gonzalez, a highly individualistic Mexican-American, was not liked by House power brokers . Downing was not re-elected in 1976 . Downing would not seek reelection .
 Downing was named chairman of the House Select Committee on Assassinations by Speaker Thomas P “Tip” O’Neill . Gonzalez, who began to serve as cochairman, did not like the decision .
 Downing wanted Washington attorney Bernard Fensterwald to serve as the committee’s chief counsel and director . Downing wanted him to be the chairman of the committee .
 Fensterwald formed a clearinghouse of assassination material called the Committee to Investigate Assassinations . He was an early critic of the Warren Commission and thoroughly familiar with most aspects of the case .
 Information for this attack came from Gonzalez’s office, officials say . Later it was learned that information from Gonzalez's office came from his office . The attack was the first of its kind .
 Downing and Gonzalez settled on a former Philadelphia prosecutor, Richard A Sprague, as the committee’s chief counsel . Sprague was the committee's chief counsel in 1976 .
 He had a record of sixty-nine convictions out of seventy homicide cases . He was known as a tough and independent prosecutor .
 He had received national attention by his prosecution of United Mine Workers president Tony Boyle for the murder of UMW reformer Joseph Yablonski . Boyle was found guilty of the murder .
 He said these assassination inquiries would be treated as homicide investigations . He said they would be considered homicide investigations by police .
 This was a novel approach to the Kennedy assassination since, until that time, all investigation and deliberation had been conducted in secret by the government . This was the government's first attempt to investigate the assassination .
 He made it clear that his investigation would not hesitate to look into FBI and CIA involvement . He said he would use subpoena power and lie-detector tests to get to the truth .
 Sprague let it be known he planned to subpoena both agency files and personnel . Sprague was aware of the CIA connections to the Kennedy assassination . He wanted to subpoena the files .
 He was truthful in projecting the costs of such a massive investigation . He said he needed a staff of at least two hundred and an initial budget of $6. million to start work . He was also truthful in saying he needed staff of two hundred .
 Sprague’s openness about both his needs and his goals prompted outrage among congressmen who had never wanted the committee in the first place . Sprague's openness about his needs prompted immediate outrage among Congressmen .
 Sprague's statements about using lie detectors, voice stress analyzers, and hidden tape recorders to learn the truth have been lambasted by many . Sprague has been accused of lying to the public about his lies .
 Sprague was too busy fending off media attacks to get his investigation rolling . Sprague is now too busy to get an investigation into the death penalty .
 Sprague early on stated, “I have not, as of this date, read the Warren Commission Report or testimony. To begin with, Sprague said he had not read the report or testimony . Sprague: "I don't know what I think about the Warren Report or
 Sprague’s selection of prosecutors and lawmen as investigators and staff for the committee . This unfamiliarity with the assassination was reflected in Sprague's selection of the investigators . Sprague chose prosecutors, lawmen instead of lawmen to investigate .
 "Many were aggressive and able but they did not understand the full ramifications of the case. Many were aggressive, able but not understanding the full implications," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Many had ties back to the FBI or CIA . None of them had the time to properly study the convoluted assassination issues .
 In recent years it was learned that the CIA had a man inside the committee . The CIA has a man in the committee, according to reports .
 The CIA grudgingly acknowledged that George Joannides, a thirty-year veteran of the agency, was paying out $51,000 a month to the Cuban Student Directorate . The organization publicized Lee Oswald’s pro-Castro activities both before and after the assassination .
 Joannides served as the CIA’s principal coordinator with the committee but did not disclose his role in the anti-Castro events of 1963 . It also was learned that he also served in the CIA's principal coordinator .
 In 2013, the agency still was withholding nearly three hundred documents pertaining to the anti-Cuban activities of the early 1960s . The agency claimed release could cause “extreme grave damage” to national security .
 A Justice Department official denied that the medal had any relation to Joannides’s work with the committee . The Justice Department failed to provide any substantiation .
 Those with detailed knowledge of the cases, with few exceptions, were excluded from the House committee's staff . Despite Sprague’s wooing of the research community, the committee excluded many of its staff .
 Sprague’s close friendship with former boss Arlen Specter, the Warren Commission staffer who created the “single bullet” theory of the assassination . Then there was the question of Sprague's friendship with Specter's former boss .
 Sprague incensed Gonzalez immediately by renting a plush apartment in Washington’s Watergate complex, then leaving for a vacation in Acapulco without informing the committee founder . Sprague is accused of leaving the Watergate complex without informing Gonzalez .
 Sprague was making enemies everywhere. With his absence and presumptuous pronouncements, Sprague made enemies everywhere . Sprague's absence from the U.S. Senate made him enemies everywhere, he said .
 I’ve never been in a situation like this before where I am getting criticized for things I might do, he says . "I’m never in this situation before," he says of the criticism .
 Sprague's proposed budget was targeted for attack, but he held his ground . Sprague: "Several people around here who are familiar with the bureaucratic game told me to first present a smaller budget"
 A_ resolution reconstituting the Assassinations Committee by a unanimous-consent voice vote on January 4, 1977, failed . The committee failed to reconvene in 1977 .
 It would take weeks of maneuvering before the committee could officially be reconstituted .
 Downing had retired and Gonzalez was named chairman of the board . By this time, Downing had retired and Gonzalez had been named chairman .
 Committee chairman Gonzalez joins attacks on Sprague . Committee chairman says Sprague is a "legitimate threat" to the White House .
 Gonzalez was already angered at not being named chairman until after Downing retired . Gonzalez was further incensed that Sprague would not allow him to run the committee the way he saw fit .
 Sprague was told he had $150,000 a month for expenses until the committee was reconstituted in January 1977 . Sprague had been told he would have to spend the money on expenses until 1977 .
 Gonzalez was taken to task by the same committee that had stalled the Assassinations Committee in the first place . Later he found out that amount actually was only $84,000, which caused a cost overrun .
 Gonzalez claimed Sprague had spent money without his knowledge or consent . Gonzalez said Sprague spent money on his son without his consent . Sprague has been charged with failing to pay Sprague .
 Gonzalez ordered Sprague to take a “number of steps” including giving written assurance that he would stay within the financial constraints of the committee’s funding and firing recently hired staff members . Gonzalez: Sprague must also give written assurance he will stay within financial constraints .
 Texas representative ordered Sprague to return all Gonzalez letterhead material . Sprague refused to bow to Gonzalez’s demands . The hot-tempered Texas representative was angry at Sprague's refusal .
 Gonzalez further blocked the committee’s work by asking the attorney general to deny staffers’ access to FBI files and by cutting off their long-distance phone calls . Gonzalez also asked the Attorney General to cut off staff’ phone calls and cut off FBI files access .
 Gonzalez charged Sprague with being “engaged in a course of conduct that is wholly intolerable for any employee of the House” and ordered him to vacate his office that same day . Gonzalez also ordered Sprague to leave his office the next day .
 The other eleven members of the committee wrote their own letter, instructing Sprague to ignore Gonzalez . However, within a few hours, the other 11 members had written their own letters .
 It appears that both Gonzalez and Sprague may have been the objects of secret personal smear campaigns . Sprague was told Gonzalez was trying to subvert the committee’s work while Gonzalez was being told he was a CIA plant on the committee . Gonzalez was also told Sprague that Spr
 Gonzalez resigned from the Assassinations Committee in March 1977 . Claimed Sprague had refused to cut costs and had tried to undermine his authority as chairman .
 The life of the committee had been extended for two more months in January . It was due to expire at the end of March 1977 . The committee was extended in January 1977 .
 Rep. Louis Stokes, a low-key black Democrat from Ohio, took over as chairman of the House of Representatives .
 House Resolution 433 passed on March 30, 1977, reconstituting the committee until January 3, 1979, and assigning it a pared-down budget of $2.2 million .
 Sprague was called to Stokes’s office just before the House vote to continue the committee . Just before the vote, Sprague had been called to the office of Stokes . Sprague says he was called by Stokes' office to discuss the issue .
 Sprague could see the writing on the wall . Despite having been promised support by Stokes and other committee members, Sprague said he was disappointed .
 Sprague’s resignation prompted several committee members to state publicly that the chief counsel had been the victim of a McCarthy-like witch hunt and character assassination . Several committee members said Sprague was victim of McCarthy-style witch hunt . Sprague's resignation prompted some to state that Spr
 The committee had existed for six months, but the constant bickering and lack of funds prevented any meaningful work . The committee has been in existence for six years .
 Throughout its brief life, its focus so far had been not on assassinations, but on sheer survival . The group's focus was not on assassination but on survival, but survival, its founder says .
 Fonzi tried to contact the last-known friend of Lee Harvey Oswald, George DeMohrenschildt, who was staying in Manalapan, Florida . Earlier in March, he had tried to reach the last known close friend of Oswald .
 Soon after learning of Fonzi's visit, DeMohrenschildt was found fatally shot . Soon after arriving home, he learned of the visit and was found dead .
 Fonzi later wrote, “The manner in which the Assassination Committee reacted to the death of George DeMohrenschildt revealed that the Committee—six months after it was formed—was still totally incapable of functioning as an investigative body.”
 Robert Blakey is a respected academician with impressive credentials but with no real desire to probe the assassinations . He is the author of a new book, "The Assassinations of the Age Age" and "The Age Age," he says .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations was no exception to its new chief counsel and director . No investigation can be better than its leadership, and the committee's leadership is no exception .
 G Robert Blakey is a professor of law and director of the Notre Dame Institute on Organized Crime . He spent four years in the organized crime and racketeering section of the Kennedy Justice Department . Blakey was chief counsel to the Senate Subcommittee on Criminal Laws and Procedures .
 Blakey is chief counsel and director for the House Select Committee on Assassinations . Blakey firmly took control of the panel and its investigation .
 He oversaw every aspect of the committee’s work, selecting witnesses, deciding which leads to follow and which to ignore, picking expert panels, hiring and firing staff members .
 Assassinations Committee was changing directions in key areas . Assassinations committee was changing direction in the 1980s .
 Sprague opted for openness in the committee’s inquiry, Blakey advocated secrecy . Sprague had opted for secrecy in the inquiry .
 Blakey also announced that the committee would not look at any new evidence in the Kennedy and King assassinations . The committee will concentrate on evaluating the old evidence the federal government had accumulated .
 Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach put pressure on the Warren Commission to quickly endorse the premise that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone . In 1964, he pushed for a quick conclusion that Oswald had acted alone in the assassination of Lee .
 Blakey apparently had a strange connection with a reputed big-time gambler . Blakey was considered an expert in the “war against crime,” according to the FBI .
 In 1975, when Penthouse magazine was sued for referring to California’s La Costa Resort and Spa as a playground for gangsters, Blakey sold his expertise and provided an affidavit condemning the magazine's charges of mob ownership while conceding ignorance of the truth of the charges .
 Blakey’s own attorney, Louis Nizer, asked questions about the odd support of the resort . The resort was built by Teamster pension money .
 Blakey was recommended as chief counsel by Christopher Dodd, the former law partner of former FBI director L Patrick Gray, who was indicted during the Watergate scandals . Dodd was also the law partner for Gray, and was indicted in Watergate scandals.
 Blakey's connections cast a shadow over his credentials as an uncompromising crime-buster . While these connections don’t prove compromise on Blakey’s part, they do cast .
 The main weapon Blakey used to stop a meaningful investigation was a nondisclosure agreement . Blakey's main weapon was to stop the investigation, he says, was to silence the media .
 Signing this agreement was instituted within one week of Blakey’s arrival . Signing the agreement was mandatory for continued employment with the committee .
 The agreement bound the signer not to reveal that he or she even worked for the committee or to reveal anything learned while serving with the committee . It also gave the committee the power to take legal action against the signinger in the event of disclosures, even long after they ended .
 Many persons who have seen this agreement, including attorneys, claim it violates the United States Constitution and therefore is illegal . Lawyers say the agreement violates the U.S. Constitution and is illegal.
 Evidence of the weak legal standing of this agreement may be found in that Gaeton Fonzi has written scathing articles against the committee and its operation . Yet there has been no prosecution of the agreement .
 Blakey invited ten prominent critics of the Warren Commission to Washington to exchange assassination information . Blakey wanted to exchange information with Warren Commission critics to Washington .
 All were required to sign a nondisclosure agreement, and all presented their information . All presented information .
 Under Blakey, committee investigators had to sign a CIA secrecy oath before examining classified files . The agency now has authority to “clear’s” any information, including investigators’ notes .
 Staff members on the Committee have received or are in the process of receiving “Top Secret” security clearances . All staff members on Committee have . received or . in the . process of . receiving "Top Secret" clearance . Staff members have received .
 The FBI, as an accommodation to the Committee, conducts background investigations for these security clearances . The FBI conducts the background investigations .
 The full Committee makes the determination regarding an individual’s security clearance . After consultation with the FBI and CIA, the full Committee decides on the issue .
 Both intelligence agencies had direct control over who participated in the committee’s investigation . In other words, both intelligence agencies were directly involved .
 The clearance review was made to conform with the CIA charter prohibition against domestic activities . It has never been explained how this clearance review conforms with the charter .
 Sprague said he refused to yield to CIA and FBI demands for security clearances . Sprague: Such agreements would have given these agencies authority to decide what the committee could disclose . In a TV interview, Sprague stated he had refused to give clearances to these agencies .
 Blakey is quoted as saying, “I’ve worked with the CIA for twenty years. In fact, in fact, he’s worked with them for 20 years.”
 The files include the Lee Harvey Oswald 201, which fills two four-drawer safes . The files are included in two safes, one of which is filled with Oswald files .
 In 1978, the CIA agent assigned as liaison to the HSCA reportedly was fired from the agency after rifling the safe containing the Kennedy autopsy photos and X-rays . The CIA agent was reportedly fired from his post in 1978 .
 The agent claimed he had an innocent explanation but would not give it to the press . The agent said he had a 'innocent explanation' for the incident .
 Some investigators resigned from the committee, citing control by intelligence agencies . They said they felt the investigation had become too narrow in focus .
 Other staff members, including investigators, were discharged on grounds that the committee had no money . Twenty-four investigators were also discharged .
 Blakey returned $425,000 to Congress in 1978, saying the funds were not needed . Blakey said in 1978 that the funds should have been returned . He returned the money to Congress .
 Whether or not the charges that Blakey sidetracked any meaningful investigation are true are true, the seeds of doubt were sown . Whether the charges against Blakey are true or not, the seed of doubt sown.
 If Blakey had wanted to restrict and misdirect the investigations of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, he could not have done a better job . Although there has been no definitive evidence to demonstrate that this was his agenda, there is no evidence of this .
 With Blakey’s arrival, aspects of the HSCA investigation changed dramatically . Blakey: "With Blakey's arrival, things have changed dramatically"
 Committee investigators had been running down promising leads in Dallas, Miami, New Orleans, and Memphis . Under Sprague, committee investigators had found promising leads .
 Under Blakey, these field investigations were severely restricted . "These field investigations are far from the oversight of Washington power," he says .
 The focus of the Kennedy probe moved away from looking at intelligence and anti-Castro Cuban involvement . It began scrutinizing organized-crime aspects .
 The committee dropped any investigation into the Robert F Kennedy assassination and the shooting of Alabama governor Wallace . Despite the abundance of evidence raising serious questions about the official versions of both those events, despite the evidence .
 On March 13, 1978, the HSCA received House approval for $2.2 million in funding to last until January 3, 1979 . The funding was set to last for the entire 1979 period .
 Scaled down and with a restricted agenda, the committee nevertheless went to work . The committee went to the task with a limited agenda, but it nevertheless went on to work.
 The committee spent a total of $5.5 million during its thirty-month investigation . Blakey says the committee spent $5 million on the investigation .
 Blakey admitted that early on the HSCA experienced “some rough sailing” and that the period of “rigorous fact-finding” lasted only six months . Blakey said the period lasted only from January to July 1978 .
 Blakey wrote that fact-finding was “intense and wide ranging’s”
 He claimed that committee members and staffers made trips to Mexico, Canada, Portugal, England, and Cuba . He claimed they also traveled to Portugal, Canada and England .
 Beginning in late July 1978, the HSCA conducted a series of public hearings that lasted until September 28, 1978 . The hearings were held over the summer of 1978 .
 There was a parade of technical and scientific experts, but no one cross-examined them . There was no cross-examination of experts at the hearing .
 The testimony of each witness seemed designed to further cement the idea that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin of Kennedy .
 Some witnesses, such as Louie Steven Witt, gave an implausible story that went unchallenged . Witt claimed to have been the “umbrella man’s” in Dealey Plaza . Some witnesses gave implausible stories .
 James Humes, the leader of the Kennedy autopsy team, was never asked why he waited fifteen years to become convinced that a bullet entered near the top of Kennedy’s head well above where the other two autopsy doctors still placed it . Humes was never questioned why Humes waited
 Humes also could have given more details about the military authorities present at the autopsy who directed the doctors in their inadequate work, but he was never asked in public . Humes could also have given details about military authorities who directed doctors in inadequate work .
 Blakey and the Committee may at the moment enjoy a certain sense of victory, but their decision to shut down the other side’s chances at rebuttal and rejoinder will eventually work against the credibility of their results . Blakey: "The Committee's decision to close down the
 Another one-sided trial of an undefended Oswald is not what the people paid $6 million to see . The trial of Oswald should not be held in public view, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The committee failed to mention the amount of medical evidence that is still missing . The committee did not mention the lack of evidence that still needs to be added to the case .
 Some material given to the committee also turned up missing from the committee . And—more ominously, some material given in advance of the hearing turned up .
 FOX News commentator Bill O’Reilly in 1963 was a news reporter for WFAA-TV in Dallas, Texas . O'Reilly was a reporter for Dallas-based station .
 "I don't think anything ever came of it. And then when when I handed it over to Gaeton, ... ... and I don’t think anything ... ever came out of it," he says .
 I am no ballistics expert so it could have been a rifle slug . But again, I'm no ballistic expert so could have a rifle .
 He said he wound up with the slug just prior to going with the Committee . He said, “I wound up . Just prior to . going with . the Committee, he said .
 "I gave the slug to the chief investigator, Cliff Fenton, with the Committee and never heard any more of it. I gave it to Cliff . I gave the . slug to Cliff. Fenton . The slug was found in the book .
 "I kept asking Cliff whether he turned it over for analysis or what he did with it," he said . "Cliff turned over it to Cliff's side of the fence," he added .
 Fenton: "I don’t know nothing about that. I’m not sure about that" Fenton said in 1982 .
 Blakey had carefully restricted the JFK assassination investigation to simply a reevaluation of previous evidence . But then Blakey was hoisted on his own petard . He had carefully limited the investigation to reevaluating previous evidence.
 Two separate studies of a Dallas police radio recording reveal evidence that more than one gunman fired on Kennedy in Dallas . Two separate scientific studies of the Dallas police recording revealed evidence of multiple shooting victims .
 More than one assassin was involved in Kennedy’s death, acoustical studies of a Dallas police radio recording indicated . A Dallas police recording indicated that more than one assassination was involved .
 This evidence destroyed the Warren Commission’s theory of a lone gunman . It forced the Assassinations Committee to completely reverse its findings at the last moment .
 A motorcycle officer by the sound of a nearby motorcycle engine opened his microphone about two minutes before the shooting started and left it open for about eight minutes . A Dallas police officer was shot dead by a motorcycle officer .
 In late 1976, Gary Mack obtained a copy of the Dallas police radio recording in the belief that the open microphone had been in Dealey Plaza . Gary Mack, today curator of the Sixth Floor Museum in Dallas, obtained the recording in late 1976 . He believes that the microphone was in De
 He reasoned that if the microphone was indeed open in Dealey Plaza, it must have picked up the sounds of the shots . The microphone must have been open, he said .
 By September 1977, he had enhanced the quality of the tape and concluded that the recording indicated as many as seven shots . The recording was made in 1977 .
 The existence of the police recording became known to the Assassinations Committee . The committee obtained what was thought to be the original recording from a retired Dallas police lieutenant .
 This original recording was turned over to the acoustics firm of Bolt, Beranek & Newman Inc. for sophisticated scientific tests . The original recording—termed a Dictabelt—was turned over for sophisticated tests .
 James Barger, the firm’s chief scientist, converted the sounds on the tape into digitized waveforms to produce a visual picture of the sound .
 Study also looked into ‘sequence of impulses,’ which could distinguish sharp, loud noises such as gunshots from subsequent echoes .
 Barger determined there were at least six such impulses . Barger asked for further tests, including an on-site test in Dealey Plaza .
 By summer 1978, Blakey was aware that the acoustical scientists supported Mack’s contention that the tape showed gunfire from more than one location . Mack: The tape was shot at a number of locations .
 There were as many as nine sounds on the Dallas recording that could not be ruled out as gunshots, acoustical scientists said . In fact, during their public testimony, scientists stated that there were as Many as 9 sounds that could be ruled as gunshots .
 After testing from two locations, they could confirm only four shots from the Grassy Knoll . But after the Dealey Plaza testing, only four confirmed shots were captured .
 The tape showed that one shot came only 1.2 seconds behind another . The tape also showed that the tape showed one of the shots came in 1.5 seconds behind the other .
 The FBI had determined that it required at least 2. seconds to cock and fire the Carcano rifle twice, this was further evidence of more than one assassin . Since the FBI had carefully determined that . it required . at least . 2 seconds to fire the . Carcano . rifle twice
 Blakey shocked committee members with this information, and staff members began to reconsider their conclusions . But not until after the police tape was turned over to yet another team of acoustical scientists for a second opinion .
 Weiss and Aschkenasy agreed with Barger’s findings and also encouraged on-site testing . Weiss: "It's a good idea to have a lot of testing done in the U.S.
 The idea was to create computerized graphic pictures of the sound patterns of rifle shots in Dealey Plaza . The pictures were created to match the patterns discovered in the police recording .
 Dallas police sharpshooters fired a total of fifty-six live bullets into three piles of sandbags located along the motorcade route on August 20, 1978 . The incident occurred in Dallas, Texas .
 At the time no one could explain why the pistol was test fired . However, at the time it was not known why it was fired .
 Dallas police say they were unaware of the committee’s desire to test fire the pistol until the day before the tests . Dallas police said they didn't know the committee wanted to test the pistol .
 Two of the three piles of sandbags were located in the middle lane of Elm Street, exactly where films show the presidential limousine . It also should be noted that two of the 3 piles were located .
 One pile --apparently representing one of the early shots -- was located in the far left lane . However, one pile was located near the scene of the shooting .
 Dallas police sharpshooter said he could not get a line of sight on the bags when it was in the center lane due to intervening tree branches . The bags were placed in the Depository because of the tree branches, he said .
 Less than a year before these tests, a film crew had worked in Dealey Plaza producing a network movie titled The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald .
 The tree that prevented a line of sight between the sixth-floor Depository window and the location of the first shot had been pruned back to its 1963 size, based on photographs taken on the day of the assassination .
 Two of the six possible shots were ruled out as having been fired from the Depository or the knoll . The possibility that shots came from other locations was also ruled out of the scene .
 The sound from the knoll was preceded by an N-wave, or supersonic shock wave . Barger agreed with this assessment and said the sound was that of a rifle bullet . The sound was the sound of a missile bullet, which is a rifle .
 McLain testified his motorcycle was the first motorcycle to the left of Vice President Johnson’s car . McLain said he was riding to the right of the Vice President's car .
 He acknowledged that his motorcycle was in the correct location to record the shots, based on acoustical studies . He acknowledges that his microphone often got stuck in the “on” position .
 McLain claimed it could not have been his microphone that relayed the sounds . A week after the committee was disbanded, McLain suddenly reversed his position . McLain said the microphone was not his microphone .
 McLain says he accompanied the presidential limousine to Parkland Hospital . McLain told reporters, “That wasn’t my motorcycle.” McLain said he was accompanied by the president by the limo .
 There would have been a siren on that Channel 1 all the way to the hospital. There would've been sirens on that siren . It was not the first time a hospital call had been called in .
 McLain said he came to this conclusion belatedly because he had not listened to the police recording . McLain: "I'm not sure what happened" McLain says he was listening to police recording when he testified to committee .
 McLain had lagged behind and was still in Dealey Plaza after the presidential limousine raced off . To complicate matters, the assassination photograph showed McLain lagging behind . McLain's assassination photograph shows him still in the Plaza .
 McLain’s criticism of these findings was just the beginning of a controversy over the acoustical studies and their conclusions . McLain: ‘Acoustical Studies’ are based on sound recordings, but their conclusions are not always correct .
 The FBI publicly disputed the acoustical studies . Not long after the committee issued its report citing at least four shots at Kennedy, the FBI disputed the findings .
 Ramsey panel's findings were called into question by researcher Gary Mack . Mack pointed out that Ramsey had based his studies on problems involving the automatic gain control .
 Dallas police Channel 1 had no AGC circuitry at that time, Mack pointed out . Channel 1 was not equipped with AGC technology .
 Ramsey’s panel admitted that if there was no AGC in the Dallas police radios, their analysis of the tapes would have to be redone . Two members of Ramsey's panel admitted to the fact that if AGC was not found in the radios, they would need to red
 Well into the mid-1980s the controversy over the acoustical tests continued, with one expert challenging another expert and one technical argument being resolved only to find yet another waiting .
 A 2001 peer-reviewed article in Science and Justice, a quarterly publication of Britain’s Forensic Science Society, claimed the Ramsey panel study was seriously flawed .
 A government scientist says there was a shot from the Grassy Knoll in addition to three shots from the Depository . Thomas, a government scientist and JFK assassination researcher, said his study proved there was one shot from Grassy . Thomas says his study proves there was three shots fired from
 HSCA chief counsel Blakey said Thomas’s work proved a shot from a second gunman on the knoll . Thomas was shot by a second gunner on a knoll, Blakey says . Thomas' work proved Thomas was a good Samaritan, the chief counsel says
 If the tapes were altered, then the acoustical controversy has to go back to square one . The tapes may have been altered, but the controversy must be re-opened again .
 The acoustical evidence prompted a complete turnabout in the official version of the JFK assassination . Despite the continuing controversy, the acoustically evidence has not yet been proven to be definitive .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations issued a preliminary report on December 30, 1978 . The report was issued in 1978 .
 Under Blakey, the committee had gone right to the finish trying to find Oswald the lone assassin . The committee was looking for Oswald's lone assassin, Oswald .
 At the eleventh hour, they were forced to conclude that at least two assassins were involved in the assassination . Then at the 11th hour, the team was forced to decide who was responsible for the deaths .
 Conspiracy advocates are pleased with this substantiation of more than one gunman in the Kennedy murder . Conspiracy advocates were greatly pleased with the substantiated evidence .
 Warren Commission attorney David Belin argued, “Congress is just plain wrong.” Warren Commission’s attorney said Congress is “just plain wrong .”
 Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, commented, “The select committee has done its work, tried hard, they are men of integrity, but they made the same mistake as the Warren Commission.”
 So the controversy over President Kennedy’s assassination, far from being settled by the House committee, continued anew .
 Even after the committee had concluded its work, controversy about the operation continued .
 The direction of the entire House Assassinations Committee rested on one piece of evidence from the beginning, the autopsy photographs . The autopsy photographs are the evidence that led to the conclusion of the House Assassination Committee .
 From the beginning until the introduction of acoustical evidence, the autopsy panel assumed the autopsy evidence was genuine . And, from the beginning of the . introduction of the acoustically . evidence, they assumed the . autopsy . panel assumed that the evidence was authentic .
 At least two of the autopsy photographs were phonies, which can be proved to any reasonable person . I was not allowed to study the autopsy photos until December and when I did study them, I found at least two were phony .
 Dr. Groden’s charge has now been substantiated by autopsy photographer Floyd Rebe and several of the Dallas doctors who worked to save President Kennedy's life . Dr. Rebe: “I believe that the president's life was saved in Dallas, Texas, was saved
 Dallas physicians unanimously agreed that the photograph the House Committee made public was not remotely like the wounds they saw in 1963 . Interviewed by the Baltimore Sun in 1979, the Dallas physicians said they were shocked to see the photo .
 When Blakey came in, he wiped out the leadership of the staff and the new people that came in had to start from square one . The new people who came in from behind had to be re-learned from their mistakes .
 "My biggest grievance with the committee is that they did not investigate the Dallas police force," Dallas mayor says . "I'm disappointed that they didn't investigate the police force. They did not," Dallas police chief says .
 In the end, the Committee consumed millions of dollars and accomplished little. It was a waste of money, but it was a wasted waste of time and money .
 The Select Committee never did the simple things required to get to the truth, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the committee never did anything necessary to find out what happened .
 The committee identified the existence of a ‘conspiracy’ in the Kennedy and King assassinations . Reluctantly, the committee said there was a "conspiracy"
 The admission of “conspiracy’s” was a small breakthrough, but the public had suspected it for years . But the admission of "conspiracy" was a very small breakthrough .
 The real truth about who was behind the conspiracies was left undisturbed . "The real truth is that the conspirators are behind the conspiracyists," the author says .
 The government reversed its view of the JFK assassination by stating that a conspiracy “probably” resulted in Kennedy’s death . Chief counsel Blakey: “Realizing that there would be an opportunity for others to fill in the details, we decided to present an understated
 The committee recommends that the Justice Department try to unravel the conspiracy that led to the deaths of John F Kennedy and Martin Luther King . The committee ended by recommending that the justice Department pick up where it left off .
 The only action on the part of Justice was the Ramsey panel, which called into question the acoustical evidence of multiple gunmen . The Ramsey panel called into questioning the evidence .
 The panel’s conclusions were themselves called into question in a peer-reviewed scientific paper published in 2001 . The panel's conclusions themselves were themselves questioned in a 2001 paper .
 In 1999, the King family won a wrongful death civil case in which they claimed King had been the victim of an assassination conspiracy . King's family won the case against Memphis police and federal agencies in 1999 . The King family has a history of racial discrimination .
 This jury verdict affirmed the innocence of James Earl Ray and awarded the King family their sought sum of $100, evidence they were not pursuing financial gain . The King family was awarded $100 after Ray was found guilty .
 This groundbreaking story received scant coverage in the corporate mass media . The story was "a groundbreaking story" in the mainstream media .
 The Oliver Stone Film JFK was released in 1991 . The film was released by the already controversial director Oliver Stone .
 The film was a Herculean effort to distill more than a thousand hours of film containing JFK assassination facts and information into slightly more than three hours . The film is based on more than 1,000 hours of JFK assassination footage .
 The film galvanized both sides of the conspiracy argument . Despite being lambasted as “absurd” and “untrue” by the corporate mass media even prior to its release, the film galvanizes both sides .
 Researchers who had been claiming a conspiracy in Kennedy’s death saw vindication in the movie . But lone-assassin advocates held the film up as an exercise in presenting unsupported theories .
 He organized an entire research team coordinated by Harvard and Yale graduate Jane Rusconi . Rusconi studied more than two hundred books on the subject . He also organized a research team .
 Rusconi's team reinterviewed some of the same people and reviewed the same documents as this author . Rusconi’s team also reinterviews some of those interviewed .
 She and her team came to the same conclusions espoused by Garrison and this author . Garrison and the author both agree .
 Despite a slow start, the film eventually built a huge international audience . It must have created concer within the circles of those who wished the troublesome and unanswered questions about the assassination would simply go away .
 The response of the mass media was mixed, with news commentators calling it fictionalized trash . Some movie reviewers gave it high marks .
 Harsh criticism of the film began months even before it was first screened, with the leaking of a first draft . Preemptive Attacks began months before the film was screened .
 The film was excoriated by the Chicago Tribune, the Washington Post, and Time magazine . Time magazine said the film was "excruciating"
 National Public Radio’s Cokie Roberts, daughter of Warren Commission member Hale Boggs, refused to even view the video .
 If there was more than one gunman, it follows that there was a conspiracy of some sort . It follows that the Warren Commission was incorrect, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It should follow also that journalists writing about the Kennedy assassination should be more interested in what actually did happen than in dismissing every Warren Commission critic as a paranoid .
 The media has consistently promoted the thesis Rosenfeld now says is wrong beyond cavil . Yet, from the start of the start, the media has pushed the thesis, he says .
 The experience of Pat Dowell, film critic for the Washingtonian, provided an example of the break between film critics and corporate bosses . Dowell: "I'm glad to have been able to do so," says Dowell .
 Roger Ebert named JFK as Best Picture of the Year . Ebert: "The achievement of the film is not that it answers the mystery of the Kennedy assassination, because it does not"
 The film went to great lengths to reenact the assassination scenes as authentically as possible . At the last moment some old Harley-Davidson motorcycles were located to re-create the motorcade’s police escort .
 Garrison travels to Washington meet with a mysterious “Mr X,” who gives him insider information regarding the assassination . Garrison meets with Mr X in the film .
 This character largely represented Colonel Fletcher Prouty, who indeed told Garrison but only long after the Clay Shaw trial . This character was largely represented by Colonel Fletcher . Garrison told the story to Garrison .
 Garrison went to Washington to meet with Army intelligence agent Richard Case Nagell at the time of the trial . Garrison says he met with Case in Washington, D.C. before the trial, but it was not true . Garrison: "In truth, at the . time of
 To say Nagell said all this would have been untruthful, just as saying Prouty met Garrison at the time of the trial would be equally untrutful .
 One unreported event during the film’s shooting in Dallas indicated that Providence was watching over Stone's production . The film was shot in Dallas .
 High above them, technicians mounted a camera on the seventh floor of the building . High above, technicians were mounting a camera high above them . The camera was mounted on a seventh floor .
 The Sixth Floor Museum had refused to allow Stone to film from the actual sixth-floor window . The museum refused to show that there is no clear line of sight to Elm Street .
 A huge glass windowpane came loose and fell down toward the crowd of extras standing on the curb below . The incident happened on the set of the latest episode of The Walking Dead .
 A gust of wind caught the pane at the last moment, causing it to slide sideways, crashing into the center of Houston Street, just vacated by the crowd . Fortunately, a gust caught the wind, causing the pane to slide into Houston Street .
 A pile of shattered glass was quickly swept up and filming continued . The pile of glass was swept up quickly .
 Many people on set, including some of the endangered extras, did not even realize that disaster had been averted .
 Despite acceptance by both film critics and most of the public, the debunking efforts continued well into the next decade .
 Bugliosi voiced concern that more Americans would believe the CIA-LBJPentagon plot by Stone than the Warren Commission’s lone-assassin theory . Buglio: More Americans would likely believe Stone's theory than Warren Commission's .
 Oswald, a lone nut, killed Kennedy and was thereafter killed by another lone nut . Ruby, a nut, was also killed by Oswald . Ruby was a nut .
 Bugliosi's book should have been titled Reclaiming the Warren Commission . He offered the same tortured logic as that discredited commission . The Warren Commission is now discredited .
 It would appear anyone who agreed with his views was credible, while those who differed were not credible . Anyone who disagreed with him was not credible, he said .
 His work is a classic example of the debate method termed “appeal from authority” in which fallacious arguments are presented from a real or imagined authoritarian source . The method is known as the appeal from authority .
 There is no evidence of Oswald’s being “seen getting in a car after the shooting in Dealey Plaza” despite noting that two motorists, Roy Cooper and Marvin C Robinson, supported deputy Roger Craig's claim of seeing Oswald leave the book depository in a Nash R
 He also offered the old argument that a conspiracy could not be kept secret . He also said that conspiracy can not be secret .
 Bugliosi fails to mention that numerous people, from organized-crime bosses to intelligence operatives, have spoken out over the years about a conspiracy . More than 25,000 government employees were able to keep the atomic bomb Manhattan Project a secret .
 Stone has been quoted widely about his attempt in this film to “fictionalize” the assassination, and to create a new mythology of the event . Stone has also been quoted as saying he is trying to create new mythology for the film .
 He has done more subtle and literarily permissible than this simplistic response . However, what he has done is more subtle than this .
 In "fictionalizing" the story, Stone has collapsed long, laborious facts, witness lists, and theories into one speech or one character . Stone has used a time-honored device dating to Shakespeare and beyond to create the story .
 Proctor summed up the feelings of many on both sides of the conspiracy argument when he concluded, “The Great Debate over the film will rage on for a while, and each side will continue to vilify the integrity of the other .
 This independent agency reviewed and later released to the National Archives nearly 5 million pages of once-secret JFK assassination records . The National Archives later released the documents to the national archives .
 The board began its work in 1994 and finished in the fall of 1998, although the further declassification of government records continued afterward .
 The ARRB was to be composed of five citizens with a background in history, archives, and the law who were not government employees . ARRB is to be made up of five people who have a history and archives background .
 They and their staff held high-level security clearances and were able to seek out heretofore classified documents within government agencies . They and staff held . They held high . level clearances .
 Board members were to have been named within ninety days of passage of the act but there was an eighteenmonth delay due to the transition between the Bush and Clinton administrations . Board members had to be named within 90 days of passing of the bill .
 The avowed intention of the ARRB was to penetrate this mystery but it failed to produce a solution to the case . The ARRB failed to solve this mystery .
 Never before has a group of private citizens been given the opportunity to bring some order to the record of one great historical event . The group was given the chance to bring order to one of the greatest historical events .
 The Board, we should remember, is not charged with answering the question of who murdered President Kennedy . The Board will not answer the question: "Who murdered JFK?"
 It is not running an investigation; it is, instead, seeking to disclose documents in an age of open secrets . We have come to embrace the idea that openness is to be preferred and that accountability is the touchstone for public confidence in government .
 Hall prophetically stated when the ARRB closed shop, it could take ten years before its work could be properly analyzed and evaluated . Hall prophetially stated that it would take 10 years to analyze the work of ARRB before it could be fully evaluated .
 Judge Jack Tunheim, who headed the ARRB, continued to support the Warren Commission by stating that after viewing the available evidence, he had not seen any direct proof to change the verdict that Lee Harvey Oswald committed the act alone .
 At least one staff member dissented from Tunheim’s Warren Commission support . While most board members have remained coy about their opinions and conclusions .
 Horne wrote that his work with the ARRB did not begin with the idea of publishing a book . Horne pulled no punches in his five volumes of the book .
 A former Navy navigator, Horne detailed the tainting of the physical evidence, both by suppression and by fabrication . Horne got to the crux of the case by detailing the case .
 Once a researcher is convinced that the President was killed by multiple shooters in a crossfire, the details of how that shooting occurred become irrelevant . The details of the shooting become irrelevant, says the researcher .
 President Kennedy was killed by a crossfire, but the government covered up the facts of his death, in the most brazen and outrageous manipulation of physical evidence in any murder case in American history . Of equal or greater importance than understanding that JFK was killed was understanding that the Federal Government covered up
 He added that the mere fact that no one in government has admitted the truth of the assassination is the surest indication that the cover-up was sinister .
 Horne was able to confirm the claims of author David Lifton that surgery was conducted on Kennedy’s body prior to the official autopsy . Horne also confirmed that the Xrays and autopsy photographs now in the National Archives are not the originals . The autopsy photographs were not the original
 Kennedy’s body left Dallas wrapped in a sheet inside a costly bronze coffin . Yet it arrived at Bethesda in a zippered body bag inside a plain military-style shipping coffin . Kennedy's body was wrapped in an expensive bronze coffin, yet arrived at the Bethesda hospital .
 Kennedy’s body was to have been sent to Walter Reed Army Medical Center rather than Bethesda, reports say . LBJ's secretary aboard Air Force One said Kennedy's body should have been at Walter Reed rather than Walter Reed .
 The original intent of the conspirators seems to have been to reunite the President’s body with the empty Dallas casket at Walter Reed... and then take the body inside it once again, to Bethesda .
 The President’s widow refused a helicopter ride back to the White House, and instead insisted on remaining with the casket all the way to Bethesda Naval Hospital . This plan was foiled by the President's widow .
 This decision of hers, which no one could countermand, created major problems for those in charge of the cover-up who had been planning to quietly reintroduce JFK's body back into the Dallas casket at Walter Reed .
 It created unwanted witnesses to multiple casket entries at Bethesda, and to the broken chain-of-custody for the body . It . . The body of the deceased was found in a casket at the hospital .
 Horne was able to confirm reports that the autopsy was controlled not by the medical personnel, but by military authorities . Horne also confirmed reports that military authorities crowded into the autopsy room . The autopsy room was controlled by military, Horne said .
 Admiral Calvin Galloway, Bethesda’s commanding officer, told them, “Leave it alone. Leave it alone,” witnesses say . Kennedy's throat wound was first thought to mark a tracheotomy and only later revealed as a bullet wound .
 James J Humes, dissembled about the time that Kennedy’s body arrived at Bethesda, Maryland . Humes said that Kennedy's body was arrived at the hospital at the time he died .
 Witness Paul O’Connor says Humes was “scared to death” during the autopsy . Witness says he was ‘scared’t death’ during autopsy .
 Bethesda technician James Jenkins described the JFK autopsy as a “circus” and said that Humes was being carefully directed through the procedure by Dr. Humes .
 President George Burkley, the president’s personal physician, was contacted by Admiral Galloway . Burkley was the president's personal physician .
 Burkley was untruthful in several Statements he made to both the Warren Commission and the later House committee . Burkley lied to both of the Senate and the House of Representatives .
 Horne dealt extensively with the famous Zapruder film in his volumes . He wrote that assessing the legitimacy of the film could lead to a better understanding of what really happened .
 Like most Americans, Horne initially accepted the film as legitimate evidence in the assassination . Horne had initially accepted that the film was legitimate evidence of the murder .
 The authenticity study was conducted by Rollie Zavada, a former Kodak employee called out of retirement . Because of both time and financial considerations, Kodak was allowed to continue .
 His report was presented only five days before the ARRB ceased operation, leaving no time for further study .
 Zavada study listed some characteristics indicating the film was an original . However, it also carried technical language and exhibits that some felt cast doubt on the film’s authenticity .
 Confusion over how and where the Zapruder film was processed began immediately . Confusion began over the process of processing of the film .
 Secret Service agent in charge Forrest Sorrels and reporter Harry McCormack took film to WFAA television station for processing . Station was not equipped to develop 8 mm color film .
 The film was taken to the Eastman Kodak Company plant that was already processing the color transparencies of witness Phil Willis . So the film was already processed there . The film is now being processed at a Kodak plant .
 Zapruder film was processed at the Jamieson Film Company on Bryan Street, says Sorrels and Willis . FBI report says film processing took place at the Kodak plant in December 1963 . FBI agent Robert Barrett quoted Zapruders as saying film processing was taken at Jamies
 A more serious question concerning the legitimacy of the Zapruder film stemmed from revelations out of the 1975 President’s Commission on CIA Activities headed by then-Vice President Nelson Rockefeller .
 The CIA admitted that the agency’s National Photographic Interpretation Center had performed a shot and timing analysis of the film . The agency also performed a print test, produced three print copies, created four briefing board panels displaying twenty-eight enlargements of frames from the film.
 Zapruder film was turned over to Time-Life on Monday, November 25, 1963 . It is unclear exactly when all this involvement with the film took place . It was done before mid-December 1963 .
 If this was the case, it was altered before anyone—at either Time-Life or the government—got to view it . It's not known if the government altered the document .
 Trask apparently was unfamiliar with Homer A McMahon, who in 1963 was manager of NPIC’s color lab, and his assistant Morgan Bennett Hunter, as neither was mentioned in his book . Neither were mentioned in the book .
 Zapruder film indeed was worked on at NPIC the weekend of the assassination . In 1997 this pair, located and interviewed by the ARRB, revealed that the film was indeed worked on .
 He remembered the film was brought to NPIC by a “Bill Smith” of the Secret Service from Rochester, although no such agent could later be found .
 Smith told McMahon he personally had obtained the film from the amateur who exposed it (apparently Abraham Zapruder) Smith flew it to Rochester for developing, then ferried it to the Washington Navy Yard .
 Hunter later recalled a Secret Service agent being present along with a military captain named Sands . Hunter recalls the incident at the time of the attack .
 Smith ordered Hunter and McMahon never to discuss their work with the film . Smith ordered both to refer any queries to Captain Sands, Captain Sands .
 McMahon also told the ARRB that he and Hunter worked with the film Smith provided provided to produce blowups of approximately forty frames . McMahon also said that the blowups were produced by Smith .
 Only selected frames were blown up to produce the briefing or presentation panels . Only select frames are blown up for the presentation or presentation .
 McMahon said Kennedy was shot six to eight times from three separate locations . McMahon added that although he conducted no official analysis, it was his opinion of Kennedy's death .
 In 2003, Kodak’s Zavada wrote, “There is no detectable evidence of manipulation or image alteration on the ‘Zapruder in-camera original’ and all supporting evidence precludes any forgery .
 Surveyors used eight-byten-inch color photo prints of Zapruder film frames . Surveyors said they conducted their survey of Dealey Plaza on the morning of November 25, 1963, with photos .
 It would be simple to blow up each frame to eight-by-ten-inch size, perform some retouching, and reshoot the frames individually .
 When run as a moving film, especially if reshot with the original camera, it would be most difficult to detect alterations . The film is most likely to be reshot in order to make it more difficult to see alterations .
 The evidence indicates that the Zapruder film manipulated at NPIC was not even the real film . The evidence suggests that the film was manipulated at the time was not the real footage .
 In 2009 Peter Janney, author of the revealing book on JFK confidante Mary Pinchot Meyer, Mary’s Mosaic, interviewed at length Dino Brugioni, former head of NPIC's Information Branch . In 2009 Janney interviewed at . length at length with
 Brugioni recalled participating in the NPIC production of assassination briefing boards using an original Zapruder film on November 23, 1963, the day after the assassination . He said he used the film to make the briefing boards .
 CIA director John McCone reportedly delivered the boards to the CIA . Secret Service reportedly ordered the boards by the Secret Service but delivered to CIA director McCone .
 McCone attempted to show this evidence to President Johnson but was brushed off . McCone tried to show the evidence to the president .
 Zapruder film was purchased by Time-Life on November 25, 1963 . Special effects experts provided proof of government manipulation of the film prior to its purchase . Time-life purchased the film in 1963 .
 In 2008, Sydney Wilkinson, with more than twenty years’ experience in the Hollywood postproduction industry, became intrigued by the Zapruder film . Wilkinson has more than 20 years of experience .
 She was surprised to learn there had never been a nongovernmental scientific imaging study of its authenticity . She said the authenticity of the photograph has never been confirmed .
 This was scanned directly to a 6K DPX digital form using a Northlight scanner, today considered considered state-of-the-art technology in feature-film postproduction .
 Some believe this patch was painted on to mask the massive exit wound in the right rear portion of his head indicating a shot from the front . The exit wound is in the rear of the head indicating that he was hit from the rear .
 More than two dozen film industry professionals evaluated the Zapruder frames and all perceived the painted patch on the rear of his head . The film industry pros at major studios at the time of the incident .
 In Frame 317, the shadow on the backside of JFK’s head looks like an artifact not created by sunlight striking an object . The shadow looks like a shadow created by light striking a object .
 The considered opinions of professionals, who together have spent over five decades restoring and working with films of the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s (when visual effects were done optically— not digitally) in that one moment superseded the statements of all those in the JFK research community
 But evidence of alteration aside, other problems remain with the historic film .
 Even the Zapruder film, long heralded as the ultimate truth of the assassination, cannot be accepted at face value . So now, along with fake government documents and phony autopsy X-rays and photographs, the public must understand that even the film can't be accepted in face value
 Jack Tunheim, by 2012 a Minnesota federal district judge, said all but a few of the JFK assassination documents are now public . Tunheim: "By 2012 a judge said by 2012, all of the documents were now public"
 “We looked as far and as wide as we possibly could,” said Tunheim to a Minnesota news station .
 Tunheim says he has not seen any direct evidence of any kind to change the verdict . Tunheim: Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone. Tunheim said that after many years of seeing all the available evidence, he hasn't seen any .
 National Archives estimates that 1 percent of the known records still remain classified . Kelly said there are still an estimated 50,000 still-secret records .
 There are so many sealed documents they can’t even tell you how many documents are still sealed or how many pages are being withheld . They’re not going to count them until they are required to do so .
 The CIA has already identified the documents that they intend to ask the president to postpone beyond 2017 . According to some reports, the documents are already identified .
 Some assassination records were destroyed even after the ARRB formed to obtain them . The ARRB was formed in order to obtain the records .
 In 1995, the Secret Service destroyed Presidential protection survey reports for some of President Kennedy’s trips in the fall of 1963 . However, the reports were destroyed in January 1995, but were never destroyed .
 The Review Board learned of the destruction approximately one week after the Secret Service destroyed them . The Board was drafting its request for additional information when it learned of its destruction .
 The Board believed that the Secret Service files on the President’s travels in the weeks preceding his murder would be relevant . The Board believes that the . Secret Service . files on . the President's travels in . the weeks . before his murder .
 Congress has failed to hold any oversight hearings on the JFK Act in over 15 years and shows no inclination to do so . The JFK Act was passed by Congress in 1996 .
 Far from closed, the JFK assassination case continues to raise even more questions . JFK assassination still raises questions about JFK's murder .
 Jesse Ventura: “If the government were telling the truth, there would be no reason to lock up anything from the people of this country.” Ventura: If the government told us anything from us, we wouldn't be locked up . Ventura: "If the truth were telling
 Researcher William Kelly concluded, “Today, the American government is afraid of its people, afraid to enforce its own laws and afraid to allow its citizens to know the complete truth about the assassination of President Kennedy .
 A Question of Oswald: The identity of Lee Harvey Oswald is still a mystery . The JFK assassination is one of the most intriguing yet misunderstood issues surrounding the assassination . Oswald's identity has been a mystery for decades .
 Evidence points to someone impersonating Oswald in the weeks prior to the assassination . Second concerns the identity of the man Jack Ruby killed, Jack Ruby .
 This whole question of Oswald doppelgangers—or look-like look-ikes—is admittedly bizarre . Oswald look-ins are admittedly bizarre, but it's not the first time they've happened .
 Questions about Oswald’s identity did not surface years after the assassination, as many people believe . Many people believe questions about Oswald's identity surfaced years after his assassination . Oswald's name was never publicly released until after his death .
 J. Edgar Hoover expressed concern over Oswald’s identity as far back as June 3, 1960, when he warned the State Department against an Oswald impostor . Hoover expressed concerns over Oswald's identity as well back in 1960 .
 Government agencies were checking frequently on Oswald long before the assassination . Government was unaware of Oswald or his background, despite assurances they were unaware of it .
 State Department: "The Embassy’s careful attention to the involved case of Mr Oswald is appreciated" Another State Department communication, this time to the U.S. embassy in Moscow, on July 11, 1961, stated, “The Embassy . in Moscow is appreciated .
 Government officials were keenly aware of Oswald's plans to kill him . Oswald was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 At the same time, a military intelligence unit in Texas was receiving information on Oswald for its files . At the time, the military was getting information for its own files .
 After the assassination, literally hundreds of people claimed to have seen Oswald in the days before the tragedy .
 Many reputable people encountered a Lee Harvey Oswald at a time when Oswald was reported elsewhere and whose stories cannot be easily dismissed . While this phenomenon is to be expected, it is expected, but it is not to be dismissed as a result .
 Warren Commission found it easy enough to dismiss these people . However, the Warren Commission did find it easy to dismiss .
 Oswald's encounter with a bogus Oswald is especially intriguing since it occurred long before Oswald reportedly arrived back in the U.S. from his sojourn in Russia . Oswald is believed to have been in Russia for a year before he returned to the United States .
 Oscar Deslatte, manager of a Ford dealership in New Orleans, contacted the FBI immediately after the assassination . The FBI is investigating the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 A man identified as "Joseph Moore" tried to buy ten trucks on January 10, 1961 . He told the bureau that a man identifying himself as “Joseph Moore’s” had tried to purchase ten trucks . The incident occurred in 1961 .
 At this time the CIA and its Cuban allies were preparing for the April 17 Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba . The CIA was preparing for this invasion of Cuba with Cuba's allies .
 Deslatte said “Moore’s asked that the name “Oswald” be placed on the purchase estimate sheet . ‘Moore” asked for the name . be placed . on the estimate sheet. ‘ Moore’ asked that . the name
 The man said “Oswald’s” would be paying for the trucks on behalf of an anti-Castro Cuban organization, he said . The man told CNN that the trucks would be paid for by an organization .
 In 1979, the FBI released a copy of Deslatte’s estimate sheet and it showed the anti-Castro organization involved was “Friends of Democratic Cuba” The group included in its membership ex-FBI agent Guy Banister .
 Senate Intelligence Committee hears testimony from a former immigration inspector in New Orleans . Another story involves testimony from an immigration inspector who worked for the federal government .
 He is certain he interviewed Lee Harvey Oswald in a New Orleans jail cell sometime before April 1, 1963 . He is absolutely certain that he interviewed him in a jail cell .
 Oswald was claiming to be a Cuban alien at the time of his death . The inspector is not now certain whether Oswald was using that particular name at that time . He is certain that Oswald claimed to be an alien .
 He quickly ascertained that Oswald was not a Cuban alien, and left Oswald in his jail cell . Oswald was later found to be a Cuban .
 Oswald was seen in many and varying situations during his time in New Orleans . Oswald was captured on camera in 1963 .
 He was handing out pro-Castro literature on New Orleans streets . He was also trying to help Cuban leaders with proposals to help train their followers .
 Oswald was a clean and well-kept, courteous young man, some say . Others say he was dirty and disheveled and a swearing hard drinker . Oswald is accused of being a drug dealer in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 It is difficult to believe these people were talking about the same individual . It is not believed to be the same person who spoke of the same man .
 As the assassination drew closer, the strange reports of second Oswalds began to increase . Second Oswalds were reported to have been Oswalds in the 1960s .
 Lee Dannelly, an official with the Selective Service system in Austin, Texas, reported that a young man came to her office for help . Lee said the young man was a good Samaritan and a good man, who was in the military .
 Oswald said his name was Harvey Oswald and that he wished to get his military discharge with “other than honorable conditions” changed to an honorable discharge . Oswald said he wished his discharge changed to a honorable discharge. He said he wanted to get a discharge with other than honorable condition changed
 Dannelly said she could find no such person in her files . She told the man to check with Selective Service in Fort Worth, Texas .
 She next saw Oswald on television after the assassination and promptly reported her experience . She saw him on television again and reported him to the public .
 Oswald did have a dishonorable discharge and he had lived in Fort Worth, Texas . On September 25, he was on his way to Mexico City, according to the Warren Commission . Oswald was killed in the September 25 attack .
 Some residents of Irving said they recalled Oswald there . After the assassination, some residents said they remembered Oswald .
 Leonard Hutchinson of Hutch’s Market came forward to say that he had been asked to cash a check for Oswald earlier in November . Hutchinson says he was asked to pay Oswald a check .
 He said this man, accompanied by a young woman, spoke in some foreign language . He said one of the men spoke to him in some form of foreign language.
 Hutchinson recognized Oswald and Marina when their photographs were broadcast over television after the assassination . Hutchinson said he recognized Oswald when his photographs were shown over television .
 Near Hutchinson’s store was a barbershop where a man identified as Oswald went for haircuts . Oswald went to the shop for a haircut . Oswald has been identified as a member of the Secret Service .
 Next is the well-documented story of Oswald’s wild car ride weeks before the assassination . Oswald's wild car trip weeks before his assassination .
 "Lee Oswald" came into a Lincoln Continental dealership in Dealey Plaza before the assassination, a salesman told the Warren Commission . Bogard told the commission that a man came into the dealership and introduced himself as Oswald .
 He was driving at 60 to 70 miles an hour and came back to the showroom, he says . "I show him a car, and take him for a ride out Stemmons Expressway and back," he says.
 He told me he wasn’t ready to buy, that he would be in a couple or three weeks . And, I made some figures and he told me that he had some money coming in . He said he wasn't ready for a buy, but that he'd be in
 "When he finally started to leave I got his name and wrote it on the back of one of my business cards, and never heard from him any more"
 Eugene Wilson and Frank Pizzo supported by two other dealership employees . The dealership owner's story was supported by three other dealership workers .
 Oswald was unable to drive, according to friends who knew him . Mrs. Oswald testified that her husband had a history of car accidents . Oswald's wife testified that he had a daughter .
 Paine, who was giving Oswald driving lessons, stated that Oswald was showing some improvement by November . Paine said that Oswald showed some improvement .
 Oswald’s whereabouts on November 9 would have made it impossible for him to have visited the automobile showrooms as Mr Bogard claims . Marina Oswald and Ruth Paine testified to the testimony of Oswald and Paine .
 Wilson said the FBI and Warren Commission dismissed the story of Oswald’s drive because they had it occurring on November 9 . In a 1977 Dallas Morning News story, Wilson said . Wilson: The FBI and the Warren . Commission dismissed Oswald's drive because it was believed to have occurred on
 Wilson said the man was Oswald and that he did know how to drive and that the incident actually occurred on November 2, a more plausible date . Wilson told the newspaper the incident occurred on Nov. 2 .
 Oswald used the same car to carry his wife and friends home after a meeting of the Lone Star Bulldog Club . Wilson said he could pinpoint the date because later that day he used the car to take some friends home .
 Wilson said the next day at a Dallas dog show he won some ribbons that carried the date . Wilson said he won the ribbons the day after the incident . Wilson says he won ribbons at a dog show that carried a date .
 The Warren Commission published a copy of an unsigned application for a Texas driver’s license in the name of Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald's application was published by the Warren Commission . The application was found in an unsigned Texas driver's license .
 Oswald was expecting to come into money at the exact time of the assassination . If the car buyer was Oswald, he would have expected to buy a car at the time . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 The night manager of Western Union in Dallas told of Oswald collecting money orders . Oswald collected money orders during the early part of November, he said .
 The man used a “little Navy ID release card” and a library card for identification . The man also used a Navy release card and library card to identify himself .
 This story of Oswald receiving money just before the assassination caused a minor uproar within both the Warren Commission and Western Union . Western Union received money from Oswald just before his assassination .
 Western Union’s officials were quick to remind employees that they were not to discuss customers or their money orders or amounts . Western Union officials remind employees not to talk about customers or money orders .
 It is apparent that Western Union employees were under pressure not to tell more about the money order incidents . Western Union workers are under pressure to keep quiet about the incidents .
 A check by Western Union failed to turn up any money orders in the name of Lee Harvey Oswald . Western Union found no Oswald money orders . Oswald's name has not yet been found .
 Oswald lived at the YMCA between October 15 and 19, 1962 . The records also indicated that Oswald lived in the same place . Oswald was also known to have lived there at the same time .
 The Dallas YMCA also had a member who frequented its health-club facilities quite often during this time . Jack Ruby was a member of the Dallas YmCA .
 Dallas police saw a man resembling Oswald handing out pro-Castro literature on downtown streets in the months before the assassination . Dallas police say they saw him handing out literature on the streets .
 The Warren Commission had Oswald leafleting in New Orleans at the time . Oswald had been leafleating in the city . Oswald was found to have been killed in 1963 .
 Oswald or someone resembling Oswald used a foreign-made rifle in the weeks before the assassination . Then there are strange incidents involving Oswald or . someone resembling him using a foreign .made rifle .
 On November 1, a “rude and impertinent’ man bought rifle ammunition in Morgan’s Gunshop in Fort Worth, Texas .
 Three people recalled this incident after the assassination and claimed the man was Oswald . Three people claimed to have seen Oswald in the White House .
 The Warren Commission determined that Oswald was elsewhere at the time of the assassination . Oswald was later found dead at the scene of the Second World War .
 Dial Duwayne Ryder, the service manager at the Irving Sports Shop, recalled working on a rifle but it was not an Italian weapon . Ryder: "It's not a rifle. It's a rifle"
 Ryder said the work was probably done during the first two weeks of November . Ryder said it could be done in the next two weeks, November .
 Three holes were drilled in the rifle for a telescopic sight, Ryder said . The rifle was charged $1.50 for boresighting, but the drilling and tapping was $1 .50 per hole .
 The Carcano identified as Oswald’s rifle had only two holes for the sight . The telescopic sight came already fixed to the rifle . Oswald's rifle is believed to have been Oswald's Carcano .
 Ryder and his boss could not identify Oswald as the man ordering the work . Neither Ryder nor his boss were able to identify pictures of Oswald as ordering work .
 Someone using Oswald's name ordered work on a weapon that was not the Oswald rifle . It would appear that someone using Oswald’s name ordered the work on the weapon .
 The Warren Commission hinted that Ryder had made up the story about working on the rifle . The commission was never willing to admit that someone might have been fabricating evidence .
 A young man was spotted sighting in a foreign-made rifle at the Sports Drome Rifle Range in early November . The incident happened at the range in November .
 One of the shooters, Malcolm Price, helped adjust the rifle sight for the man shooting . Another, Garland Slack, argued with the man on another occasion because the man was shooting at Slack's target .
 Homer Wood and his son, Sterling Wood, recalled the man and both were shocked to see his photograph on television in the days following the assassination . Homer and Sterling Wood say they were shocked by his photograph . Homer Wood: "It was a shock to see that man on television"
 Warren Commission noted that witnesses were not consistent in their descriptions of the gunman or of the rifle and scope . However, the Warren Commission found that these witnesses were consistent in describing the gunman .
 Oswald was accompanied by a man in a late-model car, witnesses say . Oswald's car was also seen at gun range, witnesses said . Oswald died at the scene of the shooting, police say .
 Price remembered helping “Oswald” sight his rifle on September 28, 1963, a time when Oswald reportedly was in Mexico City . Price also remembered helping Oswald sight his gun on September 29, 1963 .
 Penn ordered three men shooting a rifle in a field, ordered them to leave . Penn ordered the men to leave after they were approached by him .
 After they left, she found a 6. mm Mannlicher-Carcano rifle shell near where they had been target shooting . The shell was found near where the men had been shooting .
 Laboratory tests showed shell had not been fired from Oswald rifle, FBI says . FBI: Tests showed shell not fired from the Oswald rifle .
 Oswald accompanied by Cubans came from many different sources . The reports of Oswald's presence in Cuba came from various sources . Oswald was reportedly accompanied by Cuban Cubans .
 Three anti-Castro Cubans -- one by the name of Leon Oswald -- visited Silvia Odio shortly before the assassination . Recall the incident of three anti-Cuba Cubans .
 Someone posed as Oswald in the days before the assassination, carefully laying out a pattern of an irritating young man who was in possession of and practicing with a foreign-made rifle . Someone was posing as Oswald .
 If the man in question was not Oswald, it means that someone was laying a trail of evidence to the real Oswald . Of course, if the person in question is not Oswald it means someone is laying evidence .
 There is considerable evidence to suggest that the man killed by Ruby was not the original Lee Harvey Oswald . Bizarre as this may sound, there is also evidence that this was not Oswald .
 Eddowes said he became “100 percent convinced’s that President Kennedy was killed by a Soviet KGB agent impersonating the real Oswald . He said that after studying the issue of Oswald's identity, he became convinced .
 Oswald’s autopsy report showed no vaccination scar was noted in his autopsy report . Location of scars differed from those in his military records . Oswald's military records differ from those of his military .
 Marina knew only the one Oswald killed in Dallas, Dallas, but knew only one of the two men . Oswald was the man she met in Russia and Oswald was killed in the Dallas shooting .
 There is a possibility that a substitution took place prior to their meeting, but this does not eliminate the possibility that it took place before .
 There are a number of other intriguing hints that point toward substitution . There are also hints that there will be a substitution .
 Oswald wrote his mother and asked her to send him pictures of her and himself . Oswald wrote to his mother just weeks before he left Russia for home . Oswald asked his mother to send pictures of herself and herself .
 Jeanne DeMohrenschildt claimed that Oswald’s knowledge of Russia extended beyond just its language . Jeanne DeMarnschildt said Oswald's knowledge of the country extended beyond language .
 Recall that native Russians thought he spoke the language better than they did . He spoke Russian better than native Russians did .
 She said her husband, George, and Oswald would have lengthy discussions about Russian literature, including such authors as Tolstoy and Dostoevsky . The high-school dropout was self-taught Russian .
 Oswald even subscribed to a Soviet satirical journal titled The Crocodile . She said Oswald had a large collection of photographs he claimed to have taken in several different areas of Russia .
 All agreed that the English words spoken seemed acquired later in life . The man on the tape was not the native tongue of the man on tape .
 DeMohrenschildt told this author she was more amazed by Oswald’s English than his Russian . Oswald's English is more fluent than Russian, she says .
 She said he spoke in deliberate and precise terms, rarely ever using slang or curse words . She said: "He spoke very carefully, very deliberately"
 I was surprised at the English coming from this boy who was brought up in the South . I was always surprised at at the level of respect I got from the South, I said .
 A letter was sent to the Russian embassy in Washington in the fall of 1963 . A particularly intriguing hint at impersonation came in a letter from the embassy in 1963 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald wrote about his alleged travel to Mexico City . Oswald was writing about the alleged trip to Mexico . Oswald signed a copy of the book by Oswald .
 The Warren Commission published both his handwritten draft and a typed letter . The second sentence of the letter reads, “I was unable to remain in Mexico indefinitely because of my mexican visa restrictions which was for 15 days only.” The letter was published both handwritten and typed .
 In 2003, researcher John Armstrong published a lengthy and heavily documented book advancing the theory that a second Oswald, rather than a Soviet agent, had been groomed at a young age by United States intelligence with an eye toward sending him into Russia as a spy .
 His book is footnoted and running to more than 1,000 pages . It is both costly and hard to obtain and is hard to find .
 Lee Harvey Oswald would not go under his real name, so his background was merged with that of a patriotic American youth . Oswald's real name was that of Oswald, but he would not be able to go under that name . Oswald was a patriotic young man who would go under the name
 This identity switch very probably was accomplished with the knowledge and assistance of Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald may have been able to switch identities with the help of Oswald .
 Harvey went to Russia and eventually became the Oswald arrested in Dallas . Harvey went on to become the Oswald suspect in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald was the only Oswald known to his wife, Marina, and to his New Orleans coworker Judyth Vary Baker . He was known to both his wife and his coworker, Judyth .
 The real Lee Oswald was seen working with anti-Castro Cubans at a time when Harvey was in Russia and most probably was eliminated by the time of the assassination or shortly thereafter . Harvey was probably in Russia at the time .
 U.S. intelligence agencies scramble to cover up the truth of Lee Harvey Oswald's assassination . Oswald's story fits all the known evidence and goes far in explaining the scramble by United States intelligence .
 Neither Oswald’s records nor any mention of Kudlaty has been found in the National Archives . Neither Oswald's records nor mentions of the man in question have been found .
 Oswald was serving in the Marines in Japan at this time . Military records show he was in the Marine Corps in Japan when he was killed .
 Passing motorists Roy Cooper and Marvin Robinson share their accounts of the incident .
 Oswald was boarding a city bus driven by Cecil McWatters . Yet, officially, he was boarding the bus . Oswald was not on the bus at the time of the assassination .
 Eddowes went into a Texas court on January 10, 1979, and asked that Oswald’s grave be opened . Based on indisputable evidence of impersonation if not a physical switch, author Eddowees went to court in Texas to ask for the grave to be
 The Dallas County Medical Examiner’s Office said there was enough question about the identity of the body to warrant an exhumation . He had the support of the medical examiner, who said the body was not identified .
 Eddowes asked to have Oswald’s body exhumed . Political fights sprang up between conflicting jurisdictions .
 Oswald's body was buried in Rose Hill Cemetery, which is in nearby Tarrant County . Oswald had been killed in Dallas County, but his remains were buried in nearby Rose Hill cemetery .
 Dallas County Medical Examiner’s Office had authorized an exhumation, but Tarrant County officials balked . While the Medical Examiner's Office had OK'd an ex-humoration, Tarrants County officials disagreed .
 On June 1, 1979, Texas district judge James Wright denied Eddowes’s exhumation request . A Texas judge denied the request in 1979 .
 Linda Norton: "I feel it would be in the public interest to conduct the exhumation" Linda Norton said she feels it would have been in the "public interest" to exhumate the body .
 Norton said her efforts to exhume the body were being thwarted by Tarrant County district attorney Tim Curry, an elected official . Norton said the district attorney is thwarting her efforts .
 A Warren Commission document declassified only in 1975 revealed that CIA officials were suspicious of Oswald’s true identity as early as 1964 . The CIA was suspicious of the Oswald's true identity, according to the document .
 Staff member W David Slawson wrote about a letter from FBI director J Edgar Hoover on February 26, 1964 . Hoover's letter was dated March 13, 1964, in a Commission memorandum .
 Oswald could have spent time in secret police custody, being coached, brainwashed, etc. If the suicide incident is a fabrication, the time spent by Oswald recovering from the suicide in a Moscow hospital could have been spent by him in secret custody . Oswald is believed to have committed suicide in
 Secret Service agents came to him three weeks after Oswald’s burial asking questions about marks on the body . Funeral director Paul Groody, who buried Oswald in 1963, told this author . Groody: Secret Service asked about marks in Oswald's burial .
 Oswald's own mother asked for an exhumation in 1967, expressing questions as to the identity of the body in her son's grave . Oswald’s own mother expressed questions in 1967 as to whether the body belonged to her son .
 Marguerite Oswald told local news reporters that she did not believe her son had scars on his body as described by the Warren Commission . Oswald's mother says she does not believe he had scars in his body .
 Oswald's mother had told the Warren Commission how her son had seemed changed after returning from Russia . Oswald had previously said her son seemed changed when he returned to Fort Worth, Texas . Oswald's widow had previously told the Commission that her son was changed .
 Oswald’s brother Robert noted changes in Oswald when he arrived back in the U.S. Robert Oswald's brother Robert also noted changes .
 "He appeared the first couple of days upon his return . . He appeared to be rather tense and anxious," he said . "He seemed to be quite anxious"
 His face features were somewhat different, being his eyes set back maybe, you know like in these Army pictures, they looked different than I remembered him . His eyes were set back, maybe, maybe because of the set back .
 His face was rounder . When he went in the Marine Corps a bull neck . His face . . . when he went . in the . Marine Corps . A bull neck. When he was in the Marines, he had a 'bull neck'
 Pic went on to tell how he became angered when Oswald introduced him to a visitor as his half-brother . He said he became angry when he was introduced to a man he thought he was his half brother .
 Oswald had never previously mentioned that Pic was only a half-brother, he said . He said Oswald never mentioned that he was only half-sister to Pic .
 Charles Petty formally called for an exhumation and asked his counterpart in Tarrant County, Texas, to order it . Petty has been in the process of exhuming the remains of Charles Petty . Petty: "It's a good thing to say goodbye to Charles Petty"
 District Attorney Curry rejected Eddowes’s request to pay the premium on a $100,000 indemnification bond to allow exhumation to proceed .
 Court found that Eddowes, being a British citizen, lacked any legal standing in a Texas court . Meanwhile, the court found that being a UK citizen, he lacked legal standing .
 By the summer of 1980, Eddowes was joined in his exhumation efforts by Marina Oswald, who provided the necessary legal standing . Marina Oswald provided the legal standing for the ex-archivist .
 Robert Oswald’s brother Robert is trying to keep the exhumation from going forward . Tarrant County officials have been reluctant to exhume Oswald's remains .
 On August 15, 1980, Robert Oswald won an injunction against the exhumation, saying it would cause his family anguish . Robert Oswald said exhuming would cause him anguish . Oswald won the injunction in August 1980, 1980 .
 If the exhumation proved the body was Oswald, nothing would have changed . Oswald's body would have been exhumed in the 1960s . If it was Oswald's, it would be the first time the body had been found .
 Marina filed suit to have the grave opened on August 20, 1981 . Marina filed a suit in 1981 to get the grave to be opened .
 On October 4, 1981, Marguerite Oswald died from cancer in a Fort Worth hospital and was quietly buried alongside her son Lee . Nine months later, the exhumation of the Oswald grave took place .
 Robert Oswald said he could not afford to fight the issue further in court . Robert Oswald: "I can't afford to go to court. I'm not going to fight this issue further"
 The body was taken from Rose Hill Cemetery in the early moming hours and driven to Baylor Medical Center in Dallas for study . The body is taken from the cemetery in early hours of the morning .
 Forensic pathologists compared the teeth of the corpse brought from the grave with Oswald’s Marine Corps dental records . A team of four forensic pathologists examined the teeth and dental records of the Marine Corps .
 Oswald’s known mastoid operation was discovered behind the left ear, which corresponded to the mastoid surgery . Oswald had a hole in his ear that corresponded with that of his known mastoids operation . Oswald is believed to have been in a coma for a year .
 Kennedy assassination was not to be realized, as with so much else in the Kennedy assassination, this was not . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 The two funeral home directors who prepared Oswald’s body for burial in 1963 got together and talked . A few weeks after the exhumation, they got together to talk about the ex-president's burial .
 They were not supposed to be at the post-exhumation examination . They were supposed to have been at the examination .
 Marina Oswald had asked them to be present and identify rings on the corpse . But at the last minute, Marina Oswald asked them not to identify the rings . Marina Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 Both men confirmed that the rings were on the corpse in the same location they had placed them in 1963 . The rings were found in the autopsy room in Dallas, Texas .
 Groody and Baumgartner noticed that the skull of the corpse under examination was in one piece . However, as the forensic examination continued, the skull was completely intact .
 The absence of signs of a craniotomy, a normal autopsy procedure, was confirmed by doctors .
 A craniotomy involves drawing the skin off the human skull and cutting off the top of the skull with a bone saw . It is usually in a V-shaped cut, usually in the shape of a V, in order to cut off the skull .
 There can be no question that this procedure was performed on Oswald’s body since the weight of his brain was recorded in the autopsy report . Oswald's body was recorded as being carried out by his brain .
 Both funeral home directors recalled the craniotomy in preparing the body for burial . Funeral home directors also recalled the use of craniotomotomas to prepare the body .
 Both men have said they noticed no sign of the craniotomy on the skull they viewed during the 1981 exhumation study . Yet both men say they saw no signs of the surgery in the 1981 study .
 If there was no craniotomy performed on the skull in Oswald’s grave, it is proof that the body is not the same one buried there in 1963 . Oswald's body was buried in 1963, but his remains have not been found since .
 There are other indications that some manipulation may have taken place with the body . There are also indications that the body may have been manipulated by the killer .
 Marina Oswald told reporters that she received a telephone call around Easter 1964 from government officials asking her to sign papers authorizing the installation of an electronic alarm system at the Oswald grave . Marina Oswald said she was asked by government officials to sign the papers .
 She said a “respectful” man in a gray suit came to her home shortly after the call and had her sign some papers . She said the man was a "respectful" man .
 She told United Press International, “I signed lots of papers and they were never translated or explained to me.” She told U.P.I. International .
 Marina was nearly convinced that Oswald’s body had been removed from the grave, most probably after the signing of the papers in 1964 . Marina was convinced that the exhumation took place in 1964, most likely after the death .
 As far as is known, no electronic alarm system was ever installed at the Oswald grave . Oswald's grave was never equipped with an alarm system .
 Prior to the exhumation, mortician Groody told reporters how carefully Oswald had been embalmed . Oswald's body was exhumed at the time of his death .
 He also described how the body was placed in an airtight coffin that was placed inside a cement vault . The coffin was then placed inside an air tight cement vault, he said .
 Groody said that upon exhumation Oswald’s body should look exactly as it had the day he was buried . Oswald's body should be exhumed, Groody says .
 When workers exhumed the grave, they found the cement vault in pieces and the seal on the coffin broken . However, when workers ex-humed it was found in pieces .
 Water and air had gotten into the coffin and Oswald’s body had deteriorated to skeletal remains . Oswald's remains were found in the coffin of his father-in-law . Oswald had deteriorated from skeletal remains to skeletal skeletal remains.
 Several morticians interviewed by this author said such an event is highly unusual . While the rupture of seals on both the vault and coffin is not an impossible occurrence, it is not impossible .
 North-central Texas is regarded as a very stable area . It could be explained by movement of the earth, although it is not stable .
 The broken seals also could be explained by someone having opened the grave prior to the 1981 exhumation . It could also explain the broken seals in the grave .
 A logical time for such a pre-exhumation grave opening would have been earlier in 1981, when Marguerite Oswald was buried next to Oswald’s grave . Oswald was assassinated in 1968 .
 The presence of earthmoving equipment and a canopy covering both graves provided an opportunity for covertly opening Oswald’s adjacent grave . Oswald's adjacent grave was also covered by a canopy and earthmoving .
 The answer may be found in a four-hour videotape made of the 1981 exhumation study . The video was made of a videotape of the study .
 The tape was commissioned by Marina Oswald and Eddowes . It was produced by Hampton Hall, the son of a Texas politician . The tape is produced by Hall's son Hampton Hall .
 Marina's friend and neighbor was asked to view the tape . The tape was viewed by a friend of Marina's who she asked to see .
 The neighbor, along with his personal physician, viewed the videotape and reported that there was no sign or mention of a craniotomy . The neighbor's personal physician also saw the tape and said there was not mention of craniotomotomotomate .
 In 1984, a detailed report on the exhumation findings was published in the Journal of Forensic Sciences . The report was published four years after it was published .
 The report claimed a previous autopsy saw cut in the usual fashion was present on the calvarium with an anterior inverted V-notch in the right frontal region . The report claims a previous saw cut was present in the normal fashion .
 The calvarium was maintained in continuity with the remainder of the skull by virtue of decomposed mummified tissue . The skull was found in a shallow grave in the early 1900s . The remains were preserved by the remains of the remains .
 Jelly-like skin had coated the Oswald skull, which made it appear to be in one piece . In other words, decomposed, jelly like skin coated the skull, making it look like it was in one part .
 Researchers were skeptical of this information and turned to Marina for confirmation of the craniotomy by viewing the videotape of the exhumation . Marina was the first person to confirm that she had suffered a craniotomotomy .
 Photographer Hall refused to give up the tape, claiming that so much time had elapsed that ownership of the tape had reverted to him . Oddly enough, photographer Hall said so much had elapsed time that ownership had reverted .
 Marina was forced to go to court to retrieve the videotape she had commissioned . In February 1984, Marina had to go on a court date to retrieve her videotape .
 By the summer of 1986, an out-of-court settlement resulted in a promise to return the tape . The tape was returned by the end of 1986 .
 The tapes still not available even by 2013, this issue remains in controversy, like so much else in the JFK assassination case . But with the tapes still being released, it's still in controversy .
 If the body exhumed in 1981 was indeed that of Oswald, it is possible that an impostor was killed in Dallas and his body exchanged for Oswald’s .
 The idea that the Soviets, Castro agents, or mobsters could switch bodies is ludicrous . It's ludicrous that the idea that Soviets, . Castro agents or . mobsters can switch bodies, the author says .
 Only the federal government of the United States, with access to the military and such devices such as the Federal Witness Protection Program, could accomplish something of that magnitude . Only the U.S. government could accomplish that .
 The impersonation of Oswald would appear to be an issue that could be resolved easily by a truthful government investigation . Oswald impersonation is a problem that can be solved easily by truthful government investigations .
 The assassination is another area of the assassination full of omissions, inconsistencies, and possible deceit . Instead, it's another area where the assassination is full with omissions and inconsistencies . The White House has been accused of covering up the assassination .
 Oswald impersonation may be a moot point since persuasive evidence suggests that Oswald in Dallas did not kill President Kennedy . In the end, the issue of Oswald’s impersonation is moot point, since evidence suggests he was not a lone nut .
 In the three-year period that followed the murders of President Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald, 18 material witnesses died . Six by gunfire, three in motor accidents, two by suicide, one from a cut throat . Five from natural causes, five from gunshot wounds .
 Actuary: Odds against witnesses being dead by 1967 were one hundred thousand trillion to one . Actuary concluded that on November 22, 1963, the odds against them being dead were 100,000 trillion to 1 .
 The comment on the deaths of assassination witnesses was published in a tabloid companion piece to the movie Executive Action .
 By that time, part of the mythology of the Kennedy assassination included the questionable deaths of people who were connected with it .
 By the mid-1960s, people in Dallas already were whispering about the number of people who died under strange or questionable circumstances . By the 1960s, Dallas had a reputation for strange deaths .
 Well into the 1980s, witnesses and others were hesitant to come forward with information because of the stories of strange and sudden death that seemed to visit some people with information about the assassination .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations looked into the matter in the late 1970s . The committee felt compelled to look into the case .
 The committee was unable to come to any conclusions regarding the growing number of deaths .
 The committee said it could not make a valid actuarial study due to the broad number and types of people that had to be included in such a study . The committee also said it couldn't make a study that could not be made into a valid study .
 London Sunday Times legal manager Anthony Whitaker backpedaled on the publication’s original statements . Whitaker: "Our piece about the odds against the deaths of the Kennedy witnesses was, I regret to say, based on a careless journalistic mistake"
 The odds against 15 of those included in the Warren Commission Index dying within a given period are much lower . However, if one asks what are the odds against those who have died within that period, the odds are much higher .
 “Our mistake was to treat the reply to the former question as if it dealt with the latter,” he said . “We should have been careful not to treat it as an answer to the question.”
 This settled the matter for the House committee, which apparently made little or no attempt to seriously study the number of deaths that followed the JFK assassination .
 Richard Charnin, who holds a master’s degree in applied mathematics, has provided a detailed analysis of this issue . He is a former numerical control engineer for Grumman Aerospace .
 Charnin argued that the number of JFK-related witnesses is not relevant . He said that the U.S. population is not a factor in the case of JFK witnesses .
 Whitaker neglected to provide unnatural-death mortality statistics . Charnin also pointed out that Whitaker failed to provide natural-death death statistics .
 Analysis will show that the actuary’s calculation was essentially correct . In fact, he claimed that the problem was misstated, implying that the probability calculation was wrong .
 The editor's 1977 response to the House Select Committee on Assassinations was misleading and incomplete . It will show that the editor’s 1977 response was misleading, incomplete .
 HSCA Statistical expert Jacqueline Hess's claim that the actuary’s calculation was ‘invalid’ due to the ‘impossibility’ of defining the “universe” of material witnesses was disinformation .
 The dismissal of the actuary’s odds was just a continuation of the cover-up . The dismissal was just the continuation of that cover-ups, the official said . The actuary's odds were dismissed as a result of a cover up .
 Former Los Angeles prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi also argued against the significance of the JFK witness deaths . Former L.A. prosecutor also cited Robert Musen, vice president and senior actuary .
 Musen had calculated the odds of 15 people out of 2,479 in the Warren Commission Index dying within a three-year period, assuming a median age of 40, to be 98.16 percent . Musen: "Odds of 15 dying within three years of age are 98
 Bugliosi failed to note that fewer than five hundred witnesses actually testified to the Commission . Several names included in the index, such as George Washington and other presidents, were not witnesses to the assassination .
 The odds that at least 15 of 2,479 would die unnaturally within 3 years is one in 46,000 . The odds of 15 deaths in 3 years are one in about half a million .
 At least 33 of 1,400 JFK assassination-related witnesses died unnaturally in the three years following the assassination . Charnin said his analysis countered the “feeble attempts to rebut and obfuscate the actuary’s 100,000 trillion to 1 odds’
 This section has been titled “Convenient Deaths” because these deaths certainly would have been convenient for anyone not wishing the truth of the JFK assassination to become public . This section is titled ‘Convenient deaths’
 Government apologists, particular the CIA, have gone to some lengths to discredit the idea of mysterious deaths plaguing assassination witnesses . The CIA, however, has gone on to say the deaths are not mysterious .
 The means of eliminating unwanted witnesses certainly existed, both then and now . However, the means of elimination of unwanted witnesses were still available, both now and now.
 CIA technicians revealed a variety of TWEP technology —“Termination With Extreme Prejudice’ — that cannot be detected in a postmortem examination . CIA technicians testified before the Church Committee about CIA improprieties .
 One letter from an agency consultant to a CIA officer listed circumstances under which people could be killed but made to look like natural death, accident, or suicide .
 The letter went on to show that undetected murders do not necessarily have to be the result of sophisticated technology . The letter also said that the murders were not necessarily result of technology .
 It stated, “There are two techniques which I believe should be mentioned since they require no special equipment besides a strong arm and the will to do such a job. It stated .
 These would be either to smother the victim with a pillow or to strangle him with a wide piece of cloth such as a bath towel .
 The C[A has developed drugs to induce cancer, it is less well known that the agency has developed the drugs . The agency has the capability of killing, and hence the mob through operatives .
 Jack Ruby claimed to have been given such a drug just as he was granted a new trial . Ruby claimed the drug was given to him just before his new trial was due to be granted . Jack Ruby was jailed for life in prison for five years for a drug charge .
 Local law-enforcement officers and coroners are not equipped, either by training or inclination, to detect deaths induced by such sophisticated means . Local law enforcement is not equipped to detect such deaths, officials say .
 Police look for signs of a struggle, evidence of a break-in, bruises, or marks on the victim . They look for evidence of break-ins or a struggle .
 With no evidence to the contrary, many deaths are ruled suicide or accident . Many deaths have been ruled either by suicide or accidental .
 The possibility of convenient deaths leads one into a well of paranoia, yet this long list cannot be summarily dismissed . This long list of possible victims cannot be dismissed .
 Mary Richardson, wife of the minister to whom Judyth Vary Baker revealed knowledge of the New Orleans cancer lab, died . Jack Zangretti expressed foreknowledge of Oswald’s shooting . Gary Underhill, a CIA officer who claimed the agency was involved, also died .
 Early in 1964, as the Warren Commission investigation was getting under way, there was a rash of deaths of people who may have known of an OswaldRuby connection . People who knew of Oswald's connection were killed in 1964 .
 Former Ruby employees Betty McDonald and Teresa Norton were in Ruby's apartment the weekend of the assassination . Hank Killam, husband of a Ruby employee, had been in the apartment the night of the shooting .
 Former FBI agent Guy Banister and his private investigator Hugh Ward were killed in a plane crash . New Orleans mayor DeLesseps Morrison was killed in the crash along with Banister .
 Tippit shooting witness Domingo Benavides, was shot in the head, apparently mistaken for his brother . Tippits shooting witness was shot by his brother, apparently mistaking him for his own .
 Life magazine senior vice president who locked away the Zapruder film died . Jackson, the Life magazine vice president, died in June .
 Life writer Paul Mandel, who tried to explain Kennedy’s throat wound by saying he turned rearward to wave, also died . Shortly after Jackson's death, Mandel died .
 Deaths in 1965 included Guy Banister’s pilot Maurice Gatlin; and Rose Cheramie, who reported the assassination in advance .
 Mona B Saenz, David Goldstein and Dorothy Kilgallen were also killed . Also dead were Mona Saenz and David Goldstein, who had helped the FBI trace Oswald’s pistol .
 Kilgallen’s JFK notes may have been kept by Earl Smith, who may have kept them . The JFK notes were later found in the possession of Earl Smith's estate . Smith's notes were found in his home .
 In December 1965 William Whaley, the cabdriver who reportedly drove Oswald to Oak Cliff, became the only Dallas cabdriver killed on duty . Whaley was the last Dallas cab driver to die on duty in December 1965 .
 Ruby trial judge Joe Brown, Oswald’s landlady Earlene Roberts, and Ruby dancers Marilyn Delilah Walle and Karen “Little Lynn” Carlin were killed in 1966 . The deaths of those potential witnesses continued in 1966, including Ruby dancer Marilyn .
 Albert Bogard told of Oswald test driving a new car prior to the assassination . Captain Frank Martin, the Dallas police official who said there was a lot more to be said in the assassination, also died . Lee Bowers Jr. told of seeing men behind the wooden picket fence at
 Jack Ruby died as New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison began his JFK investigation . Navy photographer Leonard Pullin and Navy photographer Harold Russell witnessed the escape of the killer .
 There were also the deaths of key Garrison witnesses David Ferrie, Eladio Del Valle, and cancer researcher Dr. Dr. David . Dr. Elaadio del Valle also died in the Garrison .
 New Orleans—connected deaths continued into 1968 with that of New Orleans coroner Dr. Dr. John D. Martin . Dr. Martin's death was one of the city's most publicized deaths .
 Nicholas Chetta, who had ruled on Ferrie’s death, and Philip Geraci, who spoke of an Oswald—Clay Shaw connection, spoke of a connection .
 Also dead were Charles Mentensana, who had filmed a rifle being brought out of the Depository . John Crawford, a close friend to Jack Ruby and witness Wesley Frazier, also killed .
 In 1970, Dallas underworld figure George McGann, who was married to the "babushka lady" Beverly Oliver, was murdered . McGann was a member of the Dallas underworld known for his role in the 1970s Dallas underworld .
 Abraham Zapruder and Dallas County sheriff Bill Decker were killed in the same year . That year was also the year that saw the deaths of Abraham Zaparuder and Bill Decker .
 In 1971, Roscoe White, identified by his son as the Grassy Knoll gunman, was killed by a fiery explosion at work . White was identified as the gunman in the explosion that killed him in 1971 .
 Also dying by mid-1971 was Darrell Garner, arrested for shooting Tippit witness Warren Reynolds . Clayton Fowler, Clayton Fowler and Clayton Fowler were Ruby’s chief defense attorney . CIA deputy director General Charles Cabell was also killed .
 Between 1972 and the end of 1976, during the time of the Church Committee investigations into CIA improprieties, there was a spurt of deaths among JFK assassination figures .
 Murder victims included Dave Yaras, a Close friend to both Jimmy Hoffa and Jack Ruby, and mafia bosses Sam Giancana and John Roselli, both scheduled to testify to the Church Committee .
 Ruby-connected gunrunner Thomas E Davis died during this time . Also dying were Connally’s physician Dr. Dr. Connally and his business partner Ralph Paul . Also died were Thomas Davis, Ralph Paul and Ralph Paul.
 Milteer predicted JFK’s death and the capture of a scapegoat . He was a Miami rightwinger who predicted JFK's death and capture of scapegoat.
 The year 1977 produced a bumper crop of candidates for listing under convenient deaths connected to the JFK assassination . Six top FBI officials were scheduled to testify before the House Select Committee on Assassinations .
 Former FBI director William C Sullivan had already met with investigators for the House committee . Sullivan was the number-three man in the FBI at the time of the FBI .
 Sullivan was shot with a high-powered rifle near his New Hampshire home by a man who claimed to have mistaken him for a deer . Sullivan was hit with a rifle by the man who thought he was a deer in New Hampshire .
 The man was charged with a misdemeanor—”shooting a human being by accident” He was released into the custody of his father, a state policeman .
 Louis Nicholas was a special assistant to J Edgar Hoover as well as Hoover’s liaison with the Warren Commission . Louis Nicholas worked as a special agent to J. Edgar Hoover .
 English headed FBI laboratory where Oswald’s rifle and pistol were tested . English headed the FBI laboratory that tested Oswald's rifle, pistol .
 Donald Kaylor was the FBI fingerprint expert who examined prints found at the assassination scene . He was a fingerprint expert at the scene of the assassination .
 None of these six bureau officials lived to tell what they knew to the House committee . None of the six officials who worked for the Bureau of Investigation survived .
 During the House committee investigation into the JFK assassination, the news media reported the deaths of other key assassination witnesses . George DeMohrenschildt and former Cuban president Carlos Prio Socarras, who died within weeks of each other in 1977, were being sought .
 The ranks of organized crime and U.S. intelligence agencies were thinned by deaths beginning in 1975, the time of the Senate Intelligence Hearings, and 1978, the closing months of the House committee . Organized crime and United States intelligence agencies have been thinned in recent years .
 Charles Nicoletti, a mobster connected with the CIA-Mafia assassination plots, was murdered in Chicago . William Pawley, a former diplomat connected with both organized-crime and CIA figures, reportedly committed suicide .
 Lou Staples, Air Force One chief steward Joseph C Ayres and U-2 pilot Francis G Powers died during this time . Lou Staples was a Dallas radio talk show host who told friends he would break the assassination case .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer's shooting death may provide insights into the machinations of top government officials .
 She was the former wife of Cord Meyer, since 1962 the head of the CIA’s Directorate of Plans Covert Action Staff . Cord Meyer was the CIA's director of plans and covert operations .
 Cord Meyer was probably the closest rival to JFK in position, intelligence, and opportunity . Meyer was the scion of a wealthy, socially prominent, and politically connected family .
 Peter Janney was friends with Mary's children and was the son of CIA official Wistar Janney . Mary’s Mosaic was published in 2012 by Mary's Mosaic, a brilliant book by Peter . Peter was friends of Mary and was friends and was CIA official .
 Meyer met and married Mary Pinchot while attending Yale Law School in 1945 . Meyer was married to a socialite socialite in 1945, who he met while attending law school .
 Their marriage became a partnership of idealistic equals as they crusaded for world peace . The couple's marriage became an idealistic marriage of idealism .
 Cord Meyer caught the attention of U.N. higher-ups by writing a paper advocating a federation of nations . He became an aide to Harold Stassen, who helped establish the United Nations .
 Meyer accompanied Stassen to a conference on the U.N. later that month . Meyer and his new bride were married at the time .
 She became reacquainted with John F Kennedy, who was reporting on the conference for the Chicago Herald-American .
 Reportedly this was a rebuke he never forgot, later ignoring Cord’s request for an ambassadorship . Cord was rebuffed by Cord, and later ignored his request to be an ambassador .
 Cord Meyer’s fraternal twin brother, Quintin, was killed in action on Okinawa . Later that same same month, Cord Meyer's twin brother was killed . Cord Meyer: "Quintin's life changed when his twin brother died"
 In 1951, he left the United World Federalists, which he had helped fund, and joined the CIA at the invitation of Allen Dulles . He left the U.S. Federalists in 1951, and became a CIA director .
 Cord Meyer transformed all his poetic, insightful visionary and wisdom into perfecting schemes and strategies for America’s greater power and control . Meyer transformed his poetic and insightful vision into master masterpieces for the U.S. in the CIA .
 Kennedy reportedly was unhappy with Jackie and wanted out of this marriage but knew it would be political suicide . Kennedy reportedly knew it was political suicide to marry Jackie Kennedy .
 He began to visit Mary at her rented home, which was within an hour of the Kennedy compound .
 Mary introduced Jack to a broader view of the world, the benefits of peace, and even drugs such as LSD and marijuana . This liaison continued through 1963, with Mary introducing Jack to peace and drugs .
 Mary devised a plan to give careful amounts of LSD to ranking government officials so as to reprogram them to build a peaceful society . Mary devised the plan with Harvard psychologist and drug culture guru Timothy Leary .
 Theologian James W Douglass wrote, “Although Kennedy was a Cold Warrior who had taken the world to the very brink of nuclear war, there was a more peaceful element in his character from which God could create something new”
 Janney came to believe the seed was his relationship with Mary Meyer . Meyer was an intellectual, self-assured woman who bridled at playing the meek socialite .
 Following the JFK assassination, Mary could not stop talking about it in the capital’s social circles, raising questions and pointing out inconsistencies in the official version of the events .
 On October 12, 1964, she was shot in the head while walking on the C&O Chesapeake Canal towpath near her home . She was killed in 1964 .
 When the shot failed to kill her, a second shot angled just beneath her right shoulder blade severed her aorta, killing her instantly . She was shot in the head with a shotgun blast .
 The precision of the shots indicated the work of a professional assassin, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The precision and precision of shots indicated that the assassin had been killed .
 Raymond Crump Jr. was charged with the crime . Crump was found drunk and sleeping in the area and charged with it .
 Despite oddities in the evidence and testimony, it seemed Crump’s guilt was a foregone conclusion . One witness was found to have a fraudulent identity and disappeared .
 A determined young attorney named Dovey J Roundtree fought a tenacious defense, fully detailed in Mary’s Mosaic . Roundtree was convicted of murder in 2012 .
 Roundtree was able to show there was no hard evidence to link Crump to the murder and that he likely was set up to take the blame . Roundtree said Crump was likely set up as a scapegoat for the murder .
 Before the news of Mary’s murder, a small group of people gathered at her Georgetown home, apparently searching for her diary, in which she had made copious notes .
 Cord Meyer and another ranking CIA official were there along with James J Angleton, head of the CIA’s counterintelligence division, and his wife, Cicely . Angleton is a close friend of Mary's . Cord Meyer was also there . Mary's mother was a close
 Mary Bradlee is the wife of Washington Post editor Ben Bradlee . Tony Bradlee, Mary’s sister, was also at the ceremony .
 There were conflicting accounts as to whether the group had broken into her home . She was attacked by a group of men in the early hours of the day .
 Angleton admitted he had found the diary and related papers and burned them . Later it was revealed that Angleton had admitted to burning them . Angleton said he had burned the diary .
 CIA operative and Watergate burglar E Howard Hunt confessed to the deathbed confession of CIA operative . Hunt was one of the Watergate burglars . Hunt's confession was made on his deathbed . Hunt admitted to being a CIA operative in the 1970s .
 Topping Hunt’s list was Lyndon B Johnson, followed by CIA officers Cord Meyer, William Harvey, and David Atlee Phillips .
 He also named CIA operative David Morales and a “French gunman on the Grassy Knoll,” thought by his son St. St. Charles .
 Kennedy's murder may have played an intricate part in the higher levels of the conspiracy to kill Kennedy . Regardless, her murder may well have played a role in the plot to kill her .
 Kennedy's relationship with Mary Meyer may have been the catalyst for Kennedy to attempt to construct a more peaceful and just world . After all, his relationship with her may have led him to try and construct a world of peace .
 This could not have set well with the war machine that America had become . The war machine had become so powerful that it had to be used in the war .
 Near the end of his life, Cord Meyer himself may have indicated some intimate knowledge of the assassination . Cord Meyer may have said he knew about the assassination of President Obama .
 Since November 22, 1963, a massive amount of information has become available concerning the assassination of president John F Kennedy . Part IV: The JFK assassination is the focus of this week's CNN special .
 Most of the information leaked out only after many years had passed . Some of it was made public immediately, but most of it wasn't made public .
 Much has proven erroneous and incomplete, incomplete, and misleading in light of later developments . Much of this article has been incorrect and inaccurate .
 An abundance of evidence indicates that Lee Harvey Oswald was framed for the assassination of President Kennedy . Oswald was the prime suspect in the Kennedy assassination . Oswald is believed to have been framed for Kennedy's assassination .
 The cover-up went far beyond simple face-saving and was conducted at the federal level . It is apparent that persons within the U.S. government were involved in and aware of such a conspiracy .
 If there had been a legitimate reason for such activities, it would have been revealed long before now . If there were legitimate reasons for such things to take place, they would be revealed .
 The two most powerful men in the federal government in 1963 were vice president Lyndon B Johnson and FBI director J Edgar Hoover . Hoover was a close friend of LBJ and LBJ's close friend .
 Both men were facing the end of their careers if Kennedy was reelected in 1964 . Kennedy was facing end of his career if he won re-election in 1964.
 Johnson may have even faced prison time due to his involvement in the TFX, Bobby Baker, and Billie Sol Estes scandals .
 Both Johnson and Hoover could have been convicted if not for orchestrating the assassination itself . The cover-up that took place in the aftermath of the assassination took place was a major cover up, Hoover could be convicted .
 Both men were accessories after the fact and subject to criminal penalties . Under the law, both men were accessory after the . fact .
 Oswald was playing double, acting under orders from persons he believed to be in U.S. intelligence . Even if Oswald—real or impersonator—was recruited as a Soviet agent, he was likely to be playing double . Oswald was not a Russian agent, but he was acting under
 Despite his pro-Castro posturing, his contacts with Guy Banister and David Ferrie in New Orleans and George DeMohrenschildt in Dallas proved that in the months just prior to the assassination, Oswald was in contact with U.S. intelligence .
 Oswald believed to have been an intelligence operative . Oswald's assassination evidence takes on a new perspective . Oswald was believed to be a CIA operative .
 Oswald’s activities in the weeks prior to the assassination were carefully calculated to both incriminate him and link him with foreign governments . Thus, many of Oswald's activities were carefully crafted to incriminate Oswald . Oswald was never implicated in the assassination .
 Oswald never fired a weapon on November 22, 1963, according to the FBI . Oswald was not involved in the shooting, but there is an abundance of supporting evidence that he did not . Oswald's brother, Lee Oswald, was killed by a single bullet in November 1963 .
 The Dallas police paraffin test showed no gunpowder on Oswald’s hands or cheek, evidence that he had not fired a rifle . Oswald's hands and cheek were not covered in gunpowder, police say . Oswald was found to have fired a loose-bolted Italian Car
 Oswald maintained he was in the Depository lunchroom at the time of the shooting . Oswald also accurately named two coworkers who indeed ate in the lunchroom that day . Oswald maintained that he ate in lunchroom .
 Oswald was seen on lower floors both minutes before and after the assassination . Testimony from other employees indicates that Oswald was on the lower floors of the building .
 Oswald was found in the Depository's lunchroom less than 90 seconds after the shots were fired . Oswald was seen with a soft drink in his hand when he was confronted by two Dallas policemen .
 Acoustical material indicates that at least one shot came from the Grassy Knoll . This fact was supported in 1979 by the House Select Committee on Assassinations’ scientific study .
 These acoustical studies are supported by many witnesses as well as photographic enlargement of Mary Moorman’s snapshot depicting the ‘badgeman’ figure . The acoustics studies have been supported by witnesses and many witnesses .
 The presence of Secret Service agents in Dealey Plaza at a time when all official agents were accounted for elsewhere is a particularly pertinent piece of evidence . The Secret Service agent's presence is a key piece of the evidence .
 Either these men were bogus agents carrying identification good enough to fool Dallas policemen or they were real agents carrying out some undocumented and unexplained activity . The agents were carrying out illegal activity, police say .
 Most likely, at least two shots struck Governor Connally, one penetrating his chest and lung . A separate bullet shattered his right wrist and entered his left thigh . One bullet also struck his wrist and struck his left leg .
 At least one shot definitely missed the limousine altogether, striking the curb near the Triple Underpass . A bystander James Tague was wounded in the incident .
 One bullet struck the grass on the south side of Elm Street, another hit in the street near the presidential limousine, and yet another struck the Stemmons Freeway sign . Furthermore, there is evidence of three additional shots .
 At least six shots were fired in Dealey Plaza, perhaps as many as nine, authorities say . This count would mean at least six rounds fired .
 acoustical experts testified before the House Select Committee on Assassinations that they had discovered as many as nine sound signals that they could not rule out as gunshots . But only four were confirmed since only two sites for comparison tests were used . Only two sites were used, so only two were
 To attempt to pinpoint each gunman’s location and calculate the number and effect of each shot is an exercise in futility . The actions were taken immediately to eliminate evidence and confuse investigators .
 There would have been efforts to eliminate any evidence of foreknowledge of the assassination, it is not surprising that the proof of the framing of Oswald is meager and largely circumstantial . Oswald was framed for the assassination .
 It should be noted that circumstances cannot be altered and thus may prove to be better evidence than physical evidence, which can be falsified or planted . However, circumstances can be altered, which may prove better evidence .
 What is obvious and demonstrable is the cover-up perpetrated after the assassination, says George W. Bush Jr. Bush . Bush was assassinated in 1968 .
 Herein lies the real key to understanding the truth of Kennedy’s death, the author says .
 It was this flawed autopsy that has been most responsible for the continuing controversy over the medical evidence . —An effort on the part of federal authorities to lock assassination evidence away from the public .
 President Johnson ordered evidence locked up until the year 2039, while the House Select Committee on Assassinations sealed up its evidence for fifty years .
 The loss of the Oswald note while in the hands of the FBI, the premature elimination of military and Secret Service files, and the immediate cleansing of the presidential limousine constitute destruction of evidence, the author says .
 Price, Beverly Oliver, Ed Hoffman, James Chaney, and many others . Price, Oliver, Hoffman, Hoffman and Chaney all died in Dallas, Texas .
 The intimidation of witnesses runs the full gamut from simple pressure to alter portions of their testimony to strange and unnatural deaths . Witness intimidation runs the gamut of intimidation, including pressure to change portions of testimony .
 Millican, Sandy Speaker, Acquilla Clemons, and Richard Carr—were threatened into silence . The four women were threatened with silence .
 All of these examples of official misconduct go far beyond any innocent attempt to avoid tarnishing an agency’s reputation . All of the examples of misconduct go beyond innocent attempts to tarnish an agency's reputation .
 Many of these incidents were obvious attempts to misdirect an impartial investigation and incriminate Oswald . Oswald's actions were clearly an attempt to mislead the investigation into the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Persons who conduct such activity in connection with a murder case are legally considered accomplices and subject to the same punishments as the perpetrators . Persons who do such activity are subject to a maximum of 15 years in prison .
 The government had a strong ally in perpetrating a cover-up in the Kennedy assassination . A national news media that seemed incapable of looking past official pronouncements .
 From the moment the Kennedy assassination occurred, coverage of the tragedy involved government manipulation of a news media that appeared only too willing to be manipulated . The Kennedy assassination was the result of the government manipulating the media .
 Establishment media allowed themselves to be set up by official leaks and pronouncements about the assassination to the point where later official findings had to be accepted and defended . Establishment media set themselves up by leaks to set up the story of the assassination .
 In the days following the assassination, Dallas-area newspapers were filled with factual, if contradictory, information . District attorney Henry Wade voiced suspicion of a plot, various people told of seeing Oswald and Ruby together .
 Outside Texas, wire-service reporting was limited to the official version of a lone assassin firing three shots . The official version is that the assassin fired three shots at least three times .
 Information on Oswald’s procommunist background was leaked by the FBI and transmitted nationwide . The FBI leaked the information to the public . Oswald was a pro-communist .
 Media speculation was turned from whether Oswald acted alone to speculation on his motives . Media speculation turned to speculation about Oswald's motives .
 The entire thrust of news coverage was aimed at Oswald’s guilt . Despite the occasional insertion of the word “alleged’ed” before “assassin,” the full thrust of the news coverage focused on Oswald .
 Even the Dallas-Fort Worth papers were not immune to this rush to judgment . Even the paper itself was not immune .
 After Oswald’s death, with no one except his mother to contradict them, the media began going further in their presumption of his guilt . Oswald's mother was the only person to contradict the presumption of the media .
 This issue was in the hands of the public nearly eight months before the Warren Commission emerged from behind closed doors and proclaimed Oswald the lone assassin . The Warren Commission's findings were made public eight months later .
 Life devoted much of its October 2, 1964, issue to coverage of the justreleased Warren Report . Later, Life devoted to the Warren Report: "The Warren Report"
 Gerald Ford, himself a Commission member, reviewed his own work . Life editors chose Gerald Ford to review his own report .
 A still frame from the Zapruder film depicting Kennedy’s rearward fall at that moment of the head shot was substituted with an earlier frame that gave no indication of the direction his head moved . In that same issue, a still frame was substituted .
 He told assassination researcher Vincent Salandria, “I am at a loss to explain the discrepancies between the three versions of Life which you cite.” He said he was “at a loss’ to explain’s discrepancies .
 "I’ve never heard of doing it twice for a single issue, much less a single story," says author . "It’s never been done twice," he says .
 On September 27, 1964, the Warren Report was released to near-unanimous praise from the national news media, the primary source of public information . The Warren Report is released to the nation's attention .
 The Times again sought to lead the public’s understanding of the assassination by helping publish The Witnesses . Two months later, the Times published The Witnesses, consisting of “highlights” of Warren Commission testimony .
 The selection and editing of testimony for this volume showed a clear understanding of that evidence which supported the Warren Commission findings and that which did not . This volume of testimony was edited to show that evidence supported the findings of the Warren .
 A volume purporting to be an objective condensation of relevant testimony compiled by America’s ‘newspaper of record’ was little more than deliberately slanted propaganda in support of the Warren Commission Report . In short, the volume was intended to be a guide to the
 Respected researcher Sylvia Meagher complained, “The Witnesses, therefore, was one of the most biased offerings ever to masquerade as objective information.” Meagher said .
 Billings’s staff concluded that the onebullet theory was untenable . Life called for a new investigation in November 1966 issue .
 Similar admonitions have echoed in newsrooms throughout America over the intervening years . Similar admonities have been echoed in many newsrooms .
 The November 25 article was to have been the first of a series, became the last . Billings’s investigation was terminated and the article was the last of the series .
 Dan Rather has been one of the anchors on assassination reports for CBS since 1967 . The one television network that continually backed the Warren Commission version of the assassination was CBS .
 CBS conducted a series of tests designed to prove that Oswald could have fired his rifle in the time established by the Warren Commission . CBS conducted the tests in a 1967 assassination documentary .
 Walter Cronkite: "It seems reasonable to say that an expert could fire that rifle in five seconds" Cronkites said tests showed that experts could fire a rifle in just five seconds . Cronkitte: It's "reasonable" to say experts could shoot a rifle expert in
 Oswald, under normal circumstances, would have taken longer than he would have done . Oswald's capture of Oswald would be a surprise, but it's reasonable to say that he took longer than normal .
 Cronkite's mistake was the same as that of the Warren Commission and later the House Select Committee on Assassinations . A presumption of Oswald’s guilt guided his interpretation of the JFK assassination .
 A presumption of Oswald’s innocence would have led investigators into a confrontation with government agencies, the military, big business, and powerful politicians . Of course, a presumption . would have . led investigators to confront government agencies .
 In the Dallas area, for instance, diligent reporters were warned off the assassination story by superiors . Despite a continuing spate of new developments and information, reporters were told off .
 News reporters in the early 1960s were used to getting their information from official sources . They did not suspect that these same sources might lie to them . News reporters used to get information from officials .
 News reporters from all over the world descended on Dallas, Texas . They were at the mercy of local and federal authorities . The Dallas massacre was the first of its kind .
 "They didn’t know the city or its leaders," says mayor . They didn't know how to talk to its residents, he says . They "didn't know what to do with the city," he adds .
 The bulk of reporters waited in the police station for the next official pronouncement . So the bulk of the reporters waited .
 It seemed to be that the police had not been able to find out what had happened to the victims of the attack .
 I knew that these men from the newspapers, magazines and television networks were workingmen, just like I was . I could not blame them for carrying out their assignments, he said . "I knew that they were just like me," he wrote .
 Dallas Police Department failed to retain control over the situation, police chief says . Police chief: "I could and did blame the Dallas police department for its failure to retain any control" Dallas police chief: I could blame the police for failing to control the situation .
 The most casual remark by any of the investigators or police officers was broadcast to the world immediately, without any effort being made to determine whether it was somebody’s wild speculation, a theory that deserved further investigation or a fact supported by reliable evidence .
 The few reporters who dared investigate moved on quickly to another topic after realizing the power arranged against them . They moved quickly to other topics after realizing that they were being held captive .
 Leonard Sanders was a young reporter in the Dallas area at the time . He was a Dallas resident in the 1960s .
 He told this author that he discontinued investigating the assassination after becoming convinced that his telephone was tapped and his movements monitored . He said he became convinced that he had his phone tapped and that his movements were monitored .
 In the late 1970s, Dallas Morning News investigative reporter Earl Golz was actually ordered not to write about the Kennedy assassination again . He was ordered to stay away from writing about the assassination .
 This order was later ignored in the wake of revelations made public by the House Select Committee on Assassinations . The order was ignored after it was made public .
 This author once was told not to write any more about the Kennedy assassination as it was “upsetting people at the Petroleum Club,” a private club for persons connected to the oil industry . This author was told to write no more .
 In this type of atmosphere, it is no wonder that the public remains confused about the facts of Kennedy’s death .
 The major news media failed to function properly in response to the assassination of President Kennedy, says John Avlon . Avlon: The news media, like other official segments of U.S. society, didn't function properly after Kennedy .
 "The normal police function was subordinated to pressure from the federal government," police chief says . The normal police role is subordinate to the government, he says .
 The usual legal precautions to protect against wrongful conviction were bypassed in the case of Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was convicted of killing 12 people in November 1963 . Oswald's trial was held in New York City, New York, on November 28, 1963 .
 The possibility of wrongdoing at the top of this nation’s political structure panicked otherwise honest leadership in local, state, and federal government . The possibility . of wrongdoing is a problem for the nation's political structure .
 Major business leaders, sensing the enormity of what had happened, kept their peace . "Major business leaders," such as Apple and Google, kept quiet .
 What essentially began as a plot by a few fearful and greedy men grew into a full-scale palace revolt . It was aided by the business, banking, industrial, media, and defense communities that played no active role in the plot .
 The results of this revolt were accepted by the ‘status quo’—the Establishment —after the fact . After the fact, the Establishment accepted the results of the revolt .
 Since so much information concerning the plot to kill Kennedy has been destroyed, altered, or masked by false leads, it remains impossible to state with authority details of the plan .
 Even those involved in the plot were probably not informed of every aspect of the plot . The plot was probably not known by all those involved .
 There is enough information available today to begin to construct a likely scenario of what happened . However, there is still no way of knowing what happened in the early hours .
 Because of his family’s great wealth, John F Kennedy was incorruptible by bribes . When his father suffered a stroke, all control over him was lost . When he died, he was able to control his son .
 By 1963, it had become quite clear that Kennedy was determined to be his own man . He was determined not to be the president of the United States .
 I believe it is the business of the President to concern himself with the general welfare of the nation . I believe the President should be concerned about the welfare of all Nigerians . The president should be more concerned about his country's general welfare .
 He also was the only president since Franklin Roosevelt who was an intellectual . He was the first president since FDR to have been intellectual .
 He had gained an idealistic vision of making the world more peaceful and less corrupt . With Mary Meyer, he had gained a vision for the world to be peaceful .
 In other words, he really believed he was president . He set out to shake up the status quo of Big Banking, Big Oil, Big MilitaryIndustrial Complex with its powerful intelligence community, and Big Organized Crime .
 There is also the argument that Kennedy was opposed to Israel’s development of nuclear weapons . Kennedy was also opposed to inspections of the Dimona nuclear plant, which alienated powerful Zionists .
 The new directions being taken by the young president provoked serious talk against him within many groups . Organized crime, the anti-Castro Cubans, the CIA, business and banking, the oil industry, and even the military .
 There were many connections among all these groups—particularly in Operation Mongoose, the secret war against Castro . There were also connections among these groups .
 Secret meetings were held where money was raised to raise money for Kennedy . The anti-Kennedy feeling was pervasive in the southwestern oil and business communities .
 Tacit approval was given by the ruling financiers of Wall Street, where Council on Foreign Relations members led by David Rockefeller had railed against Kennedy’s economic policies .
 From this point on, there would be no further contact between the individuals who initiated the plot and those who carried it out . The plot was initiated by the individuals involved in the plot .
 There is little likelihood that the originators of the plot will ever be identified or brought to justice . Consequently, there is little likely to be identified, says author .
 The broad outlines of the plot can be discerned by diligent study of all available assassination information . However, the broad outlines can be easily discerned .
 It is now well documented that the mob and the CIA worked together on many types of operations, including assassination . The mob and CIA were involved in many of the most successful assassinations of the time .
 Kennedy and his brother attorney general Robert Kennedy began to wage war on organized crime . This quickly became a matter of self-defense, the strongest motivation for killing, he says .
 Officials of the FBI and CIA likewise feared the Kennedys, who had come to realize how dangerously out-of-control these agencies had become . Officials feared the CIA and FBI, who also feared the Kennedy family .
 The anti-Castro Cubans felt betrayed by Kennedy because of his orders stopping U.S. military assistance to the Bay of Pigs invaders . They were quite willing to support an assassination of Kennedy . The antiCastro Cuban government was willing to kill Kennedy .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson, former chairman of the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee, neutralized the U.S. military and its greatest political supporter, LBJ . Johnson, a former vice president of the Senate, was a key ally of the CIA .
 Top military brass were incensed by Kennedy’s plans to withdraw all U.S. military personnel from Vietnam by the end of 1965 . The Bay of Pigs fiasco and his signing of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty with the Soviet Union were among the reasons .
 General Charles Cabell, the CIA deputy director Kennedy fired after the Bay of Pigs, was back in the Pentagon . Earle Cabell was mayor of Dallas, and his brother, Earle was mayor .
 It was widely rumored that Vice President Johnson was to be dropped from the Democratic ticket in 1964 . Johnson was long associated with dirty politics, gamblers, and defense officials .
 Texas oilmen were dismayed that Kennedy was talking about doing away with the lucrative oil-depletion allowance . Kennedy was a staunch friend of the military-industrial complex .
 Kennedy ordered Treasury Department to print its own money, rather than distributing interest-bearing Federal Reserve notes . International bankers were shocked when Kennedy ordered the printing of the currency .
 Soldiers and mobsters feared their apple cart was about to be upset by this youthful president . Soldiers, mobsters, and conniving businessmen feared their economic fortunes were about to upset by him .
 The decision was made at the highest level of the American businessbanking-politics-military-crime power structure that should anything happen to Kennedy, it would be viewed as a blessing for the nation, and certainly for them. So the decision was .
 Two more Kennedys, Robert and Edward, were waiting in the wings for their turn at the presidency . Two more were waiting to be the president .
 The decision was made to eliminate John F Kennedy by means of a public execution for the same reason criminals are publicly executed . It was decided to serve as a deterrent to anyone considering following in his footsteps . The decision to eliminate Kennedy was made in the same way criminals are executed .
 Unlike the Roman senator Brutus who participated in the stabbing of Caesar, the men at the top of this consensus didn’t even have to risk getting their hands bloody . Unlike Brutus, Brutus was a Roman senator, he was not involved in the attack .
 Colonel L Fletcher Prouty: Most assassinations are set in motion not so much by a specific plan to kill as by efforts to remove or relax the protection around a target . He says most assassinations set up not by specific plans to kill, but by removing or relaxing the protection
 All the conspirators had to do was let the right ‘mechanics’ know where Kennedy would be and when . The usual precautions would not have been made and that escape would be facilitated, he says .
 It had the means to reduce normal security and permit the choice of a hazardous route, it said . The route was designed to reduce security and allow the possibility of a dangerous route .
 Operational orders originated with ranking members of the government elite, men such as Allen Dulles and Cord Meyer, and military officers like Generals Charles Cabell and Curtis LeMay . The orders are likely to have originated with members of government elite .
 Operation Mongoose was the nexus of the military, mobsters, CIA operatives, and anti-Castro Cubans . Actual planning was tasked to men knowledgeable in the ways of state assassins, such as the CIA’s William Harvey .
 Organized-crime chieftains such as Carlos Marcello and his associates Santos Trafficante and Sam Giancana were contacted . The investigation was launched in 2009 .
 They already were involved with the CIA and provided personnel and logistics . They already provided personnel, logistics for the CIA .
 They realized the consequences if their role in Kennedy’s death should ever become known . They said they would not reveal their role if it ever became known .
 They insisted that elements within the government be involved . Therefore, they insisted that they be involved in the investigation . The government insisted that the investigation be carried out .
 A world-class assassin was recruited—perhaps Michael Victor Mertz, the shadowy Frenchman with both crime and intelligence connections, or even an unknown but competent shooter like John Christian . The assassin's name has not yet been released .
 J Edgar Hoover, a power unto himself with plenty of cause to hate the Kennedy brothers, had plenty of reason to hate them . The Kennedy brothers' assassination plot began to come together, and word must have reached the ears of Hoover .
 David Morales, Watergate burglar Frank Sturgis, and David Ferrie had connections to criminal circles as well as to U.S. intelligence and anti-Castro Cubans . Many were like the CIA’s David Morales .
 It was a military-style operation in that overall knowledge of the plot was kept on a strict need-to-know basis . The operation was carried out on a need to know basis .
 Many people on the lower end of the conspiracy truthfully could say they didn’t know exactly what happened . Many people in the conspiracy conspiracy know nothing about what happened.
 To distract public attention from the real conspirators, a scapegoat—or patsy —was needed . The real conspirator was needed to distract public . The scapegoat was needed, and it was necessary to distract attention from other conspirators .
 Oswald was the perfect patsy for the Dallas assassination . Oswald was a Soviet agent or a United States agent posing as a procommunist, he was a perfect paty .
 As an intelligence agent, he would have followed orders and easily could have been manipulated into incriminating himself as the assassin . He could have easily incriminated himself as an assassin, he said .
 Oswald's position as a spy would have prevented the Russians from proclaiming the truth of the assassination to their world, since they could hardly be expected to admit their knowledge of Oswald . Furthermore, his position as spy would not prevent the truth from being revealed to the world .
 Once the idea of conspiracy is acknowledged, questions of who fired a gun, from what location, and how many times become irrelevant . Questions of who shot a gun become irrelevant in this case .
 Much more important are the questions of who benefited from the assassination and who had the ability to cover up the truth, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It appears there may have been two serious slip-ups for the conspirators . It appears they may have slipped-ups in the process .
 More likely the assassination was to have been constructed so that it would appear that Kennedy was killed by one lucky shot from the Depository . More likely it was constructed to make the assassination appear as though it had been staged for a lucky shot .
 The conspirators, of course, would have been prepared to fire another volley if necessary . "The conspirators would have had to be prepared to shoot another volley," he says . "They would have to fire more volleys if necessary"
 Second, it is equally likely that their scapegoat, Oswald, was to have been killed by a conspirator during return fire by Kennedy’s security men . Third, the conspirator was also likely to be killed by Kennedy's security men. Second, the scapegoat was to
 Oswald managed to slip away from the Depository after being shot down . Oswald was hit by a hail of fire, but there was no return fire . Oswald escaped unharmed .
 Dallas police radio channel used for presidential motorcade security was blocked for more than eight minutes due to an open microphone . No one except the conspirators knew what was happening, according to the Dallas police .
 The true assassins simply strolled away, after dumping their rifles into nearby car trunks or passing them to confederates . They dumped them in nearby trunks, or passed them to a confederate .
 One weapon may have been hidden down a water drain pipe on the Grassy Knoll . A section of the pipe collapsed many years later, as a section of it collapsed .
 It had been cut open but not welded when it was replaced and the city claimed no knowledge of this activity .
 Oswald may well have been exactly where he said he was during the shooting . Oswald may have been in the downstairs lunchroom of the Depository .
 He may have briefly stepped up a short flight of stairs and peeped out the front door of the Depository . Altgens photo shows him briefly peeking out the door of a stairwell .
 Oswald left the Depository and made his way to his South Oak Cliff rooming house, where he retrieved his pistol . Oswald retrieved the pistol to defend himself . Oswald was shot in the head at the Texas school .
 Dallas police car stopped out front and beeped its horn twice, landlady says . Landlady: Within minutes of his arrival, he hurried from his room after a Dallas police officer stopped . Police car stopped outside his room, beeping his horn twice .
 Oswald was unseen en route to the Texas Theater . Tippit picked him up around the corner from his rooming house and drove him to the theater .
 The slaying of Tippit may have played some part in this scheme to have Oswald killed, perhaps to eliminate co-conspirator Tippits . The slaying may have been to anger Dallas police and cause itchy trigger fingers .
 The HSCA determined that one shot was fired point-blank into his head, a coup de grace . It was the first time a man was shot in the head by a gunman, a coroner ruled .
 Oswald was captured alive, creating a bad situation for the conspirators . Oswald was given every opportunity to flee through a rear exit of the Texas Theater, instead . Oswald, who was given a chance to flee the theater, was captured .
 Oswald could not be permitted to stand trial and possibly reveal his true connections . Oswald was not allowed to be on trial and could not stand trial . Oswald would not have been allowed to reveal his real connections .
 Jack Ruby received his orders to kill Oswald from organized crime leaders . Ruby was the mob’s “bag man” in Dallas and apparently handled funds for the local activities of the assassination conspirators . There were no alternatives for a mob directive .
 The key to understanding the Oswald slaying is not that Ruby somehow knew when Oswald was to be transported from the police station, but rather that the Oswald transfer was delayed until Ruby was in position . The Dallas Police Department, one of the nation's most corrupt at that time, was one of
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Ruby most likely entered the police basement down a back stairway with the assistance of one or more policemen . The committee's conclusion: Ruby entered the basement with the help of a policeman .
 A cover-up began immediately, leaving only his mother to question the official version of the assassination . Only his mother was able to speak out against the government .
 While this scenario can be disputed, it nevertheless represents the only narrative that conforms to all of the known facts . This scenario is disputed, but it nonetheless represents the truth .
 Lyndon B Johnson was sworn in as president within two hours of the assassination . Johnson was the first president to be sworn in in office .
 His first act as president was to violate the laws of his own state by ordering the removal of Kennedy’s body from Parkland Hospital over the objections of the Dallas County medical examiner who was required by law to conduct an inquest .
 By that evening, Johnson was exerting undue influence over the Dallas investigation both directly and through his aides . Johnson's aides say he was influencing the investigation .
 Johnson coerced a reluctant chief justice Earl Warren into heading a special presidential commission charged with finding Oswald alone guilty of the deed . Within two weeks, Johnson had coerced Warren to head a special commission .
 The creation of the Warren Commission effectively blocked several other assassination investigations in both Texas and Washington . The Warren Commission was created in order to prevent other investigations .
 The Warren Commission, composed of captains of both intelligence and corporate business, paid precious little attention to anything that did not tend to prove the “lone-nut assassin’s theory” Warren Commission .
 Both agencies, along with the Secret Service, have been officially chastised for concealing evidence from two government investigations . Both agencies have been accused of concealing information from the two government probes .
 Government investigators found a virtual smorgasbord of assassination evidence available in Dallas and New Orleans . The evidence includes evidence from Dallas, New Orleans and Dallas, Louisiana .
 By carefully selecting data that fit the official version of a lone gunman, they were able to present a believable— if untruthful — account of Kennedy’s death .
 A documented campaign of intimidation of witnesses began in Dallas . Meanwhile, a documented campaign against witnesses began .
 Some were simply told to keep quiet while others died under unusual circumstances . Some were told they would not be able to speak out . Others died in mysterious circumstances .
 Many people in Dallas have claimed that it was FBI agents who warmed them not to talk about the assassination . FBI agents have told people not to discuss the assassination of Dallas Mayor Lee McChown .
 There is now abundant evidence that Hoover’s FBI destroyed critical evidence in this case, suppressed other evidence, and intimidated witnesses . Hoover's FBI destroyed key evidence in the case, suppression other evidence and intimidation .
 There was never a real cover-up of the assassination, only official pronouncements for the major mass media . There was lots of red herrings for diligent investigators, investigators say .
 As long as the U.S. government refuses to seek and reveal the truth of what happened on November 22, 1963, it will be up to individual Americans to cull through the mounds of Kennedy assassination material .
 Kennedy was a danger to the status quo and had to be eliminated, Kennedy says . Powerful men in leadership positions within the major corporate-military-defense-intelligence communities and the bankers who fund them, along with associated organized-crime bosses, reached a consensus .
 Mafia-Cuban-CIA pawns used to kill the chief of the CIA . Their faithful agents manipulated Mafia, Cubans, CIA pawns to kill chief . The chief was killed by the CIA, CIA and Mafia .
 President Kennedy was killed in a military-style ambush orchestrated by elements within the U.S. government that included the military with the active assistance of organized crime . Organized crime was involved in the assassination .
 The information presented within this book substantiates the fact that in 1963 U.S. government policies were changed through an act of violence . In 1963, the United States government policies in the U.K. were changed by a violent act .
 Even today there is still pressure from the top of the U.S. power structure to keep the lid on this sordid affair . Even today, the pressure is still being put on by the American power structure .
 Many officials who continue to obscure the Kennedy case played no part in the assassination conspiracy . The Kennedy case remains unsolved, but many of the Kennedy family members are innocent .
 They simply do not want to alert the American public to the corruption found in the interconnections between government, big business, the military, intelligence, and the mob, they say . They simply want to warn the public of the corruption .
 His presidency always will be remembered, not for what he did, but for what might have done . His presidency will always be remembered for what else he might do, not what he might have achieved .
 President Kennedy may have lived in a different kind of America if he had lived . But it may be worth considering what kind of the America we might have today if President Kennedy had lived.
 Imagine the U.S. if there had been no divisive Vietnam War, with its attendant demonstrations, riots, deaths, and loss of faith in government . Imagine the United States if there were no Vietnam War. Imagine the Vietnam War .
 Détente with communist Russia and China might have come years earlier, saving hundreds of millions of wasted defense dollars . The money could have been put to use caring for the needy and cleaning up the environment .
 Picture a nation where no organized-crime syndicate gained control over such divergent areas of national life as drugs, gambling, labor unions, politicians, and even toxic waste disposal . Picture no organized crime syndicate gaining control over areas of life such as drugs and gambling .
 Today there seems to be a movement to focus attention on the ‘morality’ of his private life .
 History will eventually record that Kennedy truly believed he had the best interests of his nation at heart . But history will record that he truly believed in the nation's best interests at heart.
 He wanted to lead America forward into a peaceful and prosperous future . President Obama said he wanted to 'lead America forward' in a peaceful future .
 Kennedy was in the mold of Mikhail Gorbachev, complete with his own American brand of glasnost, or openness with the public . Kennedy was an open-minded American, not a Soviet leader .
 America, the backstage rulers of America, was not ready for such innovation . America—at least the backstage ruler of America—was not ready .
 The emperor has no clothes on, but no one of any prominence wants to be the first to say so . American business and political emperors wear bloodstained clothing, but not the first .
 Members of Kennedy’s inner circle also came to understand what had really happened . Kennedy's inner circle came to terms with what was really going on .
 The proof had been taken up and they realized the extent of the power arrayed against them . The proof was taken up, and the proof had already been taken .
 Some kept their peace, some soon retired from government, and others left the country . Some kept peace, others retired, and some left country . Others left country.
 No one was closer to President Kennedy and his work than his secretary Evelyn Lincoln . She was one of his closest aides to him during his presidency .
 She was at his elbow constantly, yet no one in America can recall seeing a nationwide interview with her . No one remembers seeing her on television .
 Robert Kennedy also came to understand the tremendous power behind the events in Dallas . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1968 .
 The truth of John Kennedy’s death could come only after Robert Kennedy gained control over the FBI, CIA, Secret Service, and the Pentagon, he says . He obviously had come to realize that John Kennedy's death could only come after he gained control of the FBI and CIA .
 The younger Kennedy was gunned down the night he received the 1968 California Democratic nomination for president, which most probably would have clinched his national nomination . Surely no one believes it was sheer coincidence that the younger Kennedy died that night .
 While it may be too late for justice for John F Kennedy, it is never too late to the truth for the truth .
 Camelot was killed from within, by men whose fear and ambition overpowered their faith in and loyalty to the U.S. Constitution and the people it was designed to protect .
 After assimilating the information in this book, the thoughtful reader can now perceive the truth of the Kennedy assassination, author says .
 William Shakespeare’s immortal Julius Caesar, where Roman leaders —”all honorable men”—plotted to kill Caesar out of fear that they were losing total power in their country . An apt precedent may be found in William Shakespeare's immortal Caesar, who was assassinated by Julius
 Until the public forces politicians, academics, and the corporate mass media to confront the reality of Kennedy’s death and the power behind it, the wars, near-wars, the wasteful military buildup, foreign adventurism, death, squandered millions, trampled human
 The path to a confrontation with the evil that has gained a hold on America lies within each individual citizen, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In a work such as this, extensive footnoting within the text can often impede the flow of ideas, reducing comprehension . Footnoting in a work like this can also be difficult to read .
 Too often official government reports do not accurately reflect the actual evidence or Statements of witnesses . Too often government reports don't accurately reflect actual evidence, witness statements .
 Major statements in this work or ones that contradict the official version of the assassination are attributed in this section . Major statements are attributed to those that contradict official statements .
 Usually only one reference is given, though multiple sources may be found in most instances . Usually only references are given, but multiple sources are found .
 Accounts of witnesses sometimes represent a synthesis of their words from more than one source . Accounts of witness accounts sometimes represent synthesis of words from multiple sources .
 It should be pointed out that just because a statement is attributed to some source does not make that statement true . Just because a source quotes a statement doesn't make it true .
 People's accounts can result from mistakes as well as lies due to fear and intimidation . People’s accounts can be made up of mistakes and lies, according to experts .
 WC Report refers to the Warren Commission Report, while its attendant hearings and exhibits are referred to by volume and page . For example, XXII.644.644 refers to a volume or page .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations volumes will appear as HSCA VIII.64.64 . Similarly, the House Select Committees on Assassination volumes will also appear .
 All assassination works must rely heavily on official government reports and publications, such reports can often be called into question .
 The burden of separating fact from fiction from fiction must unfortunately fall on the reader . Therefore, the burden of separation from fact is the reader, says author .
 This sad fact necessitates access to the broadest amount of information, often going far beyond official sources . The sad fact is that access to information is often limited to official sources, and it often goes beyond .
 Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of the U.S. House of Representatives . Findings in the Assassination of President John F Kennedy in Dallas, Tex., November 22, 1963, 38. 38.
 Her husband, Buck, loaned his station wagon for press use in the motorcade . Buck had loaned the station wagon to the press .
 Bob Hollingsworth, “Rapid Bang of Gun Changes History’s Course,” Dallas Times Herald, Nov. 1963 . The Dallas massacre took place in 1963 in Dallas .
 Mrs. H.73—74.73: "Mrs. 73" Mrs. 73: "We are happy to have a happy ending," says Mrs. 74: "I am happy to be here"
 Richard B Trask, Pictures of the Pain: Photography and the Assassination of President Kennedy, Danvers, Mass., Yeoman Press, 1994, 71. Trask: "Pictures of the pain" Trask was the photographer who took photographs of the assassination of Kennedy .
 Earl Golz, “JFK Film May Reveal Two Gunmen,” Dallas Morning News, Nov. 1978. Earl GolZ, ‘JFK film may Reveal two Gunmen.’
 Mary E Woodward, “Witness from the News Describes Assassination,” Dallas Morning News, Nov. 1963 . Woodward: "Witnesses from the news Describe Assassination"
 The Flight of CE-399: Evidence of Conspiracy, is published by Cutler Designs, 1970s .
 Mark Lane and Emile de Antonio’s film of assassination witnesses, Rush to Judgment, 1966. Mark Lane. Emile De Antonio . Mark Lane . Emile . de Antonio's film of the assassination witnesses .
 V.338—339; “Time Gives Back Identity,” Dallas Times Herald, Nov., 1971. VI.338-339 . “We are not going to be able to talk to each other again. We are not here to talk about this. We will
 Paul Mandel, “End of Nagging Rumors: The Six Critical Seconds,” Life, Life, December 6, 1963 . Mandel’s book ends with “The End of Nagging Rumors”
 Cheryl McKinnon, “My Last Look at Mr President,” San Diego Star News, Nov. 1983 . McKinnon: "My last look at Mr. President" McKinnon .
 Interview with Mark Lane, April 1978; “The Assassination of President John F Kennedy—How the CIA Set Up Oswald,” Hustler, October 1978, 50, 50 .
 Bernard Fensterwald with Michael Ewing, Coincidence or Conspiracy ?, 231. Bernard Fensterswald, with Michael . Ewing . Coincidences or Conspiracy? ?? ? ? ?? Bernard Fenstwald . Bernard Fenstrandwald . with Michael. Ewing
 Myrna Blyth and Jane Farrell, “Marina Oswald—TwentyFive Years Later,” Ladies’ Home Journal, November 1988 .
 Judyth Vary Baker, Me & Lee: How I Came to Know, Love and Lose Lee Harvey Oswald, was published in 2010, 317. Baker's book, "Me & Lee," is published by Judy Vary . Baker: "Me and Lee" is a memoir of
 John Armstrong, Harvey & Lee: How the CIA Framed Oswald, Arlington, Texas, 2003, Quasar Ltd., 2003, 916. John Armstrong: How Oswald was framed for Oswald .
 Meyer Lansky: Mogul of the Mob, 184. Dennis Eisenberg, Uri Dan, and Eli Landau, author of the book, are interviewed by Uri Dan and Meyer Landau . The book, "Mansky," is published by Eli and Dennis Landau.
 Earl Golz, “Oswald Camera Disappeared During FBI Investigation,” Dallas Morning News, June 15, 1978 . Oswald Camera disappeared during an FBI investigation .
 Earl Golz, “Oswald Pictures Released by FBI,” Dallas Morning News, Aug. 1978 . Oswald pictures were released by the FBI .
 Mark Lane, “CIA Conspired to Kill Kennedy,” LA Free Press, Special Report Number One, 1978, 5.5. Mark Lane .
 Penn Jones Jr., Jr., The Continuing Inquiry, Feb., 1977; “Alleged Oswald Letter Checked for Its Authenticity by FBI Agents,” Dallas Morning News, Feb. 1977 .
 Jeanne DeMohrenschildt was a member of the Council of Statesmen in the 1970s and 1980s . She died in 1979 at the age of 65 .
 Robert Morrow, Betrayal: A Reconstruction of Certain Clandestine Events from the Bay of Pigs to the Assassination of John F Kennedy, Chicago, Henry Regnery Co. Co., 1976. Robert Morrow . Robert Morrow: A reconstruction of certain Clandestine events .
 Pat Watters and Stephen Gillers, eds. eds., Investigating the FBI, Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday & Company, 1973, 14 .
 Earl Golz, “Hoover’s Vendetta Targeted Dallas Police, Memos Reveal,” Dallas Morning News, Dec., 1980. Earl GolZ, ‘Hoovers’ Vendetta targeted Dallas police .
 Hoover’s retention as FBI director was assured by Executive Order 11154 . Powers, 396, was the FBI director of the Department of Investigation .
 Warren Commission transcripts: Meeting of Jan., 1964; meeting of Jan. 1964 . Warren Commission Transcripts: "Warren Commission transcripts" Warren Commission transcripts: Meetings of January, 1964, Jan. 31, 1964 .
 James Hepburn, Farewell America, Vaduz, Lie-tenstein, Frontier Publishing Company, 1968, 71. Hepburn died in 1968 at the age of 71 . Hepburn is best known for his role in the film "Farewell America"
 David E Scheim, Contract on America, published by Argyle Press, 1983, 201. Scheim: Contract on the America is contract on America . Scheim's book, Contract On America, was published in 1983 .
 J Evetts Haley, A Texan Looks at Lyndon: A Study of Illegitimate Power, Canyon, Texas, Palo Duro Press, 1964, 14 . Haley, a Texan looks at Lyndon Lyndon Lyndon Johnson, 1964 .
 Judge Refuses to Grant Request to Exhume JFK, Houston Chronicle, July 8, 1992 .
 Kent Biffle, “Reporter Recalls the Day Camelot Died in Dallas,” Dallas Morning News, April 5, 1981 .
 In Retrospect of the John F Kennedy Assassination, Asahi Broadcasting Network, Japan, Aug. 2004. In Retrospective of the JFK Assassination . Asahi .
 James H Fetzer, Murder in Dealey Plaza, Chicago, published in 2000, 41. Fetzer was 41 when he was murdered . Fetzer's book, "Dealey Plaza," is published by Catfeet Press, 2000.
 Roger Craig, When They Kill a President, unpublished manuscript, 1971, 7; XIX.524.524 . Craig: "When They Kill A President" Craig's book was published in 1971, and he has since published numerous editions .
 Notes of interview by Dallas Morning News reporter Earl Golz, spring 1979 . Interview was conducted by Dallas-area reporter and later by Dallas paper's Earl Grazier .
 Oswald was arrested in Dallas, Texas, in March 1979 . Oswald was killed in September of that year . Oswald’s wife, Lee Oswald, was shot in the head with a rifle .
 Edward Oxford, “Destiny in Dallas,” American History Illustrated, November 1988, 24. Edward Oxford . Edward Oxford: ‘Destiny’ in Dallas was ‘destination in Dallas’
 Ford says he edited report on JFK’s death for ‘Clarity’ for “Clarity,” Associated Press, July 3, 1997 . Mike Feinsilber, “Ford Says He Edited Report on JFK's Death for "Clarity," Associated
 Jeanne King, “Kennedy Autopsy Photos Doctored, Technicians Say,” Reuters, May 29, 1992, .
 Sherry P Fiester, Enemy of the Truth: Myth, Forensics, and the Kennedy Assassination, Southlake, TX, JFK Lancer Publications, 2012, 166. Sherry Fiesters: The Kennedy assassination is a myth that has been debunked .
 Jack Harrison Pollack, Earl Warren: The Judge Who Changed America, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1979, 6.6. Pollack: Earl Warren was the judge who "changed America"
 Tad Szulc, “The Warren Commission in Its Own Words,” New Republic, Sept. 1975, published in the New Republic .
 Holland’s comment to Lane is from Rush to Judgment documentary . Thompson, Six Seconds, rev. ed., is from Six Seconds . Holland: Lane's comments to Lane are from Rush To Judgment documentary.
 Fred T Newcomb and Perry Adams, Murder from Within: Lyndon Johnson’s Plot Against President Kennedy, Bloomington, IN, Author-House, 2011, 246. Lyndon Johnson plotted to kill President Kennedy .
 Eric Norden interview, Playboy, October 1967, 74. Garrison Garrison, 11, was 11 when he was 43 years old . Garrison was 11 years old at the time of his death . Garrison died at the age of 11 . Garrison: "I don't want Garrison to be a
 Who's Who in the South and Southwest, 8th ed., Chicago, Chicago, Marquis—Who’s Who, 1963, 755. Marquis: Marquis’ Who, who was a member of the Marquis-Who's Who, in 1963, was
 Garrison letter to John Judge, Feb., 1986; Garrison reiterated this denial to author in fall 1989 . Garrison: "I am not a believer in conspiracy theories" Garrison denied this to author John Judge in 1986 letter .
 Jerry Policoff and William Scott Malone, “A Great Show, A Lousy Investigation,” New Times, Sept. 1978, 6.6. The investigation was a "great show, a lousy investigation"