 Cuban revolution and international relations of Cuba under Fidel Castro, with Russia, China and United States. Cuba's international relations under Castro . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. under Castro. Cuba . Cuba . under Castro, Cuba .
 Fidel Castro is the Cuban leader of the Cuban revolution and rule of Fidel Castro in Cuba . Fidel Castro's rule of Cuba has been ruled by the Cuban government since the 1960s . The Cuban revolution was the first of its kind .
 A crowd carrying banners opposes landing of United States ambassador in Cuba . Crowd carries banners opposing landing of U.S. ambassador in Cuban exile .
 Cuban Foreign Minister walks out of a meeting when asked about their military policies . Cuban foreign minister walked out of the meeting after being asked about military policy .
 Castro addresses crowd about international relation with Russia and China . Castro: "We have a very different relationship with Russia, China" Castro says he will continue to work with the Chinese government . Castro has been in talks with Russia's President Vladimir Putin .
 Communist and anti-communist struggles centered on Cuba, circa 1960 . Cuba date: 1963 . Cuba .
 Crowds gathered with signage against Fidel Castro and in support of Romulo Betancourt . Crowds also gathered to protest against the Castro regime's policies .
 Scenes of protest and rioting in a Latin American or South American city . Scenes of protests and riots in Latin American cities .
 Fidel Castro's support of the Communist party in Peru is shown in newspaper La Prensa . Fidel Castro supported the Communist Party in the country .
 An inside headline from the same paper reads, ""La Embajada de Cuba Distribuye Propaganda Subversica en el Peru"" indicating that an Ambassador from Cuba distributed anti-government, subversive propaganda en Peru .
 What follows are a series of images drawing parallels between Castro and other fascist historical leaders . The images show Castro's similarities to other fascist leaders .
 A scene with Hitler speaking and gesticulating wildly and forcefully, followed by a scene with Castro doing the same . A scene of Castro and Hitler speaking . Hitler speaking with Castro .
 Prisoners in a German Nazi concentration camp were thin, weary, and huddled near a barb wire perimeter fence circa early 1945 .
 Nikita Khrushchev on a review stand waving his hat to Soviet Army forces marching below him carrying guns with bayonets fixed . The photo was taken at the time of Khrushchchev's birthday .
 A group of Chinese workers digging ditches, including men and women Chinese workers . Chinese workers dig ditches in a ditch in China's capital .
 Views of expert from various nations about the Cuban revolution, rule and policies of Fidel Castro in Cuba . Latin America Date: 1963 Duration: 2 min 55 sec .
 Fidel Castro comes to power overthrowing Dictator Fulgencio Batista on January 01, 1959 . Groups of people cheer after Fidel Castro overthrowing Batista .
 A Venezuelan expert talks about Castro after the success of the revolution . Castro was the leader of the Cuban revolution in 1959 .
 Cuban communist leader and a judge sent to exile by Batista return to Cuba . Judge and communist leader was sent back to Cuba in exile by the Batista .
 Cuban farmers, economic crises, refugees and civilians after three years of rule of Fidel Castro in Cuba . Cuba Date: 1963 Duration: 6 min 42 sec .
 Unskilled Cuban farmers in agricultural field after three years of rule of Fidel Castro . Unskilled farmers in agriculture field after Castro's rule of three years .
 OAS meeting discussed arms discovered in Venezuela indicating an armed plot by Cuba . The OAS condemns Cuban aggression . Cuba date: 1963 .
 Organization of American States building in Washington D.C. building . Organization building is located in Washington DC .
 These were proven to be Cuban by the manufacturers' identification marks . They were proven by the manufacturer's identification marks on the device .
 The young man who found the weapons is shown showing the police where they were . He was shown showing police where the weapons were found .