 IPFW Panel: “CIA and the Cold War” Cody Fuelling Title: ‘To the Brink: Turkish and Cuban Missiles during the Height of the Cold war” Faculty Advisor: Dr. Dr. Michael J. Obeidallah . Dr.
 Cody Fuelling is in his third year at IPFW with majors in history and secondary education . He is pursuing an Honors Certificate and Certificate in International Studies . Cody is currently studying at the IPFW .
 He also sits as a student representative on the COAS Student Affairs Committee . He is a member of the Student Assembly of the CoAS .
 The 13 days of the crisis in October 1962 showed cooperation between capitalists and communists could occur in the interests of the preservation of their respective systems and states . The crisis took place during the latter half of October, 1962 . The American and Soviet heads of state were placating their intentions .
 The progress of the situation was publicized to the nations of both superpowers . But the diffusion of the Soviet-American tensions around Cuban shores was not won precisely the way public media announced it .
 Negotiations involving nuclear missiles stationed by NATO in Turkey had been key to the rise of the crisis . They were an important bargaining chip in the diplomatic course elected by American President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev .
 This presentation will take a closer look at the missiles placed in Turkey and at their roles in both igniting and diffusing the situation . The presentation will look at how the missiles were used to ignite the conflict in Turkey .
 Soviet Union no longer needed to fear nuclear missiles coming from Turkey . The Soviet Union had no need to fear the threat of nuclear missiles from Turkey, it said .
 The United States no longer needed to fear nuclear missiles coming from Cuba . Likewise, the U.S. did not need to fear the threat of nuclear missiles from Cuba, the author says . The U.K. no longer needs to fear a nuclear missile from Cuba.
 The situation took relations between the Soviet and American heads of state to a high . The situation fostered mutual understanding between the two leaders . Both states had been willing to grant concessions in favor of the other .
 It is impossible to speculate what would have happened had the two heads of state remained in office . The two leaders of the two countries were assassinated in 1998 .
 Perhaps more understandings between the U.S. and Soviet Union would have transpired . Perhaps not. perhaps not. Perhaps more understandingings between Russia and the United States .
 Such speculations cannot rewrite history, and after the crisis in Cuba, there would be another quarter of a century until the Cold War would end, and tensions between the American and Russian nations have yet to fully diffuse .
 October 1962 correspondences between Nikita Khrushchev and John F Kennedy were primarily used, as was former Attorney General Robert F Kennedy’s memoir of the events .
 Fifty years after the crisis, the spotlight of historical analysis again shone on the Kennedy administration . Mark White, Jeffrey D Sachs, and Barton J Bernstein provide new insight on the situation .