 Presidential special counsel Theodore C Sorensen has similarly extolled the virtues of Kennedy's performance . The former president's attorney general has said Kennedy should have been a better actor .
 John Kennedy's role in the events of October 1962 can and has been portrayed in such a favorable light is hardly surprising . John Kennedy was assassinated in October 1962, but his role in events was hardly surprising, he says .
 The cost of failing to resolve the Missile Crisis would have been staggering . The stature of any leader who helped effect an escape from such a grave situation would inevitably assume heroic proportions .
 The U.S. response to the Soviet deployment of offensive missiles in Cuba was a collaborative effort involving many officials in the upper echelons of the administration .
 It is important to differentiate, if a distinction can be made, between the contribution of John Kennedy himself and that made by his leading advisers . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in Washington, DC .
 Kennedy's initial reaction to the Soviet deployment in Cuba on 16 October 1962 helps frame answers to those questions . Kennedy's reaction to Soviet deployment on Cuba in October 1962 helped frame answers for questions .
 It was National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy who first informed Kennedy that the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's initial reaction to the news was that he had been informed by Bundy .
 Kennedy's initial concern was that the intelligence information upon which that judgement had been based was sound was sound . Kennedy was concerned that the information had been accurate . Kennedy: "I'm not sure if the intelligence was accurate"
 He then convoke a special meeting for 11.45 later that morning, and apprized Bundy of the personnel he wished to attend . Bundy then decided to convoke the meeting, which will take place in Bundy's absence . Bundy was the only person to attend the meeting .
 President Obama devoted most of the morning to matters unrelated to the impending crisis over Cuba . The White House has been tight-lipped about the crisis .
 He greeted the astronaut Walter Schirra, Jr., Jr., and his wife, and their children, and walked out with them on to the White House lawn .
 Storm-afflicted parts of Oregon are entitled to disaster assistance, says governor . Storm-affected parts of the state will be eligible for disaster assistance . The governor also announced relief funds for storm victims .
 Kennedy called his brother Robert and John J McCloy to inform them of the current situation in Cuba . Kennedy did, though, take time to call his brother and brother Robert to discuss the situation .
 McCloy, a Republican with vast governmental experience, urged the President to do whatever was required to remove missiles in Cuba . McCloy was an adviser to Kennedy, who urged him to remove the missiles even if that involved an American invasion or air strike .
 For a half hour before the meeting with his advisers, Kennedy met with Charles E Bohlen, whom he had recently appointed ambassador to France . Bohlen was Kennedy's new ambassador to the country .
 Bohlen attended the first ExComm meeting on Cuba later that morning, and departed the next day for France . Bohlen went on to attend a meeting on the island of Cuba .
 At approximately 11.45 that morning JFK met with his leading advisers in the Cabinet Room to discuss the Cuban situation . JFK was the president of the United States at the time .
 Kennedy's response to news of Soviet missiles in Cuba was more rash than restrained . Kennedy was more impulsively hawkish than instinctively prudent . Kennedy had a reputation for coolness and rationality, but his reaction to the news was rash .
 It was left to his advisers to explore safer means of defusing the crisis . It is left to be left to explore alternative means of dealing with crisis .
 A few important decisions and judgements were made in Washington on the opening day of the Missile Crisis . The U.S. was in the midst of the crisis in the early 1960s .
 By the evening, they were correctly adjudged to be the SS-4 type of MRBMs, which had a longer range . They were later found to be more likely to be SS-3 type of missiles, which have a range .
 President agreed to increase the number of U-2 reconnaissance aircraft flights to garner all the necessary information on the missile sites .
 U.S. response to Soviet missiles in Cuba would be less clear-cut . Most other decisions, though, would prove to be more difficult .
 Rusk has described Kennedy as being 'as cool as a block of ice' throughout the Missile Crisis . Rusk described Kennedy's disposition of the President on 16 October as 'cool'
 It seems implausible to think that anyone, including Kennedy, would have responded with this sort of unflappable calm to such dire news .
 Roswell Gilpatric was probably more accurate when he recalled that at the outset Kennedy was 'very clipped' and 'very tense' Kennedy .
 "I don't recall a time when I saw him more preoccupied and less given to any light touch at all," says Mark Hughes . "He was preoccupied," says Hughes .
 They had promised on various occasions throughout the fall not to deploy offensive, ground-to-ground missiles in Cuba . Those pledges had now been clearly revealed as acts of mendacity .
 Kennedy probably felt a sense of betrayal, perhaps even duped by the Soviet leadership . Kennedy felt betrayed by the Soviets, says historian John Avlon . Avlon: Kennedy felt betrayal, and probably felt betrayal .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has suggested that this was in fact the case . Taylor has suggested this was not the case.
 On 16 October Kennedy was, Taylor recalled, simultaneously composed and angry . On that day, he said, Kennedy was simultaneously composed, angry .
 Jacobsen treated such luminaries as Winston Churchill, Marlene Dietrich, and Tennessee Williams . Jacobsen was known as 'Dr Feelgood'
 From spring 1961 onward, Kennedy started to use Jacobsen's services at least once and sometimes as frequently as three or four times each week . Kennedy's use of Jacobsen began in spring 1961 .
 Jacobsen treated the President by injecting him with potent concentrations of amphetamines and steroids . The injections were designed to help him deal with stress and to alleviate his back pains .
 Kennedy's drug-taking at the start of the Missile Crisis may have left him more inclined to take forceful action in dealing with the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 If Kennedy did feel angry (and perhaps simultaneously confident and assertive) because of the drugs, this would help explain the initial policies he advocated at the outset . Kennedy in the First Two ExComm Meetings .
 Kennedy insisted that the U.S. had to respond militarily to the Soviet deployment in Cuba . Kennedy's comments were striking in his first two ExComm meetings in October .
 Kennedy made his first analysis of the viable U.S. policy options about half way through the first meeting, after Vice President Lyndon B Johnson had spoken forcefully in favor of military action .
 Kennedy stated that an air strike limited to only missile sites was one of the alternatives . Kennedy said the first was a strike limited only to only the missile sites .
 The second strike was aimed at airfields, SAM sites, and the like . The second was a 'broader' strike aimed at not only those sites but also airfields .
 The third option involved carrying out both of the first two alternatives in conjunction with a blockade . The third involved carrying on both the first and the third .
 Kennedy: The U.S. should brief its allies before taking action over Cuba . The fourth issue, Kennedy explained, was the extent to which the United States should brief allies before action . Kennedy: "The United States needs to brief allies"
 Robert Kennedy then interjected that there was also a fifth option, namely invasion . Robert Kennedy said invasion was also possible, but was not the only option .
 A little later in the first meeting, the President once again listed the feasible alternatives . The meeting was adjourned to discuss a possible solution to the problem .
 Kennedy: 'We're certainly going to do number one; we're going to take out these, uh, missiles. We'll take out number one,' he said .
 In the course of that discusión Kennedy again listed the three viable alternatives as being an air strike limited to the missile sites, a more general strike, and invasion . Kennedy listed the options as being limited to missile sites or a general strike .
 The general air strike 34 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES would be the preferred alternative . But there should be sufficient flexibility in the military preparation to permit a change to the limited strike option if deemed necessary .
 Kennedy did note that the general strike was a less satisfactory alternative than the limited strike in the sense that it carried with it a greater risk of evolving into a dangerous, more generalized military conflict .
 Kennedy's predilection still seemed to be for the general strike . Despite that acknowledgement, Kennedy seemed to still seem to be in favor of the strike .
 Kennedy asked about the chances of success for an air strike on the missiles in Cuba, Kennedy said . Kennedy asked if the chances were successful for a Cuban air strike .
 Kennedy explored the possibility of a series of continuous air attacks . When Taylor replied that one such strike would never be entirely successful, Kennedy proceeded to explore this possibility .
 Later on in that meeting he also asked his advisers to ascertain how long it would take to organize a limited air strike on the missiles .
 The initial determination of Kennedy to undertake military action was also apparent from the conversation he had with his United Nations Ambassador Adlai E Stevenson outside the ExComm meetings .
 Kennedy showed Stevenson the photographic evidence of his friendship with him at a luncheon with him . Stevenson: "It was a very special moment for the president"
 JFK on Day 1 of the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 35 made no impact on Kennedy's thinking . Stevenson's counsel, however, did not make any impact .
 Kennedy endorsed military action as the most efficacious means of dealing with missiles in Cuba . Kennedy continued in the evening session of ExComm to endorse military action .
 Kennedy showed no interest on 16 October in imposing a blockade around the island to stop further deliveries of missiles by the Soviet Union . In line with his preference for a military response, Kennedy also showed interest in avoiding an immediate military confrontation .
 General Taylor was the first person in the opening ExComm meeting to recommend a blockade, but only as an adjunct to a general air strike against Cuba . General Taylor recommended a blockade of Cuba as a result of an air strike on Cuba .
 It was Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara who in the second meeting first prescribed the blockade strategy as a policy alternative independent of any direct military action .
 Kennedy never advocated the blockade as an independent course of action on the 16th . Kennedy, on the other hand, never advocated for the blockade . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1968 .
 He referred to it as a policy alternative on only one occasion when, during the first meeting, he said it could be a supplement to both the limited and general air strike .
 Kennedy did not mention the blockade again, not even in this context as an appendage to forcible military action . Kennedy enumerated United States policy options later on in that meeting and in the one later that day .
 Kennedy was equally disinterested in engaging in a diplomatic trade . Kennedy arranged removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba in exchange for withdrawal of American missiles in Turkey . Kennedy was as equally interested in diplomatic trade, arranging removal of Cuban missiles .
 As with all his advisers on the 16th, he did not even broach this possibility . "As with all of his advisers, there was no discussion of this possibility," he said .
 Kennedy did raise the subject of missiles in Turkey in the second meeting, but not in the context of a possible diplomatic trade . Kennedy raised the issue in the first meeting with the Turkish president .
 Kennedy: 'It's just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBMs in Turkey' Kennedy speculated as to what conceivable reason lay behind the Soviet decision to deploy missiles in Cuba .
 The emplacement of American missiles in Turkey was analogous to the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba . As Kennedy himself had unwittingly pointed out, the emplacements were analogous to that of the Soviet missile installation in Cuba.
 The United States had less justification because the Soviet Union had made no systematic effort to undermine the Turkish government such as the attempt made by the U.S. to emasculate Castro in 1960-62 .
 The notion of trading missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba occurred to neither Kennedy nor his advisers on the 16th . Kennedy and his advisers were not aware of the deal .
 His first preference seemed to be for the general strike, his second the limited strike, with invasion representing his third choice . Although he was uncertain as to which course he should pursue, he said: "His first preference was for the General strike"
 Kennedy regarded non-military responses to the Soviet deployment in Cuba as falling outside the gamut of feasible policy options . Kennedy regarded a blockade or a diplomatic solution as falling out of feasible options .
 "In his judgement, they did not merit consideration, not even as fourth or fifth alternatives," he said . In his judgement he did not consider them as viable alternatives .
 Kennedy's policy suggestions didn't seem to be based on his evaluation of the motives behind the Soviet decision to deploy missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's assessment of the military threat posed by the missiles to the U.S. was also lacking, he says .
 Any sagacious response to the Soviet deployment in Cuba had to be based on an understanding of why Khrushchev had taken this risk .
 Khrushchev's decision to furnish Cuba with missiles was a defensive move, motivated by a genuine belief that failure to do so would result in the overthrow of Fidel Castro's government . Or, alternatively, whether the decision to deploy derived from an aggressive desire to actually attack the USA or to
 In this case, a more restrained and less risky response from Kennedy would have been in order . Kennedy should have been more restrained in his response .
 Kennedy reached the conclusion on the 16th that the U.S. must respond militarily without making any clear judgement on the issue of Khrushchev's motivation . Any sensible response to the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba had to be shaped by an assessment of the goals behind Khrush
 JFK stated that Moscow would use the threat of the missiles in Cuba to pressurize the Western position in Berlin . At the second meeting Kennedy stated that . Moscow would JFK state that Moscow .
 Kennedy's overall attitude toward the issue of Soviet motivation was one of bewilderment . Kennedy was bewildered by Soviet motivation . Kennedy's view of the situation was that of bewildering .
 He did not understand why the Soviets had installed missiles in Cuba, especially in view of what he perceived to be the cautious, temperate attitude adopted by Moscow .
 It was remarkable that Kennedy could have been so utterly clueless as to Soviet motivations . Yet he was also convinced of the need for an American air strike on or invasion of Cuba .
 Kennedy's advocacy of a military response did not relate to any clear view of Moscow's motivations, it also did not correspond to his perception of the threat posed militarily by the missiles in Cuba . Not only did Kennedy's views relate to his view of Russia's motivations but also to his
 It was possible to take the position that the missiles were, militarily speaking, irrelevant because the Soviet Union was, prior to the deployment in Cuba, already capable of launching a nuclear attack on the USA with ICBMs .
 McNamara argued that the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba was militarily significant . On the other hand, others, such as Maxwell Taylor and the rest of the JCS, disagreed .
 Kennedy's own position was that the missiles in Cuba were significant in the sense that they could be used as an implicit threat to soften up America on the question of Berlin . Kennedy's position at this point in the second meeting was that .
 Kennedy was aware that Khrushchev knew that Washington could and probably would respond in kind by attacking Soviet territory . The U.S. nuclear arsenal was far more extensive than the Soviet Union's . This presumably was because Kennedy knew Washington could respond to any attack .
 Kennedy unequivocally advocated a risky, military course of action on the 16th, even though he didn't feel certain the missiles significantly altered the strategic balance of power between the superpowers . Kennedy did not believe Khrushchev would use them, and he did not think he would use it .
 Kennedy supported the use of military force against Cuba without vigorously exploring the possible consequences of such action . Curiously, Kennedy also supported the military action without vigorously examining the possible risks of it .
 One obvious problem with either a strike upon or an invasion of Cuba was that it would inevitably compel Khrushchev to consider some sort of retaliation to maintain his credibility . Then there would be pressure on the Kennedy administration to respond again to the same reason .
 There was a grave danger that an American military response to the missiles in Cuba would spiral into a generalized military conflict between the superpowers . The U.S. military response would turn into a general military conflict, the author says .
 Kennedy did argue that the chances of the Missile Crisis escalating into a broader military conflict were greater with a general U.S. air strike than with a limited strike upon Cuba . Kennedy did at one point in the second meeting argue that a general United States air strike would be better than a
 JFK demonstrated concern over the possible consequences of U.S. military action against Cuba was negligible . Apart from that, however, the concern JFK demonstrated was negligible.
 Kennedy did not believe the missiles in Cuba changed the strategic balance of power between the superpowers . Yet at the same time he was utterly convinced of the need for a military response to the Soviet challenge in Cuba .
 Speculation on this issue is unavoidable because the President himself did not articulate the reasoning behind his arguments . Speculation has been unavoidable because of the President's position .
 Kennedy's eagerness for a military response flowed from the inveterate impulse he felt always to promote an image of toughness, decisiveness, resolution, and action, especially from the standpoint of domestic policies . Perhaps the most plausible answer, though, is that Kennedy wanted to promote
 Kennedy may well have considered his credibility with the American people dependent upon his upholding that pledge in a swift and decisive manner . Kennedy had stated in September that he would not tolerate the deployment of offensive missiles .
 JFK did indeed refer on the opening day of the Missile Crisis to the public position he had adopted on Cuba in September . JFK on day 1 of the Cuban Missile Crisis: 'He did indeed JFK ON DAY 1 OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS'
 It is true that his concern with image, credibility, and domestic policies was one Kennedy did not openly express in the first two ExComm meetings, but that perhaps was precisely because this consideration was so instinctive and deep-rooted with him .
 A secondary factor behind Kennedy's initial preference was the extensive contingency planning for military action against Cuba that had taken place in the weeks and months immediately preceding the Missile Crisis .
 Kennedy may have felt that a military response was natural and logical given the fact that his administration had been seriously considering and planning for some such action anyway . Kennedy may well have felt it was a natural response to the situation .
 McNamara replied that 'the military planning has been carried on for a considerable period of time, is well under way'
 To Kennedy, a military response to the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba probably made sense precisely because his administration was so well prepared to undertake such a course of action . Kennedy, therefore, was prepared to act because of his administration's preparedness .
 It could be argued that Kennedy's endorsement of military action on the 16th was not particularly significant .
 Kennedy was no exception to the notion of a military response before rejecting it in favor of a blockade .
 The flaw with that argument is that there were still marked differences that day between Kennedy's thinking and those of many of his advisers . The flaws are that there are still differences between Kennedy and his advisers, though, as well .
 Most of those who came to support the blockade at least showed some signs of moving toward that position in the first two ExComm meetings . The blockade has been in place for two weeks .
 This they did by exploring various non-military alternatives for American policy, and also by expressing their fears about the possible consequences of U.S. military action . This is the first time they have expressed their concerns about the possibility of military action against the United States .
 This indicates that the President was far more committed on the 16th to military action than most officials who ultimately supported the blockade . President Obama was more committed to the action than those who supported it, he says .
 This suggests that Kennedy's eventual decision not to resort to an air strike or invasion was more a matter of the President being persuaded from that line of action by his advisers than of he himself quickly and easily changing his own mind .
 McNamara was the most vocal of Kennedy's advisers in the first two ExComm meetings . McNamara focused less on United States military alternatives and more on the feasibility of the blockade as the hours passed on the 16th .
 During the opening meeting McNamara seemed to be in favor of military action . During the meeting he seemed to support military action against Syria .
 In his first lengthy discussion of how America might respond, he made a number of points . He also discussed how the U.S. might respond to the Obama administration's actions .
 McNamara contended that any air strike should be made not just on missile sites but also on the airfields, aircraft not located in the airfield, and all possible nuclear storage sites . McNamara also contended that a strike should also be made on all possible possible nuclear sites .
 This, he admitted, would probably involve the death of 2,000-3,000 Cubans . This would involve the deaths of thousands of Cubans, he said . He said it would be 'probably' likely to involve death of thousands more .
 McNamara maintained that after any air strike, the U.S. should be prepared to invade Cuba . McNamara said the United States should also be prepared for an air strike .
 The Secretary of Defense argued that Kennedy should mobilize America's military forces either during or after the air strike .
 Later in that meeting McNamara again indicated his belief that invasion might ultimately be necessary . McNamara later indicated he believes invasion might be necessary for the U.S.
 McNamara still seemed to be making the assumption that the Kennedy administration would respond militarily . McNamara seemed to make the assumption in the first ExComm meeting .
 He stated that when the ExComm group reconvened later that day that day, they should all be prepared to answer three questions . He said they should be prepared for three questions: "What do you think? Please tell us."
 At this point in the discussion, then, McNamara seemed to be interested in a military response . McNamara seems to be looking at a possible military response to the situation .
 By the evening ExComm meeting, however, McNamara had modified his position . McNamara later changed his position and said he would be more cautious .
 McNamara described three possible courses of action . McNamara: "There's a lot of work to come up with"
 Rusk proposed political action, on the lines proposed by Rusk, such as devising of diplomatic approaches to Castro or Khrushchev . The first was political action . Rusk was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 McNamara argued that a diplomatic approach would reveal the Kennedy administration's knowledge of the missiles in Cuba to the Soviets and Cubans . He argued that it would forewarn Moscow and Havana of a likely military response . McNamara made this argument on the grounds that such a diplomatic move would reveal
 The next alternative, McNamara averred, was a blockade of Cuba in tandem with a public declaration that America would, through reconnaissance missions, maintain constant surveillance over Cuba . U.S. would also keep constant surveillance of Cuba, he said .
 This, in essence, was the policy ultimately adopted by the Kennedy administration . This, of course, is the policy that was ultimately adopted .
 The final option was one of the different forms of military action . And the final option is the use of force to take action .
 At this point McNamara appeared undecided between the second and third options . McNamara: "I'm not sure what I want to do next."
 Kennedy had publicly pledged in September to act if evidence emerged that evidence emerged indicating the presence of missiles in Cuba . He proceeded to argue that 'this is a domestic, political problem'
 McNamara implied that the failure to uphold this promise would seriously damage the credibility of both Kennedy and his administration in the eyes of the American public . This was the key issue, McNamara said .
 McNamara became increasingly concerned about the ramifications of U.S. military action against Cuba . McNamara also became increasingly worried about the consequences of the action .
 McNamara exhorted Kennedy and his advisers 'to consider the consequences' After discussing both the limited and general air strike options during the middle of the second meeting, McNamara said 'considering consequences'
 "I don't believe we have considered the consequences of any of these actions satisfactorily," he says . "I'm not sure we're taking all the action we ought to take now to minimize those," he adds .
 McNamara suggested that the Defense and State Departments spend the night pondering the consequences of the various policy proposals . McNamara: "The defense and state Departments should spend a night thinking about the consequences"
 McNamara modified his position on the alternatives for U.S. policy . Having now minimized the military threat posed by the missiles in Cuba to the United States, McNamara adjusted his position .
 McNamara outlined the possible courses of action at the second ExComm meeting . McNamara again outlined the options for action .
 By this point, however, his predilection appeared to be for the blockade strategy, combined with open surveillance of Cuba and an ultimatum to Khrushchev threatening both the Soviet Union and Cuba with a nuclear attack .
 'This alternative doesn't seem to be a very acceptable one, but wait until you work on the others', he said . McNamara's comment on the feasibility of threatening Khrushchev with a nuclear attack was disturbing .
 His failure to analyze and reach conclusions on the motives behind Khrushchev's decision to install missiles in Cuba was a major shortcoming in his analysis .
 His views had clearly changed during the course of the discussions, evolving from initial preference for a general air strike to be followed possibly by invasion to tentative support for the blockade strategy .
 McNamara would come unequivocally to endorse the blockade approach in the following days . McNamara's ideas were not surprising given the development of his ideas during the JFK on Day 1 of the crisis .
 Unlike McNamara, Kennedy exhibited no comparable evolution in his thinking that day . McNamara's thinking evolved in the wake of his assassination .
 Kennedy demonstrated unambiguous support for the military option . Secretary of Defense soon began to reconsider his support for military option, but he soon backed it .
 McNamara's attitude towards a military response was shaped by his evaluation of both the actual military significance of the missiles in Cuba and the possible consequences of military action . In addition, McNamara also considered the possibility of taking action against Cuba .
 As McNamara began to suspect the missiles in Cuba did not affect the strategic balance of power, his support for military action began to wane . As he started to ponder the potentially dangerous consequences of a U.S. military response, his interest in the blockade began to increase .
 Kennedy's view of the feasibility of military action, on the other hand, did not relate in the same logical fashion to his assessment of either the military significance of the missiles in Cuba or the potentially dangerous ramifications of a military response by his administration .
 After the second ExComm meeting, deliberations resumed at the State Department . They finally ended after 11.00m. in Rusk's office in Washington .
 Rusk was compared to the likes of McNamara and Bundy, decidedly taciturn . Rusk is a taciturn, compared to McNamara .
 He tended to speak at length at the start of a meeting, but would then keep quiet . He would then quiet down at the end of the meeting .
 He also had a proclivity to present alternatives for American policy without indicating his own preference .
 Rusk has subsequently claimed that he did convey to Kennedy his views in private . Rusk said he did not convey his views to Kennedy in private, but he did .
 Rusk's influence on the President's thinking by Rusk was probably limited . Even so, the influence exerted on President Obama's thinking probably limited, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Comments made by Kennedy to aides during his White House years indicated the skepticism he felt toward his Secretary of State . Kennedy's comments indicated he was skeptical of his Secretary-State .
 From JFK's perspective, Rusk seemed diffident and ineffective compared to McNamara . Rusk was a forceful and imposing adviser like McNamara, says JFK's aide .
 Robert Kennedy later revealed that before his death his brother was seriously considering replacing Rusk as Secretary of State with McNamara or possibly Bundy .
 44 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES considered in depth the issue of why the Soviets deployed missiles in Cuba .
 Rusk did not unequivocally support military action, as Kennedy did . As for the U.S. response to the missiles in Cuba, Rusk didn't say if he supported military action . Rusk was critical of the Cuban missile program .
 He presented what he regarded as the two principal alternatives for U.S. policy at the start of the meeting .
 The first was the initiation by Washington of various diplomatic ploys, designed to pressure Moscow and Havana into removing the missiles without any military intervention . The second was the use of diplomatic pressure to pressure Russia and Havana to remove the missiles .
 U.S. could demand the OAS issue a demand to send a team to inspect the missile sites in Cuba .
 Rusk admitted that the request would inevitably be rejected, but implied that increased pressure might conceivably lead Moscow and Havana into reconsidering their position . Rusk said that the increased pressure could lead Russia and Cuba to reconsider their positions .
 Rusk also included as part of this second alternative an approach to Castro . Rusk included as much as an alternative to Castro, Rusk said .
 He maintained that the Kennedy administration could warn Castro, through either the Canadian Ambassador in Havana or the Cuban Ambassador to the United Nations, that the Soviet Union had installed the missiles in Cuba in order to achieve its own foreign policy objectives .
 Castro should be informed, it was in his best interests to break with Moscow and ensure that the missiles in Cuba did not become operational . Hence, Castro should have been informed, he says .
 State Department officials had written a message to Castro during the afternooon . Assistant Secretary Martin described the message as a message from Castro .
 Rusk's initial position was that a military strike against Cuba might well be required, but that the Kennedy administration should also consider the initiation of various diplomatic moves to arrest the Missile Crisis before it escalated into military conflict .
 Others in ExComm group expressed reservations about military action . ExComm also expressed their reservations on 16 October about the military action.
 Ball found the blockade strategy more acceptable than the military alternatives . Ball: "By this point in the discussion, Ball found it acceptable than military alternatives"
 Even McGeorge Bundy, who for much of the first two ExComm meetings had been strongly attached to the limited air strike option, was at least considering the value of the blockade approach by the end of the second meeting .
 Robert Kennedy spoke little during the first two ExComm meetings . Attorney General Robert Kennedy speaks little during first two meetings .
 Attorney General spoke in favor of an American invasion of Cuba . When the Attorney General did speak, he did so in favor an invasion .
 During the first ExComm meeting he pointed out to his brother that invasion was one of the options for the administration, and he asked Taylor how long it would take to carry out such an invasion .
 'You're going to kill an awful lot of people, and, uh, we're . going to take a lot of heat on i t,' he warned . Explaining why the invasion was preferable to a general air strike, he said .
 The Attorney General assumed that an American invasion of Cuba would not produce the same scenario . It is not clear why the Attorney General thought that an invasion would not have produced the same outcome .
 In the second ExComm meeting, Robert Kennedy adopted the same position . Robert Kennedy took the same stance .
 Robert Kennedy argued the case for invasion over the air strike options, and considered pretexts 46 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES which could be used to justify invasion .
 Kahin has argued that most the responsibility should be placed on the shoulders of Lyndon Johnson's advisers rather than on Johnson himself . Kahin argues that the responsibility is most likely to be to Johnson's advisors rather than his own .
 Kahin contended that more than his advisers, Johnson was wary of becoming fully involved in a war in Vietnam . Kahin said more than advisers, more than the advisers, was wary .
 The likes of Bundy, Taylor, and McNamara, however, cajoled the President into endorsing a policy of escalation he would not, of his own volition, have pursued . President Obama has been forced to take a tougher stance on the issue .
 Kennedy's performance on 16 October made clear that his own instincts led him unwaveringly down the path toward military action against Cuba . Kennedy's own instincts were clear that he wanted military action .
 In the Missile Crisis, it was left to Kennedy's advisers, especially McNamara and Robert Kennedy (as he modified his views after the 16th), to explore alternatives to a military approach .
 He initially embraced the military approach, especially the general air strike option, before supporting the blockade . He initially supported the military option, but then backed the blockade, before backing it .
 The key difference between the President's initial outlook and most of the leading officials who subsequently came to endorse the blockade was that the President was far more convinced than they of the need for a military response .
 Robert Kennedy, who advocated an invasion of Cuba on the 16th, emerged in the following days as a leading proponent of the blockade . It is true that Robert Kennedy was true that .
 Most of the leading advisers who came to support the blockade did express reservations toward the military options on that opening day . But generally speaking, most of the . leading advisers . expressed reservations toward military options .
 McNamara and Rusk developed non-military alternatives for U.S. policy . McNamara, Rusk, and others developed alternatives for American policy .
 McNamara and Ball stated their concern over the consequences of U.S. military action against Cuba . They suggested that it might ignite a superpower war .
 Given the reservations expressed by McNamara, Rusk, and Ball toward military action, it was not surprising that they would come to approve the blockade strategy .
 Given the paucity of objections raised by John Kennedy to a military response on 16 October, it seems unlikely that he would, on his own initiative, have transferred his support from JFK on the day of the crisis .
 The author would like to thank Lloyd Gardner for his help in the preparation of this article . Lloyd Gardner is the author of the article .
 ExComm is a frequently used abbreviation for the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . ExComm has been used in the past by the U.S. government and the United States .
 Kennedy did not establish this group until 22 October . Kennedy established the group in October .
 Kennedy's faith in Jacobsen was such that he even named a ship after him . Kennedy also tried to persuade Jacobsen to live in the White House . He named him after him and tried to get him to live with him .
 In 1975 the NY State Board of Regents deemed Jacobsen's treatments and practices to be dangerous and unethical, and thus rescinded his medical license . Jacobsen died in 1975 at the age of 65 .
 In the first two ExComm meetings, Maxwell Taylor, Lyndon Johnson, and Secretary of the Treasury Douglas C Dillon also supported a military response to the Soviet missiles .
 See Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, an interim report of the Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, S.Rept.-465, 94th Congress .
 Robert Kennedy and Robert McNamara were leading proponents of blockade . Kennedy and McNamara led the blockade of Cuba .
 The Attorney General, because of the fraternal bond, exerted greater influence on the President than anyone else . The attorney general's role was important to the President because of his closeness to the president .
 RFK discussed with RFK how they could secure the 1968 Democratic Presidential nomination for McNamara in order to prevent Lyndon Johnson from getting it . Kennedy had enormous respect for the competence of his Secretary of Defense .
 If officials for whom JFK had less respect than his brother and his Secretary of Defense had been the principal advocates of blockade, then the President may well have implemented as policy his initial preference for military action against Cuba .