 CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis L962, promulgation of End: Cinclant Historical Account .
 The objective of the subject record is to present a comprehensive IEX53U account of the actions taken within the Atlantic Command to meet the requirements of the situation created by the introduction of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba in the fall of 1962 .
 The President announced the establishment ; of a naval quarantine to be effective as of 0900, 24 October .
 The President also made clear that he intended to assure the ili ; **removal of Russian missiles from Cuba . President also said he intends to . assure the . removal of Russian . missiles .
 If necessary, the United States p£ui was prepared to take additional action . The United States is prepared to act further if necessary .
 It was> in fact, a direct I 1 ****confrontation between the security of the U.S. and the challenge imposed by the Soviet Union .
 Admiral Robert L Dennison, U.S. Navy, headed for the Navy . Headquarters was in Norfolk, Virginia, Virginia .
 Unified Command Staff was integrated with the Staff of Commander in Chief United States Atlantic Fleet, also commanded by Admiral Dennison, The Army and Air Force Components of the Unified . Command were not activated .
 A JCS conducted world-wide CPX of the build up and initial phases of the geaer' had been completed in late^September . The first phase of geaeraer' was completed in September .
 Units of the Command soon to be involved in Cuban Contingency Operations were carrying out or preparing for routinely scheduled exercises .
 Exercise ""BLUE WATER,"" a CPX of Commander Toini iask Fo'ce FOUR plans, conducted from 2 to 5 October in Puerto Rico .
 Of the six cruicer types, two were in overhaul and two in the Mediterranean throughout . CANBERRA and NEWPORT NEWS are available .
 In the Amphibious Force, the only AGC immediately available was MT McKINLEY, participating in FHIBRIGLEX-62 . In the amphibious force, the AGC is MT McKinley .
 POC0N0 was sailed back from SIXTH Fleet arriving Norfolk, arriving 12 November .
 Loading of these helicopter squadrons along with 4th Marine Expeditionary Battalion Headquarters and Battalion Landing Teams 3/2 and 1/6 in PHIBRON TWELVE ships commenced 15 October .
 It is of interest that as early as about 10 October the National Military Command center began inquiring informally of CINCLANT as to thenature and scope of PHIBRIGL5X-62 . The National military Command center is inquiring about the thenature of PH
 Without ever relating the exercise to the Cuban situation, there were indications of high-level interest in it . So as to provide a proper setting for the Cuban contingency operation .
 Soviet offensive weapons were included in the military buildup of the island . Eventually, armored chicles, tanks, and more complex weapons were introduced into the Cuban ara:d forces .
 On achieving power in 1959, Castro openly collaborated with the Csarcxia^s • jgjjj and allowed them to operate as a political power . Castro openly cooperated with the Communist Party in Cuba .
 Relations between 2£th of July movement and Communists were strained during the early period of the regime, especially in competition for control of national labor organizations .
 The USSR witched and waited until February i960 before respasdiig ta ^'~r Castro's growing need for its support . The USSR waited until Feb. 9,960 to see if Castro would support it .
 Trade and credit agriMsents Vl ^r followed in rapid progression by a flow of Bloc technicians and arms to Cuba . Vl. L, - - followed by a variety of trade and credit .
 Fzz£ was indispensable to the survival of the Castro regime and had the effect of Cuba's alignment with the Bloc . This Else Else assistants fzz£ .
 In the early part of 1962 the old line ^amacmists attsicptad to gain ascendancy over Castro . The old line was used to gain control of Cuba .
 Cuba's proximity to the U.S. increased the importance of any activity undertaken th.--ra which is not it thi bast ir_«». tarest of the United States and the Free Wcrld.
 On 2 July 1962, Raul Castro arrived in Moscow for two weeks of tali with Khrushchev and other high ranking Soviet officials . Castro was the first Cuban to arrive in Moscow since 1961 .
 Approximately four flights a day were flown between Guantanamo Naval Base and Key West for shipping surveillance . The buildup was continued into October, when 40 Soviet ships arrived in Cuba . 16 Soviet ships believed to be headed to Cuba turned back to Soviet ports .
 Strategic material was photographed inbound to Cuba but was not associated with the buildup of offensive weapons, until just prior to October . Intelligence confirmed that fact in October .
 Bloc shipping, other than Sciet, arriving in Juba remained at a fairly constant level . About eight ships arrive per month, with an average of about eight ships per month .
 During the key mnths of August and September when Soviet shipping activity was at its highest, eight Bloc ships, other than Soviet, arrived in Cuba . This indicated that the weapons provided to CF 17 u u*kiTi3iae.iftCastro were carried in Soviet vessels
 The construction of permanent barracks type buildings at Soviet camps indicates. a prolonged' stay . On ths contrary, the construction of . permanent barracks types indicates a prolonged . stay .
 The extent of these deliveries could be' ascertained. New Year's Day Parade organizers say it is unlikely they will be able to confirm the extent of deliveries .
 During the period January through March 1962, the consolidation of Cuban Ground Forces into three distinct elements was cenf irmsd.73,000 in the standing Armyj 100,000  in the ready resarra; and 100,00 comprising the F.ome Guard .
 Analysis of deck loading of Soviet merchant ships revealed an imprissivs 3upply c-f advanced mi'iitarjwsapons . Analysis of photographs taksn in August 1952 of isrious deck loading revealed an .imagine .
 The introduction was confirmed cf S-T^iet and Czechoslovakian Page _6 of 17^ Pag£3 small numbers of helicopters and light transport* had been provided .
 Intelligence substantiated the return to Cuba during the summer of 1961 of approximately 75 Cuban pilots who had received MIG jet training in Czechoslovakia .
 F-^em-2 fphotograph5 of Santa Clara Airfield taken in October, after quarantine was established . Santa Clara airfield was later confirmed to be a new generation fighter intercepter .
 The Cuban Revolutionary Air Force is patterned aftir its Soviet benefactor . The Cuban revolutionary Air Force has been patterned after the Soviet Union .
 At the present time the entire MIG fighter force occupies four airfields -- San Antonio de Los Banos, Santa Clara, Camaguey International and Holguin in Oriente Province .
 His concern over the Soviet invasion was probably motivated by his concern over 'Determir' ation . He was also motivated by Moscow's determir."" ation to retain him in power .
 In early September 1962, the exis_arce of surface-t--air missiles in Cuba was confirmed . The missiles were confirmed in September 1962 .
 Missiles were even placed on launchers in firing position before their revetments were completed . Some Missiles even placed . on launchers . in firing positions before revetment was completed .
 By 1 October the number of fc*^ sites had grown to 24 where it now stands . The number of sites on the site now stands at 24 .
 Three of the .24 sites. have. since been moved short distances to provide better coverage in more poorly .m^ defended areas. Three of those .24 . sites . have . been moved . short distances .
 We estimate the range of this missile at 25 to 35 nautical miles . The missile could be capable of carrying a nuclear missile with a range of up to 50 miles .
 Two ^?:; additional sites of this type were found on 28 September, and the number p^r. had grown to 5 by the middle of October . Additional sites of the type were also found on September 28 September .
 The introduction of a nbced-force of offensive aircraft, the IL-28 , light jaf bomber, and medium range missiles closely follow .
 BEAGLES might be enrcute to Cizba when we photographed Soviet ships on 16, 28 and 29 September and on 2 October, because of the size and shape of the crates .
 An assembled BEAGLE can be seen being towed down the taxiway at San Julian Airfield in a photograph taken on 6 November .
 The existence of 9 additional crates of BEAGLES at Holguin Airfield near Guantanamo was later confirmed . 9 more crates were later confirmed to be at the base .
 It is estimated that the construction of the Medium Range Ballistic Missilsites began in early September . The construction is estimated to have taken place in September .
 The San Cristobal missile Complex consisted of 4 sites, each with 4 launch positions . Confirmation of the existence of the sites was made on 14 October . The complex consists of 4 missile sites .
 Two additional sites at Sagua Grade were confirmed on 17 October, bringi-g the total of 6 sites, or a total of 24 launch positions . Two additional launch positions were confirmed in October .
 The missile used at these sites is known as the SS-4 and has a range capability about 1,100 nautical miles . The missile is used to launch missiles at the sites . It is also known as a missile that can be fired from a range of 1,000 nautical
 A total of 42 MRBM missile transporters and some ether missile* associated equipment have been removed from Cuba aboard eight ships . The equipment was removed from eight ships aboard eight Cuban ships .
 Some were probably on the large hatch Soviet merchant ships en. fc* route to Cuba that turned back when quarantine was sstabllaasd. Some of the ships were en.fc* routes to Cuba . Some were likely to have turned back after the quarantine .
 Sighting of the Scvist navy rspisnishmant ship TEREK in the North Atlantic was considered -~ujual. On 17 October, a sighting of the Terek was considered .
 Naval patrols kept this shio under surveillance as it worked its way into the southwest .
 If two possibly valid asntaat reports are accepted, this could have meant she had been on a covert patrol in the western Atlantic near the east coast of the United States .
 Reports that Soviet submarines would be based in Cuba had been received for some time . Low level reports that Soviet subs would be stationed in Cuba have been received .
 These reports took on added significance with the discovery of medium range missiles in Cuba and the large buildup of der fensive weapons in Cuba .
 The discovery of the ZULU submarine indicated that the Soviets might be deploying some submarines to the western Atlantic in covert patrols .
 Anti-submarine warfare ccscmanders at sea were alerted to this possibility . Anti-Submarine warfare was alerted to the possibility of an attack .
 Shortly after their discovery the submarines began return to the Russian submarine .
 On 14 October sufficient information was obtained from the U-2 flights to confirm that offensive missile bases were completed and that other bases were uader construction . The U.2 flights provided sufficient information that the bases were complete .
 Most significant was the need for information concerning ship cargoes, locations of ships, 6tatus of missiles and bases in Cuba .
 Suspected ships were designated by the XS and CINCLANTFLT and located by surveillance aircraft . or surface vessels prior to interception .
 16 Soviet ships erir.oute to Cuba altered course away from Cuba shortly after quarantine was put into effect . These ships were carrying cargo that the Soviets felt would net pass the quarantine .
 Two ships stopped dead in the water for several days prior to proceeding into the quarantine area . The quarantine area has been closed for two weeks .
 Some sort of cargo was transferred by high line from a Bloc 6hip headed for Cuba to one that was enroute from Cuba . Some of the cargo was moved by high-line from a ship en route from Cuba to a ship bound for Cuba .
 One Swedish ship did not 6top when requested and would not reveal her cargo . Another Swedish ship refused to reveal its cargo .
 No action was taken by the intercepting ship arid the suspect ship proceeded into Havana harbor . The suspect ship was intercepted by the intercepted ship .
 Captain .misunderstood iiistr'^c-. c-. tions from 'his company that he was to submit ta'iinspecticn and reveal his cargo . Captain . misunderstood that he had been ordered to submit his cargo to an inspection .
 Enclosure of thi6 chapter shows the shipping trade to Cuba during the crisis . Enclosure is shown in the book .
 On 25 October, the Soviet FROG— i'ree Rocket Over Ground— unguided field artillery rockets and the SNAPPER wire-guided, anti-tank, scout car-mounted missiles were seen 'at Remedies ir.'
 The modern Soviet T-54 medium tanks were confirmed at Santiago de Las Vegas . Central Cuba, Cuba, and the modern . Soviet . Soviet T.54 medium tankers were confirmed .
 Low-level photographs indicated the presence in Cuba of Soviet . ground .force .troops drawn from Elite Guards units .
 A medium tank battalion, and armored reconnaissance company, an armored infantry company, a multiple rocket launcher battery, a nuclear-capable FROG artillery battalion , and a SNAPPER anti-tank company with about nine •triple launchers . It is believed that the FROG's and SNAP
 Some of the new equipment may have been issued to Cuban Army units . It is believed that most of the equipment are connected with the four Soviet camps .
 Previously, it was estimated that the Cuban Army battalion s was the parent ground force unit . The Cuban Army is estimated to be at least one of the largest units in the country .
 Demobilization .was begun on 2223"" November and it is estimated that t'ne demobilization process . was completed on approximately .25.November . Demobilized .
 Cuban Army. activities during, the mobilization period indicated that . training under Soviet and Blcc advisers' paid, of Cuban Army units mobilized and assumed defensive positions quickly .
 This mobilization was carried out in spite of the logistic deficiencies which continued to plague the Cuban Army . The Cuban Army continued to be plagued by logistic problems .
 Unverified repcrts allege that several Cuban Army units left their field pt-sitlcaa without authority when they experienced hardships due to lack of fcod and proper rainwear . The Cuban Army is accused of leaving their field without authority .
 Additional construction and caotz-i lags continued on the missile bases aftr the . missile bases . Additional construction continued . Additional lags continue .
 Hcvevsr, on 1 November initial evidence was cbtairad by lr.w livsl aerial photography that dismantel"" ing had begun on the MRBM bases and construction had stopped on the IR3K bases . Initial evidence was that the MRB bases had
 All the missiles from the MRBM s^tes have probably been removed from Cuba . The missiles were probably removed from the island .
 The missiles were transported as deck cargo and were covered by canvas ever the shipping crates and transporters . They were then covered by a tight-fitting plastic covering over the missile .
 No significant results were obtained by this method and flights were discontinued . Flight was discontinued after tests showed no significant results .
 One mission of two planes was fired upon by anti-aircraft weapons believed to be 57mm . The planes were fired at by anti aircraft weapons thought to have been 57mm bullets .
 TJ33 other incident involved the sighting by the reconnaissance pilcts of a MIG-21 which appeared to be on an intercept course . TJ33 also saw the sighting of an interceptor of a reconnaissance aircraft .
 The plane followed the flight :~~tbouad from the target but no hostile action was taken . The plane was followed by a plane following the flight .
 The most significant and unique aspect of photo reconnaissance was the rapid development of the films, movement by jet courier to photo interiors, and availability of interpretation results for use in military planning .
 A total of 11 BEAGLE /MASCOTS were completely assembled and two were in various stages of assembly when the decision was made to p**disassemble and remove them from Cuba .
 E^* areas prior to being loaded for shipment and also aboard the ships while • being taken back to Russia . E* areas before being loaded and aboard ships while they are in Russia .
 The MIG-21 is a first-line Soviet fighter and with the AA-2 ATOLL air-to-air missile, it possesses an intercept and kill capability up to 50,000 feet . The plane is equipped with a range of weapons capable of intercepting and killing
 The surface-to-air missiles were not operational prior to 20 October . One site was m::-vsd frrm Cabanas ti Maidando which was about 10 miles to the northw36t. The surface to air missiles were operational .
 The pilots observed an object trailing flame which eventually .burned id cut and disappeared from the sky . The pilots saw the object .
 The possibility of an actual attempt ' ' to shoot down the aircraft has b2SR-.disr.reditecl.cl. The possibility . of a . actual attempt to . shoot down an aircraft has been described as a 'risk'
 The_ intelligence support for this proposed quarantine was also adequate, says the intelligence support was adequate . The proposed quarantine would be the first of its kind .
 l&i ^ clarified responsibilities for air operations, dvring the transition from the _£j.j. to the l&I . l&J. clarified responsibilities .
 CH:CAFLANT would be responsible for air operations :in the Western Zone of Cuba, less the amphibious objective area . The mission would be based in Cuba's Western Zone, less an amphibious area .
 Task.Force would be responsible for operations in ' ' the Eastern Zone of Cuba' Task Force would be tasked with operations in the Eastern zone of Cuba . Task Force.Force. Force. Force .
 Commander Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force, £^_ Atlantic was included inplanning and would conduct operations, as directed -*— by CINCLANT when activated .
 CINCSTRSXE also performed augmentation force planning involving Army and Air Force units assigned to the U.S. Strike Command .
 The Commanding General I'nited States Continental Army Command,' , General Herbert 3.3.4 . General Herbert was the first commander of the Continental Army .
 General Walter C Sueaney, Jr., Jr. was designated as Commander in Chief Army Atlantic, and Commander in . Chief in Chief-Air Force, Commander . in Chief of the Air Force . General Powell was designated to assist CINCLANT in contingency planning . General Sueaney was
 CIHCIAHT would ‘<***""£"" -. o^erationri cLaand of individual service task forces through each of his service component comnandere. CIHCIHT would . ‘Energies’ would be ‘
 Ufel FURSE DDR-882 2ND FLT TG 123. CHARLESTON 'IN PORT Enclosure (11 Chpter I JfLJlJlLJtL JSH. m :Ufel . JfJl.J
 ADAMS DDG-2 2ND FLT TG 123,2 37-OON 73-OOW UNDERWAY . DD-942 is a 2nd FLT with a crew of four .
 Perry DDR-883 2ND FLT CHARLESTON IN PORT STEINAKER DDR-B63 2nd FLT TG 123. In Port Steinaker, the U.S. Navy's newest aircraft will be the first of its kind to fly in
 ZAMA AE-9 PIIIBLANT TG 123. Enclosure -"" Chapt ;II. 11 IIL Ml ill ill M Mi Mi HAZAMA AE.9 PIIBLANT .
 MAYport NPORT QUILLBACK SS-424 SUDLANT TG 123.il GTMO GTMO NPORT ATULE SS-403 SUDIANT TG123 . Mayport N.P.T.A. mayport mayport at the end of the year .
 PIIIBLANT NAVAIRLANT CG 2ND MAW PIIBLANT PIIBPHON PIIPPHON: PIIBP PHON: PhPhON: PHONON PHONION: PhONPHON PHonPhONPHONE: Ph
 NEWPORT NAHANT AN-83 COMFIVE TG 128,1 HALIFAX ARL-18 ORLEANS PARISH HCS-6 MINLANT TG 128 . HALIFAx ARL - 18 ORLENEW: HCS -6 MinLANT .
 N. PORT fe'ff ^W *&ta \Hl M fl 1:1 Si UDT DET PHIBLANT TG 128. JNDERWAY UNDERway . N PORT N . PORT FE'FF ^W ^W*&ta :n P
 Full utilization of all available Defense Communications System circuits was planned . Full utilization was planned for the mission . The mission was scheduled to take place over the summer .
 The ' inter~area Single Sideband Net, , and the Atlantic Area SS3 Net, were available for voice communications . The inter-area single-sideband Net was used for voice communication .
 The fleet Broadcast, Naval Teletype Net, NA70PNET, STARCOH and AIRl -~~~ COMNET were operational and prepared for increased traffic .
 The U.S. Army Signal Radio Propagagation Agency and other organizations attended . The conferees also benefited by becoming acquainted and working together .
 Preliminary planning facilitated the expansion of CINCLANT comm""* ^~ unications which followed . Although the eamaand structure was changed later, this preliminary planning helped .
 The command reorganization to direct Cuban Contingency Operations was approved by the JCS and placed in ef£-»-:t on 20 October 1962 .
 Full duplex, direct, on-line, top secret circuits were established from CINCLANT Headquarters to all probable key subordinates . In order to satisfy the connnunication requirement in the event of major changes in organizational structure and to provide the necessary communications .
 Communication sets available had to be held in reserve for possible deployment to the Cuban area . Communication sets had been kept in reserve .
 A hot line for passing AS-^IFORIANT information existed, | being a party line alcng the east coast with many locations tied in . Classified messages were sent ever the Naval Operation Net, which was j on-line 1 .
 The Kaval 2231 teletype system was avail.able for passing unclassified traffic to stations in the system . The system was used to send unclassified messages to stations on the Kaval .
 ICk ser.t representatives to provide direct liaison with DCA in masting CTECIANT circuit requirements . ICk .t representatives will be direct liaison to DCA . DCA will be able to masts CTECiANT circuit .
 The circuit may consist of several lirius tat""-rs st. various Switching centers . The circuit is a series of circuits that may contain several switches .
 These lengths are scheduled to bee -me a part :f a complete circuit when call up is received . These lengths will be scheduled to be completed when call-up is received.
 The two n:\ds cf th» .-.irnit* are installed to the ewe respective military bases . The two . n:\d cf th » .-.IRnit* is installed to each of the military bases in the US .
 The approximate r P is ..,., .,,„ „” and „ai„tained with AFLAST and ARIAST to insure I . Meanwhile, coordination vas ■>«"""" „ lthout having duplication. “Lthout
 In some areas that required circuits were ordered ""^J 1 ^^ circ uits and/or circuit ; thr oushout the .oua,e.s t^her ^/^ cOTpa „ Us provided excellent . We provided excellent service .
 ARLAKT, AFLAMT, , and other terminal points . Corps, F Bragg, Nortn conducting -^ . Corps . Corps. Corps. was conducting --^ .
 A LO kilowatt mobile f transmitter located at Cape Canaveral was offered to the Naval Comraunicacirza Station San Juan, by the Air Forca . The transmitter was located at the Cape Canaveral .
 Common user circuits v:ere utilised whenever possible . These included DCA circuits into Washington, Puerto Rico, Panama, Key West, Camp Lejeune and others .
 The CINCSAC SSB radio net was available for. use and had -stations . in Florida and San Juan where entry to other SAC installations could be made .
 The CSO Composite Fle-at SS3 Command Net, was also available for use . CSO was available for sale in the U.S.
 T-2 Engineered for passing a 3000 cycle signal, , with oiniflfisa delay distortion . Engineered to pass 3000 cycle signals, with delay distortion distortion .
 Some flexibility of conmunimimim was also necessary . Some flexibility was also needed .
 At a conference between CLT and component representative it was determined that very little equipment was available to meet CZNCLMT r-quir— u^~ nents due to internal requirements .
 The Army had an AN/TSC 20 multichannel set to provide circuits from the objective area back to Fort Bragg, branching north and south to the Department of the Army and ARLANT FORWARD-nere .
 There was a general shortage of single sideband sets, since this type equipment had only recently V-*been included in unit tables of allowances .
 The dileisna was solved by obtaink . ing 4 airborne transportable transportable communication units from the Navy . 4 airborne communication units were solved by obtaining .
 It was de-ided to move the ATCU-100 from 3alboa to Key West for extending circuits into Guantanamo . It was moved to Key Island to extend circuits into the Guantanamo area .
 This link would provide 16 channels for Voice and/pr teletype, with 5 channels terminating at Key West aad the rzst patched through to Sarfolk and the Washington area . The link would also provide voice and pr teletype .
 The ATCIT-100A j in Washington was deployed to Glynco for standby and possible circuit termination requirements . It was deployed for standby purposes only . The J-100 was deployed in Washington for standby .
 AT3""-100A at Ncrfclk was used for training and was scheduled for movement ir.to the objective area . The AT3.""-100a was used in training and scheduled to be used for . movement .
 ATCU-100A was to be air transported frc-m Norfolk as soon as an airfield was secured . The ATCUS100A will be transported to Norfolk, Norfolk .
 Army Midwest Relay at Tzzz Leavenworth, Kansas, was selected as an entry point for this multi-channel set since it wasn't heavily occupied with the present operation and was central iy located for Page 30cf .
 Radio propagation was also suitable for this j lotion C*c£ts Wd then b« routed back to the east coast for tie-in . i ^» ^th-^uth relay system between Fort Ritchie and Fort Bragg. ; .
 Training was also conducted by the Navy team manning the ATCU-lSoA at G.lynco . The equipment was furnished by the Army, the Army tathSed an operacinrteam to traiTon the set .
 During the readiness period communications was established with the Midwest Relay and other DCS entry^ points . One additional facility was brought tot .
 The Navy brought the ATCU ZUU Som *e Pacific area area for additional support . The Navy also brought in additional support for the mission .
 Communications can be conducted while airborne and continued immediately upon landing . Communications can't be interrupted while airborne .
 Plans called for landing the aircraft as soon as an airfield was secured to provide C ^^^^^ S p back to CINCLANT while the ATCIH100A was being air-shipped and placed in operation .
 As combat units moved into Cuba they were to be supported cotnffl ;^ c ^^ a U i«, e bv their oreanic personnel and equipment, maintaining links wiuh their re pectivf Ssk l""ce Commanders until such time as
 Single sideband mult i -channel equipment with teletype f^* ■£££ £»_ i^ bv cryptographic devices was planned where possible, with operation al and authentication codes available for passing information .
 The AN/GRC-10 and AN /IRC -24 was jl«««**« field communications . Other tactical equipment such as the AN/RRC -24 and AN/IRC-10 were also used .
 A tactical Radio Relay Net Net fcr command and functional use was to be established in accordance with the SOPs of the tac tical ualtt. A tactical radio relay command and use of the R-Net was established . A tactical use of this type of command and
 The Naval Communication System had been in operation all along . Little change or adjustment was necessary to handle increased requirements Ute^ for the Quban activity .
 All this occurred during the build-up period and contributed to the backlog of traffic . All this contributed"" to the backlog of traffic, says CNN.com's Jeff Jarrett .
 Fleet ships changed to Washington Broadcast and ware more evenly distributed among uu. other stations . Traffic flow improved as Fleet ships moved to the Washington Broadcast .
 'r^..'. flexibility is permitted depending on the propagation characteristics and k^'_ other factors affecting the ability to copy . However, flexibility is possible depending on propagation characteristics .
 The increased amount of traffic "" """" did not permit this wide latitude in the selection of the station broadcast .
 The Fleet Submarine Broadcast operated ir. a ncr^l manner without Lii Pag3 1 £S£l Scfr^icr^^l,' edfaSt, responsive for the AS„ Barrier Commander. The Fleet . Submarine . Broadcast operated in a manner without
 The Caribbean Emergency Network was also brought into use with ScOKGEN Santo Domingo and COMOARIBSEAFRON in the net .
 Shlp/shora communications vlth command . The command is called "Shora" and "shora" It is intended to communicate with the user .
 Upo^plation'of this vork thaam movad to San Jnan to rmprova tha installation . Upo ^plation’of this .vork tha  moved to San .Jnan to remove it from the internet .
 Pages in the process of completion when the operation ended . Page 33_ cf 17 . Page 17: Pages in process of completing .
 Occasional changes of command ships by the commands afloat caused communication difficulties . These additions would have provided improved communications for the quarantine operation .
 All fleet ships are not fully equipped to handle increased communications requirements brought en by placing a task force command aboard . When' the Commander SECOND Fleet,' s ' passed the Quarantine Command to COfcER'JDESFLOT SIX, , on 13 November 1962, there
 The CINCIANTFLT Communications Center temporarily accepted all the traffic for further relay . The i problems were solved by temporarily accepting the i traffic .
 CTNCLANTFLT communications canter had progressed through several stages of expansion and/change since its inception and was in the middle of another modification when the Cuban crisis developed .
 The results of Exercise ""HIGH HEELS"" had indicated that the facility could not handle a large increase in traffic . The results showed the facility's current stats could not cope with a large influx of traffic .
 CINdantFLT requirements to be provided by this communication center acd/or NA7C0KSTA Norfolk. CINDANTFLT requirement is required by this Communication Center acd/.
 It was decided to move the SU3LANT circuits out of the J^^ CINCLANTFLT Wire Room for more space and terminate additional circuits there . It was moved from the J ^ CINclantFLT wire room to the J^ Cinclant Wire
 The advent of the Cuban build up escalated the rata of progress -with the work reaching completion around 20 Cctsber 1962 .
 Many new circuits were being installed in the wire room while the traffic build-up was developing, causing some de^rsase in handling efficiency . Many new circuit installs were being installs in the . wire room .
 Teletype equipment came from ^AYCOilSYS Washington and some vas^or-owed from iLio Operates School and the HA8MMSUL Horrolk. Teletypewriter equipment was used in the project . Some of the equipment was donated to the i
 The C-NCLA'fT operations cT..t*r owitzhbaarc, , was expanded to a maximum with a subsequent >:rea,« lr. operator service . The operation was expanded with a maximum of 8,000 hours .
 Additional message reproducing equipment was required to handle the increased message load . Additional equipment was needed to handle increased message reproduction equipment .
 Initially assigned communi-atirns personnel were at 907 allowance, but this was not sufficient to meet -he increased work load . Initially assigned 907. allowance, this was 907 . allowance, which was not enough .
 New positions were established and internal procedures developed to cope with the facility expansion . This increase facilitated more rapid processing of messages but occasionally contributed to inefficiencies .
 Multilith macs were used or incoming teletype machines were used . The mat passed immediately to a multilith machine for reproduction or reproduction .
 Teletype machines werinstalled in the OPCOS Center for rapid delivery of "Shot Gun copies" to the War Room Staff . Teletype was installed in the OPCOS Center for rapid . delivery of ""Shot Gun" copies .
 Outgoing high precedence messages were sent to tw wire room for immediate transmission bsfcre i:t-n-l processing through >~the message center . The message center was sent to the wire room to process the outgoing messages .
 This "as supposed to reduce the rlov of non-essential traffic leaving the circuits available for passing important information," says the government .
 Us of -hia--r ^_ changes began to take effect, new parson^ 1 ^ c ""^JL^i^lS a-Slce to and backlog of traffic started to decline .
 Additional commercial circuits i-. n'kH'.-r :. can then be leased to meat mforscca requirements . Additional commercial circuit i-.n'k .n'h'r:. Additional commercial circuit i-. n'tkH'r :
 Better utilization of skilled personnel can also be facilitated by only «_3ir.g.g specialists .
 All services and major commands should implement the use of cite £.5^ numbers in messages, for ready reference, to standardize procedures .
 Tactical frequencies assigned organizations for use at the scene of w*« action must be thoroughly coordinated at the joint level to eliminate """"""l^ inter component frequency conflicts .
 Good communications equipment is in the hands of the operating forces . Good communications are essential to the military .
 Gome commercial circuits ; required for continued use of continued use are still being leased . The Gome circuit is still being used in commercial circuits .
 It was in these three weeks that Command and Staff actions were taken, relating directly and indirectly to the Cuban situation, with rit<rt-tmifm public notice .
 CDCCLANTFLT and CINCAFLANTORELLT have been directed to recommend jointly the new boundary line . The boundary line will not be changed from the existing boundary line to the new line .
 LANT/CINCLANTFLT War Room of units designated, locations, and types of aircroft . Lant/CinclantFLT: War Room .
 The quarantine operations were the forerunners to the quarantine operations which were ultimately placed into effect . They were, however, the forerunner to the quarantines .
 Increased flow of Soviet/Bloc shipping had >come a source of concern . Action was also initiated on 3 Octooer 1962 .
 The relocation involved prepositioning a Marine Air Group at Key West and the assignment of an additional 1/3 Marine Division/Wing Team to' the Atlantic Command along with appropriate amphibious shipping .
 CIJICSTRIKE informed JCS, CINCAR STRIKE and CIECAFSTRIke that the response to CIl'CLAXT's message of 6 October on increased readiness inso~ far as it applied to STRICOM forces would he prepared by his
 Soviet action against Western rights in Berlin called for Western response . Soviet action called for a Western response including among other actions a blcckada of Communist or other shipping en route to Cuba .
 An attack against the Guantsnsaio Naval Base or against United States planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters . An attack on U.S. aircraft or vessels is not permitted .
 A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, the leaders °f which request assistance in recovering Cuban independence from the Castro Soviet puppet regine. A majority of Cuban citizens want to recover Cuban independence . The leaders °F request assistance from the Cuban government .
 A decision by the President that the affairs in Cuba have reached a point inconsistent with continuing U.S. national security . A decision to go to Cuba was made by President Barack Obama .
 The consequences of the actions on tho availability of forces and on .our logistics posture to deal with threats in otnar areas, e.e., Berlin, Southeast Asiff, etc. etc. The consequences are the consequences of tho availability and logistics posture of forces .
 The removal of the thra&t to U.S. security of Soviet weapons systems in Cuba is the answer to the Castro regime, or the removal of a new regime responsive to Cuban national desires .
 CIKCLAKT in resosmss. r^mr.id-d <,doi:.-; r^ids dv l-uba against COMJS as another contingency* urui-cr ‘hicn miiU&ry ~ .-.'
 Without unduly derogating training or readiness for other critical missions, commence prepositioning of forces . The U.S. military says it will not be unduly criticized for its readiness .
 On 10 October the JCS by message io U.J:ANT, OINCSTkIKE, Service Chiefs . and information to T.-l. l. A. JCS .
 JCS had queried USCIMCEUR and CINCPAC as to availability of amphibious forces assigned to them for implementation of ClNCLANT contingency plans . JCS JCS asked USCIMceur and CinCPAC if they could provide amphibious troops assigned to
 CINCEUR stresses the effect on allies and CINCPAC on training and rotation of forces to West Pac. Both noted the impact that transfer of troops would have with CINCAC stressing the effect .
 Preclude simultaneous reinforcement of either CINCEUR or CINCPAC using trocp carrier or MATS aircraft . Preclude . simultaneous, , reinforcement of . either CinCPAC or CinCEUR using . trocp carriers or MAT aircraft .
 Selected ammo stocks for Navy and Marine forces v?re prepositicned at Florida and Caribbean bases and available in AE and CVA type ships . Selected ammo stock is preposited to Florida and the Caribbean bases .
 The USS GRAKT C3UNTY was .. "" :' made available for sealift material . Air Groups 14 and 31 to preposition certain aviarion equipment at the United States .
 T to provide information on his civil affairs requirements and tne lengtn of time civil affaire companies w*«might be required for Cuban contingencies .
 Gctooer CISCLATIT advised the JCS that one civil affairs area headquarters, four civil affairs groups, ■■■*** and eight civil affairs companies would be required . The JCS said the move would be necessary for civil affairs areas .
 Additional figrvter aircraft were deployed to Homestead and Patrick Air Force Bases . Additional aircraft were placed in and alert status for augmentation .
 Javy 3 Air Force and Marine units using Key -vast facilities were required . Key-to-the-air Force units were deployed .
 The shortage of equipment at Key West, made it ntcsrssary tjr units to provide some of their own ground handling equipment .
 'CINCONAD provided representation in the Center to facilitate' the ' interchange of intercept information' CINCONad provided representation .
 i<aval Air Station at Sanford, Florida was approved for use as an additional staging base and direct liaison between COMTAC and CO, NAS, Sanford was authorized for planning purposes . The iaval Air Stations will be used as additional staging bases .
 The use of Strategic Aix Command bases at Homestgad, MacDill and McCoy -wasrequired by CINCLANT forces .
 Action-was initiated to relocate SAC aircraft from these bases . AFLA>JT units at these* fields were relocated to accommodate AFLA*JT .
 Strategic Air Command and Tactical.IAir Command aircraft ctvacuated to ether airfields . Subsequent arrangements were made between the Strategic Air . Command and SAC aircraft moved to airfields in the wake of the war .
 SAC, CINCLANT, TAC and the Department of the Air Force enabled CIKCAFLANT to preposition his forces and materials at these vital installations for the possible execution of Cuban Contingency Plans . Complete cooperation .
 The heavy conceatration of aircraft at MacDill, Homestead, McCoy . and Key West was of great concern to CIKCLANT . The evacuation ""of SAC *"" aircraft reduced the risk to some extent .
 Option one consisted of not launching air strikes against a **•""•' selected SA-2 site . Under Option two, two SA-1 sites would be selected .
 Precise air attacks would be launched to destroy only the fire control system on one site . Only the launchers and missiles on the other sites would be destroyed . Precise attacks would also be launched only to destroy one site and only launchers .
 The new chain of command, for plans and for operations when directed, from JCS to CINCLANT to Service Component Commanders to Service Task Force Commanders, demanded that CinCLANT have a truly Joint Staff adequate .
 Off icers not assigned to the Contingency Battle Staff were assiryned super. They were assigned to a super-strength super. Off- icers were given super.
 The danger of escalation, particularly in the initial stages, made it .wis. imperative that full CINCLANT capabilities for general war be maintained . JS*^ at the same time the requirement to operate the Contingency'ar Room had taken the services of four of the
 The contingency, staff gradually merged with the CL x :CLAHT/Cn3CLAMTFLT staff . Staff with cooperation and coordination so outstanding that it was difficult to distinguish between them. The contingency staff . merged with staff with cooperation so outstanding they were so outstanding .
 Contingency Battle Staff went to a four section watch on 1 November and was gradually reduced in size from then until its disestablishment on 3 December . In recognition of this, the Contingencies Battle Staff was reduced to four sections .
 This saturation resulted in a heavy rick in the event of a successful air attack or missile bombardment of tlese fields . The saturation of the fields resulted in heavy damage .
 Task Force CHARLIE conducted training operations in the Georgia-Florida area during build-up of forces . Task Force CharLIE is based in Florida .
 Since there was no additional LST shipping available in the Atlantic Fleet, it was necessary to charter four commercial LSTs for a period of 60 to 9D days . The charter was needed to charter the four ships .
 The four chartered LSTs were still insufficient to meet hpmy requirements . It was determined thfit the original four LSTS allocated . The original four were allocated .
 The Co mm a n derin-Chief, United States Atlantic Fleet, recommended that the Chief of Naval Operations activate eleven LSTs from the Atlantic Reserve Fleet . The U.S. Atlantic Fleet recommended the activation of 11 LSTS from the Reserve Fleet.
 These eleven LSTs would require rehabilitation and, when activated, they '•■■ere to be manned by a minimum crew ready for immediace use'
 Action Sas take"" upon CffCtlS"" ° Ut "" ^ atlon co do this on .26 October. We will be doing this on October 26 .
 JPP™^^^ 3I2/316 °™* it beca^ 312/316 plans were not ade q uaL £/ he taX""""^ J 1 *""*"" U "" ed *"" 'h. build-up of Cuban military
 Substitution of items could be accomplished where it was in the best T£T. i U t ^ Wh6re SUCh substitutions were not inconsistent with the general objective of the basic mission .
 Ic '■'« f """"ner pointed out that estimate of casualties based on the assumption that the enemy may employ tactical nuclear weapon u« not meaningful because operations could cause severe losses .
 Army on 19 October . toj^X-_£ • prepare plane' for the return of these units ""to their home stations on a :t*$$\ \ 12 hour notice"
 L Armored Divi'jior;, as wall ad xczr :• Tra*. fscrcarior Corse Ii.«n r trrck companies and ins 3i7tr. ».n rtr.y .n .
 Antirs coooar.d en DEFvis, 3 ttar.-'s effacrrse 2300Z l:^i, 22 O-r.-r.-ri-SR. KE tr; pia,. pia, lie Antirs . Antirir .
 In view of the austere facilities available at Key Westit was necessary that detailed"" planning factors be provided to the Commander, Key West .
 For these reasons J"" USCONARO' requested authority from '*?"".:■?? ,.'."" the. U.S. requested authority . The request was granted by the U.N. for these reasons .
 Two terminal service companies '•. i ■i' were included to provide support for the outloadiag ( ,of assault troops) and for subsequent unloading of equipment and supplies .
 Fort Lauderdale, Florida, was the outloadirig port fdr the first increment of Task • £&-■ ■.-: xm: begun ""moving §S Stewart, Georgia, on the morning of the 26 Octbbef""l962.
 Kaval Air Station at Key West would not be available for use by Army aircraft . Facility was fully committed to support high performance aircraft . CINCLANT also pointed out that Kaval air station was not available for Army planes .
 Task Force for : outloading a th.rough"" 4 tfi'e port-in order to speed up its . introduction into, the objective ""areaTby"" from"" one' to three dayb' The revie^' ion of the movement schedules""' also
 A lack of proper storage space for loaded equipment cars at Fort Stewart, Georgia, created a major problem for the 1st Armored Division arriving at that station . The problem was a lack of storage space at the Georgia base .
 In an attempt to solve this problem and to prevent' any undue delay, CINCARLANT initiated action to procure additional rail siding capacity in the vicinity of Fort Stewart .
 CTNCARLANTv was. -then in the process of transferring . responsibility to the proposed Peninsula Base Command which was to be established in Florida for just such purposes .
 The Department of the Army authorized JG USCONARC/C.INCARLANT or. i 29 October to issue movement directives for all those units assigned to OPLAN 316 .
 These units would require replacements for currently authorized craft which night become unserviceable or mijL-'t ' fMi ^ require extensive maintenance as a result of the assault operations .
 The depot did have an in-house maintenj ance capability for processing a total of three craft for issue a aa ; operational status within a period of two to three weeks time .
 The ' remaining 27 craft would have to be processed by contract in commercial facilities, a process which would require a minimum of five to six weeks for completion .
 At the same time, CINCARLANT was able to aacource *%'"" that the Chief of Staff, United States Army, had approved the preloading of .the . Jr~ r two Roll-on, Roll-off ships and the four available LST
 CINCARLANT was now preparing plans to load them out of Savannah, Georgia, in -eiew of the fact that the troops wtra located in nearby Fort Stewart .
 Area Commands at the intermediate staging airfields gave Headquarters, X""*""""— Airborne Corps, a chance to evaluate their support capabilities and to consider the development of problems . Area Commands were given valuable information for future operations of this type .
 CG USCONARC was apprised of the specific locations of the HAWK and NIKE-HERCULES air defense battalions which it had made available for the defense of strategic locations ar.d .
 The 6th Battalion, 65th Artillery, <KAWK) a vas located in the general Key West area, with A Battery at the western tip of Key' West, B Battery on the beach nearest to Cuba ir.
 D Battery was located at Patrick Air Force Base, while D Battery located at MacDill Air Force base . D Battery is located in Texas, Texas .
 XM29 — which were to remain at their home stations with crews and equipment and which could be maintained in an on-call status to be brought forward if required . X-M29 were to stay at home stations and remain in on call status to stay on standby . XM
 CINCARLANT pointed out to the Department of the Army that it was considered imperative that immediate authority . be granted for Army use of the Key West International Airport .
 Key West International Airport or equivalent space at the Kiy West Air Station was essential to the success of Army Air Operations in the objective area . CINCARLANT emphasized to the Department of the Army that either Key West . International Airport was essential .
 The Commanding General, USJONARC, on T:9 ^-.crber described to th£ Lepartment of the Army the command or2ar..iTatior . The command had established for the implsras.-tar-ior of hie assigned misa
 Command post, which controlled troop carr.sr I a~d «-iiht aircraft, was physically located in the same building .
 Liaise ,_ detachments from the Army Material Command, port, ""« M ^'""^ pand from pertinent Department of Defense agencies were either located at Opa-locka Air Ease or were moving into position . The2nd -logistical M£;! -
 This e_t— , — ra-ization, immediatedly responsive to the Commanding General, wb.-OKAR-, as CINCARLANT, afforded maximum flexibility, control, ar.d ..-ordination . This e-t— .t — ra
 Department of the Army requested to ta*e && appropriate action with Joint Chief of Staff to effect ths des_r£~ -ranp* far of control .
 The BARC a would be available for 1* mediate use upon arrival in the objective area . The mission would be the first time the BARC would be used to mediate in the area .
 The P 554th Transportation Platoon BARC Operation and Maintenance is in the surface echelon of OPLAN 316 . Al~o—S.S. is located in the BARC operation and maintenance area .
 Planning ^J 1 ' provided that the BARC's be deck loaded on car S° vessels and that they *~ be made ready for drop discharge at the destination . BARCs should be decked loaded on S° ships and made ready to drop discharge .
 The four LST's earmarked for Task Fcros CHARLIE remained as previously scheduled for outloading through Fort Lauderdale, Florida . The Rodl-oc y Roll-off vessels were now scheduled for preloading at Savannah; Georgia; Georgia .
 Action to initiate the move, however, was held in abeyance by the Deputy Chief of Staff fee Logistics pending a final coordination on the location of the LST's .
 New logistical problems were encountered with the four LST's earmarked to transport the various ie~ creae-ts of Task Force CHAP.LIE to the objective area .
 Four LSTs were considered sufficient, since the total wetent requirements for the First Increment of Task . Therefore, four LST's were considered considered sufficient . The mission was completed in 2010 .
 Task Force CHARLIE has a carrying capacity of approximately 3,000 weight-tons for an anticipated over-the-beach landing . The LST has a capacity of about 3,500 weight-tonnes .
 Task Force CHARLIE' a . equipage would have to he reduced if that force intended to land over-tne-hsech. This myant that even with the fifth vessel, Task Force .
 As far as CINCARLANT wa», concerned, it was not a matter pf space; btt rather cr.s of weight and the manner in which the tonnage was r,o fa landed .
 The problem led directly to another, that of providing waterproofing kits for the vehicles to be landed form amphibious vessels . Jhis problem consequently led to the introduction of waterproofing Kits .
 Command. ItStp-ny Chief of Staff for Logistics, CG USCGNARC, announced on 31 0:rober L5£.har. Only one such kit was available to the Command.com .
 T .t assault fcrces could not possibly be expectedo land all"" or ;z.z.&iz vehic^ a-cos3 the beach in water ies3 than 30 inches deep. The beach is in a state of unknown .
 CINCARLANT proposed charter of a fifth LST in order to alleviate S ome of the problems thus created in connection with transporting Task For-e CHARLIE to the objective area .
 The CAL-AGRO was berthed at Ocean City Terminal, Savannah, Georgia . One such vessel under civilian ow—rsbip, the CAL -AGRO, is bertered at the Savannah terminal .
 A preliminary inspection of the vessel by CINCARLANT indicated that it was in good shape and that approximately three day 3 would be required to bring it close to its original configuration .
 On 31 October CINCARLANT requested the Commander in Chief, United States Atlantic Fleet, , to make the necessary official inspection of the vessel and to determine the practicability of chartering and operating i~ in view of the deficiency .
 F""""""theactions were taken on 31 October to move units into a posi-io-ed location at Fort Stewart, Georgia. F"" ""the actions were taken in October to move units from Fort Stewart to a new location .
 Those units which moved or. r^ consisted mainly of the Signal and Medical units . wnich were re-jquired to accompany Task Force CHARLIE .
 These '-eluded a Field and an Evacuation Hospital, a Medical Group Headquarters, ■ , two specialized Medical Detachments, a Signal Group Headquarters and a Signal Platoon'
 The Medical Group and the two hospitals were directed to move their currently assigned personnel and with full TOE equipment . The medical group and two hospitals will move their current assigned personnel to move .
 Additional professional personnel were to be provided by USARLANT when ia~ required . Additional professional  personnel were provided by  USARELANT when needed .
 CINCARI3, submit such a recommendation directly to tr.e v eiv.t -.-^' cf Staff.t . CinCARi3 .
 While all wheeled ' vehicles had been offloaded for future convoy movements, they were ret *^* tained in a combat loaded condition .
 The entire Ja^"" 1 Taak Force was placed on a three hour alert status for movement to the i ports of embarkation . Ja^'' 1 Taaak Force has been placed on three-hour alert status .
 Personnel t of the Divison Floating Reserve would arrive at Fort Steward on 2 November, with equipment arriving on 4 November . At this point, it was estimated that the personnel t would arrive on 1 November .
 Reserve Reserve was scheduled to commence a training porgram on 5 November . Training porgrams were intended to increase the individual ""combat proficiency of all **""* personnel .
 Wheeled vehiciles were to be offloaded bet to I remain under combat load . Wheeled vehicles were to remain under load. Wheeled vehicle was to be kept under load .
 The Floating Reserve was to be held on a j six hour alert for eventual movement to the ports of embarkation .
 As of * 1 November the JCS On-Call Forr.e was still located at Fort Hood, Texas,. but was shceduled to begin its move to Fort Stewart, Georgia, about 4 Nov. The move is scheduled to begin in November .
 At Fort Stewart this force would accomplish the same training ' program as the Division Floating Reserve . The force would be at Fort Stewart .
 The division planned to send four M+6 canks, four M41 tenks > and one M59 to Fort Lauderdale, Florida . Training would be conducted for all tank commanders and drivers .
 A t-tal of £0 personnel were involved in the first of such training courses fcr Task Forje JHARLIE. ire division planned to .to' ship the personnel no Fort Lauderdale ':'/ :'.:sm:sm^rsial bus .
 Array Transformation Terminal Command, Atlantic, arrived at Port Everglades, Florida, on 3 November, with the personnel and equipment scheduled to arrive at the following day . It is the first phase of the project to take place in the Atlantic .
 In order to give additional assurance, one of tie four LST's would carry a complete causeway pier of four sections . The causeway would be carried by a single LST . The pier would be one of the four sections of the causeway .
 This would enable the LST's to carry the maximum planned weights since they, would not be required to beach . This would. enable the . LSTs to carry . the maximum . planned weights . since they would not, would . not be needed to beach. This would .
 XVIIC Airborne' Corps recommended that these procedures be carried out in a practice landing as a preliminarr to actual operations in the Assault Phase of OPLAN 316 .
 The Division' Floating Reserve was scheduled to arrive in the objective area on cargo 6hlps on D+10 and could unload at any of four possible locations . It was scheduled for D-10 and D-11 .
 The availability of theFloating Reserve closed ashore was estimated at D+12. ashore at D-12.00am .
 Planning factor estimates for the number. of tanks in the . objective area on D-5-12 were approximately 300 . Planning factors estimates for . the . number of tanks . of tanks were estimated at approximately 300,000 .
 USC3NARC/USARLANT planners concluded that .operations.. at .thatpoint would'faver an; ihfari.tr-jr-hsavy rather .than a tank-. • heavy force .
 Battalion, 81st Armor, form the On-Call Force to the Division Floating Reserve, displacing the 2nd Battalion, 52nd Infantry . The 2nd and 3rd Battalion, the 81st and 81st are part of the Reserve Force .
 This, however, would have to be accomplished within the shipping currently allocated by the Joint Chiefs of Staff fcr'ti* Floating Reserve . This would be within the ship's shipping space .
 XV'III Airborne Corps was given until the t clawing day to make a firm recommendation in this regard . XV'II Airborne was given the day to decide whether to withdraw from the US.
 Boat and floating craft units of the Transportation Corps had besr. moved f crward to tia St. Mary's in preparation for actual assault .
 Tis units wire -jr.dir trs. cemmard and/er control of the 159th Transporraticn Battalion, ^Eoat> from . from . The 159th . Transporration . Battalion, from . 159th. Transporpor
 An additional boat company and a crane from the U.S. Army Transportation Terminal Command, G-l£, were also added to the project .
 CG USC3NARC directed on 3 Ntv-_n:i . Page 78 of that, upon arrival at St. Louis hospital, the hospital staff were shocked to discover that they had been sent to the U.S.
 The lC2th Traneportati -o , battalion for operational control for the duration o~f the Csban emergency . The battalion is based in St. Petersburg, Florida .
 Upon termination of the operation, that -licit .and the ecuipaii&t world revert to the control of the Co-nmanding General,. Fourth Army .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the Chief of ' ' ' Staff, United States Army, to initiate action with local authorities for use of the airi pert .
 On 4 November, tie 1st Armored Division was Queried by higher headp^quarters as to its capability to maintain its-taaTeat operational' reedixess posmre and its current deployment configuration .
 Jc Frorce CHARLEE was at full TOE strength in both personnel and equipment and was in the highest possible state of readiness . Jc . Frorce .
 All equipment was combat loaded and tracked vehicles remained loaded on flat curs in holding areas in the vicinity of Fort Stewart . All equipment remained combat loaded . Trackers remained loaded in the area .
 Personnel of the Xivisicn Floating Reserve were scheduled to close at Fort Stewart on L^-tie following day, but all equipment had already arrived . All equipment arrived .
 All wheeled veils Is s ^ • wsrs already offloaded and the tracked vehicles are scheduled for eff, ; >-' loading . loading commencing on 11 November .
 Like TasK Farce CHARLIE, the personnel prof the Liviaion Floating Reserve were in alert status . They were restricted to tie Fort Stewart reservation . The personnel prof were on alert status at Fort Stewart .
 Although tits -iCiirs wi-re still short a few key personnel and a few item3 of eruipment, th-vr were plaasd on a twelve-hoar alar'; status .
 Although not required, the' 1st Armored Division planned to place this force under the same uniform and off-post restrictions as the Tafrk Force and the Floating Reserve . The force is not required but planned to be placed under similar uniform restrictions .
 The 1st Armored Division concluded that a somewhat lesser state of readiness approximately a 24 hour alert status — could be maintained for an additional 30 days, or 'until 30 December' provided certain restrictions placed on Task Force CHARLIE and the Division Floating Reserve were relaxed .
 In addition to the above situation, queries had also been nvsde as to the possibility of a ""Stand-Down"" for these forces . The situation has been described as a 'Sit-Down'
 The division requested authority from CINrARLANT to dispatch an additional 80 personnel to Tort Lauderdale for such training as aeon as the first group ccmpleted its training phase . The first group has completed its first phase of training .
 The divisica requested authority to leave the pertinent equipment at Fort Lauderdale . until all this training is completed . The equipment will be left at the airport .
 Thad requested an additional LST for the movement of Task Fores C3A3LIE due to weight limitation of the old-style LST' CIFJAR 1 LAKT 1 s requirements hadLzzzeastd to four additional 7-ST's because of
 Joint Chief scf Staff approved tie request for tie charter of. oaa additional LST on 5 Novemier and grantfcd authority to Commander .
 Military Sea Transport Service, to charter tie LST CAL-ASRO at Savannah, Georgia, Georgia . Military Sea Transportation Service will charter tie the ship to the carrier carrier .
 Maintenance, training, and morale would be affected significantly if these units were held in their current readiness posture beyond -9 November . Third Arm pointed out that maintenance, training and morale .
 The estimated arrival of the On-Call Force has now been moved forward to 11 November . Estimated arrival has been delayed until November 11 .
 The 2nd Battalion, 81st Armor, was substituted for the 2nd Battalioa., 52nd Infantry, in the Division Floating Reserve and the latter unit va* aow :'jx the On-Call Force .
 The 3rd Battalion, 2nd Artillery, had ssea added to the On-Call Force . In addition, the 3rd and 2nd Battalion has added ssea .
 Commanding General, XVIII Airborne Corps - also designated as Commander, Joint Task Fores Cuba — submitted a number of comments and recommendations on composition and use of the forces allocated to OPLAN 316 . P^£"" la response to an inquiry from CINCARLANT
 This resulted from recurring increases in both the force requirements and availability as n«w intelligence information on Cuba was made .
 This seemed to be the next logical st«p in ths development of the '«'«ronger ""plan' The plan would be the first step in the development of a plan for the future .
 On D-Day the 62ad aid 101st Airborne Divisions would conduct their planned praciojae assault . The Marines, in sufficient force, would secure the beachhead at Tarara .
 Th2 2nd Infantry Division would land over-the-beach at Tarata immediately of L7A Pages W# W# b«hirid the Marines .
 The 1st Armored Division would land through the pert at Mariel, using the maximum available assault shipping, while the ' let Infantry Division — • Xess tSs planned airlanded elements — would immediately follow the 1st . Division .
 This would enable the use of the 5th Infantry, the.nd Armored, or the 4th Infantry Divisions, as a Floating Division . This would allow the use . of the . 5th . Infantry, . the .nd Armored or the . 4th infantry Divisions .
 The availability of assault shipping, however, was the primary factor which limited the ability to introduce additional forces into the initial phase of the . ' ' operations . '
 Current planning factors called for maximum use of the port facilities at Mdriel . Unless sufficient quantities of assault ehipping were made available, it was extremely doubtful if any more forces could be placed ashore within the first eight to ten days .
 Joint airborne exercises called ""SUN SHADE"" were conducted for each battle group of the 82nd and lOlat Airborne Divisions .
 The experience gained during the Cuban emergency has resulted in the Army attaining a high state of readiness . The As«y was ready in all respects to execute military operations in Cuba in support of U 5. natiorul policy .
 Naval forces involved in the Cuban operations included Attack Carriers, with embarked Air Groups, Anti-Submarine Forces, Service Forces, and Mine Forces Suomarine Forces .
 All of these naval units contriout ed signifi cantly to the readiness to execute CINCLANT OPIANS 312/316 if directed . If directed, the naval units will carry out the mission .
 Provide or arrange for logistic and administrative support of naval forces . Provide logistic, administrative support for naval forces.
 Anne: J to CINCLANT OPLAN 314. f&, Direct COMKHESTFOR to support Joint Task Force 122, as required . Anne: F& 314 is directed to provide support to Joint Task force 122 . Anne:: J is directed .
 Anti-raider, Mine Countermeasures, and other operations { .. :r in the Atlantic Command area outside the Cuban area of operations, (Joint Zone £i;v Cuba), in order to defend the continental US.
 Conduct ASW operations as necessary within the Cuban area of operations, . within the Cuba area of operation, . JxLsup'port of or in coordination with Commander Naval Task Force. conduct ASW .
 Direct Carib PHIBRON with embarked Marines to deploy to an area '.:ithin 4 hours steaming of Guantanamo Bay'
 Chop Carib PHIBRON to COMANTDEFCOM; when Marines disembark, sail PHIBON to CONUS port for re-load . Chop CaribPHIBON off the coast of the United States . Chop Caribbean PHIBron to COMantDEFCom; when marines disembark
 Force, to form and' deploy Naval Task Force to vicinity of objective area. Force, formed and' deployed Naval Task force to . vicinity of . objective area . Force .
 The major combat unit assigned ::as a Marine Battalion to be air lifted to Guantanamo on order on order . The unit assigned is a Marine battalion .
 At the first sign that hostilities were imminent, a Regimental Headquarters and two Marine Battalion Landing Team* should be placed aCJGuantanamo and dependents evacuated . On 12 October COMCARIBSEAFron recomner^.d that at the first . sign that
 A GV be maintained at Roosevelt Roads at all times; a Destroyer Division be maintained in the Guantanamo vicinity; and a'TAO/AOG be prepared to a:.:uirc responsibility for fresh xjater resupply . A VMF Squadron be on alert status at
 Four days later on 15 October, COMPHIBLANT recommended the immediate reinforcement of Guantanamo . The U.S. government recommended the reinforcement of the Guantanamo camp .
 VA-35 which had been assigned to COM-., NAVBASE GTMO was in place' at'McCalla by 16 October . VA- 35 was assigned to the COM-.com-based COM-35 .
 The decision had been made -that the adequate defense of Guantanamo re-auired the presence of substantial numbers of attack aircraft, naval gunfire ""support ships and marine ground forces"
 From this time forward the entire combat capability of the Atlantic Command was to be brought to bqar on the Government of Cuba . The Atlantic Command had been brought to Cuba .
 Brigadier General Collins, USMC, Commanded the ground forces . An observation plane was airborne seeking unusual activity in Cuban territory . ESSEX was underway -to provide AAW and surveillance to the west of Guantanamo .
 PHI3R0N o was within four hours of the base, but out of the sigh™ of land . Naval gunfire ships were occupying three fire support areas; two FSU 'aircraft were providing airborne CAP and two on strip alert during daylight .
 CDMNA'BASE GTMG stated that only AAW capability was being provided by FSU type aircraft of Utility Squadron 10 and ships undergoing refresher, training .
 Not only would this enhance the anti-aircraft capability but would also pryyide for improved close air support . Not only this would be possible, but also would improve the capability of the US military .
 C0M3ARI3SEAFR0N conevrring with this recommendation further cecommended to dNCLANXIT-T that the HAWK or REDE'iE be provided for defense against no warning low level air strikes .
 FIT ordered eight YMF aircraft equipped with Sidewinder displaced from Roosevelt Roads to Guantanamo by 21October . JHN JLrtiy.'..'-FIT ordered . eight YFIT aircraft . equipped with . Sidewinders displaced from . Roosevelt Roads . to Guantanamo .
 COMCARIBSEAFRON' was to provide air and surface escort to protect ships and aircraft evacuating non-combatants . It was intended to provide protection for ships and planes evacuating non-combatant during World War II .
 To provide a means of emergency water resupply in the event the Base water source was eliminated, plans were made to have two TAO/AOG readied f-v""-?to haul water when ""required" Water suppIv if water supply was cut off .
 Base defense plans were to include attack :-to the Northeast to capture the Yteras water plant . f""*' 1 Shortage of surgical teams and whole blood supply .
 On -23 October, J^*~ instructed local militiamen and soldiers, to report to the military . f*""* school at San Justo. f** school .
 Cij Army, Militia, and Communist Bloc Forces in Central and Eastern Critate Provjij^r inca. I ^* Cij army, Militia and Communist . Bloc forces in . Central and . Eastern countries .
 Incoming intelligence summaries in mid-November reported that .extsasivs construction was continuing at the Holguin Airfifild in Orientc.
 V ■ ■ .. • bC£L . The success of this air movement would hava bees. i,^. ■greatly impaired if the airfield had been exDOsed to any kind of . artillery or mortar fire .
 As a show of fore*, G0MNA73ASE GT-AS cir^tad -• t££"" ths-t.tic-n ovtr the Base on 22 October . elements of VA-35, vMA^331 t and VD'-IO
 Fleet training had been discontinued and members of the Fleet Training Group were assigned base defense-billets . adequate defense against air attack was still the ^greatest weakness .
 To improve 'the air. defense, 6 aircraft were directed to fly a one hour dawn patrol . To improve the air . defense, six aircraft were ordered to fly the one hour patrol .
 COMNAVBASE GTMO requested that 2 VFN be on station from sunset to sunrise . 4 VFN was on station at dawn and dusk . 2VFN was requested to be on the station from sunrise to dawn .
 In reserve were two more battalions comprised of companies from the Marine Barracks, two companies of CB's and fcur ccxnparii-.s .s --£ blue jackets .
 ZAHX made some observations, to CINCLANT regarding the vulnerability of air . craft at Guantanamo . craft . At Guantanamo .
 Base at Guantanamo the minimum number of aircraft try smit -jj*sra£ioral requirements . Minimum number of planes must be at Guantanamo .
 JL'; S-S-L; S-H; ECS cams in from the USS OKINAWA and the jets were fcs ccme fr.se T*&'-333 at Roosevelt Roads .
 A careful check was kept of all surface operations involving merchant ships, particularly those carrying cargo to or from Cuba . The operation was carried out in Cuba and Cuba .
 CNO sent the dependents a message delivering his congratulations and respects on the manner in which they were carrying out the evacuation . CNO also congratulated them on the way they carried out their evacuation .
 The few interruptions were caused as a result of harassing tactics on the part of the Cuban military . Page 98 of 17A Pages was Page 98 .
 Suzh '< tactics as disrupting the transportation and lengthy interrogation and search ' were used . Suzh . tactics as disrupted the transportation . and lengthy interrogations and search were used. Suzh. ' < tactics such as disrupting . transportation, lengthy . interrogation and . lengthy interrogation . and
 Certain on-board Cubans volunteered for extra duties on board the plane .
 40 Cubans were standing watches with the Base p""**""** Police as the second man in a police patrol . For example, 40 Cuban men were standing watch with the base p.""**"** Police .
 A significant development was I the bringing forward of evidence of 2 employees cooperating with Cuban authorities in the harassment of Base employees . The evidence was brought forward by the Cuban government . The two employees are cooperating with the Cuban authorities .
 12 inch water line between, the Yateras River and pump house #5 sustained a leak . Water service was normal on 31 October .
 As emergency measures however, 2 tankers and a water barge are available for fresh water resupply . The situation has been described as a 'serious emergency'
 The water problem just like the Cuban labor for?i never became critical. The water problems never became a critical issue. The problem is not a water problem, it's a labor problem .
 Marines were critically injured when they inaavcitvrrtf.lv entered a mine field . Marines were injured in the incident . Marines are now recovering in hospital .
 Four other Marines and a Navy corpsman were wound&d when they attempted to remove the injured Marines . Four others were wounded when they tried to remove Marines .
 Marine sentries accidentally ran a Ford pick-up truck through the fence line . The incident happened on 6 November 2 .
 No Cuban officials appeared at this masticg and the matter was considered closed . The matter is considered closed by Cuban officials .
 Planning .and preparations for both offensive and defensive actiens continued . Planning . continued to continue .
 A schedule was established for relieving the units on the Main Line |:-.^,:5 of ' Resistance' so that the troops could enjoy hot meals .
 Watches were organL^g,ized so that the men could have adequate sleep under more comfortable csndi; tions . Watches had been organL.^g,.ized to ensure they were comfortable .
 If g^ such a state is possible under the conditions as they existed, the situation had become normal . And, if g^ . such a . state was possible, it was possible under conditions as . they existed . The situation had . become normal, says g^. And,
 Thought was given toward sending liberty parties to other Caribbean islands for rest and recreation . Thought was also given to send liberty parties abroad for rest, recreation .
 Credibility of this rumor mounted. on 21 November when quarantine of -^£ Cuba was lifted . By 28 November 1962, the situation had so improved that most of the reinforcing Marine units had been ordered returned to their home stations .
 A minimum of three surface fire support ships are required . The ships will be armed with a minimum of 3 ships capable of carrying anti-ship missiles .
 Maintained in readiness to provide for arrival first company 12 hours and remainder of battalion within 24 hours . First company expected to arrive within 12 hours .
 Flotilla includes 2-Cruisers, 2-DLG; 2-DDR; 1-DDG; and 1-EDD assigned CTG 136 . The U.S. Navy will be using the fleet for the first time .
 The Cuban Air Force and Cuban airfields were in a poor state of readiness to launch attacks against ships on the ""WALNUT"" stations . Later, it was determined by U.S.aerial reconnaissence that the Cuban Air force and the Cuban airfield were
 With approval of CINCLANT and JCS the quarantine arc was readjusted closer to Cuba but seaward of the Bahamas Chain . The quarantine arc is now readjusting to Cuba .
 Naval Air Patrol Squadrons and the Anti-Submarine Warfare Forces Atlantic Fleet provided aircraft to search the ocean approaches to Cuba .
 At the outset of the Quarantine the U.S. Air Force provided six KB-47 aircraft and four RB-50 aircraft to augment Navy search efforts . The United States Air Force also provided six .
 The six RB -47 aircraft were -oithdrawn from the quarantine effort after about a week of seaEih operations . The six aircraft are now being released from quarantine .
 The Remington Rand Univac Sea Surveillance Computer System was the pripj'j* mary method of tracking merchant shipping to and from Cuba . The majority of ships intercepted were first sighted by aircraft and than the quarantine ships were vectored for the interception .
 The beat C^ information' on point of departure, course and speed for each ship was entered in the computer . The beat was entered by the computer in a bid to get the best speed and speed of the flight .
 A read-out every two hours listed the latitude and longtit^ ude of each ship of dnterest . The latitude of the ship was listed every hour .
 Initial frequency of the STTSUMS was six per day which was reduced to three per day commencing 31 October 1962 . Initial frequency was six times per day . The initial frequency was initially six times .
 Others with non-suspicious cargo ■slowed or even stopped, seemingly awaiting guidance from the Kremlin . Some cargo trucks were stopped or stopped in Moscow .
 JKE"" CINGIANTFLT promulgated the code name SCOTCH TAPE followed by a numeral to designate a suspect ship which might warrant special attention . It was during this phase that JKE."" CINGiantFLt promulgated a code name .
 During this phase, eleven SCOTCH TAPE ships were observed outbound from Cuba . This code j name facilitated unclassified reference to a particular merchant ship . j During this period, 11 SCOTECH TAPE vessels were observed .
 The masters of the Soviet ships accepted close Observation in varying degree, in some cases willingly, in other cases j reluctantly . Some of the masters accepted close . Observation .
 Quarantine Operations were held in abeyance on 30 and 31 October 1962 during the visit of Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to Cuba .
 The name, call signs and hull numbers of all USN combatant ships were indicated in the U.S. Navy's battle ships .
 As a result, it was necessary to initiate an extensive special air and surface search to intercept the nine Soviet ships . The search was carried out in an extensive air and sea search .
 Mention should be made of the capability of the ASW carrier groups to participate in such an effort .
 Phase Three, CTF 81 continued routine and special air searches operations on the island . KOMSOMOL 6 42 6 8 .
 This Quarantine Operation was unique in naval annals . It could well be a pat^Sn of future naval operations . The operation was unique and could be used in future operations .
 The two considerations listed listed listed in the preceeding paragraph were fulfills* by cScW readily and with no .undue difficulty . The decision was made by cSCW and the decision was unanimous .
 The <*»-J-^™ were closely directed from Washington, presumably to insure that diplomacy and military endeavors would not be working at cross purposes .
 Even *,. M-. damage incurred did not render either ship incapable of c » r '^^ £"" assign-d missions the CHESTNUT line . Even *,, M-. . damage incurred didn't render either ships incapable of . c « r ' ^ £'" assign-
 Pag^is ^'^Kpjaf^""-^ 2 *** 3 rt:ary <nt the skill, enthusiasm and spirit of the officers and enlisted personnel involved . Pag.: "The skill and enthusiasm" of the troops involved was evident . Pag: "Pag
 This deployment was directed by COMSECONDFLT in response to a directive that in order to reduce reaction time it was desired that a CVA be located in Mayport or operate in or south of the Mayport area to the maximum extent practicable .
 A3 days of steady steaming for INDEPENDENCE before she returned to her home port .
 ENTERPRISE had returned to CONDS after a European deployment on 11 October . ENTERPRise had returned home from a deployment in October .
 This OPORD provided . the basis for naval actions in support of CINCIANT OPIAN 312 . This . provided ; the basis . for naval . actions in . support of . Cinciant OPIan 312 .
 Reinforcement of Guantanamo; evacuation of dependents and non-combatant 3 from Guantanamo . Deployment by CG FMFLANT of a 4 squadron MAS to Key Vest and squadrons as required to establish a three 6quadroh MAG at Roosevelt Roads .
 Commander Naval Task Force with shore and carrier based aircraft was, commencing at H-Hour, to strike assigned targets in Cuba and provide air defense and close air support to Guantanamo .
 C0KCARDT7 SIX was intiaily designated Commander Naval Force . CCMCARDI7 TWO was to be directed to assume command when appropriate .
 CG FMFLANT. upon execution was to deploy one MAG to Key West and CHOP it to CINCAFIANT . If not previously directed, reinforce Guantanamo with cne air lifted battalion and the required ..sea lifted echelon . CGFMFLANT .
 PHIBron and CHOP itto COM GTMO Sector, CARZBSEAFron . and retain' one PHIBRON with embarked Landing Force in the Caribbean .
 Commander Antilles Defense Command on the 20th made certain recommendation with respect to control of forces . Commander Antille Defense Command issued certain recommendation .
 He recommended that air units at Guantanamo remain under the control of COMNAY; BASE GTMO and that CTF i35 allocate targets to these units from the approved target list . He also recommended that the air units remain under COMNAy; Base GTMO .
 By message to COMSECONDFLT, CG FMFIANTand COMNAVAIRLANT, CINCLANTFLT on the 20th directed to hold the ENTERPRISE A3J aircraft ashore . The ENTERPRise A3 jumbo jet will be held ashore
 OOHSECONDFLT was told to direct ENTERPRISE to take aboard a 20 plane Marine A4D squadron . The squadron is a Marine Air Force squadron .
 CG FMFLANT was told to provide the squadron and fly planes, personnel and equipment aboard as soon as possible and not later than 21.21. 21.
 COMCARDIV SIX requested C0MCARDI7 to inform him of readiness to attack assigned targets in first strike and statad his desire for early reconnaissanceand destruction -of KOMARs .
 In a follow-up message, COMCARDiv SIX further defined . approach/retirement areas and statsd his -i^tantions to remain north of Cuba .
 If directed to hit allocated targets only, strike would be under taken if the Cuban forces -committed an act of aggression against the base or if previously directed by. The strike against. would be . under taken .
 During this period there was a large volume of traffic relating to target assignments and weapons selection . During this time there were a number of targets and weapons choices .
 Enterprise with FISKE, RUSH and HAWKINS commenced movement via Mayaguana and Windward Passages . ENGLISH, HANK, CORRY and O'HARE followed through Windward • ^ Passage .
 L» A * ternate day refuelings continued until the departure of COMDARDTV TWO from . the area on 5 December .
 Had any plan executed, all units would have ; b^n""op»£ off^ornea^ ed periods without refueling periods . Had any . plan to be executed, units would . have refueled without fuel .
 Fuelings were scheduled to occur *« °""°* each day to permit the beginning of limited flight operations on completion . Fuelings planned to occur each day each day .
 The uncertainties of any readiness for contingency plans required all units S bHept a5 a5 to a high logistics level, so considerable effort was made .
 SS move was ideal for submarine protection and an effort was made to operate in the vicinity of shoals present in the area . Shoals were found to be present at the time of the move .
 Because of the increased distance ana transit time involved the Windward Passage air patrol was -cured on 29 October . Because of an increased distance an air patrol time involved, the Air Patrol was --cured .
 Due to the • number of forces positioned south of Cuba a proposal was initiated to position a tender at Kingston, Jamaica for TAV purposes . The tender was intended to be held at Kingston for the purposes of TAV .
 TG 44. assumed TF -128 ' task 'task ' • organization' divided into two groups one stationed in San Juan area and one south of Jamaica . TG 44 was assigned to the U.S. military in Puerto Rico and Puerto Rico .
 The tempo of air operations training was increased by providing one fully ready CVA and one CVA with slightly reduced readiness . By thiB means the tempo of operations training has been increased .
 This method of alternating the ready duty was continued until the departure of INDEPENDENCE and greatly increased the flight operations .
 RDVDS TG 135. with ENGLISH and STTCKELL. as escorts . RDVTSKEE, PAWCATUCK, KANKAKEE, GREAT SITKIN, MA2AMA with ENGRISH and ENTHROLLISH as esc
 On 25 November a fatal aircraft accident occurred during the catapult launch of an aircraft . The accident was the first of its kind .
 Caribbean Area with one carrier .on station and a second carrier in CONUS on call . Caribbean Area has one carrier on station and second carrier on call.
 I tracked or investigated 2? .contacts in the Western Atlantic . j On 21 October no submarine contacts were under active prosecution .
 Cuba would be forthcoming and additional ASW forces would be added to the southern Florida area . Cuba would also be forthcoming . The U.S. would also provide additional forces .
 Aircraft operating from NAF Lajes continued to perform dally surveillance in the vicinity of the TEREK, to ensure continuous contact and possible Soviet submarines attempting to rendezvous .
 Several ASW aircraft were directed to intercept csr-ain Soviet shipping enroute to Cuba . Several aircraft were sent to intercept Soviet ships en route to Cuba.
 VP aircraft and 10 submarines were directed to deploy to the Naval Station Argentia to provide forces for an Argentia Sub-Aix Barrier . On 24 October 17 17 VP aircraft, 10 submarines and 10 VP aircraft deployed .
 HUK unit,, was directed to proceed and rendezvous with the USS DEPENDENCE group and to provide ASW protection . USS DePendence group was ordered to escort the ship to shore .
 Commander advised that could be a deliberate counter action by the Soviets p against quarantine forces . Commander advised, could be . deliberate counter . action by Soviets p vs. quarantine forces. This could be an attempt to quarantine .
 The Chief of Staff, United States Air Force offer ""of USAF aircraft for aerial surveillance of. shipping utilizing B-52 aircraft was accepted j£«~J*« \ 6atrol were assigned .
 On the 26th of October CINCIANTFLT reported hisconcern over the shortJ»"" age of ASW torpedoes and strongly urged an increase in delivery of these weapons .
 The submarine situation >nth e ftlantic basin indicated that Soviet subs were making *f * f ^^S^ east of the Argentia Barrier . Subs were making east of Argentina Barrier east of Argentia barrier .
 On 30 October the quarantine was suspended commensurate with the visit of United Nations Secretary General U. Thant to Cuba . Identifying numbers were pain.ed ou.. gand photographs of the sub were obtained .
 In additisa, ASW-,„-.,— f • s participated in surveillance operations for Soviet snipping . The operation was to remove offensive weapons from Cuba .
 The code word ""S^3 TAPE"" £ SrS-slinated for use when merchant ships were kept under actual swrailx-nsa . The code was used for use in shipping .
 Details of ""SCOTCH TAPE" operations are noted in the section, on Quarantine Operations . Details of 'S2L' operations are also noted in this section .
 On 1 November the TEREK was observed continuing on her south we3t2rly -cu-sThe CAT^TERRA «ho was shadowing the TereK observed what appsared to oe'signals from the search light .
 There was no confirmation, howvr, that TEREK was actually signalling a -submarine . No confirmation that it was signalling a submarine .
 A P3A aircraft was punched to search 2 l^ a Lea to the north of the Azores . The search was carried out in the area of the islands .
 One new submarine contact . 5efignated""-35 was reported southeast of Bermuda . The contact was placad ^nder continUous""~VP surveillance .
 Surveillance would continue until TEREK was in Jm. vicinity of 55N and was observed on its homeward course . Terek was in the vicinity of the 55N when it was observed .
 Lrine contact was reported by. a HATS flight southeStt-of -Charleston, K~., however,. it wa« ^f.ttyw^ha-.axea-.was -kept under survs.llance. Lined contact reported .
 A S2F tracker squadron deployed to Cherry Point, N.C. for a period of 4 days to provide ASW co,zr operations .
 No new contacts were reported and no significant information was made . No significant information en oJ ^ c ' s were made .
 Norsmber ASW forces were primarily employed in ""SCOTCH TAPE" operations . No significant unidenti-isd st-3marine, activity reported .
 On the 25th of November, just as it appeared that the tempo of operations would subside, two new sub contacts were reported . Just as it looked like the tempo had subsided, the two new contacts have been reported .
 No sigoilxcant < «^t""occurred from the 28th through the 1st of December .
 U.S. and Latin American Naval Forces took an active part in the quarantine of Cuba . This force of combined United States and . Latin American naval forces took part in quarantine . Cuba .
 There had been little warning in the Air Force that crisis was building up over Cuba .
 The U.S. ships, listening over short wave radio, heard the President say, "Thifl urgent transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base"
 On Hedaxsday morning, the 24th of October, QOMSOLANT was directed to return to Trinidad with key members of his staff .
 Senior Chilean and Peruvian officers transferred to MULLINNIX to be briefed on the situation . On request, the senior Chilean and ""Peruvian officers were transferred to the Mullinnix .
 COMSOIANT and most of the members of his staff boarded the UNITAS United States Air detachment aircraft and flew to Trinidad, arriving the morning of 26 October . The mission was the first of its kind in the U.S. mission to the Caribbean .
 CINCIANTFLT ordered the establishment of a quarantine force which would be placed in position to intercept shipping going to and from Cuba to the northeast .
 The force permitted free access to the Caribbean area through the Le6ser Antilles passages . However, this force was only permitted to allow free access .
 CINCIANTFLT cancelled bis direct"" ive and ordered COMSOLANT to report to C3NCIANT for operational control . CINciantFLT ordered COMsolant to report directly to C4NIANT .
 Having only recently returned from an extensive period at sea, the ships were undergoing repair when the quarantine was established . Most of their crews had been on leave and the ships had been undergoing repair .
 These officers and men had.experience in cryptography and in radio communication and could also speak Spanish or, in a few . words, Portuguese or Spanish .
 COMaOi^NT and staff normally consisted of the Admiral, 8 officers and 20 enlisted men . Staff was usually made up of 8 Admirals and 8 officers . COMaNiNT was the first ship to carry out a full-time Admiral .
 Staff had expanded to 25 officers and 51 men, £f vhich 10 Officers and 20 men were earmarked for the express purpose of assignment to Communications-Liaison Teams .
 A third submarine ARV CARTTE remained on call iTvene^uelTaSiting orders to take part in the operation .
 There was no need for her services at the time, but it was planned to use her in combined anti-submarine exercises later . There was also a planned use of her for anti-surmarine exercises .
 Argentine Naval Attache was on hand to greet the Argentine ships that arrived in Trinidad .
 Mediately after tne compined operation was • ordered-.that.that. It became apparent Mediates were ordered to have the operation . Mediating became apparent after the operation was ordered .
 U.S. Naval Station, Trinidad, would be stable when ashote, would not provide either the number of circuits needed to conduct the operation nor the necessary reliability .
 These limitations were due to lack of equipment, age and obsolescence of the equipment installed . These limitations are due to the age of equipment installed and lack of communication personnel .
 The departure of Task Force""l37 on 12 November J 9 was a history-making event . Center was quickly built la_ COMSOIANT's headquarters building, the message center was built in response to increased volume of traffic .
 Reports of oercnanfshlp contacts began to reach the COMSOIANT OPCON Centex, where thsr were recorded and plotted .
 They were in *xtresely poor condition, particularly with regard to their engineering plaaxtar, and had to be giver an immediate tender availability in order to make them ready of operations .
 The quarantine ended before either of these ships put to sea . Howevsr, the quarantine, ended before any of the ships put sea .
 President Kennedy announced the end of the quarantine at his press conference on Tuesday, 20 November . AH ships of Task Force 137, with the exception of the Dominican Republic, had computed one patrol .
 The following day, 7 December, operational control .of the 7enesuelan ships was returned to the Venezuelan Navy and the' ships were sailed for home .
 The Chief of Naval Operations hailed the Latin American participation in the quarantine as an historic milestone in hemisphere relations . He thanked his counterparts in Argentic,. the Dominican Republic and Venezuela for their contributions to the effort .
 SS3H, Claris equipped submarinas), vers on statian in assigned patrol areas . SS33H is equipped with state-of-the-arted submarines . SS2H is armed with a weapon that can be deployed in assigned areas .
 C0MSU3IANT immediately prcraailsatad.an A^Sin^ to the submarine force aatting DEFCON 3 to . Insure that all eubasar ins units were advised. C0M3Iant was advised.
 Units at sea earmarked for deployment wars directed .t:r rsfjrntoport and load cut with wartime torpedo lead and .ten off for teasia-a estanded operations . Units earmarked to deploy wars directed directed at .t.rrs.rnt
 The ensuing paragraphs axe not all inclusive and only highlight Service Force operations . Service Force is based in the United States .
 The force sailed, for the ..vicinity ,;■• I of Vieques Island, PuertoRico, for a scheduled exercise . The force joined the exercise Task Force and SERVRON FOUR provided the logistic support .
 Also on this date COMSERVLANT activated the SERVLANT. war xocm ^ on a 24 hour basis consistent with the President's announcement concerning **the Quarantine of Cuba .
 CCMSERVRON TWO was designated CTG 136.3 . Undergoperiodic training in the . fg Guantanamo area .
 As the scope of Naval operations broadened it became obvious that J* additional tankers would be required to support the fleet . J* tankers will be required in the future .
 Two ""black"" and two ""white"" ^STS tankers were assigned to resupply underway replenishment groups . The need for these fahips was recognized, and the need was recognized .
 By 25 October replenishment utilizing ELOKOKIN . and CKIKASKIA in the southern mostsector, NEOSHO and KANKAKEE in the middle sector and KASKASKia in the northern sector was operating satisfactorily .
 On 29 October the underway replenishment group commander for the Quarantine forces was the commander of the quarantine forces . He was deployed to quarantine facilities in quarantine camp .
 Underway replenishment for the force was directed to conform to this 1-ne.1-ne .
 The Service Force use of TA0:«s was c-nsidered satisfactory after initial difficulties in ""hock ups"" were resolved . The service force use of the TA00: »s was satisfactory .
 Getting the men fe their u-its was cc^U^tsc by lack of tranaFage -^7 I portation to the operating force. It became apparent that neither of the two. c nor . c nor ^^n it became apparent . After a few
 L/T of fleet -freight to ships'** TF 135, varying front electronic tubes to jet aircraft engines . TF 135 is the same as the TF 135 .
 In one 24 hour period, TRUCKEE fueled and consolidated a total of 23 hours . The team spent 23 hours fueling and consolidating the truck .
 USS MAZAMA steamed continuf ' ously until 3 December meeting all commitments without incident . After Joining COMSERVRON FOUR on 15 -October, USS MAzama steamed on 15-October .
 MAZAMA personnel accomplished a task that normally would have required two days. During these fewhqurs in• x Roosevelt Roads, MAZama personnel accomplished the task that would have taken two days to complete .
 IF UA UA '^^^""STtOaelLTeacWa terminated and CO*.. to avoid, the .hurricane. If UA '~~' is terminated and . CO* is terminated . If UA UA is terminated, it will be terminated .
 COrfPHIBRON 6 had arrived in Norfolk and was taking cm fuel and Visions.ta . Because Page . la la la the mear.ta, COrFPHIBron 6 had been taken to Norfolk .
 The entire movement unit then proceeded through the Mona Passage to a pointsouth of the Dominican Repuolic. This entire movement group then proceeded . This entire . movement unit . proceeded to proceed through the . Mona passage .
 At the same t<J ^Caribbean Ready PHIBRON 8 consisting of two AP A,,, an ALA^ an LSD and an APD continued toward Guantanamo . At the time t <J ^ caribbean ready PHIBron 8 was headed to Guantanamo .
 Cuba/ CNO authorized release of 5 Tate stocks . The President announced the quarantine cf Cuba/Cuba/CNO .
 COMPRTBLANT was in ■J2 w4 w4,vHm to outibad-BLT ^ 3/8. North Carolina and sail for the Caribbean . North Carolina .
 The CHILTON va, . .directed to proceed to Korehead City . event a combat situation ensued . The children were ordered to proceed .
 C0MFH3LANT and COKPHIBGRU FOUR conferred, and it was decided to return to Norfolk . It was decided that C0H3Lant would return .
 McXBHEX, shift his flag to Little Creek and assign the AGC to CCMFHT5GRT FOUR as his flagship . Little Creek will be Little Creek's flagship in the future . McXHEX will shift its flag from Little Creek to CCMHT
 COMFHIBGRU FOUR effected a rendezvous with SOMFRTBRON 8 near San Salvador . Later COMHIBGRUGFOUR and SOMFRFRT BRON 8 rendezvous in San Salvador, Mexico .
 The staff s of COMFHIBGRU' TWO ' and CG, XVIII Airborne Corps conferred regarding the armored division lift from Fort Lauderdale by four older LSI' COMSTS also had representatives present .
 ComPHIBron 6 and COMPHIBRON 12 reported to COMFHIBGRU "" FOUR cn 24 October . COMPHibron 6 reported to have been at the top of the world's most powerful units . COMHIBron 12 and COMHibron 12
 COMPHI3R0N 6 was directed to take his squadron to a point northward of Northeast Providence Channel . In turn COMPHi3R 0N 6 ordered to take the squadron northward .
 On 27 October the souadron commander was ordered to rendezvous his group off Charleston when lading was completed . The souadrons were ordered to arrive at the end of October .
 In the meantime, not all of the Amphibious Force ships were playing their role as members -oaf the,Task Force .
 This ; versatile 1156 class LST remained uncommitted to the Task Force 44 organization until 6 November . The 1156 LST was scheduled to be deployed to the carrier carrier carrier force .
 She loaded in five ports, offloaded in three ports and steamed a total distance of nearly 5,000 miles . The ship steamed in five different ports .
 Only those forces assigned to COMPHIBIANT, CTF44 operational control were to be activated under TF U8 . Only those . assigned to . COMPHiBIANT were to have their operational control . CTF 44 operational control was to be . activated under . TF U
 COMPHIBGRU THREE was further instructed to proceed within 24 hours steaming of Guantanamo and, upon ""rival, maintain one half of his forces in readiness at saa.coma. The U.S. was also ordered to maintain one . half his forces . in readiness
 Wher loading out vas completed on 31 October, C0MPHI3LANI JJ«""""^^ ed roJ£*uIr REP at Norfolk but established at Maypcrt. The loading out was completed 31 October .
 At this point a question arose relative to the control of the operation of «BTS shipping invoWefin Se operation . At this time, a question was raised about whether the operation could be controlled by the company .
 By 2 November all FrilBIANT units assigned to the Cuban cpe rat ^ were loaded and formed Into the TaskForce -44"" organization, fe basicoperoper.a ; ^ cnal pattern of the holding operation was new firmly establishes .ask groups steaSo beyond
 Each group was required to arrive well within the required reaction time . Each group required is required to be ready for the arrival .
 STlibsrty necessary for material readies and hi** "J. . . . ,« -ajcr remains -rcactrsnant was for a landing arsa t-3 conduct rsr.ear^als andcrvidS^SStoS^ps .
 This was the ^J ^J^^f^ this decision all with this number of LFH available . The decision was made with this amount of LHS available .
 All ^ee^ve^^ * * ""-* ^ ""™™ ^^ accordingly . All of the content is based on the content of a Sovidenee Channel .
 Atlantic Movement Element ALFA ONE MT McKINLEY CHILTON ROCKBRIDGE CAFRICORNUS ALGOL LINDENWALD DESOTO County TRAVERSE County (LST 1160) LTDDLE C-E 128.3.1.1 .
 Atlantic Movement Element BRAVO ONE BOXER ONE boxer 2 THETIS BAY OKINAWA UVALDE RANKIN FT SNELLING SHADWELL LORAIN COUNTY CTE 128.3.1.1 . Atlantic Movement Elements BRAVO one boxer
 CTE 128.4.8.8 . Pa S es ■%^HA--^<\^^-C:■gecas^aas^^ ;^2223i**Qli^iWSCi6S£V*tJ^^ COLONIAL TH
 CTE 128.4.9.9 . CARTER HALL CTE 127.4 . PACRIB Movement Element BRAVO ONE BAYFIELD RENVILLE WASHBURN ; ■ ■ ■■• BELLE GROVE ■ Carter HALL .
 In addition, CNO vas advised of the possibility that all eleven LST of the Atlantic Reser^ Fleet might be needed .
 Developments concerning these LST rare followed wi-h great interest at FHIBLANT headquarters . Developments . concerning these . rare LSTs followed . great interest . at F HIBLANT HQ .
 Additional LST vo-ald have »*Vre4.«» of the most difficult problems of the Cuban operatione. The precis icacf adequate, timely amphibious lift for the Army Armored Division. The Army's armored division needs an amphibian lift .
 As many LST As feasible be transferred, to class ""selected Reserve status In the Atlantic Reserve Fleet if it vere decided not to activate tne elersn ^T for the Atlantic Fleet .
 CINCIant notified CINCARIANT, COMPHIBU^NT and CG FMFIANT of a Pi*™** CINCLMfi no Kovember to resolve the problem of over the conference sfcheduled tor u r '° ve °° co
 Upon the arrival of POCONO at Norfolk on 12 November, COMFHIBUNT shifted ""his flag aboard"
 At 0700, 16 November 1962, the high poin t of '^^^^J^f^' On conclusion of *, Undlng « ^^» ^""^^f ^^^3"" Mayport-Charleston or the holding area .
 With the lifting .of the quarantine operations on 21 November ^%<jempo _ of operations began to draw rapidly to a conclusion .
 COMPHIBLANT directed COMPHIBGRU FOUR to Conduct landing exercise at Ons low on 28 November .
 COMPHIBGRU TWO was directed to inspect four chartered commercial LST that had been contracted fori He waa to determine the specific material, personnel and training requirements necessary to use them .
 COMSERVIANT was notified that at least two tenter/repair ships were required in the Jamaica-Puerto Rico area to maintain readiness of FHXBGRU THREE :ships .
 Arrangements were made through CGMCR^SS IANT that the YOSEHTTE would remain at Kingston, Jamaica, to provide tend* repairs for PHIBGRU THREE ships . Arrangement was made through . CGM CR^SS .SS Iant would remain
 DEFCON FIVE was set in the Atlantic Flee, and Dispersal Condition FOUR was ordered in CONUS ports . DEFC ON FIVE, DEFC FIVE and DEFCENT FIVE were ordered in the U.S. and the Middle East .
 Shortly before midnight, the uncertainty concerning the stand-oown ■ was "".ended" Shortly after midnight, uncertainty regarding the 'Stand-o-own' was "ended"
 Three ships the msxiauni number of personnel and equipment of the Marine battalion that had SSTfro. Three ships that had the SSTFro. THREE ships the.uni number were the .
 Headquarters of II Marine Expeditionary Force from 23 October to 6 December . Additionally, the .headquarters functioned as Headquarters, II Marine . Expeditionary . Force from October to December .
 Evacuation of dependents from NAVBASE GTMO, Reconnaissance flights oyer Cuban territory, and Preparation for the defense of GTMO . Limited aerial attacks on specified military targets; in Cuba; and anamphibious assault by the -II MET : in Joint operations
 NAS West, NAS Roosevelt Roads and NAS Guantanamo, in preparation for the execution -of OPIAN 312 . NAS Guantanamo and NAS West are preparing for execution . The execution will take place at Guantanamo Bay .
 The 2nd Marine Division, together with aviation command elemsnts and helicopters, were embarking in preparation for the execution of OPLAN 314/316 . The Marine Division was embarking on the mission .
 CBHBWM3IAHT and 33 WlfiC 'r* ' are scheduled to rotate the assignment on a monthly basis . The assignment is scheduled to be rotated monthly .
 This organization was engaged in connection with operations in Missiasippii with XVIII airborne Corps elements in the suppression of a civil disorder . This organization had been engaged in . operations with XVII airborne . elements .
 In -view of the lack of currently available airfields to support operations in Eastern Cuba, CG FMFLANT recommended that VMAs quadrons.be based aboard CVA upon execution of the contingency plans .
 Report one MAG to CKCAFLANT for .planning and to deploy this MAG to Key West and chop to CINCAFLENTENTENT on exesution of this order . Report one . MAG to .cnnnn.com .
 RLT-6 arrived GTMO and chopped to Brigadier General Collins, USMC, the SuLtanaao Ground Uefeuse Commander . Commander Collins was the U.S. commander of the SuLieanaao ground U.E. Commander .
 PHIBRON 8, «P™ ^^ o7Z loading was directed to return to CONUS to embark additional II VS& units . PHIBron 8, ‘P™: ‘O7Z’ was directed back to the U.S.
 A battery from the 3d XAAM Battalion was ordered to Ouantanamo by air to report to the Commanding Officer, MAG-32 . The battery was ordered by the Command of the Mag-32 Command to report back to the base .
 All assigned forces were in place at GTMO except the IAAM battery which was in the process of being emplaced . By late in the day all assigned forces had been deployed .
 On 26 October, as a result of an .approved recommendation ^°S %CjQG• -IAOTsubsequentfanning for execution 6f OFIAN 314, was abandoned .
 Planning for embarkation of the II MEF, until 27 October, P*ovlded for COMPASS/CAS and CG, IIMEF .
 Actions during the following period 'were directed toward maintaining readiness cf deployed forces for a prolonged period, the modification and refinement of the designated plans, and occasional deployment of smaller ut.j.-s. forces'
 On 3 November CINCIANT requested an estimate of the time tne IKEF could maintain an advanced state of readiness . CINCINCIant requested the estimate .
 CG 7MFLANT established 20 December 1962, as the terminal date of tne period .in. 1962 . After consideration of the posture of the . posture of . II MEF units, and recommendations of task group commanders, . recommendations . of task . group commanders . CG 7
 Landing Group West was authorized to conduct a full scale exercise at Camp Lejeune, followed by separation into three increments . Thsse two increments were scheduled for rotation at 10-day i-.t-rva is . 7 m Landing Group was authorized .
 The schedule provided fot one increment to conduct maintenance and training in Camp Cjlune, one increment on liberty in Florida and Carolina ports . One increment remained at sea and conducting landing exercises in the Mayport aria .
 These three increments were scheduled for rotation at seven day ""tervals" The three increments are scheduled to rotate at seven days each .
 A VMF could be deployed from FMFPAC to provide a similar VMF rotation capability . The VMF would provide a rotation capability for training purposes, ""^as further recommended that a VMF be deployed .
 The following day CINCIANTFLT dlrwtad COM PHI3IA3T ar* CG J*^** embark BLT 2/1 at GTMO aboard PH3CEJ 3 snipping, ana to 1 M oR-3 ic-a-nt
 CINCLANTFLT further directed the II MEF less BLT 2/2 and BLT 1/8 to return to home stations . CINCLAAM: "I will continue to work as a result of this decision"
 MAG14, ""VMA-121, and the Det VMF-235 commenced returning to home bases - on 1 December . MAG14 and "VMA"121" were returning to their home bases in December .
 CINCLANTFLT has directed that a PHTBRON be sailed to GTMO and Roosevelt Roads to embark BLT .2/2 and MAG-32 less VMF-115 and return them to home stations by 15 December .
 On 15 December all FMFLANT/li MEF contingency deployments we're, termfc^ted and routine readiness measures reestablished except for MAG14 and MAG-32 which have been placed on 48 hour reaction .
 General Lemay approved the plan in principle, and directad General Walter C Sweeney, Jr., COMTAC, to inform General Sweeney to inform Admiral Robert L Dennison > CINLANT, that, if he should approve the plan, it would receive the full support of
 The plan was approved by CINCLANT as the air assault portion of existing' Cuba Contingency Plans . It was adopted by Cinclant .
 CINCAFLANT was to have operational control of all TAC aircraft and those shore-based Navy and Marine aircraft committed to the Cuba Contingency . General Sweeney was placed in the .position of::air component commander to CINCIANT .
 AFLANT forces were placed on full alert status and moved into their employment bases in Florida . AFLant forces were moved to Florida to prepare for deployment .
 Conferences were held with Army, Navy and Marine planning groups to insure maximum integration -cf effort and the fullest exploitation of the air assault plan .
 As .a reeult of the deployment, TAC aircraft at the Florida employment bases iacrjgased -vary rapidly . As a result of the deployments, the aircrafts at the bases have changed rapidly .
 The target date could not have been met without the full """"P*""""""^ an* t <ll2^Lsistance of all concerned .
 Teamwork and singleness of . the military services and full support was . Sceived from the JCS .and the Governmental agencies in Washington .
 SSSTthTSr Force, support of the operation was jlf^^^, T^tJL^^lX H e oTtead Setty^ oT^esT v^eraole^^ ""nderec^^ ^~ * l Xtactes
 It must also be remembered that fe^'^e resident mlde hour airborne alert beginning 22 Octooer just berore the President ma Page . The President has been in the news since September .
 Air Defense Command and Continental Air Defense Forces immediately moved into southern Florida bases to protect the area from air attack . The forces will assist in controlling reconnaissance and combat air patrol flights . The U.S. Air Force says it will protect Florida from air attacks .
 Air Force air defense intercepters in Florida flev more than 2,000 individual fighter patrols and maintained a 24-hour orbit of several strategic points cff Florida . Air Defense Interception: Air Force Air Force intercepter in Florida .
 MATS aircraft assisted greatly in the airlift of the thousands pf . personnel and tons of cargo into the southeast United States . Thousands of personnel were airlifted to the southeast .
 Air Force Logistics Command and the Air Force Communication Service worked hard to meet the 20 October target date . It was largely because of the outstanding efforts of the Air . Force Logistic Command and Air Force . Communication Service .
 Reserve par t:expat ion in the Cuba crisis did not begin or sud with this active duty period . However, reserve par t :expation ion in Cuba crisis didn't begin or SUd with active duty .
 During the crisis period, tuese reserve fleets airlifted almost two and one-half million pounds more and over 120 passengers into Florida .
 Reserve personnel handled, their mobilization tasks in a smooth and prefessional manner, and with high morale . These reserve personnel handled . their mobilization . tasks in . a smooth manner . and with . high morale.
 Personnel were 7 Air Liaison Officers, 32 Forward Air .on-rcllers, and b SSS control teams, all to be airdropped . remaining Air Force personnel were to be airlanded to opera e the airfield, and handle the aircraft .
 14,500 paratroopers were introduced on D-Day, which is C ™P*^"" the U.S. Airborne Forces dropped during the Normandy invasion .