 The book is sufficiently provocative to evant materials; merit serious consideration on its own . It should be read widely in the literature of the period, and read widely .
 Much of the evidence cold war and American civil liberties. needed to prove anything conclusively about Professor Freeland's thesis is that after the the events covered in this book remains beyond war the Truman administration became conthe reach of scholars .
 The Plan Plan was the ""main battle" in the forging of Pp. xii, 338.71.71 .
 In the ten years following those 13 Train-a device that attempted to elevate the Truman Doctrine to tions ""paused at the nuclear precipice,"" critics the level of the Constitution of the Kennedy mystique have raised serious questions .
 Only one of these books deals ex-Carthyism on Truman, and this study suffers clusively with the missile crisis . But all three, from some of the defects of its predecessors, have some defects .
 The book underestimates the role of Congress in the touchstone of Kennedy's foreign policy and a drive for internal security legislation, mini""major watershed in the Cold War."" mizes Truman's contributions to the defense of Truman's .
 Allison wrote under anti-Communism prior to Dewey's defeat . Allison describes the nist aggression and subversion of government .
 The Air Force and because of a misunderstand""rational actor"" model, which is most often used between civilian and military leaders over employed by diplomatic historians to explain the effectiveness of a ""surgical"" versus a ""masforeign-policy decisions"
 The Soviets withdrew their missiles, partially because of made by key individuals for their nations with the confusion created by the few top Soviet ofout reference to any of the internal, personal, ficials who actually were aware of their emor bureaucratic machinations within their replacement .
 The missile crisis, it uation in which the left hand of the USSR did is assumed, can best be explained in terms of not know what the right one was doing . Viewed from this concompeting agencies created a contradictory sitceptual frame of reference, the missile crisis can
 According to this the burden of further escalation back to the pluralist model foreign-policy decisions are the Soviets . The Soviets withdrew their missiles not product of decentralized coordination (shared because of the blockade itself, as most published power) of the various pressures emanating from accounts have claimed, but because
 The second process model is one developed by the Soviet Union placed its missiles in Cuba as the result by organizational theorists and economists . Allison speculates that the Soviet U.S. may have placed missiles on Cuba as a result of a land attack .
 It of pulling and hauling among select members assumes that international politics is made up of the Presidium . Presidium about which we do not as yet of organizational outputs that have enough public information for documenstandardized .
 There is already an abundance of cause they are based on routines for this type of evidence for the United States in dealing witlh standard or normal .
 From this vantage point, the actions ings of the ExCom (Executive Committee of of the U.S. and the Soviet Union do the National Security Council), which Kennedy did not have to be molded to fit a particular racreated to deal with the crisis .
 Each agency did what it knew best to pushed Kennedy in the direction of strong acdo without concern for internal consistency or tion . Each agency pushed Kennedy to the right direction .
 From the beginning, there was adherence to the same security standards. From the start, therefore, there were adherence to security standards, says the minister .
 IRBMs were installed by the Strategic argument that such normal diplomacy would allow Rocket Forces without Khrushchev's direct allow time for missiles to become operaknowledge. tional .
 There is no confusion, however, about lines of communication to avoid misunderstandings . The lessons drawn from the three procstanding each other's intentions .
 There is no doubt that Allison's multiconic approach adds new insights and specuicy actions of the Kennedy administration to our understanding of the up not only to a defense of the international complex process of decision making .
 This insurgency tactics and nuclear brinkmanship. study asks that diplomatic historians stop as . diplomatic historians .
 Kennedy third models require information not readily available, arbitrarily raised the incident to a high-level if ever, available about recent developments in crisis because of his excessive concern for foreign affairs .
 The Bay of Pigs and Khrushchev's poor showing at Viof Allison's hypothetical analysts address them . Also, as far own and his country's prestige (in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis) and because of the . November mid-term elections .
 The forthcoming congressional elections may or passed traditional diplomatic contacts in favor may not have played either within the ExCom of ""eye-ball to eye-ball" confrontation .
 FitzSimons reaches this conpresident's personal advisers . Like itself or among the much smaller group of the Stone and Steel, FitzSimon reaches this president's advisers .
 This is in essence the United States, which attempt to cut themselves the Kennedy Doctrine, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 It is based on the asoff from governmental bureaucracy and other sumption that since ""we can . can . . . should afinfluential pressure groups" The group was formed in response to government bureaucracy .
 Cold War and Counterrevolubling is more balanced and better documented charges against Khrushchev . The writing is disjointed and ramming .
 Holt, Rinehart and Winston.70.70 areas of the world, however, it provides a Pp. ix, 8o6.70 area of the globe .
 She also laments the fact that Kennedy used his such quibbling will be beside the point . She also criticizes Kennedy's use of these two books and the published works .
 Each book says what its author wants to have said, Americans rather than to eradicate them . Each has the flavor of contrast to the works of Allison and linguistic and moral, of its author .
 The nearly FitzSimons, the McSherry book is an insimultaneous publication so soon after the tellectual disaster . The nearly-fitzSimons' book is the nearly-infamous book is published so soon as the t intellectual disaster .
 It is both the author's and event reveals a joint urgent need for apologia, publisher's intent to present ""a serious, conservabutual" Neither does this diminish the significance tively oriented book,"" despite the difficulties inof the two books .
 The "growth of the apologiae are presented enhances the siglock-step liberalism in the past thirty years."" nificance of these court reminiscences. Indeed the manner in which herent in doing so .
 Johnson (one might say ""Ms. Johnson" in deferon inadequate research (primarily newspaper ence to the South) as a nod to Women's Lib, whose principles this book does not attempt to be pretty well rejected by Lady Bird ysis of the diplomatic relationship between Johnson's