 President Kennedy chose a less aggressive course of action, in order to avoid a declaration of war . After careful consideration, President Kennedy decided to avoid war .
 The United States agreed with the Soviets that it would dismantle all of the Jupiter MRBMs deployed to Turkey against the Soviet Union . Secretly, the U.S. agreed to dismantle the Jupiter missiles .
 Kennedy ran for president in 1960, one of his key election issues was an alleged ""missile gap"" with the Soviets . One of Kennedy's top campaign issues was the alleged 'missile gaps' with the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. at that time led the Soviets by a wide margin, which would only increase over time . Actually, the United States actually led the Soviet Union by a large margin . The United States would lead the Soviets in the Cold War years of the era .
 By October 1962, they may have had dozens, with some intelligence estimates as high as 75 . Some intelligence estimates say they had as many as dozens of people .
 The United States had a considerable advantage in its total number of nuclear warheads and in the technology required for their accurate delivery . The U.S. had a much larger advantage in total nuclear warheads .
 The United States also led in missile defensive capabilities, naval and air power . The Soviets held a two-to-one advantage in conventional ground forces, more pronounced in field guns and tanks .
 Reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as October 21 . The paramount concern was that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles .
 U.S. delegations met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, French President Charles de Gaulle and Secretary-General of the Organization of American States .
 During the crisis, Kennedy had daily telephone conversations with Macmillan, who was publicly supportive of United States actions . Kennedy telephoned former President Dwight Eisenhower shortly before his speech .
 The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was the designated flagship for the blockade . USS Leary was Newport News's destroyer escort . Newport News and Leary were the designated warships .
 Raymond Aron wrote in support of the American response to the U.S. In the October 29 issue of Le Figaro, Aron said in favor of American response . Aron: "I'm glad to see the American reaction to the situation in France."
 Khrushchev warned that the United States' ""outright piracy"" would lead to war . The crisis continued unabated, and on the evening of October 24, the Soviet TASS news agency broadcast a telegram to Kennedy .
 Khrushchev stated, ""if you weigh the present situation with a cool head without giving way to passion, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot afford not to decline the despotic demands of the USA"" and that the . Soviet Union viewed the blockade as ""an act of aggression
 Khrushchev often repeated himself and sent messages lacking basic editing . Undoubtedly a product of pressure, it was not uncommon for him to repeat himself and to send messages lacking editing .