 I first got involved in Model UN in sixth grade and have since attended close to a dozen conferences since then . I've been involved with Model UN since I was sixth grade . I'm a member of the U.S. Model UN team .
 In addition to her role as chair of our crisis, she also serves as co-President of BU Academy’s Model UN travel team .
 Last year, I chaired JCC-Colombia in a joint crisis between Colombia, Venezuela, and Guyana . Venezuela, Guyana and Colombia have been at odds over the past year .
 The year before that, I chaired JCC-Taiwan on the topic of the hotly contested Senkaku Islands . The next year, I chair the JCC in Taiwan, a year before I chaired a JCC on the issue of the Senkakak Islands .
 Outside of Model UN, I’m involved in Student Council and South Asian Student Association at the Academy . I'm involved in South Asian student associations at the academy .
 During our simulation over the weekend, I will take on the role of President Kennedy, and you will serve as my most trusted advisors as we consider our options in midst of growing tensions between America and the Soviet Union . During the simulation, President Kennedy will play President Kennedy .
 All of the ideas during debate will come from you; my only role is to oversee debate. All of this will be from you, says CNN.com .
 If you’re confused about crisis procedure, don’t worry too much about this, as we will have a brief but comprehensive training session before we kick off debate . If you're confused, please prepare for a full-time training session .
 As with any Model UN conference, your performance as a delegate relies heavily on your knowledge of the topic at hand . The success of your performance at the conference is important to your knowledge .
 It is therefore crucial that you do ample background research beforehand . Do you know who you are going to be? Please contact us at http://www.mailonline.com .
 To demonstrate your research, you will be required to hand in a policy paper . To demonstrate research, the government will require you to produce a policy document .
 These papers are useful for collecting your thoughts and developing ideas to bring forth during debate . These papers will be useful for developing ideas for debate participants .
 Events during the crisis will deviate from what actually occurred in history, so it doesn’t make sense to include events during and after the crisis in your research . Events during and beyond the crisis won't be included in history .
 The Soviet Union you will deal with during debate will act differently from the one EXCOMM dealt with during the actual crisis . The former Soviet Union would act differently during the Soviet Union crisis, the author says .
 He’ll be serving as Vice Chair for our committee and is also looking forward to meeting you guys come February . He'll be Vice Chair .
 Delegates, I look forward to meeting you all and seeing how you will steer our country through this crisis . Delegates. Delegates . Delegate. Delegate .
 In 1962, John F Kennedy assembled a group of advisors consisting of the National Security Council and others to address newfound CIA intelligence indicating the presence of Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles .
 With Cuba only about ninety miles south of Florida, the presence of these missiles represented a clear danger to American security . Cuba is only about 90 miles from Florida, and Cuba is about 60 miles away .
 EXCOMM deliberated America’s options in face of this threat . This gathered crowd, known as the Executive Committee or, more popularly, as EXCOMm, deliberated . ExCOMM is known for deliberating America's options in response to the threat .
 Relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, or USSR, were fragile long before the placement of these missiles . Relations between Russia and the United States were fragile before the missiles were placed .
 After World War II, the U.S. emerged as the world’s superpower . The United States emerged as a superpower in 1945 .
 Its defensive capabilities, which included the atomic bomb, were unrivaled . The U.S. was known for its defensive capabilities .
 American manufacturing accounted for half of the world's total output at the world . U.S. manufacturing accounts for half the total output in the world.
 On the global level, the U.S. became the leading voice within the international community . The United States is now a leading voice in the world, President Obama said .
 At the same time, the Soviet Union was expanding its own role as a world power . The Soviets were expanding their own role in the world .
 The USSR under Stalin expanded its presence into most of Eastern Europe . Soon after the war, the USSR expanded its influence in most of the region .
 It became clear that the Soviet Union’s influence on the world posed a threat to U.S. interests, both ideological and material . The Soviet Union's influence was evident in the early years of the Cold War .
 On one level, the US’s global presence and influence was threatened by the Soviet Union because its allies were limited to the capitalist nations of the world . The Soviet Union was able to keep its allies limited to capitalist nations, the author says .
 American interests were also at stake as it did not engage in trade with communist nations . As a result, American economic interests were at stake . The U.S. didn't engage with communist countries as a result .
 Winston Churchill famously characterized the increasing divide between capitalist states and Soviet-controlled communist states as an ‘Iron Curtain” that had divided the two . Winston Churchill called the divide between the two an Iron Curtain . Churchill said the divide was the result of the “Iron Cur
 Communists were labeled as anti-American totalitarians whose political agenda was antithetical to American freedom . Communists were considered to be anti-U.S. totalitarists .
 In 1947, The House Un-American Activities Committee interrogated figures in Hollywood to investigate the suspicion of Communist influence in Hollywood . The committee was a subcommittee in Congress .
 HUAC was noted for its aggressive and uncompromising mission to drive Communism out of the states . The agency was known for its uncompromising stance against Communism in the United States .
 Ten members who refused to comment based on their belief that the committee violated their First Amendment rights were blacklisted from the film industry for their unwillingness to cooperate . Ten members of the committee were also blacklisted .
 The most infamous example of Communist hysteria occurred during the Joe McCarthy trials . The most famous example of communist hysteria was during the McCarthy McCarthy trial .
 McCarthy, a Senator from Wisconsin, pursued a relentless anti-Communist crusade . McCarthy was a senator from Wisconsin . McCarthy's anti-communist crusade spanned the United States .
 Unlike HUAC, McCarthy ruled out no one in his pursuit of the White House . McCarthy ruled no one out of his pursuit .
 He prosecuted hundreds of individuals in various governmental departments and, by doing so, heightened hysteria throughout the nation . He prosecuted . Hundreds of individuals . in various government departments .
 American policymakers did not take news of these Soviet satellite states lightly either . American policymakers took note of their actions in the wake of the Cold War .
 Kennan describes Soviet Union and its ultimate mission to spread communism across the world as the ultimate threat to the free-enterprise world . In “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” American diplomat George Kennan described Soviet Union as a threat to free enterprise .
 Kennan argued that the USSR would actively seek to dismantle free markets in favor of centralized ones if not properly . The USSR would seek to replace free markets with centralized ones, he said .
 Containment sought not necessarily to remove Communist governments, but to actively prevent capitalist nations from falling to the hands of communism . Containment was created in order to prevent communist governments from falling into communist hands .
 Through isolationism, the U.S. would have retracted its influence and power it developed and exerted throughout the Cold War . The United States would have withdrawn its influence .
 Détente policies focused on deescalating tensions and relations, often with a particular emphasis on trade . The policies were often followed by a series of de-escalating relations .
 A final alternative to containment was rollback, which promoted aggressive, proactive, and militaristic action aimed at shrinking the control of the Soviet Union . Rollback promoted aggressive and proactive actions aimed at shrinking the Soviet Soviet Union.
 Containment won out as the general strategy during the Cold War . It was a happy medium between aggression and caution . The Cold War was one of the most successful methods of containment .
 The Marshall Plan revitalized economic conditions in Europe after World War II . In doing so, the U.S. attempted to install rejuvenated capitalist states .
 The United States got involved in Vietnam on the grounds of containment, fearing that if Vietnam fell under Communist rule so would the rest of Asia . Another form of containment was used later in the Cold War, when the U.S. got involved .
 On another front, availability of nuclear weaponry added an unprecedented dimension to the conflict . The U.S. and Russia are engaged in a nuclear arms race in Syria .
 John Foster Dulles, Secretary of State under Eisenhower, developed an aggressive retaliatory defense policy toward Soviet military action . Dulles developed the policy under Eisenhower .
 Both sides were aware that military action would result in mutually assured destruction and thus were forced to act cautiously in proceedings with one another throughout the latter half of the 20th century .
 The term “Brinkmanship” describes this ongoing struggle in which both sides, through aggressive action, went up to the “brink” of mutually assured destruction but cautiously avoided going over it .
 The United States and the Soviet Union tested the water through the 20th century . While both sides were cautious to never go over the “brink,” the U.S. and Soviet Union never went over .
 Both sides had vested interests in global, “Capitalism-versus-Communism” proxy wars, in which neither country ever actually initiated the conflicts . Neither country actually initiated those conflicts .
 For example, a proxy war ensued in Korea, where North Korea was backed by the Soviets and South Korea by the Americans . North Korea is backed by North Korea, while South Korea is supported by the U.S.
 In Vietnam, North Vietnam and the Viet Cong represented the interests of the USSR . The American interests where represented by the Southern Vietnamese forces . The Soviet-Vietnamese forces were represented by North Vietnam .
 Up until the crisis, the relationship between the U.S. and Cuba gradually deteriorated . The relationship between Cuba and the United States has been strained .
 Fidel Castro overthrew the American-backed Fulgencio Batista regime in Cuba in 1960 . The Castro regime was overthrown by the U.S. government in Cuba . Fidel Castro is now the leader of the Cuban government .
 In response to 6 Foner, 1009 7 Castro’s control over Cuba, Kennedy initiated the Bay of Pigs invasion . 1,500 trained Cuban exiles launched an attack aimed at overthrowing the government of Cuba .
 Castro strengthened both his control over Cuba and his ties to the USSR while growing seriously distrustful toward the United States . Castro strengthened his control of Cuba and became distrustful of the U.S. The Cuban leader became a major factor in Cuba's relationship with the USSR .
 The U.S. had also conducted other small-scale covert operations directed toward Cuba throughout this time .
 Under Kennedy, United States defense forces grew to unprecedented levels . Furthermore, under Kennedy, the U.S. defense forces were able to reach unprecedented levels of strength .
 Castro requested the installation of Soviet missiles, and Moscow obliged to his request . Castro asked Moscow to install the missiles in order to protect him .
 EXCOMM discussed Khrushchev’s motive in placing missiles in Cuba . ExCOMM looked at the possibility of a solution to the situation .
 Khrushchev could have used the Cuban missiles as diplomatic trade bait . The missiles could have been used as trade bait for a trade deal .
 Khrushchev could have used the missiles in Cuba as a way to get rid of those in Turkey . The U.S. had placed missiles potentially directed at the USSR in Turkey, and could have use them in Cuba . The missiles could have been used to remove them from Turkey .
 Before considering America’s response to this crisis, it is essential to know that Khrushchev is acting as a rational agent, and that there is likely a strategic reason for his actions . The U.S. response to the crisis was likely to be a response to Khrush
 In responding to Moscow, the U.S. acted rationally, reasonably, and justifiably . The United States made sure also to act rationally and reasonably, the author says .
 Cold War was categorized by global struggle between capitalism and communism . Both nations were in a sense fighting over acceptance from the international community .
 The U.S. made sure the international community, often represented through the United Nations, regarded any diplomatic or militaristic action the United States undertook as reasonable and justifiable . As a result of this, the U.N. regarded any such action as reasonable or justifiable, the
 Even if the U.S. had liked to strike Cuba, it could have only done so if the international community would sanction such an attack . The international community can only sanction such a strike if it is sanctioned by the international body .
 The USSR had publicly supported Cuba on numerous occasions, just as Kennedy had committed his support to West Berlin .
 This public commitment is precisely why Kennedy was reluctant to engage militaristically . Kennedy's reluctance to engage militarily is why he didn't want to engage in the war, he says .
 Khrushchev may have felt forced to retaliate had Kennedy attacked . Kennedy attacked West Berlin or elsewhere in the 1960s and '60s . Kennedy may have threatened to retaliate .
 International organizations played an important role during the Cold War . International organizations were important in the fight against the Soviet Union .
 The North Atlantic Trade Organization was formed during the rise of Soviet global influence . NATO consisted of North American capitalist nations .
 NATO’s militaristic strength came to prominence during the Korea conflict . Many US-backed missions in the war were headed through NATO .
 The United Nations had a role of significant global importance throughout the Cold War . Similarly, the U.N. had a significant role in the United States' role in shaping the world's affairs .
 The U.N. led the effort against communist North Korea’s aggression toward South Korea . Most famously, the United Nations lead the effort to stop the North Korean aggression .
 Most countries, both communist and capitalist, had representation through this forum . Furthermore, as the Cold War was a worldwide conflict, most had representation .
 Having both sides at the table often led to stalemate, especially in the Security Council . The United Nations has been criticized for not having both sides on the table in recent years .
 Either the Soviet Union or the United States would veto resolutions on controversial matters, as evidenced by the Suez Canal conflict . The U.S. and Soviet Union would veto such a resolution on controversial issues .
 It’s important to consider ways in which America can work through and with the approval of these international bodies when considering its courses of action .
 It serves our own best interest to act in a justifiable manner in the eyes of the international community to prevent the Soviet Union from potentially escalating the conflict .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara suggested that the United States furtively remove missiles in Turkey and then attack Cuba . Defense Secretary McNamara said that the U.S. could attack Turkey and Cuba .
 Both scenarios require extensive research on Moscow’s ulterior motives in placing the missiles in Cuba .
 Any action in Cuba will have an effect on other conflicts around the world . Because this is a global conflict, any action will have a global effect on the world, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 When developing policy to deal with the crisis, it’s crucial to consider ripple effect of our actions on other countries involved in US-Soviet conflict . The U.S. should consider the ripple effect on other nations involved in conflict .
 The USSR may have placed missiles in Cuba as a means for annexing the city . Keep in mind that the USSR placed missiles there as a way for annexation .
 This background guide is meant only to serve as a starting point . It is meant to serve only as a guide to the world's most famous landmarks .
 To successfully prepare for this conference, it's important that you do ample outside research as well . To prepare for the conference, you should do ample research .
 The official transcripts of EXCOMM meetings are released by the White House . ExCOMM is the largest government agency in the world .
 The events in our crisis will play out differently, as events in this crisis will be different . Keep in mind that actual events that occurred when the meetings took place should be disregarded, as well .
 He is an ardent believer in the use of military force in combating and containing communism . However, he had misgivings about the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 A former Undersecretary of State, he understands the importance of economic power in diplomacy, as well as the damage a long war could have on an economy . The former Secretary of State says a long conflict could damage the economy .
 He favors a swift strike to disarm the missiles, as well as a blockade . As such, he favors the swift strike, and a swift blockade of Syria .
 He is a proponent of using the theory of Mutually Assured Destruction to deter an attack, rather than relying on firststrike capabilities . He says the theory is to deter attacks from firststrike rather than firststrike .
 He also supports flexible response strategy and the blockade option as well as increasing U.S. military capabilities .
 Robert Kennedy has an unusual role for an Attorney-General, as both a trusted advisor of his older brother and a diplomatic envoy with experience in the Berlin Crisis of 1961 . Robert Kennedy is the Attorney General of the United States .
 President Obama strongly supports covert action in Cuba and providing military aid to rebels . He strongly supports the government of Cuba .
 McGeorge Bundy was one of the main actors behind the Marshall Plan . Bundy was also a proponent of containment, and was a major proponent of the plan . Bundy is credited with leading efforts to contain the Soviet Union .
 He was the first to alert the U.S. that Soviets may have placed missiles on Cuba, prompting the flyover which took the pictures . He was also the first person in the world to raise the alarm .
 Taylor was a critic of Eisenhower’s New Look policy, which was based on brinkmanship . He is head of the task force to determine what went wrong in Bay of Pigs .
 Ambassador Thompson is noted for his extensive knowledge of Soviet language, history and culture . Ambassador Thompson has been in Soviet Union for more than 30 years .
 Thompson is urging Kennedy to order Khrushchev to dismantle the missiles in Cuba . Thompson is wary that a blockade would lead to a strike, but he supports the blockade .
 Cline was among the first to predict the Soviet missile transfers to Cuba . Cline predicted missile transfers from the Soviet Union .
 As Head of the Directorate of Intelligence, he was among the first to inform the President . He was also among first to tell the President about the situation .
 He is an ardent supporter of Nitze's policy of active confrontation with the Soviet Union . Nitze is also an avid supporter of Eisenhower's New Look policies .
 Nitze is one of the principal architects and a major proponent of aggressive 13 containment . Nitze was the architect of the U.S. Air Force One . He is also a proponent of the concept of aggressive containment .
 He often speaks out against demilitarization or pursuing arms controls agreements with the USSR . Sometimes considered contradictory or inconsistent in his positions .
 Edward McDermott is a staffer who has worked with Kennedy since his years in the House . McDermott: Kennedy has a long history of working with Kennedy in the Senate .
 He is noncommittal, and is focused on keeping the American people safe, rather than holding any large overarching theory of combating communism . He is not committed to a larger theory of defeating communism .
 Stevenson speaks out against any form of confrontation with the Soviet Union or Cuba . Known for his cautious, sometimes even pacifistic policies, Stevenson is known for his pacifist policies . Stevenson is considered a pacifist by many .
 He is pushing for strikes on missile sites and arguing against a blockade or any other peaceful alternative . He also wants strikes on missiles sites .
 Anderson strongly supports limited military action against Cuba and the blockade method . Anderson: "I strongly support limited military intervention against Cuba"
 His relationship with Robert MacNamara is contentious, and the two do not work well together . However, the two have a strong relationship .
 Roland's priority is securing the U.S. against attack rather than thwarting communism . Like McDermott, Roland wants to secure the United States against attack .
 He is a proponent of direct military action against Cuba but also wants further naval assistance in defending American shores . He wants more naval assistance to defend American shores from Cuba .