 Historians' ‘understanding’ of this event has undergone dramatic evolution . Historians’ understanding of the events has undergone a dramatic evolution.
 Continued study of this event remains valid as long as international conflict remains a reality . Historians, political scientists, and policymakers investigate this event in an attempt to understand and alleviate future foreign policy and conflict .
 It is evident, however, that a greater volume of information pertaining to the crisis has not led to consensus, or a greater understanding of the causes and consequences of the event .
 Most historians agree that Nikita Khrushchev, Fidel Castro, and John Kennedy each played a pivotal role in the crisis and its resolution . Most historians do agree that the three men played pivotal roles in the conflict .
 This project draws on a variety of sources regarding the crisis and its administrators . It is an attempt to create an historiography of the available information regarding this important event . This project is based on a number of sources .
 The character, actions and policies of Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy were inexorable in instigating and resolving the crisis, author says . "I have investigated this crisis from the perspective that the character, . actions and . policies of the . characters of the three leaders were inex
 Professors Rod Sievers, Delores McBroome, and Gayle Olson-Raymer have provided Humboldt County educators with outstanding historical knowledge .
 Your efforts in the Teaching American History Program have greatly benefited Humboldt County teachers and our students .
 "My students and colleagues at Fortuna High School have provided me with the inspiration and collegial support necessary to a fulfilling career," she says . "I am proud to be able to continue my education in California," she writes .
 Mike Benbow, your guidance and advice throughout this project and in the classroom, is invaluable . Mike BenBow, your advice and advice has been invaluable .
 Joyce and Scott Pickering have always provided the means and encouragement necessary to continue higher education . The Pickering family is proud to support their daughter's education .
 My sister and friend, Laura Pickering, consistently provides encouragement . I hope that I can be equally supportive as she continues her education and begins a new career .
 My best friend and partner Christopher Haynes has provided invaluable emotional and academic support for me, says Ms Haynes . Mr Haynes' best friend has provided her with invaluable support .
 I am truly grateful for your help in this project and all projects before and after . I am also grateful for all the help I received from the public .
 The Cuban missile crisis is one of the most explored topics in American history . The Cuban crisis was one of America's most significant moments in its history .
 More than four decades from the date of this nuclear showdown, the Cuban missile crisis continues to be a source of much controversy and opposing historical interpretation . The Cuban crisis was the result of a U.S. missile crisis in the early 1950s .
 Additional information has, in fact, increased the debate surrounding this event, its causes, and aftermath . Rather than providing a more unified and concrete understanding and interpretation of the crisis, this additional information has instead increased debate, says CNN.com editor .
 The added documentary and audio information has enriched the discussion of one of the most pivotal moments of the Cold War . Documentary and audio added documentary has enriched discussion of the moment .
 The distance from this event and the end of the Cold War have freed many key figures to speak more frankly about the event and their role in it .
 Between 1987 and 2002, scholars and participants of the crisis met in the Florida Keys, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Moscow, Antigua, and Havana to discuss the confrontation in 1962 .
 James G Blight, Bruce Allyn, and David Welch, all present at the conferences, have written a number of books .
 The authors of this work argue that analysis and understanding of Cuba’s role in the crisis has been markedly absent in traditional 3 discussion regarding this event . They argue analysis of Cuba's role in this crisis is markedly absent .
 Many Soviet and Cuban documents have been declassified in the wake of the Missile Crisis . The declassification of these documents is key to the discussion of the crisis .
 JFK asked secret service agent, Robert Bouck, to install taping systems in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room . JFK asked Bouck to install systems in early summer of 1962 .
 Kennedy was able to discretely turn the recorder on and off . Only he and his brother Robert Kennedy were aware that discussion was often being recorded .
 JFK had recording devices installed after policy advisers who supported the invasion plan in closed session 4 claimed later to have advised against it .
 Others believe he wanted to have a source of information from which to write his memoirs after leaving the White House . Others say he may have wanted to write memoirs .
 JFK later installed a device to record telephone conversations that could have incriminated him personally and politically . This belief is encouraged by the fact that JFK installed such a device . JFK also installed a recording device in which he frequently made statements .
 Critics dismiss these tapes because JFK knew they were being recorded and JFK could decide when to turn the recorder on and off . Critics dismiss the tapes because of the Kennedy brothers knowing they were recorded .
 The Kennedy brothers were consciously manipulating their personal images in the historical record . Their colleagues were frankly and honestly processing and discussing the crisis presented to them, the Kennedy brothers .
 Further investigation has also been helpful in understanding Cold War ideology, rhetoric, and assumptions that precipitated the crisis . Cuba, the Soviet Union, and the United States.
 Weldes provides a well-written analysis of fairly standard conclusions regarding Cold War posture and assumptions . She cites the American belief that the Soviet Union was an expansionist power seeking world domination and the American dislike for Fidel Castro and his revolution as the reasons that Kennedy and his advisors could not f
 Many feel that those thirteen days in October, 1962 “brought the world to the abyss of nuclear destruction and the end of mankind,”vi . Others claim, equally convincingly, that the 7 missiles in Cuba represented a threat only to American credibility and the credibility of the
 It has shaped and influenced future foreign policy, international conflict resolution, and national posture . It has affected the psyche of the American citizen, and shaped the future of the nation .
 Though Cold War posture has evolved into national posture in the War on Terror, all of these issues continue to resonate with many citizens and governments of the world .
 The Caribbean Sea and the entire western hemisphere, is an area of great geopolitical interest to the U.S. The United States is interested in the Caribbean Sea .
 Sugar, coffee, oils, fish, fish and other goods entice those seeking economic benefit . Sugar and coffee, coffee and oils, among other goods, entice people seeking economic benefits .
 Americans soon recognized that military and political hegemony in the region was profitable . U.S. soon realized that it was profitable to dominate the region . The region was ruled by the United States and the West .
 The proximity of the Caribbean Sea and the islands within it to the United States intensified the belief that Americans should control the trade, politics, and military affairs of that region .
 President James Monroe warned European powers not to intervene in the western hemisphere . Any such intervention would be interpreted as a hostile action toward the United States .
 We could not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing . or controlling in any other manner their destiny, by any European power . vii . Though at the time, the United States possessed neither the military or political power to enforce such a statement, it became a cornerstone of
 Both the Monroe Doctrine and the Roosevelt 9 Corollary would be invoked to justify U.S. intervention in Latin America on multiple occasions . The Monroe Doctrine would be used to justify American intervention in the region .
 Americans have long believed that they hold a special place in the world . Americans are proud of their country's special place .
 Puritan belief in a utopian society of chosen individuals is still prevalent in Americans’ vision of themselves and their nation upon the world stage . Puritan beliefs have resulted in a uniquely American self-image .
 Manifest Destiny, the conviction that American institutions and cultural characteristics were superior to those of other human societies, led expansionists to consider the island of Cuba rightfully American territory by the early nineteenth century .
 Cuba’s geographic location encouraged some to unabashedly argue that it was connected by alluvial deposits of the Mississippi River to the United States and thus belonged rightfully to the Americans . Its proximity to the southern United States encouraged many to envision the extension of the slave-based,
 Illegal efforts to acquire Cuba by fomenting a revolution were as equally unsuccessful as attempts by the Pierce Administration to purchase the island .
 American ministers to Spain, France, and England met in Belgium and issued the Ostend Manifesto . Frustrated by Spain’s refusal to sell what Americans felt was rightfully theirs .
 As the U.S. steamed toward its own Civil War, questions of Cuba’s annexation became a sectional issue . Northern states feared the addition of another slave state .
 Cuba was the site of and excuse for the Spanish-American War . It would soon be the site for the war . Cuba was soon the site .
 Gary B Nash and Julie Roy Jeffrey state, “hroughout history, the American people have actively and sometimes forcefully imposed their ideas and institutions on others’s . Others have imposed those ideas on others, they say .
 The international crusades of the United States have usually been motivated by a mixture of idealism and self-interest . This was true of American involvement with Cuba in the Spanish-American War of 1898 .
 By the late 1890s, the Cuban question had regained the focus of American citizens, businessmen, and politicians . The Cuban question was regained the attention of Americans, businessmen and politicians.
 Politicians wished to reduce, or eliminate, European influence from the Caribbean region . Politicians wanted to reduce or eliminate European influence in the Caribbean .
 Profiteers wanted to establish shipping lanes and ports for U.S. commerce . Profiteer hoped to establish ports and trade lanes for United States commerce .
 Many wished to develop a canal in Central America that would link the east and west coasts of the United States . The canal would provide access to the profitable markets of Asia .
 Military advisers 11 recognized the value of naval control of the region as evident in Alfred T Mahan’s discourse, The Influence of Sea Power Upon History in which he argues that national influence is dependent upon naval power .
 The Cuban question was catapulted back into American discourse by actions of the Cuban revolutionaries against Spanish rule . The question has been re-discussed since the Cuban revolution .
 In the early 1890s, the Cuban economy collapsed, largely due to the U.S. response to the depression of 1893 with protectionist tariffs . The American response was largely to the American response .
 As depression in Cuba fueled unrest, anti-Spanish forces attempted to gain control of the island . Anti-Spain forces tried to take control of Cuba in the 1930s .
 By 1896, citizens of the United States had invested more than $30 million in Cuba, mostly in mines and sugar plantations . Many American citizens recognized the Cuban independence movement as not entirely unlike their own revolution against the British .
 Many individuals and organizations were outraged by the atrocities committed by the Spanish against the Cubans . Fueled by the “yellow journalism” of William Randolph Hearst and equipped with revolutionary rhetoric .
 These groups and individuals encouraged American support of the Cubans in their quest for independence and raised funds for the struggle .
 The governments of Spain and the United States had agreed that regardless of how this dispute turned out, power would not be transferred to the Cubans 12 themselves . In fact, a negotiated settlement between Madrid and Washington seemed plausible until 1898 when two incidents infuriated Americans and ‘justified�
 A confidential letter written by Spanish official Dupuy de Lome was intercepted that stated President McKinley was a “weak, venal, and vacillating politician”xiv This letter was quickly made public and fueled fury against Spain within the American citizenry .
 The United States Battleship Maine was rocked by an explosion while in Havana harbor . The U.S. Battleship was rocked in Havana Harbor .
 McKinley presented Spain with an ultimatum that included a Spanish assurance that there would be no further hostile actions, the repayment of the cost associated with the damage to the Maine, and finally, Cuban independence . McKinley .
 McKinley requested a declaration of war from Congress on April 11, 1898 . President McKinley knew that Spain would not accept this last request and so prepared for war .
 Congress recognized Cuban independence and authorized the use of force against Spain . In an intriguing additional resolution, the Teller Amendment, Congress stated that the United States did not intend to annex the island .
 The Platt Amendment was added to the new Cuban constitution by the U.S. in 1901 . The amendment was added by the United States in 1901 to the Cuban constitution .
 The Platt Amendment provided beneficial economic rights to Americans, guaranteed a naval base at Guantanamo Bay . It also guaranteed the right to intervene in the affairs of the island “for the preservation of Cuban independence, and the maintenance of a government adequate for the protection of life, property, and
 The American Good Neighbor Policy of the 1930s changed the style of American interference in Latin America from direct intervention to a more discrete form of political meddling . The policy was a form of direct intervention in Latin American politics .
 Cuba went through a series of leaders in the 1930s, with U.S. officials watching with great interest and interfering when deemed necessary . Cuba has had a long line of leaders since the late 1930s . The Cuban government was overthrown in 1953 .
 Sergeant Fulgencio Batista led the revolution in 1933 against Machado and then encouraged Ramon Grau San Martin to resign in 1934 . The U.S. maintained close contact with Batista during this period of leadership transition .
 American foreign policy evolved from one that tried to prevent the rise of fascism to one more concerned with halting the advance of communism . American politicians and businessmen became increasingly concerned about the communist influence in Latin America .
 U.S. support undoubtedly figured into Batista’s decision to run for president in 1940 . United States support undoubtedly helped Batista run for the presidency .
 Batista's democratically elected administration, as well as the other administrations of the 1940s, lost legitimacy because of their corruption and disorder . Batista’s democratically elected . administration, and other administrations, of the . 1940s . lost legitimacy .
 In March, 1952, prior to the scheduled presidential elections in June, in which Batista remained a distant third candidate, Batista took control of the government in a military coup . Batista's government was overthrown in March 1952, before the scheduled elections .
 President Prio, his family, and close associates left Cuba with little resistance . Prio and his family were able to leave Cuba without significant resistance .
 The idea to instigate a coup was presented to Batista by younger officers who sought his leadership because of his success in the 1930s . Batista was presented with the coup idea by young officers who wanted his leadership .
 Unlike in the 1930s and 1940s, 14 Batista did not have much popular support within the Cuban population . Batista relied on militarism to stay in office and relied on the use of violence .
 Fidel Castro, who was running for a seat in Congress in 1952, was outraged by the military coup . Castro became a leading proponent of armed insurrection within the antiBatista movement .
 The attack of July 26th, 1953 ended disastrously for Castro and his followers . Many were tortured and killed, and the rest were imprisoned . Castro's followers were tortured, killed and imprisoned .
 The Cuban population was simultaneously horrified by the brutal response of the Batista regime and inspired by the efforts of the young Cuban insurgents . The Cuban people were horrified by Batista's brutal response to the uprising .
 Fidel Castro captivated public attention and at his trial introduced a concise political vision of reform . He defended himself with dignity and eloquence before being sent to jail . Fidel Castro was sent to prison in 1961 .
 In 1955, Batista released political prisoners, including Fidel Castro, who resumed opposition activities from his place of exile, Mexico . Batista's government released Castro's political prisoners in 1955, including him .
 In 1954, Batista staged an election and used his ‘re-election’ to claim legitimacy and justify his regime . Batista used the election as a means of legitimising his regime in 1954 . He staged a 're-elected' election in 1954 and used it to
 Following the 1954 election, Batista introduced a number of concessions, including the release of political prisoners . Fidel Castro greatly benefited from the concessions, from which he greatly benefited .
 The Batistianos continued policies that favored wealthy regime supporters at the expense of the working class . Meanwhile however, the Batistians continued to favor the wealthy .
 Labor leaders of the July 26th Movement and the communists worked collaboratively in an attempt to improve conditions for workers in the sugar industry . However, they remained entirely different organizations with separate and often opposing methods and goals .
 Many believed that “Batista had evolved into the worst kind of Latin despot – a leader offensive and corrupt and corrupt enough to draw the ire of the American people but not powerful enough to stave off disorder in his own country” United States felt justified in revoking support
 By 1958, the anti-Batista movement had mobilized diverse groups and constituted a significant threat, and the ruling regime was rapidly deteriorating . The movement was mobilized by diverse groups of people .
 The U.S. placed an arms embargo on the island nation, following a hostage situation instigated by Fidel and Raul Castro . The United States placed the embargo on Cuba following the hostage situation .
 Fidel Castro was born into a wealthy family that owned a large sugar plantation in Oriente . American officials were torn between condemning the Batista regime and encouraging the opposition movement in which a young Castro was rising to a dominant position .
 Fidel and his band of rebels were imprisoned and then exiled to Mexico . Following their defeat at the Moncada Barracks on July 26th, 1953, Fidel was imprisoned . Fidel was exiled from Mexico after the defeat .
 In 1956, he returned to the mountains of Cuba and continued to build a rebel movement . He returned to Cuba in 1956, where he spent most of his life in the mountains .
 The July 26th Movement was made up of various professionals and groups of different political beliefs . Castro and a small band of rebels recklessly attacked the Moncada Barracks on July 26, 1944 .
 Fidel Castro captured the imaginations of many in Cuba and the United States . Fidel Castro, though a suspicious enigma to most in Washington, captured the imagination of many .
 In the summer of 1958, rebels led by Raul Castro kidnapped nineteen American and Canadian civilians and thirty enlisted men of the Navy and Marines . They claimed U.S. support of the Batista regime to be their reason for the action .
 The CIA was sent to prevent Fidel Castro from assuming power from the declining Batista regime . American officials felt their suspicions of the young rebel had been realized .
 Fidel Castro was the single leading figure of the July 26th Movement . Fidel Castro remained a leading figure due in part to his engaging personality and in part 17 to social and economic conditions within Cuba .
 On January 1, 1959, Batista and his close associates fled Cuba and Castro entered Havana . Castro triumphantly entered Havana with the support of the majority of the Cuban population . Despite the efforts of the CIA, the CIA and Cuban government failed to defeat Castro .
 William Wieland frankly stated his fears and those of his fellow Washington colleagues; “Fidel Castro is surrounded by commies.” “The Cuban dictator is surrounded in Cuba,” he said .
 CIA agents traveled to Cuba both before and after Castro’s takeover to arrive at a conclusion regarding this question . I am certain he is subject to communist influences .
 Nikita Khrushchev and other Moscow officials had also been trying to assess the political persuasion of Fidel Castro and the Cuban revolution . Khrushchevitch and others had been trying .
 PSP condemned violent revolution and denounced rebels’ attack on Moncada barracks . PSP condemns violent revolution, and denounced the rebels' attack on the barracks . Most notably, the PSP denounced violent revolution .
 Two of the Cuban leadership triumvirate – Raul Castro and Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara – were communists . Interestingly enough, two of the Castro leadership triumsums were communists.
 Che Guevara, a physician, though openly communist denounced the PSP as a passive and irrelevant group . The PSP was a passive, irrelevant group, though open communist .
 Che joined the PSP in 1957 . He was encouraged by Raul, who encouraged him to join the PSP .
 Raul Castro’s effort to hide his membership in the communist party from his brother was concerning to both the PSP and the Kremlin . Fidel Castro was indeed, “surrounded by commies.”
 Fidel Castro was the man who truly controlled the path and character of the revolution in Cuba . Fidel was the only person to control the Cuban revolution, not Che or Raul .
 Fidel Castro visited the United States as a guest of the American Society of Newspaper Editors . Less than four months after replacing Batista, Fidel Castro was in the U.S. less than a year later .
 Fidel Castro was hounded by questions regarding his position on communism . Castro visited the U.S. in April, 1959 . Castro was asked about his views on communism in the United States .
 While Fidel Castro was in the United States making statements denouncing communism, Raul was trying to establish a relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union . “That is why we are against Communism," Raul said .
 Upon his brother’s ascension to the post of prime minister, Raul had gained control of the Cuban armed forces . Raul was the prime minister of Cuba .
 Raul sent Lazaro Pena, a member of the PSP, to request aid for the Cuban military in the form of Spanish communists who recently graduated from the Soviet military academy . The Kremlin had indirectly already given much aid to the military efforts of Castro and his revolutionaries .
 Czech government received request for weaponry from the rebels in 1958 . Czech government requested the guidance of Moscow . Czechs requested the help of Moscow for weapons .
 Khrushchev instructed Prague to provide the Cubans with the requested weaponry . The Czechs did attempt to hide their involvement by allowing only those of German and Czech design .
 Requests for the expansion of economic relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union were denied . Moscow was still unsure of the character of the Cuban revolution and its leading figure .
 It is unclear when and why Fidel Castro decided to accept communism and steer his revolution toward an alliance with the Soviet Union . Castro's revolution was centered around Soviet-backed communism .
 He continued to resist and disclaim communism to the point of causing a rift between himself and Che and Raul . After his consolidation of power he continued to disclaim communism .
 There were many political reasons for Fidel to deny the communist tendencies of his revolution, perhaps the most obvious being the CIA orchestrated overthrow of Jacobo Arbenz in 1957 .
 Fidel was surely aware of a warning from Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel 20 Nasser to Che Guevara to maintain independence and sovereignty from any superpower . While publicly denouncing communism, Castro paradoxically introduced socialist agrarian reform policies and then chose the author of those policies, Osv
 Fidel slowly began to agree that his greatest enemies were the noncommunist members of the July 26th movement and began replacing them with PSP members . Fidel slowly agreed with him that his enemies were noncommunists .
 He also began to seek greater military and economic assistance from the Soviet Union .
 Both nations cautiously yet optimistically negotiated an agreement to exchange Cuban sugar for Soviet goods . The agreement was reached between Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev set up a “chance” meeting with KGB agent Nikolai Leonov and Raul Castro while the Cuban was touring Czechoslovakia in 1960 . Reacting to fears that perhaps Castro was losing interest in an alliance with the Soviet Union and was turning toward the Chinese
 Raul Castro and Che Guevarra had very publicly proclaimed that revolution would be necessary to establish socialist governments . The support of stable communist regimes by way of weaponry and personnel should be encouraged .
 Khrushchev and the Soviets recognized that Fidel Castro was first a 21 revolutionary, and second a communist, thus increasing their concern that he may abandon the Soviets to pursue the more active revolutionary path advocated by the Chinese . The Soviets were concerned that Castro may abandon them to pursue a more active
 It should be borne in mind that the United States is now not at such an unattainable distance from the Soviet Union as formerly . The U.S. should not be at such a distance from Russia as formerly, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 If need be, Soviet artillerymen can support Cuban people with their rocket fire . The Cuban people can support the Cuban people, if need be .
 The Pentagon could be well advised not to forget that, as shown at the latest tests, we have rockets which can land precisely in precisely in a preset square target 13,000 kilometers away . And the Pentagon could also be reminded that, in fact, they have rockets capable of landing precisely
 Khrushchev’s arrogant and generally inaccurate claims of Soviet nuclear capabilities were nothing new or extraordinary . This threat was significant in that it established nuclear protection for the island of Cuba .
 Khrushchev assured the Cubans, Chinese, and Americans that the Soviets were committed to supporting communism throughout the world, and more specifically, in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro expressed his appreciation for Khrushchev’s nuclear deterrent by arranging for Raul to visit Moscow . Raul further solidified the Soviet22 Cuban alliance by gaining further military and economic aid .
 Khrushchev’s declaration of nuclear protection and growing alliance with the Castro regime illustrates his desire to prove Soviet prowess abroad . It illustrates the importance of the revolution in Cuba as his avenue for doing so, writes David Frum .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy’s inaugural address highlighted Cold War concerns . Kennedy's inaugural address was an attempt to counter the Cold War .
 JFK sought advice from outgoing president, General Dwight D Eisenhower . JFK sought the advice of General Eisenhower prior to his inauguration .
 Eisenhower warned Kennedy that the Soviet Union was on the offensive and would pose an extremely grave threat . Eisenhower also warned that the Soviets would pose a grave threat to the United States .
 Domino Theory influenced the decisions of the Kennedy Administration as well as those of the later Johnson, Nixon, and even Reagan administrations . The Domino theory was influential in the Kennedy administration .
 Eisenhower expressed further concern about the government in Cuba and encouraged Kennedy to support guerrilla operations against Castro . Kennedy strongly believed in the need to actively prevent communism from expanding beyond the Soviet and Chinese bloc . Kennedy was influenced by the intense anticommunism of his father .
 He also intended to make a concerted effort to improve U.S.-Soviet relations . He also, however, intended to try to improve relations with the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev also seemed eager for a moderate détente and requested high-level talks . Kennedy responded to warmly, but made it clear that he could not participate in a summit immediately due to both foreign and domestic political concerns .
 JFK inherited a rather disorganized and unclear policy regarding Cuba . Kennedy inherited a much more disorganized policy regarding the island nation .
 Eisenhower administration planned to overthrow Castro regime through overt attacks and covert sabotage . Eisenhower administration wanted to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba .
 It soon became evident that a paramilitary force would be necessary to remove Castro, but it was undecided what kind of force was adequate . The role of the U.S. would be in creating and funding it would be unclear .
 Early planning and actions had been taken to establish a 1,500 man guerrilla army in Guatemala . By the time Eisenhower left office, early planning had already been taken .
 The invasion had to occur at night and at a location where there would be little resistance, and if air support was necessary it would need to come from Cuban air bases . Kennedy’s requirements greatly limited the possible landing areas and perhaps resulted in the failure of the operation .
 The Bay of Pigs 24 location left the landed exiles to defend themselves and decreased the likelihood of inciting a general uprising throughout the island . Because it was an isolated beachhead and Kennedy did not wish to employ United States air support, it was left to defend itself .
 Kennedy approved the plan for the invasion at the Bay of Pigs with conditions that made U.S. involvement further invisible . In early April, 1961 – right after agreeing to meet Khrushchev in Vienna in early June – Kennedy agreed to the plan .
 Kennedy believed the best way to pursue American interests was to promote diplomacy with the Soviet Union and take covert military action against Castro . Kennedy believed diplomacy was best way of pursuing American interests .
 The Cubans and Soviets had very different views about U.S. intentions regarding an invasion of Cuba . The Cuban government and the Soviet Union had different views on the invasion .
 Khrushchev ignored concerns of the PSP that an American invasion was imminent . Intelligence of the KGB that suggested the rebels in Guatemala were finalizing preparations for a Cuban invasion .
 Soviet inaction may also be partly attributed to the fact that they had twice reacted to seemingly false Cuban calls of an American threat in October and January .
 The exile force, working with archaic WWII propeller 25 planes, depended upon air superiority to have any chance of success . The exiled force worked with archaic propeller propeller planes .
 JFK decided against the planned second air strike . JFK wished to avoid further questions about the American role in the situation in Cuba .
 The initial air strike had disabled only 60% of the Cuban air force and air superiority was necessary for the small band of émigrés to hold the isolated beachhead for any extended period of time . After brief successes against Castro’s surprised forces, the émigés
 Without air support, Castro’s tanks and air force were able to pummel the defenseless rebels . The Cuban armed forces are stronger, the popular response is weaker, and our tactical position is feebler than we had hoped .
 Kennedy now faced the difficult decision of abandoning the Cuban exiles or initiating greater U.S. support . Kennedy faced the choice of abandoning exiles in favor of greater United States support .
 At the suggestion of his advisers, Kennedy grudgingly agreed to the use of unmarked American jets to protect the Cubans . However, timing errors resulted in their ineffectiveness anyway .
 By April 19th, American officials concluded the invasion had been a total failure and attempted to evacuate the remaining émigrés . 1,189 surrendered to Castro’s forces, 14 were rescued .
 The awkward attack resulted in a unified and publicly socialist Cuba . The awkward and embarrassing attack led to a unification of Cuba .
 The belief that counterrevolutionaries and U.S. politicians wished to overthrow the Castro regime had now been realized . Both the Soviets and Cubans wished to prevent the operation from being successful the next time .
 John F Kennedy was very personally and deeply affected by the botched invasion of Vietnam . The president of the U.S. was killed in the Vietnam War .
 Some suggest that it further solidified Kennedy's distrust of military advisers and experts . Kennedy accepted responsibility for the failed operation .
 Cold War ideology, combined with personal anger over the Bay of Pigs, had created a powerful incentive for the Kennedy’s to launch a ‘secret war’ to get even in Cuba .
 Despite Khrushchev’s rhetoric regarding détente between the superpowers, the Soviet Union continued to also speak of Soviet military and nuclear missile superiority, and to fund and aid revolutionary movements in third world countries .
 Southeast Asia was becoming an increasingly sensitive locale in the scope of the Cold War . Southeast Asia became a key part of the world's most sensitive region in the war .
 Kennedy portrayed his own administration as being comparatively young and imaginative in terms of the Cold War . Kennedy portrayed Eisenhower's administration as youthful and imaginative .
 Kennedy was determined to not be viewed as weak compared to the retired General. Kennedy, however, was determined not to be seen as weak . Kennedy was also determined to be not seen as a weak compared .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion perhaps marred the confidence of the new administration, encouraging some officials especially the Kennedy brothers to react to missiles in Cuba in a more hostile and belligerent fashion . Khrushchev appeared the stronger leader at the end of 1961 .
 The Bay of Pigs and the indeterminate outcome in Laos were sending the wrong signals about his resolve to use all means to defend U.S. interests overseas . John Kennedy was worried that the Bay of Pigeas and the Laos outcome were sending wrong signals .
 The brothers, especially the president, were equally concerned about the costs of a policy of unalloyed belligerence toward the Soviet Union . But the brothers were equally worried about the cost of the policy, they said .
 The counterrevolutionaries’ invasion illustrated the necessity for a crackdown on dissidents and the creation of a surveillance state that some members of the PSP had been encouraging for some time . Furthermore, the counterrevolutionary’s invasion . illustrated the . necessity for the crackdown on dissident dissidents
 The Soviets also concluded that their aid would perhaps be necessary to prevent the overthrow of the young Cuban government . The KGB assumed control of Cuban intelligence and Cuban requests for military aid were quickly approved and fulfilled .
 The resolve and posture of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro was solidified . Additionally, the resolve of Kennedy and his allies in the U.S. became solidified.
 The Castro regime was strengthened by the attack of the U.S. on the island of Cuba and the young revolution . Castro regime strengthened by nationalism created by attack of United States colossus against the island .
 Nikita Khrushchev was conscious of the Chinese criticism that the USSR was not doing enough for third world revolutions . The Soviet leader was further convinced of the need for the Soviets to protect and aid the Communist beachhead in the western hemisphere .
 The Kennedy Administration was determined to prove that despite the embarrassing operation, they still intended to do everything necessary to protect U.S. interests .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy were determined to achieve their goals in the Caribbean and maintain their current standings in the Cold War world . The leaders also recognized the danger of nuclear confrontation .
 Following the Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy instituted a larger plan to harass and eventually replace Castro with a more American-friendly government . Operation Mongoose was launched in November, 1961 .
 Operation Mongoose, headed by Edward Lansdale, was the Kennedy administration’s plan to weaken the Castro regime through covert sabotage, aid to Cuban exile forces, and an eventual U.S.-led military invasion . The Kennedy administration's plan was to weaken Castro through sabotage and aid
 Robert Kennedy personally oversaw the operation . General Edward Lansdale, who had become a prominent counterinsurgency figure in Vietnam, was the lead planner .
 Recently declassified American documents outline various plots of sabotage, economic isolation, infiltration, and even assassination .
 One plot involved the use of underworld figures twice progressed to the point of sending poison pills to Cuba and dispatching weapons to commit the deed . Another plot involved using underworld figures to send poison pills and dispatch weapons to Cuba .
 Another plot involved furnishing weapons and other assassination devices to a Cuban dissident . The plot was also alleged to involve furnishing a weapon or other assassination device to Cuban dissidents .
 Cuban intelligence uncovered additional schemes of sabotage and assassination . The proposed assassination devices ran the gamut from high-powered rifles to poison pills, poison pens, deadly bacterial powers .
 The KGB-led intelligence agency in Cuba uncovered a CIA office and 8 tons of weaponry . The KGB led the KGB to Cuba and uncovered the CIA office .
 The undercover office remained operational in Cuba following the break in diplomatic relations in January, 1961 . Cuban officials claimed that the U.S. had too many diplomats placed in Cuba whom they assumed to be CIA agents .
 A Guatemalan plot to assassinate Fidel and Raul Castro and Che Guevara was intercepted by Soviet intelligence and revealed to the Castro regime . The plot was also revealed to Soviet intelligence .
 Many were convinced that U.S. military action would be needed to remove Castro . Many believed that American military action was necessary to remove the Castro .
 By 1961, the Cuban government and their Soviet allies had been preparing for a U.S. invasion for almost two years . The Cuban government was preparing for an invasion, or at the very least, American support for an insurgency force, for two years.
 The young and idealistic Kennedy Administration continued with a very similar policy toward the island . Continued economic sanctions, intensified covert action, and the further development of contingency plans for an American invasion of Cuba .
 Castro was aware of the removal of Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala . It was perhaps instrumental in his decision to delay his announcement of the socialist path of his revolution .
 Eisenhower and later the Kennedy administration both encouraged other Latin American countries to contain and suppress Castro through both economic and diplomatic means . The Eisenhower and Kennedy administration were both encouraged by other Latin America countries .
 Eisenhower Administration tried to persuade Latin American foreign ministers to denounce intervention of China and the Soviet Union in the Western Hemisphere .
 Between the period of Castro’s public embrace of communism on December 1st, 1961 and the New Year, 13 Latin American governments halted all relations with 33 Cuba . Castro's embrace of Communism led to the end of relations between Cuba and the United States .
 In January, 1962, the Organization of American states expelled Cuba at a meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay . Cuba was expelled by the O.A. States expelled Cuba in 1962 .
 Cubans continue to proclaim that the OAS did so in response to U.S. pressure . Cubans say that the decision was made following American pressure . OAS has been criticized by Cubans for not responding to American pressure on Cuba .
 In reality, many Latin American states feared Castro’s antiAmerican rhetoric, increasing Soviet influence in the hemisphere, and the revolutionary nature of Marxism-Leninism . Castro in fact, did intend to aid revolutionary movements .
 The Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations enacted increasingly damaging economic sanctions against Cuba . The Eisenhower administration tried to isolate Cuba diplomatically, but also imposed increasingly damaging sanctions .
 In 1957, Cuban profits from trade with the United States totaled $600 million dollars . This fell dramatically in July, 1960, when United States sugar purchases were significantly decreased . In October 1960, an embargo was placed on all Cuban goods except medicine, cigars, and some foods other than sugar
 President Kennedy was informed that a recent U-2 flight had provided photographic evidence of the construction of Soviet Medium Range Ballistic Missile sites on the island of Cuba .
 Kennedy had made several public statements, as recently as September 4th and September 13th, warning the Soviet Union that offensive weapons in Cuba would be considered unacceptable by the United States .
 The Soviets had also declared that they did not intend to introduce surface-to-surface offensive weapons to the island . In a speech to the U.N. General Assembly on October 8th, Cuban president Osvaldo Dorticos had made a disconcerting statement, �
 JFK convened the Executive Committee of the National Security Council to discuss how to proceed . JFK: “I repeat we have sufficient means with which to defend ourselves”
 President Kennedy decided to quarantine Cuba because an air strike could not guarantee the destruction of all Soviet missiles in Cuba . After much discussion and debate, President Kennedy imposed a defensive quarantine .
 Nikita Khrushchev declared that the measures outlined in your statement represent a serious threat to peace and security of peoples . Kennedy received a letter from the Soviet leader on October 23, 1962 .
 Khrushchev recalled or slowed down ships headed toward Cuba, and Kennedy adjusted the quarantine boundaries and chose to allow some ships to pass through uncontested waters .
 Both leaders sought the guidance of high-level advisers and made it clear to their military leaders that no action should be taken without their personally expressed consent .
 It soon became clear that both the Soviet Premiere and American President wished to avoid the “final failure”lxii and were becoming increasingly concerned .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy gradually moved away from tense standoff . By way of indirect private communication and letters, some of which made conflicting demands and were delivered by Western Union agents on bicycles .
 On October 28th, Khrushchev announced, “The Soviet Government, in addition to earlier instructions on the discontinuance of further work on construction sites, has given a new order to dismantle the weapons, which you describe as offensive, and to crate them and return them to
 Castro learned about Khrushchev’s decision over the radio, rather than from the Soviet leader himself . Castro issued a “five point plan” as a solution to the underlying tensions in the Caribbean which led to the crisis .
 Castro’s requests that the U.S. halt covert sabotage and relinquish control of Guantanamo Bay to Cuba were ignored . Castro's request that the United States halt covert . sabotage was ignored .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed to remove all “offensive” weapons in return for an American pledge not to invade Cuba . The agreement stipulated that the Soviets would immediately begin removal of all ‘offensive’ weapons .
 Privately, the Kennedy brothers agreed to remove the missiles in Turkey . They wished to avoid the appearance that they were willing to abandon NATO allies to secure American interests .
 Khrushchev conceded to the political situation that the Kennedy Administration was concerned about and agreed to keep the Turkey missile trade a secret . The deal was kept secret .
 On October 27th, an American U-2 was shot down while flying over Cuba, heightening the tension of an already dangerous situation . Despite encouraging developments, the crisis was not over .
 Castro dismissed the American demand that onsite inspections be allowed to verify the removal of missiles and the list of allegedly offensive weapons submitted by Kennedy was dismissed by Castro as unacceptable . The American demand for inspections was dismissed as unacceptable by Castro .
 Castro felt that on-site inspections on the island of Cuba threatened the sovereignty and independence of his nation . Castro felt the inspections threatened his nation's sovereignty . Castro said inspections on Cuba threatened his country's sovereignty, independence .
 The IL-28 bombers included on Kennedy’s list of offensive weaponry were legal Cuban property, given to a sovereign nation by their Soviet allies . Furthermore, he claimed that they were given to the Cuban nation by the Soviet allies, and that they are legal property .
 Castro eventually agreed to the removal of the IL-28s along with the other weaponry . After further negotiation between the Soviets and Cubans, Castro agreed to remove the weapons .
 On November 20th, Kennedy publicly announced that Castro had agreed to the removal of all offensive weaponry, and terminated the quarantine the next day . Castro agreed to remove all offensive weapons from Cuba .
 The missiles were loaded onto the decks of Soviet ships, where they were photographed by U.S. surveillance aircraft . American surveillance aircraft photographed the missiles .
 The dangerous confrontation led to a temporary thawing of Cold War tensions . A ‘hot line’ was established between the Kremlin and White House so as to facilitate future communication .
 Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy were responsible for the resolution of the crisis . It is undoubtedly true that the crisis would not have occurred were it not for the actions of the three men involved .
 Leaders of each of the three administrations involved played a significant role in the nature of the crisis and its peaceful outcome . The leaders of all three administrations played a major role in solving the crisis .
 Nikita Khrushchev first came up with the idea to place nuclear missiles in Cuba while vacationing in Bulgaria . According to his memoirs, Nikita S. Khrushche came up .
 He presented his idea to the Presidium upon his return to Moscow on May 20th, 1962 . He achieved unanimous approval, though several key Soviet leaders voiced concern . The idea was approved by unanimous approval .
 Khrushchev claimed the missiles were strategic weaponry with the sole intention of deterring U.S. aggression . Much of his rhetoric prior to American discovery of the missiles, however, supports his claim that the missile was strategic weaponry .
 Khrushchev: “An attack on Cuba is being prepared. An attack on Cuban territory is being planned.” In a speech to the delegation he sent to propose the idea to Castro, he said, ‘An attack is being . prepared”
 The correlation of forces is unfavorable to us, and the only way to save Cuba is to put missiles there.”lxix Certainly, one could interpret this as merely an attempt to persuade the geographically convenient island to host nuclear missiles .
 Khrushchev and the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba with the sole intention of protecting the island from an imminent invasion by the U.S. It is necessary to examine American actions that may have encouraged such a belief in Moscow and Cuba .
 The American campaign of economic and diplomatic isolation, supported by covert sabotage, continued and intensified after the Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961 . The U.S. campaign of isolation and covert sabotage continued after the invasion .
 The Cubans seemingly agreed that a second American invasion was inevitable . Many members of the Soviet Presidium agreed . The Cuban Presidium believed the invasion would be inevitable .
 The ultimate goal of Operation Mongoose was the eventual elimination of the Castro regime, which Lansdale scheduled for approximately October 1962 . Lansdale's ultimate goal was to eliminate Castro's regime .
 Many contingency plans were prepared and in place as the possible final move of Operation Mongoose . Many members of the Kennedy Administration continue to claim that the U.S. had no intention of invading Cuba .
 Following the Bay of Pigs invasion, most U.S. officials believed that direct American military intervention would be required to remove Castro .
 President Kennedy hoped to remove the Cuban government through covert means, yet he simultaneously planned for a full-scale invasion of the island . President Kennedy wanted to remove Cuba from the island by covert means .
 Both contingency plans included the use of all branches of the military in a fast and overwhelming attack on the small island at great cost in lives and money . Kennedy obviously wished to establish a quick and powerful strike against Cuba .
 The Soviets were beginning to agree with their Cuban allies that an American invasion of Cuba would become a reality . Concrete data about the start of the operation is as yet unavailable; there is talk of its being in the next few months .
 In April 1962, President Kennedy and the Shah of Iran publicly witnessed 10,000 soldiers land on Onslow Beach, North Carolina as part of Lantphibex62, a massive amphibious invasion exercise, simulating landing of 40,000 troops on an unnamed island .
 A less public, but even larger practice invasion was planned for Vieques Island, Puerto Rico, less than fifty miles from Cuba . Simultaneously, Khrushchev and the Presidium approved a six-month old request from the Castro regime for more Soviet weaponry .
 By October 1962 the Soviets had intelligence that the U.S. was increasing its presence in the Caribbean . Robert McNamara had ordered senior military officials to remain ready to participate in invasion planning .
 There were covert operations extending over a long period of time. recollection is that they extended from the late 1950s into the period we’re discussing, the summer and fall of 1962 . The operation was conducted in the summer of that time .
 Leaders of the U.S. Senate and House called for the invasion of Cuba, says President Obama . Obama: "There were important voices in the United States – important leaders of our Senate"
 If I had been a Cuban leader at that time, I might well have concluded that there was a great risk of U.S. invasion. So I state quite frankly again, again, that if I had . been a . leader, he says .
 If I had been a Soviet leader at the time, I might have come to the same conclusion, he says . And I should say, as well, as . well, if I had . been a . Soviet leader, he adds .
 I can state unequivocally we had absolutely no intention of invading Cuba. The second point I want to make – and I think it shows the degree of misperception that can exist and can influence both parties to a dispute [. . . . – is that] I can . state unequivocally
 President Obama said the US government had contingency plans to deal with the situation in Cuba . He said: "All of you – certainly our Cuban friends and our Soviet friends – are familiar with contingency plans"
 All of our militaries – Soviet, Cuban, and U.S. – have contingency plans covering a wide range of contingencies . The United States. has a contingency plan covering a range of scenarios .
 Khrushchev was vacationing very near the ‘defensive’ American Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The Soviet premiere decided to place a similar threat near American soil so as to illustrate how unsettling such a threat could be and further, that the Soviet Union would continue to assume an active
 The agreement to place fifteen Jupiter missiles in Turkey was concluded in 1959 . The agreement was concluded under the Eisenhower administration . The Jupiter missiles were placed in Turkey .
 The missiles were, in fact, offered to all NATO nations to alleviate fears of a ‘missile gap’ favoring the Soviet Union . They were offered to ease fears of the 'Missile gap'
 NATO unanimously approved the emplacement of American nuclear missiles onto European territory to protect against Soviet aggression . Only Turkey and Italy volunteered to house the missiles on their own soil .
 Kennedy administration agreed to remove missiles in Turkey as part of the resolution of the crisis . The missiles were significant to the crisis and its outcome, perhaps a key motivation behind Khrushchev’s decision .
 The desire to retain leadership of the communist bloc in the Cold War of the 1960s also influenced Khrushchev’s decision to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . The decision was also influenced by the desire to keep the communist .
 Following Stalin's death, Sino-Soviet relations had rapidly deteriorated . Following Stalin’s death, relations with China had deteriorated .
 The Chinese criticized Khrushchev for statements he made regarding the unnecessary brutality of the Stalin regime . The Chinese criticize the possibility of ‘peaceful coexistence” in which nations joined the socialist bloc without bloodshed .
 In 1962, while Khrushchev was being criticized as weak, the Kennedy Administration began to act in ways that the Soviets interpreted as arrogant . The Kennedy Administration's actions in 1962 were seen as arrogant by the Soviets .
 Kennedy had decided to resume nuclear testing in April 1962, after Khrushchev had unilaterally broken the moratorium the previous year . Kennedy's decision to resume testing was made in 1962 .
 Khrushchev was becoming increasingly concerned over the growing evidence of American involvement in Southeast Asia . Perhaps most frustrating was a lack of progress on the issue of Berlin .
 In The Cuban Crisis Revisited, Leslie Dewart argues that by placing nuclear missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev hoped to both prevent an American attack against the island, and perhaps even use their removal as a bargaining chip in the settlement . Ronald Steel concludes that Kennedy falsely assumed that Khrush
 Raymond Garthoff, a participant in the 47 crisis, claims, “We saw the principle Soviet objective as redressing a strategic inferiority, publicly revealed, and growing in diversity” This belief is echoed in the statements of many members of the Kennedy Administration, including Robert Kennedy
 Khrushchev himself recognized the dual purpose of the deployment, and made this clear in his attempt to convince the Soviet Defense Council to support “a decision to which he was already firmly committed” In his memoirs, he reports saying to his colleagues, “It would be
 Khrushchev's memoirs omitted from second volume of memoirs . Soviet insistence that Cuban protection was only reason for deployment was convenient way to save face after he withdrew missiles .
 Timothy Naftali and Aleksandr Fursenko suggest that the Soviet alliance with Fidel Castro was also in question in May 1962 . The Soviet-Russian alliance with the Cuban leader was also at issue in 1962 .
 Khrushchev felt he needed a bold move to remind Washington of Soviet power, to ensure that the Kremlin received the respect it deserved from Washington . For these specific reasons, in the late spring of 1962, in . 1962, the Kremlin felt it needed to be respected by Washington .
 At the same time he wanted to demonstrate to Castro personally and dramatically that the Soviet Union would defend his revolution . At the time, he was trying to show to Castro that he had the support of his revolution, but also wanted to show him that he would defend it .
 Khrushchev broke with tradition to emplace nuclear missiles only ninety miles from the U.S. in 1962 . The decision was undoubtedly influenced by Cold War ideology, writes Peter Bergen .
 Khrushchev had no intention of forcing such a confrontation . He respected the possible destruction caused by nuclear technology and had no intent of forcing it .
 Time and again between 1956 and 1961, he had threatened nuclear retaliation as a bargaining chip to further his political objectives . He had threatened to use the threat as a political bargaining chip .
 Whatever his motives, Khrushchev did not intend to start a nuclear war by placing missiles in Cuba . But he did not have the desire to threaten nuclear war when it might actually lead to one .
 Khrushchev recognized the possible consequences of such a dangerous standoff . Feared the crisis might escalate beyond his or Kennedy’s control, negotiated a settlement .
 The role of Cuba has been portrayed as that of a passive stage for a conflict between two superpowers . Oddly enough, the role of the Cuban nation has been played as a passive role in the conflict between superpowers.
 In reality, Cuba was a very active player in this dramatic event and certainly affected the development, nature, and outcome of the missile crisis . Cuba was very active in the development and nature of this missile crisis, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Declassified Soviet documents and Cuban participants in the Moscow and Havana conferences are beginning to illustrate that Cuba played a very significant role in the international crisis of October, 1962 . The events of October 1962 are being investigated by several qualified academics .
 In Cuba the missile crisis is referred to as the October Crisis, illustrating that the event was actually one in a series of potentially catastrophic crises faced by the Castro regime . By October 1962 Operation Mongoose, the Kennedy Administration 50 campaign to harass and destabilize the Cuban government was well underway .
 Immediately following Castro’s ascension to power, the U.S. enacted policies of economic and diplomatic isolation . The United States enacted policies that followed Castro's rise to power .
 John F Kennedy inherited a Cuban policy from the Eisenhower administration that included a plan to forcefully remove Fidel Castro by aiding a group of Cuban émigrés . The Eisenhower administration's Cuban policy was based on political pressure and political pressure .
 Kennedy had criticized Eisenhower administration as stagnant and unimaginative when it came to Cold War issues . He maintained a very similar policy toward the island of Cuba .
 Eisenhower’s plan for an invasion of the island by Cuban exiles, supported by the United States, became a reality under the Kennedy Administration in April 1961 . The plan for the invasion of Cuba was a success in the 1960s .
 The Bay of Pigs debacle ended in embarrassment and defeat for the United States . It had significant consequences for the missile crisis that materialized eighteen months later .
 The Soviet Union began to significantly increase its aid to Cuban intelligence within a week of the Bay of Pigs invasion . At the request of Raul Castro, the Soviet Union increased its aid .
 The KGB sent agents to head all departments of Cuban intelligence and train Cuban agents . The KGB also supplied necessary technical equipment to Cuba .
 Anibal Escalante was a PSP member who had been encouraging Fidel Castro to crack down on dissidents prior to the invasion . He rose to a prominent position in the cooperative Cuban-Soviet intelligence organization that began to create the surveillance state .
 Following the failed invasion of counterrevolutionaries and their superpower ally, Castro began to see the need for the police state . The PSP had been encouraging for quite some time .
 Raul and Che had been members of the communist party since the 1950s . Fidel joined the PSP in November 1960 and Raul joined the party in December 1960 .
 The American sponsored attack confirmed the image of the ever-threatening nearby superpower that Castro had projected in order to push forth radical reform policies . Castro had hoped to portray the American-backed attack as a threat to Cuba .
 Castro and other leading members of his administration portrayed American aggression, ranging from assassination attempts to economic embargoes, as necessitating the Soviet alliance . The choice of communism . could now be presented as the only possible response to the crime of the Yankees’s .
 It boosted Castro’s political stature in Cuba, Latin America, and the developing world . Castro's political stature boosted by the move .
 Sheldon Stern seems to agree that Castro’s success in crushing the Bay of Pigs invasion allowed him to announce his commitment to communism, “in the wake of his stunning triumph,” but doesn’t go as far as to say that United States actions actually drove him
 An additional 80 tanks and 40 jets and reconnaissance aircraft were marked for Cuba and scheduled for delivery . The invasion illustrated to both the Cubans and their Soviet allies that more must be done to protect the young revolution .
 The Cubans and many Soviets seem to have assumed that the Kennedy Administration had reacted to the 1961 Bay of Pigs debacle by preparing for a much larger invasion of Cuba . Because of this, many assumed that Castro welcomed the Soviet nuclear missiles to deter the American attack .
 Following the botched Bay of Pigs invasion, the Kennedy Administration intensified its campaign of covert action against the Cuban government .
 Most within the administration felt that U.S. military force would be required to remove the Castro regime . Most of the administration, however, felt that American military force was needed .
 General Edward Lansdale was recruited by the Kennedy brothers to design Operation Mongoose . The plan was to weaken and eventually eliminate the communist government in Cuba by way of covert sabotage, economic embargoes, diplomatic isolation, aid to counterrevolutionaries .
 Lansdale’s project was to include a schedule illustrating when the effectiveness of covert operations would be exhausted and the island would be ready for outright removal of Fidel Castro and his administration by way of military force .
 The Kennedy Administration also increased American military presence and undertook large, conspicuous military exercises in the Caribbean . Furthermore, the administration isolated the Castro regime through both economic and diplomatic means .
 In 1961 President Kennedy eliminated the quota of sugar that the United States would purchase from Cuba . In early 1962, President Kennedy put an embargo on all trade with the island, except in the case of necessary medical supplies .
 Cuba was expelled from the Organization of American States in January 1962 . Cuba was also banned from the sale of arms to the island . The Organization also instituted collective economic measures .
 As McNamara and others would later admit, Castro understandably expected an invasion by the U.S. The Castro government was not prepared for an invasion .
 In October 1960 and again in March 1962, the Soviet Union threatened to use nuclear weapons against Cuba . The Soviet Union alleviated Cuban fears of an imminent attack by threatening the use of nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev declared that his commitment to the Cuban revolution included the use of nuclear weapons if necessary . The U.S. was preparing for an invasion in 1960 .
 Fidel Castro, Raul Castro and Che Guevara publicly recognized the Soviet nuclear deterrent as being largely responsible for the continued safety of Cuba . It was the second such reassurance in only four month .
 Many in the academic community believe that this pattern of U.S. aggression against the Cuban government resulted in Castro’s acceptance of Soviet nuclear missiles .
 This theory has been echoed by many Cuban, Soviet, and American participants in the crisis, including Castro himself . Castro himself. Castro himself has said that the crisis in Cuba should have been prevented .
 Castro has declared that he accepted the missiles not as a means of protection because in reality, the presence of the missiles made Cuba a target – but as a way of bolstering the strategic forces of the socialist bloc . More often, however, he has declared he accepts the missiles .
 It is likely that the defense of the Castro regime, as well as the enhanced position of the socialist bloc in Cold War diplomacy, influenced the decision of both Castro and Khrushchev to deploy Soviet missiles to Cuba .
 There is evidence to support the circular argument that the character of the Cuban revolution resulted in American aggression, which in turn, resulted in Cuba’s alliance with the Soviet Union . The revolution then resulted in intensified American aggression and the acceptance of Soviet nuclear missiles .
 Philip Brenner argues that Cuba, particularly Castro, influenced the character of the crisis . Khrushchev’s decision to resolve the situation by removing the missiles led to the crisis, he says .
 Cuba’s preparations “would have made the ensuing conflict different from the one anticipated by United States planners” At the Moscow conference, members of the Cuban delegation claimed that the difficulty and the casualty rate of the invasion would be much greater than the Americans appreciated .
 At the height of the crisis, he defiantly ordered that all aircraft in Cuban airspace be shot down . The Cuban government has been unable to find out what caused the crisis in Cuba .
 On October 27th, 1962, a U-2 plane was shot down over eastern Cuba, killing the pilot, Captain Rudolf Anderson . Captain Anderson was the pilot of the U.2 .
 Khrushchev became concerned by Castro’s behavior and recognized that the crisis had the potential of escaping his control and resulting in grave consequences . The Soviet commanders in Cuba believed the reconnaissance plane was taking photos as preparation for the imminent United States invasion .
 Castro’s letter to Khrushchev of October 26th, received by the Soviets on October 27th, was especially distressing to the Soviet Premiere .
 As part of the Soviet policy of glasnost, previously withheld sections of Khrushchev’s memoirs were published in the West .
 Khrushchev recalls Castro's correspondence of October 26th, which he interpreted as Castro’s suggestion for a first strike attack against the U.S. In these sections, Khrushche recalls the correspondence of Oct. 26th .
 The danger that that aggressive policy poses for humanity is so great that following that event the Soviet Union must never allow the circumstances in which the imperialists could launch the first strike against it . If . . the imperialist invade Cuba with the goal of occupying it, the danger . is so
 Khrushchev also concluded in his memoirs that Castro was a reckless and emotional person who did not understand the potential consequences of nuclear war . If they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment .
 Khrushchev chose to exclude Cuba from the negotiations for the settlement of the dispute . Castro inadvertently played a large role in the resolution of the crisis .
 Castro admits that he would have agreed to the use of nuclear weapons . Castro says he did not suggest that “the USSR should be the aggressor, because that would be immoral and insane .
 "We took it for granted that it would become a nuclear war anyway, and that we were going to disappear," he says . "Because, in any case, we took ... that we would disappear anyway," he adds .
 Castro has said that he equated a conventional attack against Cuba with a nuclear attack on the United States . The very different forms of attack would have much the same effect on the respective nations . It is possible that Castro would have been less concerned about the consequences of nuclear war and therefore more
 If this is the case, then Khrushchev was correct to exclude Castro as he quickly maneuvered a resolution . If that is true, he would have been correct to fear the possible consequences of the rapidly deteriorating crisis .
 The Americans insisted upon on-site inspections to verify that all offensive weapons were removed, in return for a secret American pledge not to invade the island of Cuba . In exchange for the inspection, the Americans insisted on inspections .
 Castro declared that the Soviets had no right to bargain away Cuba’s sovereignty by way of inspections and the return of all IL-28 bombers . Instead, Castro announced that negotiations would be considered only if his “five points” were recognized . Castro insisted that the IL-
 Castro’s demands included an immediate end to the American economic embargo, all U.S. sponsored insurgent activity and covert sabotage . Castro maintained this position despite the appeals of UN General Secretary U Thant and Anastas Mikoyan .
 Fidel claimed that the Americans were not required to allow for the observation of a third party to verify that their pledge not to invade Cuba was being upheld . Fidel said that inspections should take place on Cuban soil to verify the Soviet pledge .
 In an attempt to placate Castro, the Soviets left 3,000 of the 40,000 Soviet troops on the island as a defensive force . The Soviets left the island in a bid to appease Castro .
 Castro refused inspection on Cuban soil so the Soviets were forced to reload missiles and other weaponry onto Soviet ships where it would then be photographed by U.S. surveillance aircraft and verified by experts . The Soviets were then photographed by United States surveillance aircraft .
 Castro’s 60 statements at the Havana conference suggest that he still has not forgiven the Soviet leaders for what he perceived as the abandonment of an ally . Cuba played a very significant and active role in the crisis .
 Fidel Castro was not a passive player in the Cuban crisis . His personality and actions influenced the causes of the crisis, as well as the character of the conflict and its eventual resolution .
 The nature and effectiveness of President Kennedy’s actions prior to and during the Cuban missile crisis have been a topic of much disagreement within the American academic community . John F Kennedy's effectiveness of his actions in Cuba has been debated for years .
 Some suggest that Kennedy, an obsessed Cold Warrior, refused to negotiate or compromise with the Soviet Union and pushed the U.S. unnecessarily close to nuclear war over a situation he had created with his aggressive policy toward Cuba .
 Others believe that Kennedy expertly resolved the crisis through his staunch refusal to accept the 'outrageous' actions of the Soviet Union . Others believe he proved himself a capable and powerful executive .
 The theory suggests that a pattern of hostility toward the Castro regime enacted by the Kennedy Administration did, most likely, initiate the crisis of October 1962 . The U.S. was reacting to what it saw as threatening behavior from the Cubans and Soviets, the theory says .
 The ‘traditionalist’ view suggests that failures within the intelligence agencies of both the U.S. and the Soviet Union created misperceptions and misunderstandings that resulted in the crisis .
 Robert McNamara states that, “the decisions of all three nations, before and during the crisis, had been distorted by misinformation, misjudgment, and miscalculation” The participants in the crisis also seem to have reached some consensus on Soviet motives for the deployment of nuclear
 Whether such statements suggest Kennedy had a full understanding of the conflict within the larger context of the Cold War or that he was a typical Cold War politician continues to debate .
 Kennedy or one or more members of the Executive Committee considered each other's motives . Each of these motives was at least briefly considered by Kennedy .
 There has been little discussion among former members of the Kennedy Administration regarding the idea that the Soviet Union put missiles in Cuba to protect the island from an American invasion . Until recently there was little discussion .
 Khrushchev’s primary goal was to protect the young revolution, yet this possibility was hardly considered by ExComm . According to contemporary statements he made, and his later published memoirs, he made it clear that this was not his primary goal .
 Participants were the only ones with access to information regarding the crisis for quite some time and so controlled the history of the crisis and its resolution . This was also the accepted view of most general observers of most American observers .
 John F Kennedy was certainly influential in bringing the crisis to an end, but his means of doing so are being further explored . He was certainly not the only administrator whose efforts were necessary to resolution . John F. Kennedy's efforts were certainly necessary to end the crisis .
 The Kennedy Administration created a climate in which the Soviet Union felt it was possible to place nuclear missiles in Cuba without considering the response of the U.S.
 The theory that Kennedy's weak Cold War policies resulted in the missile crisis is countered by the opposite argument that it was in fact, Kennedy’s aggressive policies that created the environment that led to the crucial Soviet decision .
 Proponents of what William J Medland calls the left-wing perspective of the revisionist argument suggest that Kennedy adopted a belligerent course so that he could demonstrate his toughness, firmness, and manliness to the world .
 Kennedy rejected a path of private negotiation for a public showdown, they say . Furthermore, they suggest that Kennedy rejected private negotiations for public showdown .
 Thomas G Paterson and William J Brophy reject the claim that Kennedy behaved recklessly due to concern over domestic politics and the upcoming November elections . They say Kennedy was concerned about the November elections and domestic politics .
 Paterson and Brophy believe that the naval quarantine was not politically motivated . Many American politicians both Democrat and Republican called for harsher action . The Democrats had no political need to manufacture a war scare, and Kennedy did not welcome a new Cuban crisis .
 The public statement may have been a tactic to keep the American public informed of military mobilization, as well as an attempt to rally support of American citizens and the world, the authors say .
 Most discussions of Kennedy’s handling of the crisis evolve into the question of the actual threat posed by the missiles in Cuba . Most discussions eventually evolve into a question of whether the missiles were actually a threat .
 Kennedy’s critics claim that in an attempt to improve his domestic political prestige, Kennedy concocted false reasons to justify the public military response to the missile threat . Kennedy's critics say that the missiles posed a grave and serious risk and drastically altered the balance of power .
 They suggest that the outdated missiles were useless for a first strike and thus were ‘defensive’ weapons and did not pose a significant threat . The nearly identical missiles in Turkey are seen as proof that the administration understood that these missiles were not of an offensive nature .
 They criticize Kennedy for escalating and extending the crisis by submitting a list of “offensive” weapons he demanded be removed in order to resolve the crisis . The IL-28 bombers were included in the list of "offensive" weapons Kennedy submitted .
 Kennedy unnecessarily brought the world to the brink of nuclear war . Kennedy, by choosing to view the missiles as an offensive threat and demanding their removal, unnecessarily brought world to brink of war .
 Kennedy recognized the missiles did not actually pose a dramatic military threat, but the political consequences of inaction were dangerous enough . The major argument is the political effect on the United States.
 Many within the Kennedy Administration felt that if the Cuban threat went unanswered, Soviet confidence to act elsewhere in the world might be bolstered . European confidence in their American allies would be damaged, resulting in a dangerous world in which Soviet actions went unchecked .
 Last month, I said we weren't going to , and last month I should have said we don’t care. This month, we were going to, but last month we said we didn't care. Last month I said, "Last month I . should have . said
 Whether the military balance was greatly affected by the introduction of Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba, it is clear that the Kennedy Administration felt the international political consequences were great . After all, this is a political struggle as much as military.
 Kennedy reacted to what he considered to be a grave threat to the interests and safety of the United States and its allies . Therefore, the argument that Kennedy acted in the manner he did solely for domestic political gains and the desire to appear strong, seems flawed .
 He applauds Kennedy’s actions as commander in chief during this confrontation . He concedes that previous actions of the Kennedy Administration were precipitous in the Soviet decision to move nuclear missiles to Cuba .
 Stern discusses Kennedy’s posture in the face of possible nuclear war with the Soviets . Stern strays further from the conventional exposition of this event with his presentation and analysis .
 Kennedy expressed distrust of military operations and solutions as well as recognition of the danger of backing the Soviets into a corner and forcing escalation of the crisis .
 Creating a Nation and a Society, by Gary B Nash and Julie Roy Jeffrey, is not so approving of Kennedy’s role in resolving the Cuban missile crisis .
 Nash portrays Kennedy as an “aggressive cold warrior” Nash also discusses the failed Bay of Pigs ‘fiasco’ in which he cites the failed invasion as an important precursor to the Soviet decision to place missiles in Cuba . Nash: The failed invasion of the failed .
 Nash suggests that the Bay of Pigs experience hardened Kennedy’s stance toward communism . Nash: The experience reinforced the Soviet and Cuban belief that the U.S. wished to overthrow Castro .
 Nash declares, “Understandably fearful of the American threat after the Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro sought and secured Soviet assistance.” The language of the . American People text is clearly critical .
 Nash’s breakdown of what constituted the crisis reads, “the USSR had begun to place what Kennedy considered offensive missiles on Cuban soil,” and obviously calls into question if it doesn’t directly imply that the crisis was a creation of the Kennedy administration .
 The Cold War policies of the Kennedy Administration included economic and diplomatic pressure, assassination attempts, covert sabotage and harassment, and aid to counterrevolutionary groups . This was first demonstrated with economic aggression and then with the organization of subversive forces against Cuba .
 McNamara admits he would have believed a U.S. invasion imminent if he had been a leader of either the Soviet Union or Cuba . McNamara himself admits that he believed a United States invasion was imminent .
 The Kennedy Administration believed a communist beachhead in the Caribbean to be unacceptable and extremely dangerous to American interests . The primary problem was the Cuban alliance with the Soviet Union .
 American officials feared Castro’s support of socialist revolutions throughout Latin America, which he proclaimed in his Second Declaration of Havana . The Soviet Union and members of the PSP believed that this was a risky undertaking .
 The third reason for U.S. aggression against Cuba lay in its “hostile rhetoric directed at the United States’s,” the author says . It was difficult to ignore domestic calls for action against the hostile Soviet outpost, he says .
 McNamara: Cuban government "betrayed its promises of a free election and began to establish a dictatorship that violated the civil and political liberties of the Cuban people” McNamara says .
 The continued debate regarding JFK’s role in this international conflict highlights the important fact that if the potentially catastrophic situation of October 1962 is to continue to be viewed as an example of 72 international crisis resolution, it is important that the strategy and posture of the negotiators be investigated .
 Kennedy’s critics suggest that belief in his uncompromising foreign policy led to further American initiatives in the Cold War, specifically in Vietnam . Critics say that belief led to more U.S. initiatives in Cold War .
 Robert McNamara concluded that nuclear weapons are inexcusably dangerous . McNamara has concluded that unless they are destroyed, they represent the possible future destruction of mankind .
 Though the elimination of nuclear weaponry is unlikely, it suggests perhaps, an increased respect for the power of nuclear technology and for the dangers inherent in international conflict .
 It is clear that the personalities and statesmanship of Castro, Kennedy, and Khrushchev were significant to the creation and outcome of this crisis . The personalities of Castro and Kennedy were significant in the creation of the Cuban crisis .
 Khrushchev’s exact motives for deploying the missiles are unclear . There is strong evidence that he misestimated the American reaction to the deployment .
 Khrushchev became increasingly concerned that the crisis would escalate out of his control, and thus was instrumental in its resolution . Furthermore, he was also concerned about the possibility of escalating out of control .
 Castro's historic ‘relationship’ with the Kennedy brothers, his acceptance of the Soviet missiles, and his behavior after their discovery and during their removal, all played a hugely influential role in the October Crisis . Castro’s behavior after the discovery and after their removal all played
 Kennedy's role in the crisis has undergone the greatest evolution in his career . Kennedy is the subject of numerous articles and books available on his work in the U.S.
 Critics have suggested that Kennedy’s determination not to show weakness in the face of the Cold War led the world close to a nuclear war . Kennedy's determination to remove Castro from Cuba led to a Cold War backlash .
 The Kennedy Tapes portray a moderate and capable statesman, different from many of the traditional and revisionist portraits painted by participants and scholars . Kennedy's Tapes show him as a moderate statesman different from the traditional or revisionist portrait .
 He worked tirelessly to alleviate the crisis through diplomatic means and avoid armed conflict and escalation, despite calls from his advisers and members of Congress for harsher action .
 He can perhaps be criticized for his secret negotiations regarding the Jupiter missiles in Turkey and his political sacrifice of Adlai Stevenson . Though he was willing to risk his political reputation if it meant averting nuclear disaster, he can perhaps criticize for his actions .
 Kennedy did request that his agreement to the removal of the Jupiter missiles remain a secret so as to avoid political difficulty both within the U.S. and with NATO allies . Kennedy requested that the agreement to remove the missiles remained a secret .
 He was one of the first in the administration to suggest the removal of the antiquated Jupiters in exchange for removal of Soviet missiles .
 This contingency was not activated because Khrushchev agreed to the removal of the missiles in Cuba in return for a secret agreement to remove the American missiles in Turkey . This contingency would have been activated if the U.S. missiles were removed from Cuba .
 Adlai Stevenson was sacrificed by the Kennedy brothers in their attempt to avoid political fallout . Stevenson was undoubtedly sacrificed in an attempt to protect his reputation .
 We believe that even if we knew every detail about the crisis that would not mean that we could write a definitive history, even if that history were to be written from the perspective of each participant in turn . We are not sure if we know every detail of the crisis .
 It is clear that this was a pivotal event of the Cold War which represented great danger, whether real or imagined, and that the political maneuverings of the statesmen involved resulted in its resolution . It was clear that it was a crucial event which represented a great danger .
 The goal of this lesson plan is to illustrate the tensions of the Cold War era and the nuclear age . The personalities and influence of each of the three administrators on the crisis and its resolution, and to explore the crisis itself .
 Students should begin to recognize the danger inherent in international conflict and analyze ways in which we can prevent and mediate future conflicts . Students should also be aware of the danger of international conflict .
 Students with the section of the chronology from October 1st through October 16th, 1962 . Use this information to help students understand today's events in the news .
 Read the section out loud, and show students the photographic evidence . Mention to students, that Kennedy couldn’t decipher the photographs without the aid of experts .
 Students will recognize the need to understand the motives and reasoning of the participants, specifically Khrushchev and Castro . Students will also be able to learn the motives of those involved in the events .
 Khrushchev chose to emplace Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba, why Castro chose to accept them, and how Kennedy chose to react to their discovery, using their knowledge of these three characters and of the Cold War era . Conclude the class session by asking students to write down their predictions
 The purpose of this hook 80 is to encourage students to see the missile crisis as the horrifying and exciting event that it is . The hook 80 will be used to show students how horrifying the event is .
 By allowing students to make predictions and/or suggestions as to how to handle historical situations, educators provide a more active form of education and empower students to act confidently when faced with decisions .
 Discussion of content Hook will take a full class period . See Discussion of Content Hook above . This activity/discussion will take place during the class .
 January 1st, 1959 through October 16th . Provide students with the section of the chronology that includes January 1, 1959 to October 1st .
 Ask students to review the two handouts and alone, or in pairs, write up the geopolitical significance of this event .
 Cuban-American relations lecture outline to guide them through lecture . Students will learn more about Cuba's relations with the United States .
 Pair the lecture with relevant photographs which can be easily found on the internet . Since students respond positively to visual aids, pair the lectures with relevant photos .
 As a second activity, ask students to write out how they believe Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro will respond to the crisis . Ask students how they feel each leader should respond .
 To gain a better understanding of the tension, escalation, and eventual resolution of the crisis, go over the chronology as a group . Go over chronology of the events in the U.S.
 Note to students that there is no documentary evidence or evidence of any kind of communication between Castro and Kennedy . Ask students if/why this is significant and ask them if they think it is significant .
 Instruct students to write how each primary source either supports or refutes their beliefs of causation of the crisis and the role of each individual leader . Use specific examples from the documents to help students understand their views .
 Chavez gets Russian Helicopters, published April 4th, 2006. Distribute the BBC article .
 Ask students to write a one-page response to an article that discusses if/how these developments are significant . Write a response to the article about the developments .
 Days Eleven through Fifteen – View either the 1974 film, The Missiles of October or the more recent film, Thirteen Days . View either of these films at the top of the list .
 Students should write a critique of the film, focusing on its portrayal of the causes of the crisis and the actions, behaviors, and character of the participants .
 In their film review, they should discuss the possible consequences of the historical inaccuracies within the film .
 This is a good extra credit or homework assignment, if necessary . Since time in class is limited, this is probably a good homework assignment .
 Instruct students to research the current U.S.-Cuban and/or Venezuelan relationship . Students will provide their opinion on these contemporary international relationships .
 Students trace the rise of the United States to its role as a world power in the 20th century . Students trace rise of U.S. to role as world power .
 Describe the Spanish-American War and U.S. expansion in the South Pacific . Describe it as a major factor in American expansion in South America .
 NATO and SEATO were key to deterring communist aggression during the Cold War . The alliance was formed to deter communist aggression and maintain security .
 Cuba expropriates U.S.-owned properties, promising compensation . Shortly thereafter Cuba first expropriated properties . Cuba promised compensation to the United States in return for property expropriation .
 President Manuel Urrutia of Cuba says communism is not really concerned with the welfare of the people . He says that communism is a danger to the Cuban Revolution .
 Fidel Castro accuses President Urrutia of treason and resigns as prime minister . On 17 July, Fidel Castro resigns from post in Cuba . Castro accuses president Urruttia of being a traitor and accuses him of treason .
 He is arrested and on 15 December he was sentenced to twenty years in prison for conspiracy, sedition, and treason . He is sentenced to 20 years for conspiracy and sedition .
 President Obama meets with Cuban leaders and signs agreements . He signs $100 million in trade credits to help lessen Cuban dependence on the United States .
 The following day, the Soviet Union announces that it is willing to buy the sugar that had been destined for the U.S. The sugar had been bound for the United States . The Soviet Union announced it was willing to purchase the sugar .
 JFK pledges U.S. will not intervene militarily to overthrow Castro . JFK pledges the United States will not interfere militarily with Castro's overthrow .
 By 19 April, the invasion has failed; more than a thousand Cuban rebels are captured by Castro’s forces . More than 1,000 Cuban rebels were captured . Castro's forces captured by Cuban rebels .
 Khrushchev announces a six-month deadline for a resolution of the Berlin situation . The deadline was six months before a resolution was reached . Khrushchevitch announced the deadline for resolution of Berlin crisis .
 Gilpatric acknowledges that the U.S. enjoys considerable nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union . The United States enjoys considerable military superiority over Russia .
 U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk declares Cuba a threat to the Western Hemisphere . Rusk calls for isolation of Cuba and calls for Cuba to be isolated .
 The OAS declares the Castro government incompatible with the inter-American system, and expels Cuba from the organization . Cuba was expelled from the OAS in 2009 .
 The organization agrees to prohibit its members from selling arms to Cuba, and agrees on collective measures against Cuba . The organization agreed to prohibit arms sales to Cuba .
 Edward G Lansdale’s “Cuba Project” program review details American covert activities in Cuba . October 1962 was October 1962 as a target date for Castro's ouster. October 1962 is October 1962 when Castro was ousted .
 Cuba denounces the exercise as a provocation and as proof that the U.S. intends to invade . Cuba says the exercise is a provocation that the United States plans to invade.
 Khrushchev first discusses the idea of deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba with Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoyan . The Soviet Union first deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba in late April .
 Soviet press representative in Havana, Aleksandr Alekseev, receives an urgent cable to return to Moscow . On 25 April, the Soviet press rep in Havana was forced to return home .
 Another military exercise in the Caribbean, “Jupiter Springs,” is planned for the spring or summer .
 Khrushchev first mentions the idea of the deployment to Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko . Khrushchchev first mentioned the idea on the return flight to Moscow . The idea was first discussed by Andrei Gromyko, the Foreign Minister .
 Biryuzov, travels secretly to Havana to propose to Castro Castro the deployment of nuclear weapons to Cuba . The plan was rejected by Castro, who wanted nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 The Cuban leadership unanimously and enthusiastically gives its approval of the proposal . The Cuban leader gives his approval in principle . The proposal is expected to be approved by the Cuban leadership .
 Malinovsky initial a draft treaty governing the deployment of Soviet forces to Cuba . The treaty was based on a draft agreement signed by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 The first surface-to-air missiles and supporting equipment for the construction of nuclear missile sites leave the Soviet Union . Late July .
 He claims that the USSR is committed to helping Cuba resist further imperialist attacks . The USSR has pledged to help the Cuban government resist further attacks .
 The Cubans propose that the deployment be made public to forestall an American overreaction . Khrushchev successfully argues for continued secrecy . The Cuban government successfully argues that the U.S. should not be allowed to make the deployment public .
 Kenneth Keating tells the Senate that there is evidence of Soviet missile installations in Cuba . Keating: There is evidence that there are evidence that Soviet missiles were built in the country .
 Keating urges JFK to take action and proposes that the OAS send an investigative team to Cuba . Keating: OAS should send a team to investigate .
 Dobrynin conveys a message from Khrushchev that no ground-to-ground or offensive weapons would be placed in Cuba . RFK relays the message to Dean Rusk and to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara .
 RFK suggests that a statement be issued declaring that the U.S. will not tolerate the introduction of offensive weapons in Cuba . RFK suggested that the United States would not tolerate offensive weapons .
 The president reassures the U.S. public that the Soviets have deployed no offensive weapons in Cuba . The president warns the Soviets against such a deployment .
 Dobrynin reiterates his assurances that Soviet military assistance to Cuba was strictly defensive in nature and did not represent a threat to U.S. security . Dobrynins: The Soviet military aid to Cuba is strictly defensive .
 Khrushchev promises that the Soviets will refrain from any activities that “could complicate the international situation” before the U.S. congressional elections in November . Dobrynin also delivers a message in which the Soviets promise not to “complicate the international . situation’
 Cuba denounces this as a provocation, and proof of American plans to invade Cuba . Cuba says this is proof that the U.S. is planning an invasion of Cuba .
 JFK notes that no information to date suggests that military action would be necessary or justified . JFK says no information suggests that such action would have been justified or necessary .
 Dennison, commander-in-chief of the Atlantic Fleet, to make preparations for a blockade of Cuba if necessary .
 Charles Halleck sanctioned the use of U.S. forces to defend the Western Hemisphere from aggression or subversion from Cuba . Hallecks pledged cooperation with the OAS and “freedom-loving Cubans” to achieve selfdetermination .
 Hilsman calls Dean Rusk, who then calls Paul Nitze . Nitze is the assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs . Rusk is the secretary of state's deputy chief of defense .
 JFK confirms that the United States will impose a quarantine, rather than execute an air strike . JFK: "An air strike could not guarantee the destruction of all Soviet missiles in Cuba" JFK: U.S. will impose quarantine, not execute air strike, instead .
 The Washington Post speculates about recent White House activity . However, the paper also mentions the possibility of Berlin . The paper also speculates that the White House is focusing on Cuba .
 Congressional leaders express support, but many advocate stronger action . The congressional leaders expressed support for stronger action, but some say more needed .
 According to reporters, Dobrynin is ‘ashen’ when he leaves Dean Rusk’s office . According to a reporter, he was “ashen when he left the office. According to the reporters, he is “Ashen” when he
 The U.S. ambassador delivers a letter from JFK and the text of his speech to the Kremlin . He does not meet with any high-ranking officials, and there is no immediate response .
 President announces presence of nuclear missile sites in Cuba . U.S. ambassador Adlai Stevenson informs Acting Secretary General U Thant of the president’s speech . United States will request a meeting of the Security Council .
 Oleg Penkovsky, a senior officer in Soviet Military Intelligence and a Western spy since 1961, is arrested in the Soviet Union . He was a senior Russian intelligence officer in the 1960s and 1961 .
 The final vote is 20-0 in favor of condemning the Soviet missile deployment and endorsing the quarantine . The vote is also in favor for condemning the deployment of Soviet missiles .
 Khrushchev agrees to U Thant’s appeal for a moratorium on further action, and agrees that if the U.S. ends the quarantine, the USSR will suspend arms shipments to Cuba . If the United States . ends the . quarantine, Russia will suspend . arms shipments
 He calls for voluntary suspensions of arms shipments to Cuba and suspension of quarantine for two to three weeks . The quarantine is voluntary, he says, so that a settlement may be negotiated .
 Thomas Power, commander-in-chief of the Strategic Air Command, raises the alert level to DefCon2 . The alert level indicates full readiness for war, Power says .
 Unbeknownst to JFK, Power sent his alert message in the clear, rather than in code (as would have been standard procedure) to demonstrate to the Soviet Union his confidence in American nuclear superiority . Power sent the alert message to demonstrate his confidence .
 Khrushchev states that the U.S. will have to learn to live with Soviet missiles in Cuba, just as the USSR has learned to . live with American missiles in Turkey . The United States has to live in Cuba just as it did with Turkey .
 Khrushchev also claims that SAMs and ballistic missiles in Cuba are under “strict Soviet control,” and vaguely proposes a summit . The former Soviet leader also proposes a meeting with Cuba's leaders .
 JFK draws Khrushchev’s attention to his repeated warnings against the deployment of offensive weapons to Cuba, and to the Soviets repeated statements that they had no need or intention to undertake such a deployment . JFK draws attention to the Soviet Union's repeated statements .
 Initially the letter contains demands for a non-invasion pledge and for the withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey and Italy . The letter was sent to the White House from Washington D.C. to Turkey .
 Khrushchev receives new reports suggesting that the invasion will begin shortly . Later in the day, he receives reports suggesting the invasion is about to begin . The invasion begins shortly after 9 p.m. ET on July 1 .
 Khrushchev re-dictates the letter, eliminating mention of the missiles in Turkey and Italy . The letter was made public in the wake of the missile crisis in the 1960s .
 He also announces that the tanker Bucharest has been intercepted and permitted to proceed without boarding . Bucharest was stopped by the ship Bucharest and allowed to proceed .
 The United States Navy permits the Marucla to proceed . Finding no prohibited material, the U.S. Navy finds no material .
 A couple of hours earlier Georgy Kornienko, Dobrynin’s deputy in Washington, reports that the information indicating an imminent invasion is faulty . A few hours earlier, Geornienkos said that information indicating the imminent invasion was faulty was faulty .
 Dobrynin and Kornienko choose not to report the information to Khrushchev, so as not to delay the delivery of the letter . The pair chose not to send the letter, as it was too late .
 Fomin suggests that if Stevenson were to propose this in the U.S., Zorin would be interested . Fomin says if Stevenson proposed it in the United States, he'd like it .
 Khrushchev inadvertently omits any mention of Jupiter missiles in Italy in the drafting of his next letter to Kennedy . The letter was written in the next draft of the letter .
 The letter proposes a solution to the problem . Fomin proposes more explicitly by Fomin . The letter also proposes a compromise with the government .
 Fomin had no prior knowledge of Khrushchev’s letter and had been acting on his own initiative . ExComm mistakenly assumes Fomin’�s message to Scali was a precursor to the letter . Fomin, however, was acting on own initiative and had no
 Fidel Castro meets with the rest of the Cuban leadership to discuss the next course of action . Fidel Castro then meets with other leaders to discuss his next move .
 JFK concludes that “there is no evidence to date indicating that there is any intention to dismantle or discontinue work on these missile sites” JFK concludes .
 Castro dictates a letter to Khrushchev to prepare for a U.S. invasion . Castro says they have done all they can .
 Dated 26 October, the letter itself was sent at 6:40 A.M. on 27 October .
 Moscow Radio carries Khrushchev’s proposal, as well as his statement that Soviet missiles in Cuba are under strict Soviet control . The proposal was carried out by Moscow Radio .
 Soviet air defense forces shoot down an American U-2 over Banes in eastern Cuba, killing its pilot Maj. Maj. Major Maj. Vladimir Kuznov . The U2 was shot down by Soviet Air Defense Forces .
 Plane returns safely to base without drawing fire from Soviet fighters . Soviet fighters scramble to intercept it, but it does not draw fire . Plane lands safely in Soviet airspace .
 Khrushchev raised the idea of swapping Turkish for Cuban missiles . Scali has instructions from Rusk to determine what has happened to the previous proposal .
 Khrushchev interprets this as an appeal from Castro to launch a preemptive nuclear attack on the U.S. The United States was attacked by Castro in the 1960s . The Castro-Krushchev message was interpreted as a threat to launch an attack .
 RFK recalls telling Dobrynin that the U.S. knew work on the missile bases in Cuba was continuing . JFK did not want a military conflict but that his hand was being forced, he says .
 He writes: “You would agree to remove these weapons systems from Cuba under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision; and undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems .
 Lauris Norstad which presents the difficulty for NATO of any Cuban-Turkey missiles trade . Norstad presented the difficulty of any trade between NATO and Turkey .
 JFK tells Stevenson to tell U Thant that a Soviet tanker is approaching the quarantine zone . JFK also tells Stevenson that the Soviet ships would not challenge the quarantine .
 Cordier is instructed, upon further signal from the White House, to give U Thant the letter, requesting him to propose the removal of both the Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The White House instructed Cordier to give him the letter .
 Cuba refuses to allow United Nations on-site inspections in Cuba . U.N. inspectors will not be allowed in Cuba, Cuba's president says .
 Mikoyan’s instructions are to discuss verification procedures for the removal of the Soviet missiles, and to enlist Castro's cooperation in complying with the terms of the agreement . The agreement includes withdrawal of IL-28 bombers .
 We observe today not a victory of party but a celebration of freedom--symbolizing an end as well as a beginning . January 20, 1961, is a symbol of renewal and renewal, change .
 I have sworn before you and Almighty God, the same solemn oath our forbears prescribed nearly a century and three-quarters ago. For I swear before you, Almighty God . For . I swear to the oath of allegiance to the U.S. Constitution, the oath was prescribed nearly
 "Man holds in his mortal hands the power to abolish all forms of human poverty," says Pope Francis . For man holds the power of abolishing poverty, he says .
 The same revolutionary beliefs for which our forebears fought are still at issue around the globe . The belief that the rights of man come not from the generosity of the state but from the hand of God . And yet the . rights of the . state come from the hands of God,
 "We dare not forget today that we are the heirs of that first revolution," says President Obama . "We are heirs to that revolution," he says .
 The torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans born in this century, tempered by war, disciplined by peace, proud of our ancient heritage . Let the word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch is passed to new generation .
 Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe .
 "To those old allies whose cultural and spiritual origins we share, we pledge the loyalty of faithful friends," President Obama says .
 Divided there is little we can do--for we dare not meet a powerful challenge at odds and split asunder, says President Obama . "Divided there are little things to do," says Obama .
 To those new states whom we welcome to the ranks of the free, we pledge our word that one form of colonial control shall not have passed away merely to be replaced by a far more iron tyranny .
 Those who foolishly sought power by riding the back of the tiger ended up inside . But we shall always hope to find them strongly supporting their own freedom--and to remember that .
 If a free society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot save the few who are rich, it can't save the rich . A free society can't help the poor, says David Cameron .
 To our sister republics south of our border, we offer a special pledge--to convert our good words into good deeds--in a new alliance for progress . The pledge is to assist free men and free governments in casting off the chains of poverty .
 This peaceful revolution of hope cannot become the prey of hostile powers . But this peaceful revolution must not become the target of hostile nations .
 "Let all our neighbors know that we shall join with them to oppose aggression or subversion anywhere in the Americas," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 "Let every other power know that this Hemisphere intends to remain the master of its own house," says President Obama .
 To that world assembly of sovereign states, the U.N. is our last best hope in an age where the instruments of war have far outpaced peace . We renew our pledge of support--to prevent it from becoming merely a forum for invective .
 "Only when our arms are sufficient beyond doubt can we be certain beyond doubt that they will never be employed," he said . "We will never use our arms again," he added. "But we will always use them to protect ourselves from harm"
 Both sides overburdened by the cost of modern weapons, both rightly alarmed by the steady spread of the deadly atom . Yet both racing to alter that uncertain balance of terror that stays the hand of mankind's final war .
 Remember civility is not a sign of weakness, and sincerity is always subject to proof . So let us begin anew--remembering on both sides that civility isn't weakness . Let us remember civility not to be weak, but to be sincere .
 Let both sides explore what problems unite us instead of belaboring those which divide us . Let's both sides find solutions to the problems which divide them. Let's find out what problems united us.
 Let both sides, for the first time, formulate serious and precise proposals for the inspection and control of arms--and bring the absolute power to destroy other nations under the control of all nations .
 Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors . Let's hope that science will be invoked instead of the terrors it has been created .
 Let us explore the stars, conquer the deserts, eradicate disease, tap the ocean depths and encourage the arts and commerce . Together let us explore and conquer deserts, conquer deserts and eradicate disease .
 If a beachhead of cooperation may push back suspicion, let both sides join in creating a new endeavor, not a new balance of power, but a new world of law . The strong are just and the weak secure and the peace preserved .
 President Obama's administration has not been finished in the first one thousand days, nor in the life of this Administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet . President Obama has pledged to make the world's first major change in history .
 "In your hands, my fellow citizens, more than mine, will rest the final success or failure of our course," says President Obama .
 Each generation of Americans has been summoned to give testimony to its national loyalty . Since this country was founded, each generation has been called to give evidence of its loyalty .
 The graves of young Americans who answered the call to service surround the globe . They include those who died in service in the U.S.
 In the long history of the world, only a few generations have been granted the role of defending freedom in its hour of maximum danger . In the past few generations of people have been given the role to defend freedom in the most dangerous moment of freedom .
 I do not believe that any of us would exchange places with any other people or any other generation . I do believe that we would not trade places with other generations . I'm not sure if we would swap places with anyone else or anyone else .
 The energy, the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will light our country and all who serve it . "The glow from that fire can truly light the world," says President Obama .
 President Obama asks citizens of America and the world to show their strength and sacrifice . "Ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifices which we ask of you," he said .
 With history the final judge of our deeds, let us go forth to lead the land we love, asking His blessing and His help, but knowing that here on earth God's work must truly be our own .
 "Aggressive aggression is almost imminent within the next 24 or 72 hours," says Mourinho . "From an analysis of the situation and the reports in our possession, I consider that the aggression almost imminent"
 "I understand that his variant would call for a large number of forces and it is, in addition, the most repulsive form of aggression, which might inhibit them," he says .
 I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists' aggressiveness is extremely dangerous . If they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger forever . However harsh and terrible the solution would be,
 "We view as quite real and quite close. But at the same time, we are ready to calmly confront a situation that we view quite real," says President Obama .
 Our October 27 message to President Kennedy allows for the question to be settled in your favor, to defend Cuba from an invasion and prevent war from breaking out . President Kennedy: "Your goal is to prevent an invasion of Cuba from occurring"
 In this way, the president of the United States has positively answered my messages of October 26 and 27, 1962, 1962 . President of the U.S. has 'positively answered' my messages, he said .
 I must say that I understand your feelings of indignation toward the aggressive actions and violations of elementary norms of international law on the part of the U.S. I'm sorry for your feeling of indignation, President Obama says .
 If there's an invitation it will be necessary to repulse it by every means . Naturally, if there is an invitation, it will need to be repulsed by every way .
 President Obama: "We will do everything possible to stabilize the situation in Cuba, defend Cuba against invasion"
 This position of our government concerning your communication to us is embodied in the statement formulated today, whose text you surely know . The statement was made by the Prime Minister's Department of Justice .
 We decided not to sit back and wait for a surprise attack, with our detection radar turned off, when the potentially aggressive planes flying with impunity over the targets could destroy them totally . We decided to turn off detection radar to avoid a possible attack .
 "We didn't think we should allow that after all the efforts and expenses incurred in and, in addition, because it would weaken us greatly, militarily and morally," she said .
 If we sought to avoid the risks of a surprise attack, it was necessary for Cuban artillerymen to have orders to shoot, says George W. Bush .
 "We cannot accept that, as it would be tantamount to giving up a sovereign prerogative," says David Cameron . "We are not going to give up our sovereignty," he says .
 We have received your letter of October 28 and the reports on the talks that you as well as President Dorticós have had with our ambassador . We have also received reports from the president and the ambassador of the country .
 We understand your situation and take into account the difficulties you now have during the first transitional stage after the liquidation of maximum tension that arose due to the threat of attack on the part of the United States imperialists .
 The Cuban government has promised to withdraw the missile base from Cuba, since it is viewed as an offensive weapon, in exchange for the U.S. commitment to abandon plans for an invasion of Cuba . The United States will lift the so-called ""quarantine,"" that is,
 This led to the liquidation of the conflict in the Caribbean zone . The conflict was characterized by the clash of two superpowers and the possibility of a thermonuclear world war using missiles .
 Political and government figures are leaders of a people who doesn't know everything . But we, political and government leaders, must be leaders of people who can't readily comprehend what we leaders must deal with .
 The U.S. government should have prevented a war of annihilation, says George W. Bush . Bush says the U.N. should not have allowed itself to be carried away by passionate citizens .
 Preventing war and an attack on Cuba depended not just on measures adopted by our governments but also on an estimate of the actions of the enemy forces deployed near you . Preventing the war depended not only on the measures adopted but on the effectiveness of the measures .
 There are opinions that you and we, as they say, failed to engage in consultations concerning these questions before adopting the decision known to you . In addition to there being opinions, there are also opinions that there were not enough consultations .
 If we had continued our consultations, we would have wasted time and this attack would have been carried out, he says . Under the conditions created, also bearing in mind the information that the unabated warmongering group of U.S. militarists wanted to take advantage of the situation
 We have lived though the most serious moment when a nuclear world war could have broken out, says David Cameron . The world has lived through a serious possibility of a nuclear war, he says .
 The U.S. would have sustained huge losses, but the Soviet Union and the whole socialist camp would have also suffered greatly . The United States would have suffered greatly if the U.K. went to war with the Soviets .
 As far as Cuba is concerned, it would be difficult to say even in general terms what this would have meant for them, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There's no doubt that the Cuban people would have fought courageously, or that they would have died heroically . There is no doubt there would have been a heroics in Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Of course, we made concessions, accepted a commitment, action according to the principle that a concession on one side is answered by the other side. "Of course, I made concessions," he said. "I accept a commitment"
 U.S. aggression on the part of the United States and thermonuclear war with the commitment of a concession in exchange for concession, the upholding of the inviolability of the Republic of Cuba and the prevention of a world war . "I think that the total outcome of this
 We have adopted and will continue to adopt all the measures necessary to strengthen our defense and build up our forces, so that we can strike back if needed .
 The shooting down of a plane over Cuba turned out to be a useful measure because this operation ended without complications . The operation ended with no complications .
 "We think you will completely dominate your domestic enemies without our assistance. But we think you'll completely dominate our domestic enemies"
 This process of struggle will continue as long as there are two political and social systems in the world, until one of these-and we know it-will be our communist system-wins and triumphs throughout the world .
 There will still be machinations against you, but together with you, we will adopt all the measures necessary to paralyze them and contribute to the strengthening and development of the Cuban Revolution . The Cuban Revolution will continue to be strengthened and developed, Cuban President says .
 I don't know what news you received; I can respond for the message that I sent you the evening of October 26, which reached you the 27th . I can't say what news I sent to you, but I can tell you what I did .
 "What we did in the face of events, Comrade Khrushchev, was to prepare ourselves and get ready to fight," he said . "We were prepared to fight. What we did was prepare ourselves," he added .
 When in our opinion the imperialist attack became imminent I deemed it appropriate to so advise you and alert both the Soviet government and command-since there were Soviet forces committed to fight at our side to defend the Republic of Cuba from foreign aggression-about the possibility of an attack .
 Danger couldn't impress us, for danger has been hanging over our country for a long time now, says David Cameron . "We have grown used to it. Danger is hanging over us. We have grown accustomed to it," he says .
 Countless eyes of Cuban and Soviet men who were willing to die shed tears upon learning of the decision to withdraw the weapons . Countless tears were shed upon learning about the surprising, sudden and practically unconditional decision to pull weapons .
 The Cuban people were ready to do their duty toward the nation and humanity . Perhaps you don't know the degree of . the degree to which the Cuban people . were . ready to . do its duty .
 The imperialists would by this act become aggressors against Cuba and against the USSR, Cuban president says . Cuba would respond with a strike that would annihilate them, he says . The Soviet armed forces are stationed in Cuba to help in Cuba's defense .
 CNN's John Sutter says the Pentagon's aggressive circles in the Pentagon are dangerous . He says they prefer a preventive strike . Sutter: "I maintain mine about the dangerousness of the aggressive circles"
 "I spoke not as the troublemaker but as a combatant from the most endangered trenches," he said . " Moreover, I spoke ... not as a troublemaker," he added .
 There not must a few Cubans, as has been reported to you, but many Cubans who are experiencing at this moment unspeakable bitterness and sadness . "Many Cubans ... are experiencing ... bitterness and sad," says President Obama .
 The imperialists are talking once again of invading our country, which is proof of how ephemeral and untrustworthy their promises are, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . The imperialist is talking again about invading our nation .
 I must say frankly that measures indicated in your statement constitute a serious threat to peace and to the security of nations . I have been critical of the measures, but I have remained silent on the matter .
 The statement by the Government of the United States of America can only be regarded as undisguised interference in the internal of the Republic of Cuba, the Soviet Union, and other states .
 Cuba cannot recognize the right of the U.S. to establish control over armaments which are necessary for the Republic of Cuba to strengthen of its defense capability . And naturally, neither can . neither can we recognize . the right to . establish control of the United States .
 The armaments which are in Cuba, regardless of the classification to which they may belong, are intended solely for defensive purposes . We affirm that the armaments . are intended to secure the Republic of Cuba against the attack of an aggressor .
 The viewpoint of the Soviet Government with regard to your statement of October 22 is set forth in statement of the . Soviet Government, which is being . transmitted to you through your Ambassador at Moscow .
 I think you will recognize that the step which started the current chain of events was the action of your Government in secretly furnishing longrange missiles to Cuba . I think . Government in Cuba secretly furnished longrange . missiles to the island .
 I think you will recognize that the step which started the current chain of events was the action of your Government in secretly furnishing offensive weapons to Cuba . The Cuban government has been accused of trying to assassinate Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 No offensive weapons were being sent to Cuba, the UK says . After that time, this Government received the most explicit assurances from your Government and its representatives, both publicly and privately .
 Letter from Khrushchev to President delivered to Embassy by messenger 4:43m.m. Embassy translation follows of letter .
 I see, Mr President, that you too are not devoid of a sense of anxiety for the fate of the world understanding, and of what war entails. I see Mr President. Mr President . He said: "You too too are devoid of an anxiety for ... understanding, the fate
 If one concentrates artillery, and adds to it the necessary number of troops, then the same cannons do become an offensive means . The same cannons prepare and clear the way for infantry to attack, he says .
 President Obama is a military man and should understand: Can one attack, if one has on one's territory even an enormous quantity of missiles of various effective radiuses and various power, but using only these means?
 Has something so new appeared in military strategy that one can think that it is possible to attack thus? Has it so new that one could think that one of these things is possible?
 I say precisely attack, and not destroy, since barbarians, people who have lost their sense, destroy . "Barbarians ... destroy. barbarians," he said .
 We should then be forced to put into effect the necessary measures of a defensive character to protect our interests in accordance with international law. We should be forced, he says, to put in effect .
 I spoke in the name of the Soviet Government in the United Nations in the U.N. I introduced a proposal for the disbandment of all armies and for the destruction of all armaments, he said .
 We, for our part, will declare that our ships, bound for Cuba, will not carry any kind of armaments . We will declare our ships bound for the island, bound to Cuba, won't carry any sort of armament .
 Original of letter being air pouched today under transmittal slip to Executive Secretariat . Original of . letter being . air pouched today under air pouch . to Executive . Secretariat.
 Message from President to Khrushchev should be delivered as soon as possible to highest available Soviet official . Message should be sent to highest possible Soviet official, says President of Soviet Union .
 I have studied with great satisfaction your reply to Mr Thant concerning measures that should be taken to avoid contact between our vessels and thereby avoid irreparable and fatal consequences . I have read your reply, Mr President, I have said .
 In your statement you expressed the opinion that the main aim was not simply to come to an agreement and take measures to prevent contact between our vessels . Such contacts could, as a result of such contacts spark a military conflict, after which all negotiations would be superfluous because other forces and other
 The means situated in Cuba, of which you speak and which disturb you, as you stated, are in the hands of Soviet officers, the letter says . The means in Cuba are in Soviet hands, he writes .
 These issues have so far not been resolved, but they are awaiting urgent solution, which would clear up the international atmosphere . These issues are not resolved, and are awaiting an urgent solution to them .
 The Soviet Government has given a new order to dismantle the arms which you described as offensive, and to crate and return them to the Soviet Union . In order to eliminate as rapidly as possible the conflict .
 "There is every condition for eliminating the present conflict," says President Obama . "There are every conditions" for eliminating conflict, he says .
 I note with satisfaction that you have responded to the desire I expressed with regard to elimination of the aforementioned dangerous situation, as well as providing conditions for more thoughtful appraisal of the internal situation .
 We trusted your assurance, because the weather was indeed poor in that area at that time, because of the weather, because it was bad . The weather is indeed poor, and we trusted your assurances .
 I should like to express the following wish; it concerns the Cuban people. I should also express my wish, it concerns Cuba's Cuban people .
 If you do not want this to happen, it would better if no cause is given for a dangerous situation to arise . And if you don't want this, don't give any cause for it to happen .
 President's reply to Khrushchev letter of October 28 for delivery to highest available Soviet official . Text message sent to highest Soviet official for delivery of letter .
 President Hugo Chavez said they would help to protect Venezuela if the U.S. ever mounted an invasion . Chavez: They would help if the United States ever invaded Venezuela . Chavez said the Venezuelan government would help protect Venezuela from an invasion.
 Washington has dismissed claims of a possible invasion as ridiculous . Washington says Mr Chavez's military purchases pose a threat to regional stability .
 A crowd of Russian and Venezuelan generals and diplomats was treated to an air show . The Russian-built helicopters displayed the strengths of the Russian-made helicopters .
 A group of around 20 parachutists jumped in formation out of the olive green MI-17 helicopters during Monday's ceremony . The ceremony was attended by around 20 people .
 President Chavez says Venezuela's latest purchases could be used to transport parachute troops quickly into combat . President Chavez said Venezuela's new purchases could also be used by parachute troops .
 This would be ideal for a war of resistance, Mr Chavez said . He said the U.S. may want to invade Venezuela to seize its oil reserves . Mr Chavez has expressed concerns that the United States wants to seize Venezuela's oil .
 Army Commander Gen Raul Baduel said Venezuela planned to buy a total of 33 helicopters from Russia . Venezuela's army commander said the country planned to purchase 33 helicopters .
 Venezuela has agreed to buy a total of 100,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles from Russia . Venezuela has also agreed to purchase more than a million rifles from the Russian state .
 Mr Chavez repeated his accusation that the U.S. blocked a deal to buy training aircraft from the Brazilian manufacturer, Embraer . He said the Brazilian planes contained protected American technology .
 Mr Chavez's words may do little to dispel fears in Washington that Venezuela is stepping up its arms expenditure and upsetting the balance of power in Latin America . The BBC's Greg Morsbach in Caracas says Venezuela's arms expenditure is increasing . Washington is concerned Venezuela is upseting the balance
 Editorial cartoons are not just like other comics. They're not just about other comics, they're about editorial cartoons . They're about to be more like other cartoons.
 The Daily Mail is a weekly, irreverent look at CNN iReport . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Please submit your photos of the latest from CNN Living .
 A symbol is any object or design that stands for some other thing, person, or idea . Symbolism is a symbol of some other things, people, or ideas . A symbol can be used to identify a person, person or idea, or to identify an object .
 Changes in size or shape often add to the cartoon’s point . Exaggeration and Distortion are common examples of cartoon exaggerations .
 Distorting an object means changing it in some way to make it look funny, ugly, etc. Distorting objects means changing them to make them look funny or ugly . Distorted objects can be made to look ugly, ugly or funny, or funny .
 It is often insulting, but it can also help the cartoon make its point quickly . The cartoon is often taken out of context quickly, but can also be quickly made .
 Caricature is a portrayal of an individual’s features in an exaggerated or distorted way . Caricatures is a depiction of a person's features in a distorted or exaggerated way .
 In it, a viewpoint is expressed in such an odd way as to make that view actually seem ridiculous . In this case, it's expressed such a view that makes that view seem ridiculous.
 Words are used to reinforce the cartoon’s nonverbal features . Captions are added to the cartoon to reflect the cartoon's nonverbal characteristics .
 Famous saying, slogans, song lyrics, and well-known phrases can be used as captions . Famous phrases, slogans and song lyrics can also be captions.
 Gary B Nash and others, The American People: Creating a Nation and a Society, 4th ed. Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers, 2003), 823. cxli Gary B . Nash and . others,
 Gary B Nash and others, The American People: Creating a Nation and a Society, 4th ed. Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers, 2003), 824. .
 Gary B. Nash, Gary B., Julie Roy Jeffrey, John Howe, Peter Frederick, Allen Davis, Allan Winkler, Allen Winkler .