 Fidel Castro Ruz became involved with political protests as a young student . Fidel Castro became involved in political protests during his time in prison .
 After Batista s coup in 1952, he went to court and tried to have the Batista dictatorship declared illegal . He also tried to try to have Batista declared illegal in court .
 Castro's attempt to bring down the Batista government did not work, and so in 1953, Castro turned toward violent means . Castro turned to violent means in 1953 after an attempt to peacefully bring down government .
 Castro led a group of men to attack the Moncada military fortress on July 26, 1953 . Castro led the attack on the military fortress in Cuba .
 His little rebellion was immediately crushed by the Batista army . However, he was not immediately able to escape .
 The Roman Catholic archbishop of Santiago had to make the government promise that the rebels would live, if they would stop fighting and come down from the mountains . In fact, the government had to tell the rebels that they would live if they stopped fighting .
 Fidel Castro and his followers were sentenced to three years of imprisonment . The government kept its promise and Fidel Castro was sentenced to prison .
 Batista, in order to gain some popular support, released them after a few months . Batista released them as soon as possible to gain support .
 Castro s rebellion failed, but it sparked hopes of revolution everywhere in Cuba . Castro's rebellion failed but sparked hopes for revolution everywhere .
 Castro and a small band of about eighty-five men returned to Cuba in December of 1956 . After a few years of exile in Mexico, Castro was forced to return to Cuba . Castro spent the last few years in exile before returning in December 1956 .
 Many of the men perished during the initial landing, but a small group including Fidel Castro and an Argentinian Marxist Marxist Ernesto "Che" Guevara survived . The group went into the mountains after the landing landing .
 Castro and Guevara fought the Batista army continuously in small guerrilla wars . During the next two years, Castro and Guerillailla fought in small guerillas against Batista forces .
 They called themselves the Twenty-sixth of July Movement, after the earlier unsuccessful raid on the Moncada barracks .
 The group gained in numbers and popularity among Cubans as the desire for political change in Cuba increased . Their group gained an increasing number of Cubans in Cuba .
 Castro promised sweeping changes including free elections, non-corrupt government, land, improved educational systems, jobs and health care for all . Castro promised reforms including land, jobs, land and jobs . Castro's government has been criticized for corruption .
 Castro became sort of like a Robin Hood for Cuba and many flocked to his banner . Castro was the sort of Robin Hood of Cuba . He was the leader of the Cuban revolution .
 The final blow to the Batista regime came when the United States withdrew its support as Batista was falling from power . The U.S. withdrew support when Batista's regime was overthrown .
 Batista fled the country with his family and close friends to the Dominican Republic . Seeing that a full scale war against him was inevitable, he fled to the country . Batista died in 1953 .
 On January 8, 1959, the revolutionary forces marched into Havana unopposed . Havana was the first Cuban capital to enter the country from Cuba .
 Tension between Cuba and the U.S. increased dramatically after the Castro takeover . Tension increased after Castro's takeover of Cuba .
 The main reason was that Castro and Guevara were leading Cuba toward communism . "The main reason" was that they were leading the Cuban government toward communism, he says .
 Castro took all estates larger than one thousand acres and nationalized it, meaning that it was made the property of the government . As a part of the sweeping reforms that Castro had promised, he had promise to reform .
 Most of the seized land, including over 2 1/4 million acres owned by U.S. investors, were made into large state-owned farms . Most of those acres, including 2 1-4 million owned by United States investors, have been turned into farms by the state .
 The lost of sugar mills, banks, hotels, utility companies, etc. totaled about $2 billion . Sugar mills and banks, banks and hotels were among those that lost .
 By then, it became clear that Castro was leading Cuba toward communism instead of democracy . Castro's promise toward democracy was realized in Cuba, but he was leading toward communism .
 The USSR signed their first trade agreement with Cuba in February of 1960 . This conclusion was further bolstered by the USSR signing a trade agreement in February 1960 .
 In January of 1961, the United States severed diplomatic relations with Cuba and imposed an unilateral trade embargo against the island country . Only two years after the fall of Batista, the U.S. imposed an embargo against Cuba .
 Even before the U.S. broke relations with Cuba, there had already been plans made against the Castro regime . The Castro regime has been criticized for its brutality .
 The United States supported Operation Pluto, the secret name of an invasion on Cuba, in hopes of overthrowing Fidel Castro . The U.S. supported the secret invasion of Cuba, which was the name of Operation Pluto .
 The Bay of Pigs Incident, as it was later known as, began on April 15, 1961 with air raids on Cuba . It was the first air raid on Cuba that began in 1961 .
 1,500 U.S. trained Cuban exiles landed on Cuba with weapons supplied by the United States . Two days later, the Cuban government was forced to hand over weapons to the rebels .
 At the time, the U.S. government was convinced that the Cuban people would join the invading forces once they land and that the Castro army would disband . The United States was convinced .
 The United States government had to pay $50 million in food and medical supplies to ransom them . The U.S. government paid the ransom to ransom the hostages .
 After the Bay of Pigs Invasion, Castro openly admitted that he was committed to communism . Castro admitted to being committed to the Communist Party in Cuba .
 In the summer of 1962, U.S. spy planes saw that Cuba was receiving large amounts of military equilpment from the Soviet Union . Cuba was getting military supplies from the Soviets in the summer .
 Photographs revealed that the Soviets were building missile installations within Cuba . Photographs reveal that the Soviet missile installations were built in Cuba .
 The United States felt threatened because the missiles had a range of 1,000 miles and they were capable of carrying nuclear warheads . The U.S. felt threatened by the missiles because they were able to carry warheads .
 President John F Kennedy warned Americans of the danger of a nuclear war . With a nuclear threat only 90 miles off the coast of Florida, the threat was 90 miles from the coast .
 U.S. demanded that the Soviet Union dismantle the missile installations or risk retaliation from the United States . The Soviet Union must also dismantle its missile installations, the president said .
 Two days later, on October 26, Nikita Khrushchev of the USSR stepped back and accepted the demands, effectively bringing the world back from the brink of nuclear destruction . The world was on the verge of nuclear war when the U.S. agreed to the demands .
 While the rest of the world has moved on to a policy of engagement with Cuba, the U.S. is still stuck in the Cold War mode trying to isolate the island nation .
 The most recent legislation against Cuba is the so called Helms-Burton Law, which punishes third-country businesses that invest in Cuba . The law is designed to punish third country companies that invest into Cuba .
 'Most businesses are unimpressed by the threat, the opposite, they are very angry. Most businesses are angry at the threat,' says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Most businesses acknowledge that Helms-Burton Law will probably slow investment in Cuba . But more investment will continue as long as profits can be made, they say .
 Even our allies, such as Canada and Mexico, have expressed deep regret in the passage of the Helms-Burton legislation . The legislation was passed by Congress in 1996 .
 U.S.-Cuban relations continue to deteriorate . So while the rest of the world move on and look to the future, they will continue to do so . The relationship between the two countries has been strained for years .
 The Cuban revolution actually improved the standard of living from that of pre-Castro times . The Cuban economy actually improved from pre-Cuba times .
 When Fidel Castro took over, he guaranteed free education and health care to all Cubans . Fidel Castro also guaranteed free health care and education to all Cuban citizens .
 Cuba's education is free at every level, from elementary schools to the universities . Cuba s education is also free at all levels, including elementary schools and universities . In fact, Cuba has a free education system .
 Cuba has the highest education budget in all of Latin America . Literacy rate is virtually 100% in Cuba, and literacy rate is almost 100% .
 Cuba aligned itself with the Soviet Bloc as Castro committed Cuba to communism . Castro aligned himself with the Bloc in order to achieve communism .
 A ton of sugar, which has the equivalent value of 1. tons of oil, was being bought by the Soviet Union at the price of eight tons of . oil to one ton of . sugar . The Soviet Union was buying sugar for the equivalent of 8 tons of crude oil .
 The subsidy effectively pumped $5.5 billion into the island economy annually . The subsidy was effectively pumped out of the island's economy .
 Unemployment went up during the 1970s due to mismanagement and inefficiencies, unemployment went up . However, unemployment increased during that period . Unemployment increased during the 1960s .
 In 1980, 125,000 Cubans fled from Cuba to Florida, seeking for a better life . In 1990s, more than 100,000 Cuban refugees fled to Florida for better lives .
 When the Soviet Union broke up in 1989, Cuba lost its much needed economic support from the former Soviet Bloc . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the collapse of Soviet-bloc countries .
 Castro admitted, “ have lost 70 percent of its purchasing power” after the breakup of the Soviet Union . Castro himself admitted to the loss of purchasing power after the collapse .
 The free fall of the economy finally stopped in 1995 after numerous economic reforms . The country's free fall in the 1990s was due to a series of reforms .
 In 1993, Castro allowed Cubans to own and spend dollars and hold dollar denominated back accounts . Castro did something that was unthinkable, he let Cubans own and spent dollars . Cubans were allowed to own, spend and hold dollars .
 In 1994, Castro authorized Cubans to own small private businesses, a departure from his policy of state controlled economy . Cuba's economy has been dominated by state-run economy since 1961 .
 Most important reform was in 1995 when foreign investors were allowed to own Cuban enterprises outright, not just in tourism, but in basically all sectors of the economy . The most important reform happened in 1995, when foreign investment was allowed in Cuba .
 Reforms generated much needed foreign investment which total about $5 billion as of 1996 . Reforms were followed by reforms in order to attract foreign investment in 1996 .
 The money is not nearly enough to make a significant difference in the Cuban economy, but it has helped the economy to rebound .
 After a decline of about 40% between 1989 to 1994, the economy grew 2.5% in 1995 . After a 40% decline in the economy between 1989-1994, the country's economy grew in 1994 . The economy grew by about 2% that year .
 Clearly, these reforms represent steps toward a market economy, and as the desire for improved living standards increase, the Cuban economy will undoubtably continue to open up .
 Fidel Castro keeps a tight grip of the political scene in Cuba . Road To Political Change: Fidel Castro's Cuba is on the road to political change .
 There are no opposition parties or any kind of official political opposition . The country has no official political parties or an official opposition .
 Fidel Castro, being the President, basically have a monopoly of power in Cuba . Fidel Castro is the President of Cuba . He is the Cuban President .
 Local elections do not affect anything on the national level . Yet these local elections do affect anything national level, says CNN's John Sutter .
 National and international issues are handled by the National Assembly . National Assembly is responsible for national and foreign policy .
 The National Assembly is the equivalent of the American Congress . In the National Assembly, members are appointed instead of elected . Members of the Assembly are appointed rather than elected .
 Political grip loosened in 1993 when for the first time, members of the National Assembly were elected by popular vote . The political grip on the country's political power was eased in 1993 .
 The elections were tightly controlled and only one candidate could vie for each seat . Only one candidate was allowed to run for the seat in each district .
 The high voter turnout rate shows that Cubans were eager to legitimize the government s attempt at reforms . Although as an election, this was a farce, it the high voter turnouts show that Cuba s attempt to reform was successful .
 This eagerness shows that Cubans are ready for political change and they are willing to take an active role in making this happen . Cubans eager to take part in political change shows that they are ready to take a part in this process .