 President Kennedy had forty-eight hours to make up his mind before the story leaked . The story leaked before the president made his decision .
 It’s very hard to get to nuclear war if the framework you bring to the equation is purely rational . It's very hard for nuclear war to be rational, says Dr. Peter Bergen .
 Some worried that nuclear-tipped missiles could be transferred to a young revolutionary named Fidel Castro . In 1962, the Soviet Union was emplacing nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba .
 President should not decide between going to war or allowing Iran to acquire a nuclear bomb . Obama should not think narrowly about his options, says CNN's John Sutter .
 During crises, consider all available options, or create your own, Obama says . ‘When presented with a binary choice between unacceptable options, it is important to explore alternatives that, however unacceptable, are less catastrophic.’
 Fidel Castro sought to become the Cuban prime minister . Had he succeeded, the crisis would have become significantly more dangerous . Fidel Castro was prime minister of the Cuban government .
 The White House cut the Cubans out of the game because they could become a wild card, it says . President Obama recognized that the White House could be a potential wild card player .
 Make sure all actors part of a crisis know the consequences of their actions . Make sure that all actors involved in the crisis know their consequences .
 In addressing nuclear dilemmas, military might and diplomacy are not distinct alternatives, but necessary complements . The U.S. should use diplomacy and military might as a tool to deal with its nuclear ambitions, experts say .
 Kennedy believed that the use of military muscle should be a last resort . He believed that projection of U.S. power in ways that threatened potential use of force was an essential instrument of statesmanship .
 JFK’s successful strategy in CMC depended on imaginative diplomacy: he invented additional options short of war . Military might and diplomacy are not mutually exclusive: military might not be mutually exclusive .
 President Kennedy famously said, “Let us never negotiate out of fear.” When two options are unattractive, consider a broader scope of possible actions, invent additional alternatives .
 North Korea added eight bombs of plutonium to its arsenal and conducted a nuclear test . Following that principle, the Bush administration watched as North Korea increased its nuclear arsenal .
 “The perfect should not be the enemy of the good. Always leave the door open for negotiations and diplomacy,” says David Cameron .
 Kennedy knew that this was a long-term project . Kennedy's ultimate goal was to bury Communism, but he knew it would be a long term project .
 Distinguish between the ideal outcome in the long-term and what can be achieved in the short-term . Distinguise between ideal outcome and what you can achieve in the longer term .
 JFK drew a cardinal lesson: Where the consequences could be catastrophic, never force an adversary to choose between humiliating retreat and war . Take time to consider all options before going to war, JFK wrote .
 How close the world came to nuclear war during the Cuban crisis should be a reminder to us today of the very real possibility of nuclear war .
 Any one of dozens of accidents could have triggered a chain of reactions ending in war . Nuclear powers are interdependent based on their shared interest in avoiding nuclear war .
 Kennedy signaled U.S. resolve by publically demanding withdrawal of missiles . Kennedy signaled American resolve during the Missile Crisis . When faced with two unacceptable options, make a creative third option .
 A leak of information could have compromised the decision-making process, officials say . A leak could have been a breach of the law, they say . The decision was made following a leak of confidential information .
 Secrecy is quite important in decision-making to give time for deliberations . Secrecy was important in deciding whether to give deliberations time to be considered .
 No event demonstrates more clearly than the Missile Crisis that with respect to nuclear war there is an awesome crack between unlikelihood and impossibility . The Missile Crisis was the most likely nuclear war to occur in history .
 Most people would like to imagine that the nuclear sword of Damocles has been carefully lowered and put away, even if it has not been hammered into a plowshare . Especially in the aftermath of the Cold War, most people want to believe that the sword has been put away .
 U.S. and Soviet Union were rivals in the Cold War era . Nuclear war is still possible, but it's still possible .
 While Cold War is over, be alert for new nuclear dangers . Essence of Decision also provides political scientific analysis of decision-making .
 Model I focused on decision-making from the perspective of a state as a rational actor . Model I . focused on decisions made by a state in a rational state .
 The second Model focuses on the role of organizations within a government as actors in a collaborative decision-making model . The model is based on the model of organizations in the government .
 The third model focuses on ‘governmental politics’ and the role of individual policymakers and statesmen negotiating and deliberating to form policy . The other models focus on “government politics”
 Since nuclear war between the U.S. and Soviet Union would have been mutual suicide, neither nation would choose nuclear war; nuclear war not a serious possibility . Nuclear war not serious possibility.
 Given its strategic nuclear advantage at the time, the U.S. could choose lower-level military actions without fearing escalation to nuclear war . The United States was able to choose lower level military actions .
 Leaders of both nations will think soberly about the challenge and their options and find limited actions to resolve disputes short of war . Nuclear crises manageable; when vital interests at stake, leaders will think .
 Nuclear crises inherently chancy; information and estimates available to leaders reflect organizational capacity and routines . Information and estimates reflect organizational capacities and routines as well as facts .
 Leaders presented with much narrower options than the menu that analysts might consider desirable . Leaders are presented with narrow options than what analysts might think desirable .
 Organizational rigidities and even mistakes crucial for U.S. success . Organizational rigorities are crucial for United States success .
 Problem of control and coordination of large organizations, so prescription to put thought into routines established in principal organizations before a crisis . Problem of controlling and coordinating large organizations .
 U.S. leaders can choose actions that they believe entail real possibilities of escalation to war . United States leaders must choose actions they believe involve real possibility of escalation . The United States has a right to take actions that could escalate to war.
 Interaction of internal games within White House or Kremlin could yield war, even nuclear war as a outcome . Interaction could yield nuclear war, as a result . Interactions could yield the possibility of a nuclear war .
 Mix of personality, expertise, influence, influence and temperament that allows a group to clarify alternatives even while it bargains over separate preferences must be better understood . Mix of personalities, expertise and influence must be understood, say experts .
 Employs multiple viewpoints, including iconoclastic ones, in decision-making process . Employ multiple viewpoints in decision making process. Employ multiple perspectives in decisionmaking process.
 Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba in 1962 and U.S. in Europe since 1983 were deterrents to side deploying them and provocations to the side facing them . For example, Soviet missile deployment in Cuba was a deterrent to the Soviet Union .
 Deterrence is based on threat, and the two sides often disagree about which types of weapons and deployments are inherently retaliatory rather than first-strike threats . The U.S. and the U.K. often disagree on which type of weapons or deployments are necessarily retaliatory .
 In crises mistrust and commitments harden, making it more difficult for leaders to be confident that they can discern or demonstrate the differences between enhanced communication and deception or between restraint and weakness . In crises, leaders must be confident they can distinguish between enhanced communications and deception .
 The best solution to these tensions is to install sober and careful statesmen in both capitals – a vital but lofty goal . It's a vital and lofty goal, but the best solution is to create sober statesmen .
 Deterrent measures are frequently seen as provocative, especially in crises . To mitigate tensions resulting from this paradox we need good leaders, says David Cameron .
 Richard Betts, “Surprise Attack and Preemption” in Allison, Graham T., Albert Carnesale, and Joseph S Nye, ed. Richard K Betts. “surprise attack and preemption’
 James Blight and Janet Lang: How Castro Held the World Hostage . “Already we are beginning to see the inexorable process by which historical events when they recede far enough into the past, take on an antiquarian quality and gradually lose their visceral potency.”
 Those fortunate enough to have had a near miss will know how much their driving improved as a result of it . Those lucky enough to get a near-missed car will be able to get back on the road .
 Be wary of the dangers of political and cultural myopia, of failure to communicate, misperception and misperceptions, failure to put yourself in your opponents’ shoes .
 Aspiring nuclear states should know that nuclear weapons are a problem, not a solution, writes James Blight and Bruce Welch .
 Decision-makers’ preconceived world views affect how information is processed . “A rational models of deterrence are not enough.”
 There are high risks of accident, miscalculation, or misperception that can cause nuclear war . We need to find ways through briefings and simulations to ensure that top officials have a better grasp of the complexity of nuclear systems they direct before a crisis occurs .
 It is critical to prepare top officials to deal with crises before they occur, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The superpowers had not yet worked out the rules of the road governing such novelties as a Marxist regime in the Western Hemisphere or overseas Soviet military bases . This will expedite identification and mitigation of potential sources of tension .
 The two countries had not yet appreciated the significance of crisis stability and the importance of fast, direct communications between Washington and Moscow . The decreasing utility of force as an instrument of policy, they say .
 The crisis revealed how threats of military force lost its potency during the nuclear are. Furthermore, the crisis revealed that threats of nuclear force lost their potency .
 The policymakers at Hawk’s Cay felt this burden so powerfully, while the scholars at Hawk's Cay felt it not at all, primarily accounted for the gulf between their understandings of the event . The gulf between the two accounts of the events can be explained by the gulf of understanding
 It was also the burden of responsibility…that primarily account for the many differences between the hawks’ and the doves’ approaches to the crisis. “Burden of responsibility’s also account for differences between hawks and doves,” says Julian Zel
 It's remarkable how little agreement there was on this here this weekend. It was remarkable that little agreement was reached on this issue, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Don’t have a process that creates a crisis unless you want one,’s the author says . And second, don't have a crisis created unless you’ve got a crisis, he says .
 The crisis was caused by the United States because of the way it reacted to the missiles in Cuba . The U.S. caused the crisis by reacting to the missile attacks .
 Biggest source of crisis instability: miscommunication, mistakes, and misunderstandings . Biggest problem is miscommunication and mistakes, says President Obama .
 The story of the Missile Crisis is replete with misunderstandings and miscalculations . It's replete in the story of misunderstandings, miscalculation, and it's not always easy to predict .
 Something more than "dumb luck" was involved in sidestepping a nuclear apocalypse . But something more than ‘dumb lucky’ was involved, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The problem was not so much with the collection of intelligence as with its interpretation and analysis, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The problem is not the collection but the interpretation of intelligence, he says .
 Sometimes, the unconventional explanation may explain a shocking truth . Sometimes, it may explain the truth, but sometimes, it doesn't .
 Nuclear weapons changed warfare completely: They made classic military victory impossible . Nuclear weapons have made classic warfare impossible .
 "To manage future crises, we much devise strategies to achieve our objectives without the use of force," says President Obama . "We need to devise strategies for future crises," he says .
 Fen Osler Hampson, “Escalation in Europe,” in Allison, Graham T. Graham T., Albert Carnesale, and Joseph S Nye, ed. . Nye . Hampson .
 Missile Crisis illustrates the need for better international laws and institutions to defend small-state sovereignty . Missile Crisis highlights the need to better international law and institutions, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Missile Crisis illustrates Cuba’s need to provide for its own defense; it could not rely solely on the Soviet Union . Cuban President George W. Bush says the crisis illustrates the need for Cuban defense .
 Robert McNamara said that there was no longer bureaucratic decision-making but crisis management . Sorensen said that “procedures do, of course, affect decisions.”
 Khrushchev’s policy simply cannot be reconciled with the policy of Soviet missiles into Cuba . Crisis crises could most readily be traced to grave foreign and domestic threats that leaders believed could only be overcome through an aggressive foreign policy .
 The most important external threat was the expectation of a dramatic shift in the balance of power, says Graham Allison . Allison has suggested that the missiles could have been perceived as the solution to a number of different problems confronted by influential groups within the Soviet hierarchy .
 Assumption of rationality cannot be reconciled with Khrushchev’s policy, says historian . Assumption is not reconciled, says author . Khruschev's policy was based on assumption of rationality, he says .
 Analysts' interpretations of the crisis tell us at least as much about themselves as they do about Khrushchev and Kennedy . The review of the literature here suggests that this is even truer of the analysts' interpretations .
 Each side projected its own psychology and stereotypes about the behavior of the other . Analysts did the same .
 Analysts of the Missile Crisis have tried to deny the strong strain of irrationality in decision making . Analysts say irrationality is the result of irrational thinking .
 The crisis lowered the long-run risks of nuclear war, but its lessons were wrongly applied in Vietnam . Vietnam's nuclear crisis lowered long-term risks of war but failed to realise its risks, experts say .
 “One of the important and very difficult lessons from the crisis is that it did take time. During crisis, necessary to have deliberate and thoughtful discussions on possible solutions.” “It did take a lot of time to find a solution to the crisis,” says the
 It took time for people to work out the possibilities, to see options that they didn’t see – even for President Kennedy to cool down, because he was prepared in the initial sessions to resort to immediate attack, says historian .
 There is almost no chance any president of the U.S. will have that leisure to deal with a crisis in the future . President must not allow himself to be hussled by the media into premature decisions, David Gergen says .
 Decision makers must have time to develop and consider many options for dealing with international crises . Decision makers should not allow themselves to be pushed into premature decisions, says Peter Bergen .
 Only such examination can reconstruct key judgments within the little worlds in which they were made . Only examination of the world can reconstruct the judgments made by those who make it .
 The best way to assess and assess the judgments made by policymakers of the past is to consider those judgments in light of the most detailed and seemingly insignificant historical information available .
 The U.S. agreed to pull its nuclear-armed Jupiter missiles out of Turkey in return for the Soviets pulling their missiles from Turkey . Kennedy agreed to the Soviet demand that the United States pull out its nuclear missiles in exchange for the return of their missiles .
 The president understood that this concession would not play well with the American public, especially with the political right . It would also damage Washington’s relations with its NATO allies, especially Turkey, especially .
 He told the Soviets that they could not speak openly about the deal, or else he would deny it and ultimately renege on it . So he told them that they couldn't speak openly . He told them they could . Or else he'd deny it, or he would ultimately re
 There were suspicions in the West that such a deal had been cut, and the Kennedy administration was queried on the matter . Still, there were suspicions .
 The president and his principal advisors lied and denied that there had been an agreement to take the Jupiters out of Turkey . The president said there was no agreement to remove them from Turkey . President Obama has been accused of lying about the deal .
 Sometimes leaders lie to the public and to other governments in order to resolve international crises, CNN.com's John Sutter says . Sutter: Sometimes leaders tell the public what they want to do to solve international crises .
 The lies the helped end the Cuban Missile Crises can be viewed nobly because they helped defuse a dangerous nuclear confrontation . The lies were lies that led to the Cuban missile crisis .
 President is isolated in the thinking he has to do and has to take consideration, even in the presence of a group like the ExComm. ExComm .
 In crises, realize that the ultimate decisions rest with the person in charge . “ExComm didn’t advise the President on the politics of the event.”
 The president should be advised on the domestic and political ramifications of a crisis, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Crisis led the U.S. and Soviet to take fewer risks, given their newfound fears of destruction by mutual miscalculation . The crisis led the United States and Soviet leaders to take less risks .
 Presidents often make decisions about war apart from Congress and even their advisors because of the need for secrecy, flexibility, and the need to act quickly . Presidents often decide on war alone because of need for flexibility, flexibility and secrecy .
 Richard E Neustadt and Graham T Allison, afterword to Robert F Kennedy, Thirteen Days . “The uses made of history appear to have contributed, demonstrably, to the high quality of analysis and management apparent during the missile crisis.”
 Kennedy and his advisors used historical examples to help understand the crisis, which increased the quality of their analysis and decisions .
 That may be historically insignificant except to them, but it matters at least to them . "That may be historic insignificant except ... to them," they say .
 Putting off the killing of those people for at least a week probably reduced the risk of nuclear exchange by mutual miscalculation . "Arguinal improvement, as we mean it, could consist of even less and still be worth the effort"
 JFK learned of the missiles in Cuba, his first impulse was to do something . JFK's "first impulse" was to take action, JFK says .
 Only second did he think of whether to do anything, in what sequence, keeping open what options, he said . Only second was he thought of whether he did anything, or what he did .
 When high government officials make big decisions, details matter . Details matter, seeking marginally better outcomes is worth the effort . Examining second thoughts can be helpful .
 There are five areas which are seen as preventing us from drawing useful lessons from history . The Uses of History for Decision-Makers .
 People still react to stress, fear, and fatigue the way they did in the 1960s, says Dr. John Defterios . He says people still react, fear and fatigue to stress .
 The way in which personalities and organization interests interact doesn’t change much over time . Another is the dynamics of small-group politics, which doesn't change much .
 A third is the wisdom of classical diplomacy . Building golden bridges behind your enemy is as valuable and as important in the nuclear age as it was in the age of the great Chinese dynasties .
 A fourth is the awareness of nuclear risks and the importance of the crystal-ball effect . A fifth is awareness of the risks associated with nuclear risks .
 If the Kaiser, the Czar, and the other leaders of Europe had been able to see in 1914 what the world was going to be like in 1918, there would have been no World War I; nuclear weapons provide a powerful crystalball .
 Bob McNamara referred to quarantine earlier as a signal to the Soviets . McNamara refers to quarantine as a 'signal' to the U.S.
 Organized procedures are not full controllable by small groups of men . We know that it was only one among a very great number, several of which the ExComm didn't even know about .
 We heard a great deal about the problems of micromanaging complex military operations such as quarantine, ASW activities, and reconnaissance . We also heard about the difficulties of micromaniating .
 Third, be sensitive to the risks of accident, as illustrated by the stray U-2 over Siberia . Be sensitive to risks of an accident .
 Organization procedures are not fully controllable by small groups of meng.g. military operations . Organization procedures must be fully controlled by large groups of people .
 Beware of being too clever by half the uncertainties surrounding any crisis make it impossible and unwise to craft and pursue a delicately nuanced strategy that relies heavily on your own virtuosity for success . Beware of the toll caused by stress and fatigue .
 This means that the First World War or Guns of August analogy is only valid up to a point, largely because of the crystal ball effect of nuclear weapons . Also, nuclear crises are different… also, nuclear crisis are different .
 Do not create overly complex plans in crises: avoid being too clever for the situation . Avoid being overly clever in crisis situations . Do not be overly complex in crisis planning .
 While conducting secret deliberations or actions during a crisis, be aware of those you may be shutting out . Be aware of who you may shut out .
 He was able to use both hard and soft power and combine them very effectively on the world stage, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Kennedy was in office in the throes of the Cold War, at a time when the United States and the Soviet Union were building up nuclear arms and fighting proxy wars in far corners of the globe .
 Leaders cannot rely on use of force alone in foreign policy decision-making . Leaders can't rely on force alone to make foreign policy decisions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 According to the prevailing models, the American advantage of seventeen to one, and the vulnerability of the Soviet forces, should have deterred Khrushchev from placing missiles in Cuba and encouraged Kennedy to take larger risks than he did . Kennedy took a larger risk than he should have taken .
 Models cannot explain decision-making: one must also account for the psychology of leaders in a given situation . Models cannot fully explain decision making, says Julian Zelizer . Models can't fully explain decisions, he says .
 The outcome of one set of events may greatly change the odds for the next event . The odds change, and the outcome of that event may greatly affect the odds .
 Some strategists might conclude that Kennedy must not have believed those probabilities would lead to a nuclear exchange . Kennedy acted irrationally in not launching the first strike that an expected value calculation would suggest, he says .
 Consider risks relative to consequences of consequences of inaction or different circumstances . Consider the risks of taking action against inaction or taking action in a different way .
 Joseph S Nye, Jr., Jr., Nuclear Ethics . “In cases that involve vital survival interests, we should not rule out unilateral action, though when possible we should seek international support .
 The starkest case in the last half century was the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . It was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in the Cuban crisis .
 In a novel situation, effective leadership may require greater diversity in the group that shapes decisions . In the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961, John F Kennedy followed standard bureaucratic procedures .
 Doing nothing could have been costly for America’s political competition with the Soviet Union . At the same time, given the bipolar Cold War, doing nothing was costly for U.S.
 Sanctions were not effective in removing Castro, but they were an efficient means of imposing costs and containing Castro . Sanctions imposed by the U.S. were effective in imposing costs, containing Castro, says Julian Zelizer .
 Military action may be most effective option to crisis, but risks require policymakers to consider alternatives . The U.S. should consider alternatives to military action, experts say .
 Avoid cherry-picking lessons just in order to justify current policy decisions . Avoid cherry picking lessons just to justify policy decisions, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Walter Pincus, “Cuban missile crisis still a teachable moment” “There are many historical examples which demonstrate military evasion of civilian control over military operations," he says .
 Be wary in international crises: civilian policymakers may lack full control over the military . “Inadvertent escalation may occur because offensive and defensive actions are frequently indistinguishable.”
 The defensive needs of attack submarines may cause them to destroy Soviet strategic submarines . Such actions are likely to be interpreted by the Soviet Union as very offensive .
 Measures that one state takes to defend itself may seem offensive to the adversary against whom they are directed . In more general terms, measures taken by one state may seem to be offensive to its adversary .
 The defender may have no choice but to take such actions, even if he understands that they threaten assets that the adversary values highly . The defender's actions may be justified, even though he understands they threaten his assets .
 Defender often does not understand how threatening his behavior, though defensively motivated, may seem to the other side . Even more dangerous, however, is that he often doesn't realize how threatening it may be to the defender .
 When the adversary reacts in a violent or escalatory fashion, the defender is surprised . The defender may respond even more extremely. Thus, when the defender reacts in such a violent fashion, he is surprised.
 Difficulties raised by the ‘fog of war’ can result in inadvertent escalation to nuclear war . Difficults raised by “fog’s fog of war can lead to accidental nuclear war, experts say .
 Missile Crisis illustrates the likelihood that something could go wrong during a crisis . Missile Crisis was a major event in the U.S. history .
 Missile Crisis reminds us that our current nuclear weapon SOPs have not changed . Despite end of Cold War, Missile Crisis was still Cold War . Nuclear weapons are still in use in the world .
 Their cultures emerge from the intense emotional experiences through which they have passed, they say . They emerge from intense emotional . experiences that created vivid memories that readily spring to mind .
 Munich, Pearl Harbor, the Cuban missile crisis, and the war in Vietnam were such experiences . Munich was the first time the U.S. was at the top of the world's most powerful cities .
 When future, or even present, conditions are difficult to discern, people make decisions based on what they see . What they see is influenced by their memories of what has happened in the past . People make decisions when they see what they think and what they remember .
 These are personal memories; sometimes they are organizational or national memories . Sometimes these memories are personal . Sometimes personal memories are more important than national memories. Sometimes these are national memories, sometimes personal .
 Intense emotional experiences like the Cuban missile crisis end up determining people's strategic cultures and traditions . Intense . emotional experiences such as the Cuban . missile crisis determine people's . strategic cultures, traditions .
 This emotional response would predispose the decisionmaker to certain broad courses of action such as trust/distrust, cooperate/fight . The emotional response is likely to predispose a decisionmaker toward certain course of action .
 After that, the serial evaluation of options would occur in order to specify a course of action consistent with the broad emotional response . The evaluation would then take place in the next few days .
 The process in the Cuban missile crisis, which was a success, has notable similarities to the Vietnam crisis . What is striking is that the process is similar to that in the case of Vietnam, it was successful .
 In both cases, the basic decision was made very early in the process, before it was necessary to decide, and quite clearly before all the relevant information had been received . The decision was taken very early, before the necessary information was received .
 In both cases, the decision was not changed, or even reconsidered, when important information or analysis was received that was not consistent with the decision .
 Leaders do not use fully rational decision-making processes, including taking into account new information, to determine what course of action to take . Leaders fail to take account of new information or take new information into account, experts say .
 In the former, the threat of nuclear escalation was explicit, in the latter implicit . In the latter, it was implicit, with the threat implicit .
 In each case, the two parties were in direct communication with each other, maneuvering for advantage in terms of local stakes .
 These examples illustrate an important defect in much of the recent discussion about crisis management . The problem is that crisis management is not being discussed in the media .
 There is a tendency to assume that the overriding interest of the parties is to defuse the crisis . But it is not always the case that the parties are trying to deal with the crisis, says David Cameron .
 The goal would be given progressively more weight as a crisis intensified . But that goal would certainly be given more weight .
 This record supports a prediction that as more states acquire nuclear weapons, the probability of their getting involved in conflicts will increase . This prediction is based on the fact that more states are likely to get involved in nuclear weapons .
 Crises between nuclear-armed states can happen, and when they do, participants want to fulfill their interests in the crisis, not just avoid war . Crises could happen, but when they happen, they do not just want to avoid war, but to fulfill interests in crisis .
 Henry S Rowen, “Catalytic Nuclear War’s” is published by Henry Allison, Graham T., Albert Carnesale, and Joseph S Nye, ed. Henry Rowen .
 Our commander in chief needs political space to do what’s necessary to prevent a new war in the Middle East, says President Obama .
 In foreign policy crises, often President and decision-making team will need time and space to deliberate over decisions before pursuing one course of action . President needs time to deliberate with decision-makers before pursuing a course of actions, experts say .
 Strategic Air Command was supposed to launch bombers, under failsafe procedures, before nuclear weapons were predicted to detonate on United States soil .
 SAC, however, failed to do this during the October 28 “test tape” warning incident . SAC failed to follow up on the warning tape, but did it again in October .
 Armenian and Azeri leaders should review their militaries’ routines to weed out those contingency SOPs that may lead to escalation into a war against their orders .
 It helped us avoid further confrontation with the Soviets; it resolved the Berlin issue; and it established a new basic understandings about U.S.-Soviet interaction . It helped . It also helped .
 Uncontrollable elements, such as accidents and miscalculations, may drive states to nuclear war . “…the highest officials in the American government clearly recognized that a confrontation with the Soviet Union would entail a certain risk of nuclear war.”
 McNamara’s assumption was that nuclear preparations would serve to deter Soviet responses in general; that is the implied nuclear threat was not directed simply at the possibility that the U.S. might consider using its nuclear forces . One must be willing to accept a certain risk of escalation in
 The risk of nuclear war was consciously manipulated in order to affect Soviet options in the crisis and support American objectives . The risk was deliberately manipulated to help the U.S. avoid a nuclear war with Russia .
 In conventional crises, leaders may sensibly seek one advantage or another . Leaders may also seek advantages in dealing with crises, such as terrorism .
 A conventional country enjoying military superiority is tempted to use it before other countries right the military balance . They may bluff by threatening escalatory steps they are in fact unwilling to take, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In a nuclear confrontation, no country can take a first step without considering the last . "No country takes first step in nuclear confrontation without considering last step," says South Korean president .
 Nuclear deterrence works; due to the fear of nuclear retaliation, states are more cautious and will not risk escalation . The fear of a nuclear strike will keep states cautious and not risking escalation .
 Cuban missile crisis has crucial lessons for modern leaders . Lesson 1: No one can “win” a nuclear war. Lesson 2: "No one can "win" a war.” Lesson 3: “No one’s can win a nuclear
 Both sides gradually formed views on how to ensure strategic stability and that was reflected in official SovietU.S. and then Russian documents .