 Superpower relations and the Cold War,1941–91 Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK's largest awarding body .
 We provide a wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and specific programmes for employers . We also provide a range of vocational and occupational programmes .
 You can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at www.edexcel.com/contactus . Alternatively, you can get the details of our contact with us at the details .
 "We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they are in the world," says the school's founder .
 Examiners must mark the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the last . The first candidate must be marked at the same time as the last candidate .
 Candidates must be rewarded for what they have shown they can do rather than penalised for omissions . Candidates should be rewarded with what they've shown they're capable of, not penalised with omissions, rather than being penalised .
 Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the answer matches the mark scheme . If the question is answered correctly, the answer should be given full marks . The mark scheme should be based on the fact that the question was answered correctly .
 Examiners should also be prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not worthy of credit according to the mark scheme .
 Question 1: Explain two consequences of the collapse of the Soviet Union . Explain the consequences of Soviet Union's collapse . Explain why Russia's collapse was one of the most significant changes in the world .
 An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be awarded more than the top of Level 1 . The expectation for candidates for AO1 is that they demonstrate both knowledge and understanding . An answer to a question of no qualities cannot be given more than a Level 1 award .
 Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities outlined in the mark scheme . Indicative content guidance . Answers must also be credited for their use of material that meets the requirements of the mark .
 While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this does not imply that these must be included in the article . Other relevant material must also be credited . This does not mean that these references must not be included .
 Some passages of the narrative may lack coherence and organisation . The account of events shows some analysis of the linkage between them, but some analysis is not clear .
 Maximum 4 marks for answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by stimulus points . Maximum marks for questions that don't go beyond those prompted by stimuli .
 The account of events analyses the linkage between them and is coherent and logically structured . It analyses the linkages between the events and is logically structured.
 No access to Level 3 for answers which do not go beyond aspects prompted by the stimulus points . Only access to level 3 for questions prompted by stimulus points.
 The middle mark in Levels 2 and 3 may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2 . The middle marks in Levels 1 and 2 and 2 can be achieved with stronger performance .
 It shows some reasoning, but some passages may lack coherence and organisation .
 "It shows a line of reasoning that is coherent and logically structured," the author says . "It's a logical and coherent line of logic," he says .
 An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1a . The expectation is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding .
 The importance of the formation of NATO for the development of the Cold War . NATO was formed in 1950s in order to counterbalance the Soviet Union-led Russia-led Yugoslavia .
 The importance of the summit meetings of 1959-61 for relations between East and West . The summit meetings were held between 1959 and 1961 in China .
 The importance of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan for Superpower relations is discussed . The Soviet invasion was the first invasion to invade Afghanistan .