 In response, Israel, followed by the United Kingdom and France invaded Egypt . Israel invaded Egypt in response to the invasion of Egypt .
 The Suez Crisis began on October 29, 1956, when Israeli forces pushed into Egypt toward the Suez Canal . Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the canal, a valuable waterway that controlled two-thirds of the oil used by Europe .
 The Israelis were soon joined by French and British forces, which nearly brought the Soviet Union into the conflict . The Soviet Union nearly brought in the conflict and damaged relations with the U.S.
 In the end, Egypt emerged victorious, and the British, French and Israeli governments withdrew their troops in late 1956 and early 1957 . Egypt was defeated by Egypt in the Arab Spring in 1956 .
 The Suez Canal was built in Egypt under the supervision of French diplomat Ferdinand de Lesseps . The canal was built by the French diplomat under supervision of the French .
 The man-made waterway opened in 1869 after ten years of construction . It separates most of Egypt from the Sinai Peninsula . The Sinai Peninsula is one of the world's most populated areas .
 The Suez Canal was a source of conflict among Egypt's neighbors and Cold War superpowers vying for dominance . It was the nationalization of the canal by Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser .
 Two years earlier, in the wake of World War II, the Egyptian military had begun pressuring the British to end their military presence in the canal zone . Two years later, the British government had begun to end its military presence .
 The Suez canal was developed by Ferdinand de Lesseps, who in the 1880s made an unsuccessful attempt to develop the Panama Canal . Nasser ordered the Suez Canal seized and nationalized, arguing tolls from the ships passing through the canal would pay for the Aswan Dam
 British and French troops landed at Port Said and Port Fuad and took control of the area around the Suez Canal . Originally, forces from the three countries were set to strike at once, but the British forces were delayed .
 The Soviet Union was also confronted with a growing crisis in Hungary . However, their hesitation had given the Soviet Union time to respond .
 The Soviets supplied arms from Czechoslovakia to the Egyptian government beginning in 1955 . They helped Egypt construct the Aswan Dam on the Nile River after the U.S. refused to support the project .
 The response of President Dwight Eisenhower’s administration was measured . The response was measured. The response to the crisis was measured in the form of a president .
 It warned the Soviets that reckless talk of nuclear conflict would only make matters worse . It also warned Khrushchev to refrain from direct intervention in the conflict .
 Eisenhower also issued stern warnings to the French, British and Israelis to give up their campaign and withdraw from Egyptian soil . Eisenhower issued stern warning to the British, French and Israeli forces to withdraw .
 Eisenhower was upset with the British for not keeping the U.S. informed about their intentions . Eisenhower was angry with Britain for not informing the United States of its intentions .
 The United States threatened all three nations with economic sanctions if they persisted with their attack . The U.S. threatened to impose economic sanctions on the three nations .
 The British and French forces withdrew by December . Israel finally relinquished control over the canal to Egypt in March 1957 .
 The Suez Crisis marked the first use of a U.N. peacekeeping force . It was the first time the force was used in the Suez crisis .
 The United Nations Emergency Force was an armed group dispatched to the area to supervise the end of hostilities and the withdrawal of the three occupying forces . Britain and France found their influence as world powers weakened as the United States and Soviet Union took a more powerful role in world affairs .
 The crisis made Nasser a powerful hero in the growing Arab and Egyptian nationalist movements . British Prime Minister Anthony Eden resigned two months after withdrawing British troops .
 For almost a decade, the Suez Canal became the front line between the Israeli and Egyptian armies . In 1975 as a gesture of peace, Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat reopened the canal .
 Eisenhower proposed a more direct route for shipping between Europe and Asia, effectively allowing for passage from the North Atlantic to the Indian Ocean without having to . The Eisenhower Doctrine was created in 1957 in response to the increasingly tense situation in the Middle East .
 Egyptian and Syrian forces launched a coordinated attack against Israel on Yom Kippur, the holiest day in the Jewish calendar . Egypt and Syria attacked Israel on October 6, 1973, hoping to win back territory lost to Israel during the third Arab-Israeli war, in 1967 . The Eisenhower
 On November 4, 1979, Iranian students stormed the United States Embassy in Tehran, taking more than 60 American hostages . Taking the Israeli Defense Forces by ... took the Israeli defense forces by .
 Israel is small country in the Middle East, about the size of New Jersey, located on the eastern shores of the Mediterranean Sea . In a TV address on October 22, Israel's prime minister made a speech to the nation . Israel is bordered by Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria
 Israel is a religious and political effort that brought thousands of Jews from around the world back to their ancient homeland in the Middle East . The nation of Israel has a population of more than 9 million people, most of them Jewish .
 While some critics call Zionism an aggressive and aggressive, some say it's an aggressive form of Zionism . The canal was built in the 1950s and 1960s to connect the Nile to the Suez Canal .
 The modern Suez Canal is only the most recent of several manmade waterways that once snaked their way across Egypt . The modern canal system is only one of several of the world's largest waterways .